OF PRAYER AND MEDITATION.

WHEREIN ARE CONTAINED FOVVERTIEN DEVOVTE Meditations for the seven days of
the week, both for the morninges, and eueninges. And in them is treyted of
the consideration of the principal holy Mysteries of our faith.

WRITTEN FIRST IN THE SPANISHE tongue by the famous Religious father. F. LEWIS
de GRANADA, Provincial of the holy order of preachers in the Province of
Portugal.

depiction of Christ Si quis vult post me venire, abneget semet ipsum, et
tollat crucem suam quotidie, et sequatur me. lux. 9. verse. 23

Qui dicit se in ipso manner: debet sicut all ambulavit, et ipse ambulare. ^.
Johan. 2. verse. 6.



Imprinted at Paris by Thomas Brumeau, at the sign of the Olyue. Anno Domini.
M.D.LXXXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND WORSHIPFVLL, OF THE four principal howses of
Cowerte in London, professinge the study of the Common Laws of our Realm,
RICHARD HOPKINS wishethe dew consideration of the holy mysteries of the
Christian Religion.
THE holy scriptures affirm in diverse places, Dan. 9.11 and 12. Matt. 24.
Marc. 13. Luc. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 2. Apoc. 11.12.
and 13.
that the nearer we approach toward the coming of Antichriste, and the end
of the world, the more perilous will the times be for all Christians. And the
peril hereof arisethe cheefelye of the great envy and malice of Satan, who
fearinge the end of the world, knowinge that then his tyrannous kingdom
therein will have an end also therewith, extends the vttermoste of his rage
against all faithful Christians, and assaulteth them daily more and more
with diverse wily temptations, and terrible persecutions, to procure them
thereby to follow his most wicked rebellious example: that is, to break gods
holy commandments, to contemn his divine ordinances, to neglecte his
service and honor, and by pride and rebellion to lose the image of god, and
embrace the image of Satan, and so to be utterly unapt to attain unto those
everlasting heavenly ma^sions of felicity, and glory, for which man was
created.

Wherefore to the intent that all Christians might be more circumspecte, and
stre^gthened, to resist faithfullye against all Satan's wylye deceytefull
temptations in this our dangerous age, approchinge so near toward the
coming of Antichriste, and the end of the world (as by many coniecturall
signs it seems) a holy Angel has forewarned us hereof very preciselye in
the revelacions of S. Ihon, thunderinge out these words with a great voice:
Apoc. 12. verse. 12.
woe be to the land, and sea, because the Devil is descended unto you,
having a great rage, for that he knows he has but a short time. And this
great rage of his is the more to be feared in this our corrupt age, for that
we read also in Saint Ihons revelations, Apoc. 20. verse. 3.
that the Devil shall be let lose toward the end of the world for a small
time. In other ages and times of our holy christian forefathers the devils
exceedinge great malice and mighty power has been much restrained and
bownde through the great virtue of the Cross, The devil shall be let lose
more and more the nearer that Antichriste approchethe.
and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, communicated then very plentifully
unto the Christian people generallye by their devoute frequentinge of the holy
Sacraments of the Catholic Church, (which be holy vessels of grace)
whereby our Christian forefathers have been greatelye strengthened to resist
faithfullye against the most horrible temptations of Schism, Heresy,
Infidelytie, and Atheism, and to live generally very holy and austere
Christian lives in the fear and service of almighty god, and in dew
reuerente obedience to the Catholic Church. But now whereas in this our
ungracious age such a number of horrible sects, and heresies, and such a
general corruption with pride, dysobedience, lyenge, detraction, gluttony,
incontinencie, infidelity, Atheism, and all kind of dissolute wickedness do
abound and reign more and more in all parts of Christendom, woe be
therefore to the Land, and sea, (as the holy Angel has forewarned us)
because the Devil is now descended, and let lose toward the end of the
world for a small time, having a great rage, for that he Knows he has
but a short time to continewe his tyrannous kingdom in this world.

And the very cause of this so extraordinary lettinge lose of the devil now
more and more toward the coming of Antichriste in the end of the world,
2 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 10. and 11.
saint Paul seems to explane in this sense: that for so much as the
wicked will not receive the true doctrine of the Catholic Church with
charity, The Catholic religion daily decreasinge, and heresies daily
increasinge unto, worse and worse sects, is an evident argument that the
devil is more and more let lose toward the coming of Antichrist.
humility, obedience, and thankfulness, to the end they may be saved,
therefore Almighty god lets lose the devil now emonge them, by permittinge
him to sow in their proud inconstante wilful minds many erroneous
opynions, and heresies, that they may believe in lyenge.

And certainly if we will aduisedlye consider the wily procedinges of the
devil in sowinge so manifold Sects and heresies in this ungracious age, Note
Sata^s wily prociedinges in this corrupt age.
and the final end whereunto he directs them, we may euidentelie perceive,
that it is to cause all Christians now toward the coming of Antichriste to
be first dissolute in their lives, and after dowtefull in their faith, and
then to contemn all the holy Sacraments, and other Mysteries of the
Christian Religion, and afterward having by degrees removed away out of
their Churches all holy memories of our Savior Christ, and of his blessed
Mother, Apostles, Martirs, and other of his glorious Saints, and also out of
their minds all fear of God, and of his dreadefull judgments, then they be
easelye induced by him shortelie after to become hard hearted, and insensible
to conceive any spiritual things, and also at the last to become Atheistes,
without any conscience, Religion, or belief that there is a God. And so
Antichriste findinge his way so open and ready prepared for him, may then
come frielye when he will, and cause himself to be received as a Messiah, and
adored as God, findinge the Christian people generally without any devotion
and Zeal to the service and honor of our Savior Jesus Christ, and without
any belief that there is a God.

Now emonge all the wily deceitful devises of Satan for ouerthrowinge of the
Christian Religion, and so to prepare the way for Antichrists coming, there
is none (in my simple judgment) of greater force, and consequence, than his
so earnest endeavor to procure all Christians utterly to contemn and forgette
all the holy mysteries of the Christian faith. Which if he could possibly
compass (as he labors very earnestly therein by diverse crafty means in
this our corrupt age) then vndowtedlye all the whole Christian Religion, and
even our Savior Christ himself, and his blessed Mother, and all his holy
Apostles, and Martirs, and other of his glorious Saints would consequently
in a short time after be generally contemned, neglected, and forgotten
througheout all Christian countries.

And to write here freely my mind as I think, it would seem very
marvelous unto me (if I were not fully persuaded that the devil is now more
and more let lose (as Saint Ihon in his revelations has forewarned us he
should be for a short time toward the end of the world) how the devil
could prevail so farfoorthe, as to induce a whole new late sect of
heretics that be called Puritans (professinge in gaie words to be more pure,
more sincere, and better professors of Christ's gospel than any other
Christians either be or have been in any age since the Apostles time) to write
of late so vnchristianlie by common consent even in an English printed book
against obseruinge in the Church the most ancient yearly solemn holy
feasts of Easter, In the puritans reply against D. Vvhitgifte, page 120.
121. 122. and 163.
and Pentecoste, and against all special meditations at any one solemn time
of the year more then at others of Christ's Resurrection, or of the Coming of
the Holy Ghost, or of the hour of our death: because (say theie) these
meditations should be used continewallie every day in the year, and owght
not to be appointed by the governors of the Church to be used at any one
special time more than at others. Whereby every godly christian reader may
easelie perceive how the devil being no we let lose labors very buselie
by these countersaite pure gospellers under a wily deceitful color of
aduauncinge continewal mediatation and memory of the holy Mysteries of the
Christian Religion every da^e in the year, to have no manner of mediation or
memory of them emonge Christians any day at all: that so by their subtle
wicked doctrine a ready open way may be prepared in all Christian men's
Churches and minds for Antichrists coming.

But o the wonderful providence and care of our Savior Christ to preserve a
continewal knowledge and reverence of his holy Mysteries emonge all faithful
Christians in his Catholic Church, How in all ages has been preserved
emonge Christians a co^tinewal knowledge and reverence of the holy misteties
of our faith. Matt. 28. Verse 20. John. 14.16. John. 16.13. 1. Tim. 3.15.
as has very manifestelie appeared in all ages since Christ's Ascension
until this our corrupt age. And surely it is a matter worthy of great and
devout admiration for any good christian to consider, how the Apostles, and
the aunciente holy Catholic Bishops their successors being by our Savior
Christ's own promise assuredly inspired, assisted, and directed by the Holy
Ghost from time to time in government of the Catholic Church in all truth,
have with such divine wisdom disposed the whole year into so many several
holy festival days, as that thereby have been represented, and preached unto
all Christian people in all Christian Churches throughout Christendom a
continewal solemn instruction, memory, and reverence of the holy Mysteries
of the Christian Religion. In so much as the common Christian people by those
holy festival days alone (albeit they wanted not also diverse other holy
instructions therein in confessions, and Sermons,) were in all ages
sufficiently instructed in the holy Mysteries of their Christian belief: I
mean, they were thereby made to understand so much of them, as (having
withal a dew religious respect to preserve a continewal reverence in them to
the dignity of such high holy Mysteries) was fully conueniente for their
weak capacities, and for the comfortinge and strengtheninge of their faith,
and as they were bound of necessity to know.

As for example, The principal holy festival days of the year.
by the aunciente institution of the holy feasts of Aduente: of our Savior
Christ's Nativity, and Circumcision: of his Adoration by the three Kings: and
of the holy solemnity of Lent, at which time the Catholic Church teaches
all Christian people to imitate so near as they can our Saviors fasting of
forty days in the deserte, and represents then also with sorrowful
mourninge, penance, and compassion, all the whole order and history of our
Savior Christ's most bitter Passion and death for the redemption of al
mankind: And afterward the Church solemni Zeth with great Joy the holy
feasts of our Saviors Resurrection from death to life: of his Ascension into
heaven: and of the Coming of the Holy Ghost. And then follow also the
holy feasts of the blessed Trinity, and of the most holy Sacrament,
commonly called Corpus Christi day: And the holy feasts of the blessed
Mother of our Savior: And of Saint thou Baptiste his precursor: And then the
holy feasts of Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and of other of our Saviors holy
Apostles and most famous Martirs, and Confessors: And also the holy feasts
of Saint Michael the Archangell, and of all the glorious Saints in heaven:
And withal a solemn day of devout memory and general prayers ana
^mesdedes for all faithful Christian Sowles departed out of this transitory
life, and as yet remayninge in the fire of Purgatory, to make satisfaction
there for all pains dew and prescribed for their sins in the merciful
just balance of the divine Majesty. All which holy festival days being so
diuinelie and orderly disposed into so many several parts of the year, and
adorned with the holy reuere^^e ceremonies appoyncted to be used in all
Christian Churches througheout all Christendom with great solemnity and
reverence upon those holy days, have yearly from time to time in every age
since the Ascension of our Savior Christ into heaven, very lively and
continewallie preached, represented, and explaned unto the common simple
Christian people all the holy Mysteries of the Christian Religion, which theie
had professed at their Baptism, and were taught in the Apostles Creed to
believe. And the reverent solemnity in every year of these holy festival
days induced them unto a continewall memory, admiration, love, and reverence
of those holy Mysteries, and greatly strengthened their faith in them, and
caused them to have a wonderful feruente piety, devotion, and Zeal toward
the honor and service of Almighty God, whereby they lived very virtuous lives
like the children of light (as Saint Paul terms them,) Ephesians. 5. verse. 8.
and died generally as holy faithful Christians in the obedience, love, and
favor of his divine Majesty.

But alas these golden times be paste, and ended, and the devil being let
lose now more and more toward the coming of Antichriste, and the end of
the world, we find by palpable experience, that since the time that such a
free licentious liberty has been permitted unto every lewd bablinge
Minister to rail against all the holy aunciente divine ordinances, used and
allowed generally so many ages in all Christian Churches, and to term them
in blasphemous manner Antichristian inventions, and to preach openly in
pulpittes, and publishe in printed books whatsoever new heretical opinions
the ennemie of mankind sug gesteth into their fantastical heads, the faith
of Christians is thereby generally become so weak, and inconstante, and in
very many or most persons so wholly undermined, and utterly overthrown, and
their hope is so transformed into presumption, and their charity is waxen so
cold, and so little piety, love, devotion, reverence, and Zeal remain in
them toward the service of Almighty God, and so much Pride, gluttony,
incontinencie, lyenge, detraction, disobedience, with most horrible
contention, schism, heresy, infidelity, Atheism, and all kind of iniquity
do generally abound throughout Christendom, that we have good cause to
fear, least that terrible time approaches now very near at hand, which
our Savior forewarned us in the gospel, to wit: Luc. 18. verse. 8.
that at his coming to judge he should hardly find faith in the earth.

Wherefore we have now very great need of extraordinary spiritual helps
to strengthen our weak minds, to withstand so many deceitful temptations of
the enemy of mankind in this so corrupt and dangerous age. And for this
purpose I have translated out of the Spanishe tongue diverse books of a very
holy and famous learned religious father called Lewis de Granada, whose
devout manner of writing has (in my simple judgment) a singular rare grace
to pearce the hard heart of a dissolute sinner, and to move and dispose his
mind to the abhorringe of sin, to the contempt of the world, and to the
fear, lone, and service of Almighty God. And I understand that his books
have wroughte wonderful much good, not only in Spain, and Portugal, but
also in Italy, France, and Germany. And I think there be few countries in
Christendom but have his Spanishe works translated into their tongues. And
it is now about fourteen years ago, since the time that Master Doctor
Hardinge (a man for his great virtue, learning; wisdom, Zeal, and
sincerity in writing against heresies, of very godly and famous memory)
persuaded me earnestly to translate some of those Spanishe books into our
English tongue, affirminge, that more spiritual profit would vndoutedlie
ensewe thereby to the gayninge of Christian sowles in our country from
Schism, and Heresy, and from all sin, and iniquity, than by books that
treat of controversies in Religion: which (as experience has now plainly
tried) do nothing so well dispose the common peoples minds to the fear,
love, and service of almighty God, as books treatinge of devotion, and how
to lead a virtuous life do. The dew consideration whereof has so provoked
or rather pricked me in conscience, that I have resolved to publishe
(godwillinge) in printe all my translations, in case I shall perceive that
such as be godly, wise, and learned, shall like of them. And first (as it
were for an assaie) I have here printed his devout Meditations of the
principal holy Mysteries of the Christian Religion, which book I find
greatly commended by diverse godly learned men.

It may be that some readers of this book being not greatly acquainted
with the holy exercises of a spiritual life, in his religious order, and
perceyuinge very evidently that far more Christian sowles be lost in this
our corrupt age with ouermuche presumptuous confidence and securetie of their
salvation, than with ouermuche fear of leesinge the same, has therefore
framed his manner of writing in these meditations chiefly against the
infinite number of presumptuous and careless dissolute Christians, that presume
most certainly, and assuredly to be saved, and yet do live very
dissolutelie all their whole life time, without all care of keepinge gods
commandments, and without all fear of their account at the dreadeful day
of judgment, notwithstanding that our Savior Christ himselse who shall be
then our Judge, has by plain and express words forewarned us in the
gospel of saint Mathewe, Matt. 19. verse. 17.
that if we will enter into the Kingdom of heaven we must Keep his
commandments, which every Christian may be able to keep, being assisted,
strengthened, and helped therein with the grace of God, which is never denied
to any that pra^eth duly for it: and also that we must at the day of
judgment give an account of every idle word. Matt. 12. verse. 36.


And verelie if we peruse diligently the holy scriptures, we shall find that
not only Enoch in the law of Nature, Epist. Jude. verse. 14.
and afterward all the Prophets, but also saint Ihon Baptiste, and our
Savior Christ himself used the same manner of preachinge that this religious
godly father does here. And they thought it to be the very best and rediest
way for conversion of sinners from their sinful dissolute life's, to show
plainly unto them the damnable state they live in, and to put them in mind
of the severe justice of almighty God at the terrible day of judgment
against all such as endeavor not to keep his commandments. Acts 10. verse.
42.
And saint Peter protests (as it appears in the Acts of the Apostles) that
our Savior Christ commanded likewise him, and the rest of the Apostles, to
preach and testify this point espetiallye, that Christ is appointed to be
the Judge both of the quick, and the dead. 1. Pet 1. verse. 16.
And therefore in an other place he requires all Christians to live in fear
duringe the time of their conversation upon the earth. 2. Cor. 5. verse. 10.
and 11.
And saint Paul makes also the like solemn protestation of the terrible
day of judgment, and what a strait account every one of us must make at
that dreadefull time, and exhorts the Corinthians with the knowledge and
consideration there of to persuade all men to live in the fear of God. And
disputinge also before the President Felix of the Christian religion, Act. 24.
verse. 25.
and namely of the dreadefull day of judgment, he uttered such wonderful
terrible things thereof, that as the holy scripture mentions, he made the
very President himself (though he were an infidel) even to tremble and
quake for fear with the only hearing of them. Apoc. 14. verse. 7.
And sain te thon likewise in his Revelations affirms, that he saw an Angel
preachinge the everlasting gospel unto all Nations, tribes, tongues, and
people, (meaning thereby that he preached as well to the good, as to the
wicked, without any exception therein of the faithful Christians,) saying:
Fear our Lord, and give honor unto him, becawse the hour of his iudgeme^te
is come. And I am persuaded that all godly wise and grave men will easelie
agree in this opinion with me, that this manner of preachinge of the terror of
the day of Judgment, and of the most horrible pains of hell, is much more
needful now in this our corrupt age in England, and Scotland, than in
Italy, Spain, or other Catholic countries, sith so great numbers of them
are infected with so many heretical licentious doctrines, that have caused
them to put quite away out of their minds all fear of God, and of his
terrible judgments, and to presume most certainly and assuredlye to be
saved by their only faith, Philip. 2. verse. 12. 1. Cor. 4.4. 2. Pet. 1.10.
and so are generally become utterly careless of endeuoringe to work their
salvation with fear, and tremblinge, and do live as dissolutelie as any
barbarous Pagans, and Atheists: In so much as all godly aunciente wise men
do greatelye lamente to see by experience the terrible prophecy of David to
be generally verified at this day throughout our Realm: which is, that the
judgments of almighty God be taken quite away from the face of the ungodly.
Psalm. 9. verse. 26.
And if these and such like godly Meditations and considerations of the
terrible threateninges and judgments of almighty God against the wicked, be
not a fit remedy for their conversion from their careless dissolute life's,
what other remedy then can possibly be devised for them?

Howbeit I have very great hope, that with the grace of God these godly
Meditations will work much good effect for the conversion of many of them.
For vndoutedlie that man is very wilful and obstinate in his wickedness, that
readinge advisedly all these godly Meditations is not moved inwardelie in
his heart in some part of them to the fear, love, and service of almighty
God, and to the abhorringe of sin, and amendment of his lise. And such
readers as shall be inwardelie moved and called thereunto by almighty God, I
conjure them in his holy name, and in regard of their own salvation, Ephesians.
4. verse. 30. Psalm. 94.8.
not to make sad the Holy Ghost, in hardeninge their hearts, and resistinge
vngratefullie and wilfully against his divine inspirations, when it shall
please his infinite goodness, and mercy, with such singular love to knock and
call at the door of their hearts, but in any wise to open it out of hand,
and receive him most humbly into their hearts, with such louinge hearty
interteynement, submission, thankefulnes, service, and honor, as duty
requires they should do unto their most high sovereign lord, and
Creator, that has such a special louinge care of their salvation.

Now this book of Meditations, and whatsoever else I have translated, and
shall godwillinge hereafter publishe in printe, I do most humbly offer unto
the service of almighty God for the benefit of our country. And for so much
as I am very wary and assured that this book contains not any thing
whereby I may justly incur any penalty prescribed by any laws of our
Realm, I am the bolder humbly to recommende it by this my dedicatorie Epistle
unto your Honors and woorshipps: partly for that I have spente some part of
my time in the study of our Common Laws in the Middle Temple emonge you, and
am very much bound unto diverse of you: But chiefelie for that I know right
well the great capacity and dexterity of your spirits, the gravity of your
judgments, and your wisdoms, experiences, authority, and example, to be of
such principal estimation, and worthy respect in our Realm, that in case
ye do Zelouselye emploie your endeavors to the due reuerente consideration of
the holy Mysteries of the Christian Religion, (as I doubt not but very many
emonge you do,) your holy example will generally allure a great number
throughout our whole Realm from all contentious disputinge, and iarringe
about these late new controversies in Religion, to embrace firmly and
Zealouselie the aunciente Catholic belief, and to imitate the virtuous lives
of our holy Christian forefathers, who had much more abundance of the grace
and light of the Gospel of our Savior Christ, than we have in this our
ungracious corrupt age, as very manifestly appears by their so manifold
good Christian fruits left by them unto us, to the glory of our Savior
Christ, and of his dear spowse the Catholic Church, and to the continewall
great admiration, confusion, envy, and dispite, of Lucifer, and of all his
rebellious wicked spirits, and of all Jews, Turks, Heretics, and other
Infidells his adherentes.

An exhortation to young noble men and gentlemen.
And (requestinge here humbly pardon, and license, to treat in a familiar
manner with the younger sort) I desire your Honors and woorshippes continewallie
to remember what great inclination ye have unto virtue more than others of
obscure parentage, and base estate, in regard of your noblenes, and
magnanimity, which ever inuiteth you to imitate the noble virtuous steps of
your noble Christian auncesters, and to set upon high and noble virtuous
enterprises, and to do all your works nobly, and excellent^^e, that ye take
in hand. As also to consider, that a virtuous life is the greatest and most
noble ornamente of nobility. And that for this end chiefly almighty God
bestows upon noble personages here in ea^the principality, rule,
gouernemente, and honor, that they should give virtuous and godly example
unto all others that be under their rule, and gouernemente. And by experience
we find that ordinarily no bishop or other preacher is able with such
facility to plant virtue emonge the common people, and cause them sincerely
to love, honor, and embrace it, as noblemen, gentlemen, Magistrates, and
Governors are able to do, in case they them selves do give good apparante
example of virtue, religion, and devotion, and be Zealous also in procuringe
all others to do the like. And therefore I beseech you to determine with an
honorable constant resolution to employe your time in the most noble exercises
of virtue, and to fear, love, serve, and honor almighty God, who is your most
noble, high, sovereign Lord and Creator, and not to suffer either your
study or practice of the laws, or other your worldly offices and affairs to
be so great an impedimente unto your spiritual exercises, but that you may
have ever one windo we open toward the heavenly Jerusalem, Dan. 6. verse. 10.
as Daniel had in his chamber in Babylon, prayinge there three times in the
day toward the earthelye Jerusalem. And in case your worldly impedimentes
be over great, then wisdom requires that for salvation of your sowles you
do cast them away from you. And imitate herein the worldly foresighte of
wise Merchants when they be in danger of drowninge in a stormy tempeste
upon the sea, who use at such times for salvation of their lives to cast into
the Sea their rich merchaundise, and all their troublesome heavy
encombrances, thereby to cause their ship to sail more safelye. And I do
also humbly beseache all good Christian readers that shall like well of these
spiritual exercises to remember me in their devout prayers, that I prove not
like unto those foolish carpenters that made Noah's ark, who made it to save
others from drowninge in the general fludde, and yet were drowned them selves.

Thus with all due humble submission of my self, and my travails herein to
your honors, and woorships, I humbly crave pardon for passinge here somewhat
the bowndes of my profession, and treatinge as a divine of spiritual matters,
according as since my departure from the Middle Temple by some study and
readinge of diverse spiritual books, and continewall conversation these
fifteen years with many virtuous and Learned Catholic Priests in these
parts I have been instructed. And I most humbly beseache almighty God that
these Godly Meditations may work so good effect in all your minds, as I
have often times very earnestly requested of his d^uine Majesty.

From Paris, upon the holy festival day of Pentecoste. In the year of our
Lord. 1582.
AN ADVERTISMENTE BY the translatour to the Learned Reader.
FOr so much as the Author of this book has published at diverse times
several editions thereof in the Spanishe tongue, and in the later editions
has from time to time very much and often corrected, altered, and augmented
the same, not only in manifold words, and sentences, but also in diverse
chapiters, otherwise than in the former editions, that were printed either in
Toledo, Salamanca, Lisbone, Andwarpe, or in any other place before the year
of our Lord. 1567. I think it very conueniente to give notice of it to the
Reader: and withal that in my Translation I do follow the edition in the
Spanishe tongue printed at Andwarpe by Christopher Plantine, in the year of
our Lord. 1572. For I perceive that the french Translation differs in duers
places from this best corcted edition of Plantins: and so do likewise all the
Translations that I have seen in the Italian tongue printed in diverse years
at Rome, Naples, and Venice, by Michael Tramezzino, Horatio Saluiani, Ioua^ni
Baptista Guerra, and Gabriel Iolito: until that now of late all the Authors
works have been newly translated into the Italian tongue, and printed at
Venice by Georgio Angelieri, in the year of our Lord. 1581.

AN EXHORTATION TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, made by the Right Reverend Father in
God, BERNARDE de FRESNEDA, Bishop of CVENCA, one of the privy Council of
Estate to the mighty KING PHILLIPPE OF SPAIN, etc. And his Ghostly Father,
to read this book with good attention, and with a desire to profit, and
proceed forwards in godliness.
Three things necessary to preserve Justice: to wit, prayer, readinge, and
good works.
IT is the doctrine of the holy fathers, that there be three things very
necessary and of inestimable importance to the just man to preserve him in
his justice: to wit Prayer, Readinge, and doing of good works. In these
three things ought the just man to exercise himself every day, and divide
his time so discreetly, and so like a good Christian, that he be ever found
occupied in some of them. Prayer illuminateth, purges, comfort, rejoices,
obteyneth fervor, causes all traueile to seem sweet, and light, breeds
devotion, engendereth confidence, (in case our own spirit do not reprove
us:) Prayer bannisheth away slouthe, frayeth the ennemie, and ouercometh
temptation. And therefore a certain wise man said: Non te pigeat orare, si
vis a vitiis liberari. Be not slack to pray, if thou will be delivered from
vices.

Prayer is very necessary toward the obteyninge of the grace of God,
without which the spiritual life will utterly decay, and perish. And
therefore prayer is preferred before readinge. Tertullian speakinge of prayer
says. That thing is always to be used, which is always good: And he adds
furthermore, and says: If prayer be necessary in all places, and at all
times, Continency necessary unto prayer.
then is continency necessary also unto prayer: for so much as prayer
proceeds of continency, wherefore if thy continency has cause to be
ashamed, then shall thy prayer likewise be ashamed. The spirit carries our
prayer unto God: and if the spirit find it self faulty, then our prayer
ascends with shame unto him. Again, Cassiodorus says, that perseverance in
prayer avails much to obtain firmnes of heart. By means of continual
prayer the devils and their deceytfull snares are overcome, and by the same
the just man weakeneth their forces, and vexations. By means of prayer he
makes them become weak, cowardly, and easy to be conquered: and by the same
he makes himself also become strong and a conqueror over them. If thou
pray with perseverance thou shall obtain sweetness, and withal a more
fervent desire to pray. And then do we pray in truth when we have none
other thing in our mind, but do apply all our intention unto heavenly
things, and have our heart wholly enflamed with the fire of the holy Ghost.

1. There be three effects of prayer. The first effect is common unto all
works done in charity: Three effects of prayer. S. Thomas. 2.2. quest. 83.
artic. 1^.
which is, to be meritorious: And for this effect actual attention is not of
necessity required in prayer, but it is sufficient to have an habitual
attention, as in all other meritorious acts.

The second effect, is proper unto prayer alone, Our first intention when we
begin our prayers must be to attend to the service of God by them: and ^f
we do nothing willinglye whilst we pray contrary to this our first
intention, We shall obtain our Lawful and necessary requests.
which is to obtain of almighty God the thing we desire. And for this
effect it is sufficient also to have the first inte^tion, which is the thing
that God respects in our works: for if this first intention fail we shall
not obtain the thing we require, because almighty God will not hear his
prayer that seeks not the thing he asks of him in such sort as he ought,
and for such end as he ought.

3. The third effect of prayer, is a spiritual refection of the soul. And
for this effect it is necessarily required to have an attention in prayer: and
not only such an attention as is attent to the material words, or as the
second attention, that marketh the sense and meaning of the words, but much
more that attention that marketh and is attent to the end of prayer, which is
almighty God, and unto the thing for which we pray.

The readinge of holy books.
The readinge of holy books conteininge fruitful and profitable matters not
only lighteneth our ignorance, but it also discharges our duty in well
spendinge our time therein: it corrects our faults, teaches good and holy
manners, discovers vices, exhorts unto virtues, stirs up fervor, causes
a fear of God, recollecteth the mind, recreateth and comfort the heavy,
sorrowful, and discomforted soul. Vndowbtedlie it procures great profit and
fruit to read books of holy matters: of such matters I mean, as do
recollecte the soul that is distracted, and wanderinge abroad emonge so many
diverse and sondrie things. Readinge teaches and shows us the way how to
lead a good life: Examples do induce and provoke us to imitate and follow
the same: And prayer obteyneth us grace to accomplish it fully, and perfect
lie. Readinge (say the holy fathers) is good: Prayer unto God is better: but
the doeinge of good works for Gods sake is above all Out of holy readinge
the good deuowt persons do gather how to meditate upon God: And out of godly
meditation proceeds an earnest affection, and a very prompte and ready
elevation of the spirit unto God, out of which issues that inward prayer that
pearceth the heavens, passes above the highest places, and has a desire to
unite it self unto almighty God, in whom are all good things that may be
desired.

Besides readinge, and prayer, it is necessary to do some good and profitable
work.
But because our weakness is not able to continewe and persevere always in
prayer, and readinge, it is therefore very profitable, yea and necessary to
work also, and to do some thing that is good, and profitable: which cannot
choose but so it will be, in case prayer go before the work: and yet it shall be
much better if prayer do accompany it: but best of all, if the work do
also end in prayer, and then is the work most perfect. To work with our
own hands is profitable both for our soul and body.
To do some kind of work with our own hands, besides that it is very
profitable and wholesome for the body, it helps our spirit also, our
neighbor is thereby edified, and our senses are comforted and refreshed. And
in case thou find thy self slothful, heavy, and unwilling to work and
labor with thy hands, yet persevere therein, and thou shall overcome it. O
that we might once come to have such a perseverance and constancy as the
Saints had, Note how the Saints co^tinewed in prayer, readinge, and
woorkinge with their hands.
who prayed without intermission. And yet notwithstanding their continuance in
prayer, good Lord, it is merueilous to consider, how studious and continual
they were in readinge, how feruente and laborious in bodelie exercices, and in
doeinge of good works: in so much as no kind of labors, pains, nor
trauayles, could ever overcome them. Now what other thing is the life of the
Saints unto us, but only a holy readinge, which we ought to imitate without
ceasinge. Who so enforcethe himself to labor for gods sake, shall obtain
greater grace of God.
That man that shall enforce himself to take pains and labors for Gods
sake, shall obtain the greater grace of his divine good nesse, and shall out
of hand feel the profit and commodity of his traueile. An evil custom is
overcome by a good: the which good custom if it be converted as it were into
nature, it waxes so strong, that it tourneth the things that were hard, and
difficulte, and causes them to become easy, and light. And all this (as
Saint Paul says) comes to the just man by means of continual prayer. And
therefore he says, sine intermissione orate: 1 Thessalonians. 5.
pray ye without intermissio^. Saint Paul knew right well, that whilst we
walk here in this life we are compassed all about with enemies, temptations,
tribulations, and with infinite deceitful ginnes, with wars without, and
fears within, 2. Cor. 7.
and therefore he advises us to pray without intermission. For whereas
almighty God permits so many vexations and troubles to come for the sins
of the world, his intent thereby is, to stir up his elect, and to awake
them, that they should lift up their spirit unto heavenly things. 2. Tim. 2.
For he that prays not fights not, and he that fights not manfully, and
makes resistance, is forthwith overcome, and leeseth his crown, and reward.
Who may be able to pray and fight co^tinewallie.
And if thou demand of me, who is able to pray and fight continually. I
say, that every one can do it, that in truth and humility of heart calls
upon almighty God for succoure, and puts his full trust in him in very
deed. Psalm. 144.
For (as the prophet David says) Our Lord is mighty unto them, that call
upon him, if so be they call upon him in truth. We may pray all ways with
our spirit, and with a godly intention.
And if thou can not pray continually with thy mouth, yet pray with thy
spirit and with a godly intention. For it is a very continual sacrifice unto
almighty God in the soul of our heart to have a desire to do good works, and
to serve him with all our heart. And truly that man does always pray that
does always good works. And whosoever is hartelie sorry for his offenses he
has committed, and sigheth, mourns, and longs for the good things that
are to come, prays always, and says with the prophet David. Psalm. 37.
O Lord before thee is all my desire, and my mourninge is not hid from thee.

These three points now good Christian Reader, which serve (as we have
declared) to preserve the righteous man in his righteousness, are so well
taught, and so wonderfully set forth in these notable books of the Reverend
religious Learned Father, F. LEWIS de GRANADA, that he must needs be very
hard hearted, who readinge them with attention, devotion, and with a Christian
desire to take profit by them, does not marvelously inriche him self with
these three treasures: to wit, with prayer, readinge, and doeinge of good
works. Wherefore whosoever is desirous to profit in these three things, has
here very Catholic, sound, and profitable doctrine, and in all points
agreeable with the universal doctrine of the holy ancient Fathers, and of the
divine Scriptures. In these singular devout holy books he shall not find any
thing that may either offend him, or bring him into any error, or scruple.
Here shall he find many things that may edify, delighte, teach, and
provoke him to the love of God, and withal to the abhorringe of sin, and
contempt of the world. From receauinge which fruits no man is here excluded:
for so much as the Awthor has with a rare wisdom in such wise tempered the
doctrine, and accommodated him self unto all states, and conditions of
persons, that neither the very high and learned have any cause to leave it,
as over base for them: nor the very low and unlearned to refuse it, as over
high for their capacities. For here is made a convenient provision of
competent meats both for the one sort, and for the other. And because the
Awthor understood right well how far the mouths of men now adays are out
of taste, and how much they are more affectionate unto the sleshe pottes of
Egypt, than to the bread of Angels, I mean hereby, rather to the readinge of
profane books, by reason of the pleasant style wherewith they think they are
written, than to the books of spiritual doctrine, which are commonly written
with more simplicity, he has therefore dressed this meat in such wise, and
has written this doctrine in such a sweet and pleasant style, that it may
provoke an appetite unto this book, even in such persons as do otherwise loathe
good and wholesome food: besides, that the very matters them selves are
exceedingly well chosen, and of great profit. And because it were the part of
rude and rusticall persons to give thanks to the bees that make the honey
combs, and not unto almighty God who created the flowers from whence the bees
gather the honey, which they work in their hiues: I exhort all persons to give
thanks to the devout and Learned Author of these works, for these so sweet
and sauorie honey combs which he has here given us, in such sort that they
omit not to proceed further, and to give thanks to almighty God also, who
has sent the flowers wherewith this honey is made. And withal I make humble
request unto all men, that I may be partaker of the prayets they shall make by
means of the good disposition which (I trust) with the grace of God the
readinge of these holy and excellent devout works shall cause in all godly
and devout Christian Readers.



Bernard de Fresneda Bishop of Cuenca.

TO THE VERY REVEREND FATHERS, AND right honorable personnages: DON ANTONIO DE
CORDOVA: and Father LORENCO DE FIGVEROA.
The Epistle of the Awthor. Note reader that these to whom the awthor
directs this book, are two noble personages, of the most noble and ancient
howses of Spain: which have forsaken all their wordlie possessions, and
entered into religion.

I Cannot find any other place, whither I may better direct this my small
present, then to your Reverend hands. For (settinge a part diverse and sundry
reasons of great importance, that bind me so to do) certeinlie the wonderful
change of liffe, which your Reuerences have made, and the holy example which
you have given to the world in this our corrupt age, are sufficient cawses to
move all such as do any thing desire the glory of Christ, to serve you in
this your spiritual journey, that have in such wise amplefied his glory. I
might well speak of this matter more largely in this place, (and surely
without lyinge, or flattery.) and to speak herein, were not to emploie the
time, in the praises of men, but in the praise of almighty god. For So Much as
it is manifest, that this your wonderful change of life, has not proceeded of
flesh and blood, but of the right hand of the highest. But because it behooves
all men of our cote, and profession, to be free, not only from all flattery,
but also even from all suspicion of the same: I will therefore content my self
at this present only with giving tha^ckes to our lord, for this notable
virtuous act of yours, and I will confess, that we have seen that wonder in
our days, which the holy ancient father S. Jerome declares to have chanced
in his time. He writes it in a certain Epistle to Ruffinus in these words.

Bonosus thy frynd and mine, is now gone up by that mystical ladder, S. Ierom.
ad Ruffinum.
which the Patriarck Jacob saw: and according to the mystery of Moses, he
has now sacrificed the brazen serpent in the desert. where at this present he
sows with tears, that hereafter he maic Reap with joy. Let the truth of
this worthy act, putt to silence all the lyenge wonders which the Greikes and
Lattins have written in their histories. Behold here a young man brought up in
our company, and instructed in all good arts, and learning, who had no want
neither of lands, nor riches, nor honor, nor dignity, emonge his equales, who
forsakinge his mother, and his sisters, and above all, his most deerlie beloved
brother, went to live in an Island, which is very solitary, and fearful, and
environed with diverse seas, there to dwell like a new inhabitor of paradise*
and being alone in this place (howheit not alone, for so much as he is in the
company of Christ) he sees now the glory of almighty God: which the
Apostles them selves never saw, but when they were alone in the mownt. Thus
far be S. Ieromes words. This holy example of Bonosus is treulie a thing,
wherein almighty God is to be praised, as in a singular work of his grace.
And suerlie no less is he to be praised in your Reverend and most honorable
personages, who having much more to forsake in the world, than Bonosus had,
and being now in the very flowers of your youth, have forsaken the world and
all the vain po^pe and pride thereof and with all your great lands and
possessions, the dignity of your high noble estates, and the hope of so great
honorable promotions that were due unto your nobility and virtue, and to the
renowned deserts of your very ancient and most noble families. And all this
you have do^ne to embrace even the poverty, nakedness and obedience of Christ.
you have not done like that young man in the gospel, Math. 19.
who remembering how great possessions he had, refused to follow the way of
perferction which our savior Christ tawght him. But ye have done like that
wise and prudent merchant, who after he had found the pretiouse pearl, Math.
13.
sold all he had in the world to bye the same. And if unto this wonderful
change of yours, we join also the notable virtuous change of liffe, which the
most noble and renowned Duke of Gandia has made in our days, This Duke of
Gandia forsook his great Dukedom in Spain, and became a religious man of
the holy society of Jesus: commo^lie called Iesuittes. Cantic. 8.
and the merueylous changes of sundry other right honorable personages which
might here be reheresed, it will very evidently appear, that there is more
sweetenes in the way of Christ, then the world thinks there is: sithence
even those, that have had so long and so great experience both of the one
kind of life, and of the other, do very hartelie and willingly renownce all
that ever the world gives and promeseth unto them, for the least crumme that
falls from Christ's table: saying with the spowse in the Canticles. If a man
give all his substance, for charity, he will contemn it as nothing.

For So Much therefore, as very reason would, that every one should serve them,
that serve our most merciful and louinge lord, it seems unto me, that it is
my bounde^ deutie also, to do you some service, in this your spiritual
journey, at the least with this little volume: which treats of prayer and
meditation etc. that the holy and devout exercises of your Reuerences may be
helped somewhat by the same: the which (I trust in our lord) shall be al ways
furthered, and proceed prosperously, both with it, and without it. And
althowghe this be a dett which I owe unto you: yet do I for this dett crave of
you a grace, and this is that your Reuerences will most humbly beseach our
lord, that it may please him of his infinite mercy and goodness, to grant his
favor and assistance to this book: that the profitt of them, that shall read
it, may be answerable to the pains of him that made it, and to the good heart
wherewith he offers it unto them.

THE PROLOGE AND ARGUMENT OF THIS BOOK.
PRAYER, what payer is.
(to define it properly) is a petition we make unto almighty God, for such
things as are apperteining to our salvation. Howbeit prayer is also taken in
an other more large sense; An other definition of prayer.
to wit: for every lifting up of our heart unto god. And according to this
definition, both meditation and contemplation, and every other good thowght
may be also called a prayer. And in this sense we do now use this vorde because
the principal matter of this book, is of meditation, and consideration of
things apperteyning to almighty God, and of the principal mysteries of the
Catholic faith.

The very thing that moved me to treat of this matter was, for that I
understood, The want of consideration is one of the principal cawses of all
the euilles in the world. Jeremy 12.
that one of the principal cawses of all the euilles, that be in the world, is
the want of consideration: According as the Prophett Jeremy signified when he
said. All the earth is destroyed with desolation, becawse there is none that
thinks with attention upon the things apperteyning unto God. whereby it
appears, that the very cawse or our evils is not so much the want of faith,
as the want of due consideration of the mysteries of our faith. For trewlie if
there were no want in this behalf the mysteries of our faith be of so great
virtue, The consideration of the mysteries of our faith is a great bridle to
with hold us from sin.
and efficacy, that if the very least mystery of them, were considered with
attention, and devotion, even the same would be a great bridle and redress of
our liffe. For who would ever go about to committ any sin, if he considered
that almighty God died for sin? and that he punyshethe sin, with
perpetual bannishement out of the kingdom of heaven, and with everlasting
pains and torments in the horrible fire of hell?

Whereby ye may see, that although the mysteries of our faith, be of very
great force, to incline our hearts unto goodness: yet because there be very
many Christians that have no due consideration of the things they believe,
therefore they work not such effect in there hearts, as such mysteries being
well weied and considered were able to work. For like as the physicians
affirm that if we will have a medecin to help a sick man, it is necessary,
it be first wrowght and digested in the stomak with natural heat, (because
otherwise it shall not be any profitt to him at all:) even so also, if we will
have the mysteries of our faith to be profitable and healthful unto our
souls, it is requisite they be first wrought, and digested in our hearts with
the heat of devotion and meditation: because otherwise they shall profit us
very littell. And for want hereof, we see that many Christians, which are
very whole and sownd in matters of faith, be yet in there lives very
licentious and dissolute. The cawse why many Christianes, that are sound in
matters of faith; be yet very dissolute in their lives.
And the reason is, because they do not consider, and weigh the holy mysteries
which they believe: and so they keep there faith, as it were fast locked in a
corner of a chest, or as a sword in the scabarde, or as a medecin in the
potticaries shop, and use not the benefitt thereof, for such purposes, as it
serves. They believe generally, and as it were in a fardel or gross so^me,
all such things as the Catholic Church believes. They believe that there
shall be a judgment, that there shall be pains for the wicked, and glory for the
good: Very few Christians do set the^ selves to consider the mysteries of our
faith.
but how many Christians shall ye find, that do consider after what sort this
judgment, these pains, and this glory shall be, with other the like
circumstances?

Now this is the cawse, why the holy scripture so earnestly commends unto
us, the continual consideration, and meditation of the law of God, and of the
mysteries thereof: which is indeed the study of true wisdom. Consider I
pray you, how instantly Moses that great prophett and frynde of God commends
this unto us: saying: Deuteron. 5.
Prynte these my words in your hearts and carry them bound as it were for a
sign in your hands, and teach them to your children, that they may think
upon them. When thou shall be sitting in thy house, or trauaylinge in the way,
when thou shall lie down to sleep, or rise up in the morning, think and
meditate upon them, and write them on the thresholdes and gates of thy house,
that thou may always have them before thine eyes. with what more effectual
words could he commend unto us, the continual meditation, and consideration
of heavenly things, then with these? Proverb. 1.3.
And no less does Solomon commend the same holy exercise unto us in his
Proverbs: where he exhorts us, to carry the law of God always, as it were
a chain of gold about our necks, and at night to go to bed with it, and in
the morninge so sone as we awake, to begin immediately to exercise our selves
in the same: Blessed is that man, that is so occupied. And so does
Ecclesiasticus term him, Ecclesiast. 14.
when he says: Blessed is the man, that dwells in the house of wisdom,
and meditateth upon the law and commandementes of God, and exercises him
self in justice, and reasons of holy things by his understanding. Blessed
is he that considers her ways in his heart, and understands her secrets.
He shall look in at her windows, and hearke^ at her doors. He shall abide
beside her house, and fasten a stake in her walls. He shall pytch his tent
besides her.

Now what other thing may we infer of all this, but that the holy Ghost
intended, by all these metaphors, to express unto us the continual exercise,
and consideration, wherewith the just man is always occupied, in searchinge
the worckes and wonders of almighty God. And for this very cause, Psalm. 1.
Eccles 31.
emonge the praises of the just man, this is put for one of the most
principal: that his exercise is to meditate upon the law of our lord, day
and night; and that he is always co^uersa^t in the secrecy of parables:
giving us hereby to understand, that all his trade and co^uersatio^ must be, in
searching, and meditating upon the secrets and wonderful worckes of almighty
God. And even for this very cawse also, Ezech. 1.
were those mystical beasts of Ezechiel represented unto us with so many
eyes; to signify unto us, that the just man stands in greater need of the
continual consideration, and sight of spiritual things, then of a number of
other exercises.

By this therefore we see plainly, what great need we have of this holy
exercise, and consequently how blyndelie and fowlie they are deceived, that
either despise or make little account of the holy exercise of prayer, and
meditation: not considering that this is openly to gaynesaie and contemn that
thing, which the holy Ghost has with so great instancie commended unto us. I
wish that such persons would read those five books of consideration, which
S. Barnard wrote unto EVGENIVS the Pope. And there shall they perceive, of how
great importance this holy exercise is, toward the obteyning of all virtues.

Now for this cause many Catholic and religeous persons, understanding what
great and inestimable fruit ensues of this godly meditation, have gone about
to exercise them selves ordinarily therein, and have appointed every day
certain special times and howeres for the same. Howbeit oftentimes they wax
cold, and give over this holy exercise, by reason of two difficulties they
find in it. Two difficulties in the exercise of prayer and meditation.
The one is the want of matter, and of consideratio^s wherein they may occupy
there cogitation at that time. And the other is the want of feruencie and
devotion, which is very requisite to accompany this holy exercise, in case
we mind to have any fruit and commodity thereby. In steed whereof, they find
many times great drynes of heart, and withal a great combat of diverse and
sondrie thowghtes. The order and division of the contents of this book.
For remedy of which two inconveniences, I have ordained this present book,
which is divided into two principal parts.

The first part, for remedy of the first inconvenience, treats of the matter
of prayer, The first part of this book.
or meditation: wherein are contained fowertience meditations, serving for all
the seven days of the weike, both in the morninge and evening. And these
meditations do contain the principal places and mysteries of our faith, and
especially the consideration of those mysteries, that are of most force, and
power, to bridle our hearts, and to incline them to the love, and fear of God,
and to the abhorring of sin. In like manner there are set out, the five
parts of this exercise, which be Preparation: readinge: meditation: thanks
giving: and petition: which is done to this end, that a man may have great
variety of matters, wherein to occupy his heart: wherewith to procure and
stir up the taste of devotion, and withal wherewith to illuminat and instruct
his understanding, with diverse considerations, and instructions. Besides this,
there is also treated therein, of six kinds of things that are to be
considered in every one of the points of the Passion of our Savior: that
both they, and all the rest, may minister unto us more plentiful matter for
meditation. These three things are set forth in the first part of this
work, for remedy of the first inconvenience.

The second part of this book.
The second part, for remedy of the second inconvenience, treats of those
things, that do help us unto devotion, and likewise of those, that do hinder
us from the same. It treats also of the most common temptations, that are
wont to molest devout persons. Moreover there are given certain aduices to be a
direction unto us that we err not in this way. These four articles are set
out in the second part of this book.

The third part of this book.
After these I have added the third part, in which is treated of the virtue of
prayer, and of her two companions, fasting, and alms deeds: to the intent,
that when a man sees, that in all the book there is treated of prayer, and of
the pains he ow^^ht to take for the same: he may understand, how well his
labor is employed, which is bestowed in obteining of a thing, of so great and
wonderful profitt.

Peradventure the Christian reader will be offended with the length of the
meditations, which we have here set fourth for the seven days of the weike.
Howbeit for this I have many answers. The first is, considering that in these
meditations, is treated of the principal places, and mysteries of our faith,
(the consideration whereof is of so great importance, for the due orderinge and
reforming of our liffe) it behooves me therefore to enlarge my style (in these
matters espetiallie) by reason of the great fruit, and commodetie that may
ensue unto us by the same. For in this book our meaning is, not only to give
matter of meditation, but much more to show the end of meditation, which is
the fear of God, and amendment of our liffe. The end of meditation is the
fear of God, and amendment of our life.
For the procuring whereof, one of the things that most helps us, is the
profound and long consideration of the mysteries, that are treated in these
meditations. For certeinlie these fourtene meditatio^s, be as it were so many
sermons, in which is laid, as it were a certain battery to man's heart, to
cawse it to yeald, (so much as is possible) and to surrender it self up into
the hands of his rightefull and true souereine Lord.

This was the chiefest cause that moved me to make the meditations so long.
Besides this, I see not, why the ghest that is invited, should complain that
the table is to full furnished with many dishes, since we bynd him not (as by
way of constraint) to make an end of them all, but only emonge so many
sundry things to make his choice of that, which serves best for his purpose.
Moreover (that there might be the less occasion of complaint) I have putt the
sum of each meditation at the beginning thereof, to the intent that such as
mind not to pass any further, might there have such things breiflie
abridged, as be necessary for the time, they intend to bestow in this holy
exercise.

THE END OF THE PROLOGE.
THE FIRST PART, WHICH TREATS OF the matter of consideration.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Wherein is treated of the great profitt, and necessity of
consideration.
FOR so much as in the exercise of consideration, it can not be, but that some
labor and pains must neides be taken, as well by reason of the employing and
occupieng of the time, which it requires of us every day: As also in regard
of the quieting, and close recollecting of the heart, (which is a thing very
requisite for the same) I think it therefore very necessary, before all
other things, to declare here, what great fruits, and commodities do ensue of
this exercise; to the intent that the heart of man, which without great promises
and allureme^ts is not moved to take great pains, may by this mean be the
more moved, and provoked to the love of this holy exercise, and to bestow
greater pains and labor therein.

Now the greatest commendation we can give to this virtue, is this, that it is
a great helper and furtherer of all other virtues. Consideration helps all
virtues in there exercises. Summa S. Thomae. 22. q. 82. artic. 1.
I mean not in supplieng the proper office of them, but in helping them in
their exercise. In so much that like as devotion is a general stirrer and
prouoker unto all virtues (as S. Thomas affirms) And as the hearing of a
sermon, (if it be hard with such attention and devotion, as it owght to be) is
also an exercise that moves us, not to any one virtue alone, but to all
virtues, (for so much as each good instruction is directed to this end:) even
so likewise is consideration a great help and furtherance not only to any
one virtue alone, but unto all kind of virtues. For there is no more
difference between a Sermon, and consideration, then is between the reading of
a lesson, and the repetition of the same reading; or between the meat that is
set before us in a dishe, and the same meat, when it is digested and co^cocted
in the stomak. Now this is one of the greatest, and most assured praises we can
give to this virtue: The proper praise of consideration.
For by this means it puts not away the labors of other virtues, but
rather makes provision how to help and further them in their labors, yea and
stirs and provoke them thereunto. This is the thing, which by the grace of
God, we intend now to prove very manifestly in this place.

For the better vnderstandnig whereof, Note here what virtues are common both
to a Christian and an Infidel: and what virtues are peculiare, and propre to a
Christian only.
it is to be known that emonge virtues some be common both to the Christian,
and to the pagan philosopher (as those four that be called Cardinal virtues,
To wit Cardinal virtues.
PRVDENCE, JUSTICE, FORTITVDE, AND TEMPERANCE. Of which virtues the
philosophers understood and wrote very much.) Other virtues there be, that are
proper and peculiare unto a Christian only, in that he is a Christian:
whereof the pagane philosophers neither knew nor wrote any thing at all: or
if they did, it was surely very little. These are principally those three most
noble virtues called Theologicale virtues: Theological virtues.
To wit. FAITH, HOPE, AND CHARITY. which have for their object almighty God
him self: and their proper office is, to dispose and direct a man toward
him. These Theological virtues have the empire, and soueraintie over all other
inferior virtues, and therefore they move and prou^ke them, to do their
operations, whenever the same is expedient for their service. After these,
there follow other very principale, and excellent virtues, (which be very
nere of affinity unto them. Religion.
) As the virtue called Religion: whose object is the service and honor of God:
The virtue called Devotion: Devotion.
which is the act and exercise of the same religion: and the office of it is,
The fear of God. Humility. Summa S. Thomae 2.2. q. 161. art. 5. ad 2.
to make us very prompt, and ready, to do all such things as apperteine unto
his service. The fear of God, which refreyneth, and brydeleth us from sin.
Humility which is also after a sort (as S. Thomas says) the root and
foundation of all virtues. And penance, Penance.
which is the gate of our salvation, whereunto appertains the sorrow and
grief for our life past, and withal a firm purpose, and determination, to
amend our life in time to come. Of all these virtues the pagan philosophers
understood very little, or nothing at all, notwithstanding that these be the
virtues that have the soueraintie and principality over all others, yea they
be the roots and founteines of all our weal. First, because (for the most
part) they be spiritual virtues, that have the accomplisheme^t of their
perfection in the inward part of our soul, (where all the beauty of the
dawghter of the king stands: Psalm. 44.14.
) And secondly, because all these virtues (faith excepted) be affectiue
virtues, and consequently they be unto us great motions and prouocations to do
good works. Wherein the providence of the grace of God wonderfully appears.
For like as nature has provided for us natural affections, and desiers, that
should be as it were certain spurs to provoke us to do all such things as
are requisite for our natural life: even so likewise has the grace of God
provided for us other supernatural affections, that might be also spurs and
prouocations unto us, to do all such things as are behouefull for our
spiritual life. And such be these virtues before mentioned: to wit, LOVE,
SORROW, FEAR, HOPE, with the rest, without which virtues the spiritual life
were like a barge without ores, or like a ship without sails. For So Much as
without these virtues we should not have any thing to move and provoke us to
do good works. And yet hereof we have greater need in this life, than in the
other. For (consideringe that the way of virtue is so sharp, and full of
difficulty) what should become of us, if we had not these spurs and
prouocations of love, of fear, and of hope, to spur and prick us forwards
to labor and traueill in the same? For this cause therefore are these virtues
so much commended. For besides that they are such principal virtues, (as we
have declared) they be also very great prouocations, and motions, to move us
to do good works.

Why the exercise of consideration is so much commended.
This foundation being now laid, I say that the greatest praise we give to
the virtue of consideration, is that the same is a great minister and helper
unto all these virtues, as well of the one sort, as of the other, according as
we will now declare. Where also it shall appear, that the commendation we give
to this virtue, is not so much in respect of the virtue it self, as for the
service, and commodity, it brings to other virtues.

HOW CONSIDERATION HELPS FAITH. I.
Faith is the first beginning and foundation of all the Christian life. Heb.
11.6.
NOW therefore to take our first beginning of faith; it is manifest that faith
is the first beginning, and foundation of all the Christian life. For faith
makes us to believe, that almighty God is our creator, our governor, our
redeemer, our sanctifier, our glorifier, to be short, our beginning, and our
last end. Faith is that which teaches us, Faith bridlethe ma^s heart, and
causes him to live in the fear of God.
that there is an other life after this; and that there shall be a general
judgment of all our works: and that we shall receive either everlasting
glory for the good, or else everlasting pain for the evil. And it is clear,
that the faith and belief men have in these things brideleth their hearts,
and causes them to stand in awe, and to live in the fear of God. For if
faith were not emonge us as a mean to bridle and direct us herein, what (trow
ye) would become of the life of man? And therefore the Prophet said: That the
just man lives by faith: Romans 1. Heb. 10. Galat. 3. Abac, 2.4.
not that faith alone is sufficient to give us life: but because faith (by
means of the representatio^ and consideration of those things that it
teaches us) provoke us to refrain from sin, and wickedness, and to follow
virtue, and goodness. Ephesians. 6.16.
And this is the cause why the Apostel wills us to take faith as a shield
against all the fyrie darts of the enemy. For certainly there is no better
shield against the darts of sin, than to call those things to mind, that
faith has revealed unto us against the same.

Wherefore that this faith may work this effect in us, it is very requisite
that we do sometimes ponder and consider in our minds with good attention and
devotion such things as our faith teaches us. Unless we po^dre and consider
the mysteries of our faith, our faith is as it were a lett^e clovp, and
sealed.
For if we do not so, it seems that our faith shall be unto us, as it were a
letter closed up, and sealed: in which althowgh there come notable important
news of very great sorrow, or joy: yet it moves us not at all, neither to
the one, nor to the other, no more than if we had received no letter at all.
And the reason is, because we have not opened the letter, nor considered what
things are contained in it. Now what thing could be said more aptly, or
more to the purpose, towchinge the faith of the wicked and dissolute
Christians? For suerlie there can not be things of greater terror, and joy,
than those are which our faith declares unto us. But the wicked Christians
because they do never open this letter, to see what things be contained in
it, (I mean hereby, because they do never think and meditate upon these
mysteries of our Christian faith, or if they think upon them, they pass them
over very lightly, and in great have,) they cause not in them this manner of
motion, and alteration, to wit, of joy, or of fear. Wherefore it behooves us
sometimes to open this letter of our faith, I mean, the mysteries thereof,
and to read the same very leisurlie, and to consider with good attention, what
things are tawght us in the same, the which is done by means of the exercise
of consideration. For it is consideration that opens that which is locked,
and unfolds that which is folded together, and makes that clear unto us,
which is otherwise dark, and obscure. And so by illuminatinge our
understanding with the greatness of the mysteries of our faith, it inclines
our will, (so farfourth as appertains to the office of consideration) to
conform our life to the same. This office of consideration almighty God
figured very notably in the law, what was signified by the clea^ beast in
the law. Leuit. 11. Deuter. 14.
when emonge the conditions that were required in the clean beast, he assigned
this for one, that the beast should chewe the cudde, to wit, the meat that it
bad eaten before. Now it is certain, that it was little to the purpose whether
the beast were clean, or unclean, and suerlie almighty God made little
account of that: But his meaning was, to represent unto us in that clean
beast, the condition, office, and exercise of those beasts, that be
spirituallie clean, (to wit, of the just and righteous persons) that are not
content only to eat such things, as appertain unto amightie God, in
beleeuinge them by faith, but after they have eaten them, they do also chewe
them by means of consideration, in searchinge and ponderinge the mysteries
which they believe. And after they have understood the meaning and excellency
of them, they distribute and divide this meat unto all the spiritual members
of the soul, for the sustentation and reparinge of the same.

Insomuch that if we mark this matter well, A notable similitude.
we shall find, that it fares in this case as in the seed of a tree, which
althowghe it do virtuallie contain within it the substance of the tree, yet
has it neide of the virtue and influence of heaven, and of the benefit and
moisture of the earth, to cause the virtue that is enclosed in the seed, to
come forth to light, and to grow up by little, and little, and wax a tree.
Even so in like manner we say, that although faith be the first seed and
original of all our weal, yet must it neides be helped with this benefit of
consideration, that by the same, and by means of charity, the greine and
fruitful tree of good life (which is virtuallie contained therein) may grow,
and come to light.

HOW CONSIDERATION HELPS HOPE. II.
Summa S. Thomae. 22. quaest. 17. art. 5. and quaest. 18. artic. 1.
CONSIDERATION helps also no less the virtue of hope. This hope is an
affection of our will that has his motive and root in the understanding. As
the Apostle signifies plainly unto us, saienge: All things that are written,
Romans 15.4.
are written for our instruction: that through patience, and consolation,
which the scriptures give unto us, we may have hope and affiance in almighty
God. For vndowtedlie the holy scripture is the fountain, The holy scripture
is the founteyne of comfort.
from whence the just man gathers the water of comfort, wherewith he
strengthens him self, to put his hope and trust in God. For first of all he
sees in the holy scriptures the greatness of the works and merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ, The works and merits of our Savior Christ are the
principal stay and foundation of our hope in God.
which are the principal stay and foundation of our hope. There he sees
likewise in a thowsande places the greatness of the goodness, sweetenes, and
majesty of almighty God liuelye expressed, and set out to the eye; and
withal the merciful louinge providence he has over them that be his; the
gentleness, and benignity, wherewith he receives them that come unto him: and
the faithful promises and pledges he has given unto them, whereby they are
very well assured, that he will never forsake them, that repose their hope and
trust in him.

There he sees, that there is no one thing more often repeted in the Psalms,
more commonly promised in the Prophets, more evidently declared in the
histories from the beginning of the world, than the louinge favors, graces,
and benefits, that our Lord continually bestows upon such as be his
servants: and how he has most mercifully helped and defended them in all
their calamities, and distresses. How he helped Abraham in all his iourneis:
Jacob in his dangers: Joseph in his bannishement: David in his persecutions:
Job in his adversities: Tobias in his blindness: Judith in her enterprise:
Hester in her petition: The noble Machabees in their battles, and triumphs:
and to be short, as many as with humble and religious hearts committed them
selves unto him. These and other the like examples do stre^gthen and encourage
our heart in labors, and adversities, and cause it to hope and trust assuredly
in God. Now what does consideration work in all this? Forsothe, it takes this
medicine into her hands, and applies it to the weak and diseased member,
that has need of it. The fruit of consideration.
I mean hereby, that consideration brings all these things into our
remembrance, and represents them to our heart: it searches and weygheth the
greatness of these louinge pledges and mercies of almighty God, and with them
animateth and encourages the afflicted person that he be not dismaide, but
rather fortifieth him with a strong hope, and enduceth him also to put his
trust in that most merciful and louinge Lord, who never failed any one man,
that had recourse unto him with all his heart. By this therefore thou see
Christian reader, how consideration is the minister and seruante of hope, and
how it serves her, and represents unto her all such things as may
strengthen and encourage her. But that man that considers not any of these
things, and has no eyes to see any part of them, wherewith can he possibly
strengthen and fortify this virtue of hope in him self, that it may be
profitable unto him in his labors, and adversities?

HOW CONSIDERATION HELPS CHARITY. III.
Charity of all virtues is the most excellent.
AFTER Hope, follows Charity, whose dew praises can not be uttered in few
words. For Charity is the most excellent virtue of all virtues, as well
Theological, as Cardinal.

Charity is the life and soul of them all: 1. Cor. 13.2.13.
and charity is also the accomplishement of all the law. For as the Apostle
says: Romans 13.10.
He that loves (that is, he that is in perfect charity) has fulfilled the
law. This is the virtue that makes the yoke of God sweet, and his burden
light. According to the measure of our charity, we shall have like measure of
glory in heaven. 1. Cor. 13.2.3.
This is the measure whereby the portion of glory that shall be given unto us in
the life to come must be measured. This is that virtue that is likinge and
acceptable unto almighty God, and for whose sake all such things are very
acceptable unto him, as be indede acceptable unto him: For trewlie without
charity neither faith, nor prophecy, nor martyrdom be of any value in the
sight of God. Charity is the fountain and original of all other virtues. 1.
Cor. 13.4.
To conclude, Charity is the fountain and original of all other virtues, (by
reason of the preeminencie and soueraintie it has to command them, and to
make them to do their offices. As the same Apostle confirms, saienge:
Charity is patient, and benign: Charity is not envious, it does no hurt to
any man, it is not proud, nor ambitious, neither does it seek her own
commodity: Charity is not angry, it thinks no evil, it rejoices not at
wickedness, and it is very glad of the truth: Charity suffers all things,
it believes all things, trusts all things, and bears all things.

Now althowghe it be true, that all virtues and good works do help us
toward the obteyninge of this most excellent and precious jewel: yet of all
others consideration helps us most specially. Our will is a blind power, and
must be guyded by our understanding.
For certain it is, that our will is a blind power, that can not step one
foot, unless the understanding do go before, and illuminate, and teach it,
what thing it owght to desire, and withal how much it owght to will and
desire the same. It is also certain (as Aristotle says) that each good thing
is amiable in it self, and that every thing does naturally love his own
proper weal. And therefore that our will may be inclined to love almighty
God, it is requisite that the understanding do go before it, we be provoked
to love God, both in regard of his divine perfectio^s, and in regard of his
wonderful love and benefittes toward us.
to examine, and try, and so consequently to declare unto the will, how amiable
almighty God is, both in respect of him self: (to wit, in regard of his
divine perfections,) as also in respect of us, (to wit, in regard of his
wonderful love and mercies showed toward us,) that is: the understanding
must weigh the greatness and excellency of his bounty and goodness, of his
benignity, of his mercy, of his beauty, of his sweetness, of his meeknes, of
his liberality, of his noblenes, and of all other his perfections, which are
innumerable. Besides this, the understanding has to consider, how louinge and
merciful almighty God has been toward us: how much he has loved us: how
much he has done and suffered for our sakes, even from the maunger until his
very death upon the cross: how many great blessings and benefits he has
prepared for us for the time to come: how many he does presently bestow upon
us: from how many great evils and miseries he has delivered us: with how
great patience he has suffered us: and how gently and lovingly he has dealt
with us: with all his other benefits, which be also innumerable. Summa S.
Thomae 1.2. q. 27. art, 2. and 22. q. 82. art. 3.
And thus by consideringe and ponderinge very much in the consideration of
these things, our heart shall by little and little be enkendeled and inflamed in
the love of such a merciful and bountiful louinge Lord. For if the very
wild and savage beasts do love their well willers, and benefactors, and if
gifts (as it is commonly said) do break the hard and stony rocks; and if
that man that finds benefits, finds withal (as the Philosopher says)
Chains whereby to take and bind men's hearts: what heart is there then so
stony hard, or savage, that consideringe the passinge bountiful goodness and
greatness of all these inestimable benefits, is not enkendeled and inflamed in
the love of our most louinge and merciful Lord that has bestowed them upon
us?

Add also hereunto, that when a man considers these things atte^tiuelie
with him self, and endeuoreth with the grace of God to do so much as he is
able to do for his part, almighty God will then also do that, that
appertains unto him: that is, almighty God will move him that moves
himself, Almighty God will help him, that helps him self.
and help him that helps him self, by helpinge our consideration with the
light of the holy Ghost, and with the gift of understanding, the which the
more it penetratethe and understands all these reasons that induce us to the
love of God, the more does it enkendle and inflame us in the same love of him.
For like as that everlasting light and word of the father is not a barren
word, but a fruitful word, which together with the father produces the
holy Ghost, which is a love consubstantiall: even so does this light and word
of God work in our hearts, by enkendelinge and inspiringe this love of God in
them.

This may yet be confirmed and declared more plainly by an other reason. For
it is manifest that althwghe this virtue of charity do grow and increase (as
we have said) with the acts of all other virtues, Vehement acts of charity
do increase charity. Summae S. Thomae 2.2 q. 24. art. 6.
being done in the state of grace: yet does it cheiflie increase with her own
proper acts, when such acts be vehement, according as S. Thomas affirms.
For like as by writing well, and with an earnest care and diligence, a man
atteineth to be a good writer; by paintinge, a painter: and by the exercise of
singinge, a musition: Note that the use, exercise and continuance of louinge
much almighty God, makes a man become a great lover of god.
even so likewise by louinge, he may become a lover. I mean hereby, that like
as the use of writing well, causes a man to be a good writer, and of
paintinge well, a good painter etc: even so likewise the use, exercise, and
continuance of louinge much almighty God, makes a man at length to become a
great lover of God. For albeit this heaue^lie ability and virtue be the gift
of God, and a thing which he infuseth, powers, and works in our sowles, yet
nevertheless he works this by this mean; I mean hereby, that as well the
virtues infused into our sowles by almighty God, Both the virtues infused,
and the virtues acquisite, do increase with the exercise of their own acts.
as the virtues acquisite (to wit, the virtues that be obtained by our own
labor, and industry,) do both of them grow and increase with the exercise
of their own acts, althowghe in a different manner. Whereupon we may infer
thus much, that the more a man shall multiply the acts of the love of God,
and the more he shall exercise himself in this virtue of charity, and the
longer he shall endure and persevere in this work of love, we can not exercise
our selves in actual louinge of God, without the knowledge and consideration
of the causes that may induce and provoke us to the love of God. The will
cannot move with out the understanding.
the more shall this heavenly gift of charity be rooted and fortified in
him. But now how can this be done without the exercise of consideration? How
can the will be occupied in louinge of almighty God, unless the understanding
be exercised in blowinge, inkendelinge, and discoueringe unto it the causes of
the love of God? For like as when two horses draw in a chariot, the one can
not go forwards without the other: even so these two powers (to wit the will,
and understanding) be in such sort lincked together, that ordinarily the one
can not go forwards without the other: (at the least the will can not move
without the understanding.) Thou seist now good Christian reader how inwardly
and entierly the exercise of consideration is annexed to the love of God.
For So Much as a man can never (or very hardly) set him self to love, unless he
do also consider, or have before considered such things as may move him unto
this love. And it is very needful for us to use some exercise of
consideration, not only for the increasinge of this virtue of charity, but
also for the preservation of the same: that is to say, consideration is
necessary, not only that charity may increase, but also that it may not
fail, and decrease, emonge so many contradictions, and stumblinge blocks, as
it has in this frail and miserable life. We see that a fish being out of
the water dies forthwith: and a drop of water being out of the sea is
quickly dried up: and the fire being out of his natural region is
incontinently consumed, Charity is as it were a stranger in this transitory
life.
unless there be some care and diligence used to feed and maintain it, by
puttinge often times wood unto it wherewith to preserve it. Now the very like
need has the fire of charity also to preserve it in this life, where it is
as it were a stranger, and pilgrim. And the wood wherewith it must be
preserved, is the consideration of the benefits of almighty God, and of his
perfections. For each one of these things being well considered, is as it
were a faggot, or fierbrande, that enkendeleth and inflam^^^ this fire of the
love of God in our hearts. Wherefore it behooves us to nourishe and maintein
this fire of charity oftentimes with the wood of consideration, that this
divine flame may never fail in us. According as almighty God has signified
in the law, when he said: Leuit. 6.12.
Upon my Altar (which is the heart of the just man) there shall be always fire.
And therefore let good diligence and care be taken every day in the morninge,
to maintein this fire of charity with wood, (to wit, with the consideration
of all these things,) that by this mean it may be always preserved. And so
is it said in the Psalm: Psalm. 38.4.
Through my meditation there is enkendeled d^fier: to wit, the fire of
charity.

This necessity of consideration may be proved by an other reason also. For
we see by experience in all habilities, and graces, both such as are natural,
All virtues may be lost by disco^tinua^ce and want of use and exercise of
them.
as those also that are acquisite, (I mean, gotten by our own traueile and
industry,) that like as they increase by use, and exercise, even so are they
also forgotten if we leave to exercise them. And this we see playnelie verified
even in such things as be very natural and customably used. For what thing
is more usual than the tongue, and language, which a man is enured and
acquainted withal even from his mothers pappes, and yet may it be forgotten
in time, if it be not used, and exercised. But what speak I of the tongue,
saying it happens sometimes, that when a man has lain sick in his bed, but
only four or five months, he can scarcely afterward frame him self to
go again when he ryseth, notwithstanding that goinge is a thing so natural
and so customably used. Now if the habilities which be so natural and so much
exercised do so much decay when they be not used: what will the supernatural
habilities do, which are but as it were certain proppes and stays adjoined
unto us, Charity and all other virtues will quickly be lost, unless we
exercise our selves very often in them.
to supply the defectes of nature? And if charity with all other virtues
infused be in like manner to be reckened in this account, in what case then
shall we be, if we do but very seldom or never exercise our selves in them?
For if that thing that is even natural will be lost for want of exercise, how
much more will that be lost that is supernatural? And if that thing may be
lost that is fast riueted even in our very bowels, what shall that do, that
is but as it were only fastened unto us with little pinnes?

Again if it be true, that all amity and fryndshipe is both preserved and
increased by means of familiarity and communication; and by the want thereof
is utterly quenched and lost (according as Aristotle affirms) what shall
then become of those persons, that have no manner of communication with
almighty God at all. And what can we hope of them, that do never speak with
him, nor he with them, nor so much as think, consider, or treat of any
heavenly matters? Thou seist then (dear Christian brother) of how great
importance the exercise of consideration, and communication with almighty God
is unto us, for the preservation of this virtue of charity.

HOW CONSIDERATION helpethe Deu^tion, and all other virtues affectiue. IIII.
AND consideration is no less behouefull to be had for all such virtues, as
are called affectiue: that is, apperteining to the affection, whereof we have
made mention before. Emonge which virtues, what Devotion is. Summa S. Thomae
22. q. 82. art. 1.
one of the most principal is devotion: which is a certain heavenly ability
and gift, that inclines our will to desire all such things with great
affection and earnestnes as appertein to the service of almighty God: which is
one of the things, that man has most need of, in this state of nature
corrupted. For we see by experience, that men do sin, not so much for want of
understanding, as for want of will: I mean hereby: that they sin not so
much for want of knowledge what is good: as for that they are unwilling to
do the thing they know to be good. And this unwillingness proceadeth not of
the nature of virtue (which of it self is most sweet, delectable, and very
agreeable to the nature of man) but of the corruption of man.

Now considering that this defect of our will is the very chief and
principal impediment we have, Our own will is the principal impedime^te that
hinderethe us from virtue.
to hinder us from virtue, and goodness: our principal care must be, to seek a
remedy for the curinge of this defecte. For which purpose one of the things
that helps us most, is devotion. For devotion is none other thing, but a
heavenly refreshing, and a blast, or inspiration of the holy Ghost, that
breakethe and makethe his way throwgh all these difficulties, Note what a
wonder full effect, devotion workethe in a man.
shakith of this heaviness, cures this lothsomnes of our will, and causes us
to have a taste and savor in that thing, that was otherwise unsavory, and
thereby makes us very prompte, agile, and quick, unto all goodness. And this
wonderful effect of devotion the servants of God do daily try and perceive
by experience in them selves, at what time they have some great and singular
devotion. For then they find them selves more willinge and lusty unto all
labor and pains, then they be at other times. And then it seems, that the
youth of their souls rejoices, and is renewed: and then they try by
experience in them selves the truth of those words of the prophett, Psalm. 102.
where he says: They that trust in our lord, shall change their strength: they
shall take wings, as it were, of an Eagle: they shall run, and not be
weary: Esa. 40.
they shall go, and not fainte.

Devotion has also an other property, which is, to be as it were a certain
founteine, Devotion is a continual spring of holy desiers
and perpetual spring of good and holy desires. For which cause in the holy
scriptures, it is commonly called an ointment, Cant. 1. and 4.
which is compounded of many sundry sorts of odoriferus spyces, and thereby
yeldeth out from it many sweet odors: Now the very like operation has
devotion also, for the time, it endures in our hearts: for so much as it
wholly spreads it self abroad into a thousand sundry kinds of holy
purposes, and desiers, the which the more they increase, and are dilated, the
more does the stenches of our appetite decrease, and diminish, which are the
evil desiers, that proceed from the same. For like as the evil sauore in a
sickmans chamber, is not so much perceived, when there is a little frankencence,
or some other odoriferus thing burnt therein: even so the savor of our evil
desires is not so much perceived, so long as the most sweet sauore of this
precious ointment continues within us. And for so much as it is certain, that
all the corruption of our life comes of the corruption and ste^che of our
appetite, and of the evil desires that procead from the same, it shall be our
part therefore to use great diligence in procuring this heavenly ointment of
devotion, which is of very great force and efficacy to diminishe and consume
this pestilent corruption.

And in like manner, as consideration serves in all the premises, even so does
it also serve and further all the other virtues before mentioned: which are:
the fear of God, the sorrow for our sins, the contempt of our selves:
(wherein consists the virtue of humility, No good affection can be in the
will, unless it proceed of some consideration of the understanding. Summa S.
Thomae 22. q. 82. art. 3.
) and thanks geuinge unto almighty God for his benefits. For (as we have
said before) there can be no good affection in the will, unless it proceed of
some consideration of the understanding. For how can a man have sorrow and
contrition for his sins, but by considering the filthenes and multitude of
them: the loss we receive by them? the hatred almighty God conceaueth against
them? and with all, how polluted and corrupted the soul remains, by reason
of them? Aganie how can a man stir up his heart unto the fear of God, but by
consideringe the highenes of his majesty, the greatness of his justice, the
profoundnes of his judgments, the multitude of his own sins, with other
the like things? How can a man humble and despise him felfe with all his
heart, unless he consider the great number of his own frailties, infirmities,
falls, and miseries? S. Bernarde.
For if humility be (as S. Barnard says) the contempt of our selves, which
proceeds of the knowledge of our selves, it is manifest that the deeper a man
shall wade by means of consideration into this knowledge of him self, and the
more he shall dig into this donghill, the better and more trewlie shall he
understand, what he is of him self, and the more shall he contemn and humble
him self. Now to speak of thanks geuinge unto almighty God, for his
manifold inestimable benefits, out of which do proceed those songs, and
praises of God (which is a principalle part of true religion) from whence (I
say) does this rendering of thanks proceed, but from the profound
consideration of the same benefits? For the more a man shall by means of
consideration, penetrate, and understand the greatness and excellency of Gods
benefits, the more is he provoked to praise, and give thanks unto almighty
God, with all his heart for the same. I do here also pass over the contempt of
the world, and the hatred of sin, with other the like virtuous affections,
which next after grace, do proceade of this exercise of consideration, which
is the spur and prouoker of them all, and the oil, wherewith the lamps of
all these virtues and good affections, and of other the like graces, are still
nourished and meinteined.

HOW PRAYER JOINED with consideration helps all the virtuous affections. V.
PRAYER likewise when it is joined with consideration (as ordinarily it is wont
to be) helps no less then consideration it self: yea sometimes it helps
much more. For consideration commonly is not occupied any further but only
about enkendelinge of some one of these virtuous affections: but prayer (when
it is attent and devout, and is withal accompanied with spirit and feruencie
of mind) is wont to stir up all these virtues aforesaid. For when the
soul presents her self before almighty God, with an earnest great desiere
to appease his wrath, and to desiere him of mercy, then there is no stone so
hard, but that it is moved hereunto. I mean hereby, that there is no holy
affection, but that it is then wholly exercised and employed to this purpose.
And it fares in this case, as it does with a mother that is desirous to still
her child, or as it does with a good and louinge wife, that has a desire to
pacefie her husband, when she perceaueth him to be angry, In which cases they
are wont to omit no means they can devise, that may aniewise further the
matter. For So Much as in prayer the religious soul accuses her self before
almighty God: The offices and effects of prayer. Math. 18.
there with the publican she is confounded, and ashamed for her sins and
offenses; there she purposes an amendment of life: there she humbles her
self, and trembles before the supreme divine majesty. There she believes:
there she hops: there she loves: there she adoreth, there she praises:
there she gives thanks for all benefits: and there she offers sacrifice
unto almighty God, The habites of virtues do increase with the exercise of
their acts.
both for her self, and for all her neighbors. All these things be performed
in a devout prayer. And because the habites of virtues do increase with the
exercise of their acts, hereof it procedethe, that the soul by means of this
exercise of prayer remaynethe very much bewtified and perfited in these
virtues. As S. Laurentius Iustinianus, affirms in these words. In the
exercise of prayer, the soul is cleansed from sin, charity is nourished:
Faith is illuminated: Hope is streingthened: the spirit is conforted: the
bowels are mollified: the heart is quieted: truth is discoueuered: temptation
is overcome: heaviness is put to flighte: the senses are revived: the strength
that was weakened is repaired: lukewarmenes is abandoned: the rustines of vices
is consumed: and in this exercise the lively sparcles of heavenly desires, do
rise up, and show them selves, emonge which burnethe the flame of the love of
God.

By this we understand, that prayer is a most convenient exercise for that man,
that minds to reform his manners, and life, and to change himself into an
other man. As our Savior has plainly signified unto us, in the mystery of
his glorious transfiguration, whereof S. Luke writes thus: that as he wa^
prainge in the mount, he sodeinlie transfigured him self in such wise, that
his face shined very brighte like the son, and his garments became white
like snow.

why our savior woul de transsigure himself rather at the time of prayer,
the^ at any other time.
Our Savior could right well have transfigured himself at other times, then
at prayer, if it had pleased him. But he would of very purpose be tra^sfigured
whiles he was at prayer: to signify unto us in the transfiguration of his
body, what virtue prayer has to transfigure our souls: that is: to make them
to lose the customs of the old man, and to clothe them with the new man, which
is created after the image of God. Prayer ha the great virtue to transfigure
our souls.
There it is, where the understanding is illuminated with the beams of the
true son of justice, and where the garments, and ornaments of the soul are
renewed, and becomme whyter then snow. This is the very thing, that almighty
God signified to holy Job, when he said.

What? Is it by thy wisdom, Job 39.
that the hawk prunethe and changethe her feathers when she beats her wings
ag^^nst the sowthe? Certainly it is a thing greatly to be wondered at, that
this bird knows how to cast of her old feathers, and how to fether her self
with new. And that for this purpose, she seeks the whot air of the sowthe,
that with the heat thereof, her poores may be opened, and with her moving the
old feathers fall of, and so give place to the new that begin to spring
out. But how much more wonderful is it, to see a soul unclothe her self of
Adam and to put on Christ, to change the conditions of the old man, and to
adorn her self with the conditions of the new man? Now this change that is so
wonderful, is then wrought, when the devout soul turns her self to the
sowthe, and there beats her wings in the air. And what is it to turn her
self to the sowthe: but to lift up her spirit to the consideration of the
eternal light, and to the beams of the true son of justice? And what is it
to beat her wings in the air, but to be there sighinge and pantinge with
heavenly affections, and desires, calling upon almighty God, with great
anguishe of mind, and desiringe most humbly his fauore and grace? For then
blows the aler of the sowthe, that is the heavenly refreshinge of the holy
Ghost, who with his temperate heat, and sweet mouinge, strengthens, and
helps us, to cast of all the old feathers of the old Adam, that they may
give place to the new feathers of virtues and holy desires, which there do
begin to grow and bud out. And this is that thing, that Ecclesiasticus
signified by other words when he said; They that fear our lord will prepare
their hearts, Ecclesiast. 2.
and sainctifie their sowies before him. The which is principally done in the
exercise of devout prayer. For there it is, where the soul presents her
self most familiarly before almighty God, (as S. Barnard says.) And there it
is, where by approaching nere unto the everlasting light, S. Bernarde.
she sees more clearly her own defectes, and so bewaileth, and accuses
them, and seiketh remedy for them, desiering our lord of his grace, and fully
purposing an amendment on her part, and thus by little and little she
sainctifieth and amendeth her life. Thou see now good Christian reader what a
great help this exercise of consideration is, toward the obteyning of those
most high and excellent virtues, which are (as we have said) peculiar to a
Christian man.

HOW CONSIDERATION helpethe toward the obteyninge of the four Cardinal
virtues: which be: Prudence: Justice: Fortitude: and Temperance. VI.
MOREOVER consideration helps also (after a sort) toward the obteyninge of
the other four virtues, called Cardinal virtues: Note here the wonderful
effects of consideration declared by S. Bernarde.
which be. PRVDENCE, JUSTICE, FORTITVDE, AND TEMPERANCE. as S. Barnard plainly
affirmerh in his book of consideration, by these words: First of all,
consideration purifieth and cleanses the very fountain, from whence it
proceadeth: which is the soul. Besides that, it governs our natural
passions, it directs our works, it corrects our faults, it frames our
manners, it beutifieth and directs our life: to be short, it gives knowledge
to a man of things both divine, and human. It is consideration, that
distinguishes things confounded, it recollecteth those that be scattered
abroad, it searches secrets, it seaketh for truths, and tries and
examinethe such things, as are in deed but apparent, and counterfeit. It is
consideration that disposes for the time to come, and thinks of the time
past, providing for the one and bewailing the other, that so nothing may
remain with out correction and due chasticement. It is consideration, that in
the midst of prosperity, foreseeth adversity, and therefore is not dismaide
when it comes: for that it has prevented the same before hand with
consid^ration. Of which two things the one apperteineth to Prudence, and the
other to Fortitude. It is consideration, that sits down as a judge, to give
sentence betw^ne pleasure, and necessity, and appoints to every of them
their bounds, and limits: geauing to necessity, that, which is sufficient,
and taking from pleasure that, which is superfiuus, and in so doing, it makes
and formethe the virtue of temperance, whereunto this office apperteineth. Thus
far be the words of S. Barnard: whereby thou may perceive, how great, and
general a help consideration is toward the obteining of these virtues.

HOW CONSIDERATION HELPETHE TO RESIST VICES. VII.
AND consideration does not only help to obtain virtues, but also to resist
the vices, that be contrary unto them. For what kind of temptation is there,
against which a man does not feight with the weapons of prayer and
consideration? For althowghe it be most necessary to use other weapons for
this purpose, as fasting, taking of discipline (by scourginge our selves)
alms deeds, austerite, and affliction of body, and to eschew the occasions
of euilles, with other like things: yet at a sudden, what other weapon can be
devised more ready, and as it were ever at hand, then prayer, and
consideration? With what other weapons does the just man feight, and overcome
in these battles, then with them? If he be assaulted with the cogitation of
carnal pleasure, and delight, he hydeth him self wholly in the holes of the
rock: that is: in the precious wounds of our savior Christ crucified. If he
be assaulted with anger, and desire of revenge, he thinks upon the wonderful
patience, and meekenes of our Savior Christ, and upon those sweet words, he
spoke, when he desired pardon on the Cross, for those very persons, that
crucified him. If he be entysed with glotonie, and delicious fare, if he be
allured with the desire to lie in a soft bed, and to lead a delicate and wanton
life, he lifts up his eyes, and considers the bitter gaulle, and vinegar,
which that fountain of life our sweet Savior Christ drancke upon the cross,
and also the hard bed, of the cross whereupon he died, and the paynefull and
austere trowblesome life, which he led for our sakes. When he begins to be
puffed up with pride, he considers the greatness of our Savior Christ's
humility. When he is moved with covetousness, he considers the extremity of
the poverty of our savior Christ. When sleep and slouthfulnes makes him to
become heavy, and dull, he considers, the paynefull watchinges, and
traueiles, that our savior endured for us in his prayers. When he is weried
with the trowblesome labors and pains of this present life, he considers
the greatness of the heavenly treasures, and glorious delites, which he shall
receue in the life to come. When he is tempted with the fickle pleasures and
delights of this miserable world, he considers the euerlastingnes and
bitterness of the horrible pains and torments of hell fire? When he is
molested and weried with the exercises of penance, he thinks upon the
virtuous examples of the Martirs, of the Apostles, of the Prophets, and of the
ancient holy religious Monckes: and with the consideration of that which is
past, he causes all that he does presently, to seem little unto him. And when
it so happens, that with all these defensiues he can not well sustain the
weight of his burden, he adds then unto the diligence of consideration, the
voice of prayer, calling and cryenge with great anguishe of mind, upon
almighty God, who (be you well assured) will never forsake them, that call
upon him, but promeseth that he will give ear unto them: and has given us
very manifest and sundry examples, that he never forsaked them, that called
upon him with all their hearts. This is that, which the prophet David affirms
in a thousand places he did, when he saw him self compassed about with the
snares of his ennemies, and with tribulations and afflictions, saying. I
presented my prayer before him, Psalm. 141.
and I impartid unto him my tribulation.

HOW CONSIDERATION helps us to atchieue and accomplish all works of virtue,
that be awstere and full of hardness and difficulty. VIII.
AND consideration helps us not only in ouercomming the temptation of vices:
but also in every virtuous work that is hard and full of difficulty unto us.
For when taking of discipline: (which is whippinge our rebellious flesh for
our sins.) the wearinge of hear clothe: the goinge barefore: the fasting
with bread, and water: the rysinge to prayer at midnight: and the labors,
troubles, and persecutions of this life, be ircksome unto us, if then we
intend (like faithful servants of God) to persevere, and go forward with
our good beginning, unto what other haven do we resort, but to prayer and
consideration? For there do we humbly beseach our Lord to grant us fortitude
and grace, that we fall not under our burden, and there do we lift up our
eyes, and consider a thowsande kinds of examples, and remedies, that may
encourage us to persevere in our good purposes? Thou see now, devout
Christian reader, what a great help and succor we have in this virtue of
consideration, toward the service and use of all other virtues.

HOW CONSIDERATION excludes not other particular helps unto virtues. IX.
HOWBEIT, let no man for all this imagine, that hereby is excluded the
particular labor, and study that is to be used about every one of the other
virtues, for that consideration is so great a help to obtein them. For so much
as general helps, do not exclude the particular helps, that be required in
every thing. And the general helps required toward the obteyninge of all
virtues, Note the general helps unto all virtues.
are, not only consideration, but also fasting, silence, prayer, hearing of
Sermons, goinge to confesion, receiving of the blessed Sacrament of the
altar, and devotion, with other the like virtues, which be general helps and
prouocations unto all virtues. But besides these general helps, that do give
light to the understanding, and move the will to goodness, it is very
requisite also, to use the proper exercises of the same virtues, whereby to
root, and make the habites of them, more perfett by use, and to cause a man to
have a more promptnes and facility, in the exercise of good works. For other
wise, like as the sword, that never comes out of the scabbord, is commonly
very hard to be drawn out, at the time that a man has neide to occupy it:
even so whosoever does never exercise him self in the acts of virtues, shall
never be prompt or quick in doing them, when he shall have need to use them.

And althowgh charity be the greatest, and most general help we have unto
all virtues, yet consideration is, as it were, the general instrument of
charity, whereby to atteyne unto all goodness, as we have here declared. And
therefore, like as the soul is the first beginning of all the works of man,
and yet it uses natural heat, as a general instrument unto all such things,
as it does: even so is charity the beginning of all our good works, Charity
is the beginning of all our good works.
and yet charity uses consideration, and devotion, as general instruments
to bring them to pass. So that it is no derogation to charity, to give this
pre-eminence unto these virtues, forsomoche as this pre-eminence belongs unto
charity, as to the mistres, and principal agente, but to consideration, and
devotion, as to her instruments, and helpers.

HOW THE EXERCISES OF prayer, consideration, and meditation, etc. apperteyne
not only to religious persons, and priests, (thowghe principally unto
them) but unto the laity also. X.
BUT peradventure thou will say, that these exercises of prayer,
consideration, and meditation, do appertein, only unto religious persons, and
preistes, and not unto the laity. True it is I grant, that these exercises do
principally appertein unto religious persons, and priests, by reason of their
state and profession of life: but yet nevertheless, the laietie are not utterly
excused of vsinge some kind of exercise of prayer (thowgh not in so high a
degree, and perfection) if they mind continually to preserve them selves, and
to live in the fear of God, Lay men are bound to have faith hope, charity,
humility, and other virtues: as well as religious persons and priests.
without committinge any deadly sin. For even the laity also, are bownde to
have Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, the fear of God, contrition, devotion,
and an hatred against sin. Now saying all these virtues be for the most part
virtues affectiue, (as we have already declared) which affections must
necessarily proceed of some consideration of the understanding: if this
consideration be not exercised, how shall these virtues be preserved? How shall
a man help him self by faith, if he do not sometimes consider such things,
as his faith tells him? How shall he be enkendeled in charity, and
strengthened in hope; how shall he brydel him self with the fear of God? How
shall he be moved to devotion, to sorrow for his sins, and to the contempt
of him self (wherein consists the virtue of humility, which apperteineth
unto all kind of persons) if he do not consider those things, wherewith these
affections are wont to be inkendeled, according as we have before declared?
Neither owght a man to pass over these things, in the exercise of
consideration, with to much speid, and in post have. For emonge the miseries of
man's heart, one of the greatest is, that it is so sensible to understand the
things of the world, and so insensible to understand the things,
apperteinyng unto almighty God. In so much that unto the one, it is, as it
were, a very dry reed, and to the other, as it were, grene wood, that can not
be set on fire, and enkendled, but with very great labor, and travel. And
therefore we must not in our exercise of consideration, pass over these
things in such have, but stay, and pawse for a time in them, more or less,
according as the holy Ghost shall instruct us, and according also, as the
business and occupations of every man in his state, and vocation of life, shall
give him leave. And it is not a matter of mere necessity to have certain times
appointed every day for consideration.

Unto these things ye may add furthermore, the dangers of the world, with
all the great difficulties, men have to preserve them selves without sin, in
a body so evil disposed, and in a world so dangerous, and emonge so many
ennemies, as we have continually assaulting us on every side. And therefore
(if for that thou art not a religious person) thy state of life do not bind
the unto so much exercise of prayer and meditation, yet the greatness of the
danger and perrill, wherein thou live in the world, must needs bind the to
use some exercise therein. The state of a religious person (I confess) is
greater then thine, Note why the laietie live in more danger of fallinge into
deadly sin, then religious persons.
but thy danger of falling into sin, is also greater then his. For the
religious person is protected, and guarded, by his superior, by enclosure within
his monastery, by observance of his rules, by obedience, by prayers, by
fastinges, by sainge daily divine service, by the awsteritie of his order, by
good company, and religious conversation, and by all other spiritual
exercises, and virtuous labors of the holy monastical life; in so much that
even the very walls of their monasteries be a great defense, and sauegard
unto them, to keep them from the occasions and dangers of sin: but the lay
person living, practisinge and dealinge daily and howerliein the thronge, and
press of the world, (besides that he is destitute, and unprovided, of all
these great helps, and sauegardes) he is compassed about also on all sides,
with dragons, and scorpions, and treads always upon serpents, and
baseliskes: I mean, the dangerous conversation with wicked persons, and the
continewall occasions, and temptations, of fallinge into deadly sin, both at
home, and abroad, within him self, and without him self, both at doors, and
at wyndowes, and has a thousand several diuelis he engines, and snares, laid
to entrappe him at all times, both day and night. Emonge all which dangers and
temptations, for him to keep his heart pure, and his eyes chaste, and his body
clean, in the mids of the raginge fires of youth, of nawghtie company, of
lewd conversation, and emonge so many evil examples of this wicked world,
(where there is scarcely hard one word of God, but rather iestinge and
scoffinge at all such, as be given to virtue, and godliness) it is one of the
greatest wonders, that almighty God works in the world. Wherefore if the
religious person owght to be always armed because he is by his profession a
man of war, even so must the lay man be armed also in his manner, (althowgh
not in so high a degree) not because the perfection of his state of life, does
bind him so much thereunto, but by reason of the great peril and danger he
lives in. For as well do they go armed, that have ennemies, as those that be
soldiers, and men of war. The soldiers go armed, by reason of the bond,
and duty of their profession, and the others go armed by reason of their
necessity. Emonge which spiritual weppons, we do not only put prayer,
consideration, and meditation: but also fasting, silence, hearing of sermons,
reading of devout books, frequentinge the sacraments, and auoidinge the
occasions of sins, with all other awstere usage of the body. All which
things be, as it were, a certain bryne, and pickle, to keep and preserve this
corruptible, and evil inclined flesh of ours, that it breed not worms, and
stenche in it. For vndowtedlie, since the corruption of original sin, it is
the greatest and hardest matter of the world, for men to keep them selves any
long time, without deadly sin, living in such a corrupt and dissolute wicked
world as this is. For if those very persons, that do use all these spiritual
helps, and exercises, are all that not withstanding much molested with the
feate, and danger of fallinge into deadly sin: what shall becomme of those,
that do never use any of all these spiritual exercises, scarcely in all
their life! And if the holy king David, and many other saints (that lived
with so great warines, and virtuous discipline, and went armed with so many
kinds of spiritual weppons) did notwithstanding take such great falls, at
what time the occasions of sin, were ministered unto them, what shall become
of them (troweye) that make none account at all, of any of these spiritual
exercises.

AN ANSWER TO AN Objection, that some slouthefull Christians do make,
against the holy exercise of prayer, meditation and consideration, saying:
that they are bound to no more, but to keep and observe the commandementes of
God, and of his Catholic Church. XI.
BUT thou will say, I am not bound to keep any more, then the commandments
of almighty God, and of his Catholic Church. True it is, I grant. But yet to
keep well this wall, we have need of a forewall, or bulwark: and to keep
this vessel, we have need of a cubbort to keep it in: and to raise up this
buildinge, we have need of a scaffold, and other engines to raise it up
withal. I mean hereby, that to keep the law of God, we have need of many
things, to strengthen, and encourage our hearts, for the kepinge, and
observation of the same law. For if the nature of man were in such good
plight, as it was before sin, then were it a very easy matter to fulfill
our duty herein: but now alas having so many lettes, and contradictions, we
have need to have ever two cares, the one how to keep the law of God, and
the other how to strengthen our heart, that it may overcome the impedimentes,
and contradictions, that do hinder us from fulfilling the laws, and
commandementes of God. When the children of Israel, 2. Esdras. 4.
returned from the captivity of Babylon, they went about to build Jerusalem
again, and they intended to do nothing else, but only to build: but because
the borderers round about them sowght to hinder them in their buildinge, their
labor and traueill, was thereby dowbled. So that they were constrained to
appoynte the one part of the people to attend to the building, and the other
to fight, and drive away their ennemies from the wall. Now in our case,
whereas there be so many ennemies, that do daily and howrelie seike to hinder
us, in this spiritual building of virtues: the deuilles on the one side, with
a thousand subtle snares, and deceites: the world on the other side, with a
thousand kinds of scandalous offenses, and evil examples: and the flesh in
the midst, with diverse and sondrie kinds of appetites, which be so fyerie,
and so contrary unto the law of God, (for God requires chastity, and the
flesh longs after sensuality: God requires humility, and the flesh
seaketh after vanetie: God would have austeritie of life, and the flesh hunteth
after delights and pleasures) if now there be no spiritual weappons
exercised, to drive away these ennemies, if there be no medecynes used to cure
this corrupted flesh, how shall a man keep chastity emonge so many dangers,
charity, emonge so many sca^dalous offenses; peace, emo^ge so many
contradictions; simplicity, emonge so many malicious deceites: cleannes of
life, in a body so filthy: and humility, in a world so much given unto
pompeous pride, and vain glory: Now to cure this flesh, and to make
resistance against these ennemies, that do hinder us in this building of
virtues, we have need of other virtues. Some to carry the burden, and some
others to help us to carry the same. For the virtue of chastity fulfilleth
the burden of the commandment: which says: Thou shall not committ
fornication: but fasting, prayer, avoiding of occasions of sin, taking of
discipline, by whipping our rebellious flesh, and other the like holy
exercises, do help to mortify the flesh, that it may be the better able to
bear this burden. All which virtues, although they be not always of precept,
and bounden duty: yet are they often times of very necessity, and bounden
deutie to be exercised, whenever the danger we be in is so great, that it
requires the exercise of them, for the keepinge and fulfillinge of the
commandementes.

But emonge these virtues, and defensiues (that do help us to observe the
commandments) one of the most principal is prayer. For prayer is a
principal mean to obtain grace, which is the thing that is of chiefest
force, to sustain the burden of the law of God. Ecclesiast. 35.
And therefore Ecclesiasticus says. He that keapeth the law, multiplieth
prayer. For whereas he sees by experience, that none can keep the law of God
(by the observation whereof everlasting glory is obtained) without the grace
of God, he helps him self by prayer, to obtein grace, by means wheeof he
may be able to keep the law of God. The law commands us to be chaste. But
besides this, the holy Ghost adds, and says by the wise man. Understanding
that none could be chaste, Sap. 8.
unless thou (o Lord did give him grace for the same, and it was a great
grace to know of whose gift this was) I went unto our Lord, and I demanded
of him this grace; with all my heart. Whereby thou may see (according as we
declared in the beginning) that the wall has need of a forewalle, or
bulwark, and the vessel has neide of a cubbord to keep it in, and some
virtues have need of other virtues, to defend, and guard one an other.

Now if this be true, that thou art bound to keep the law of God, and not to
commit any deadly sin, it is good reason, that thou do seek out all such
means, as may help thee to keep the same law, and to preserve thee without
deadly sin. The which means although generally they be but of counsel, yet
sometimes they may be of precept, when the necessity of exercisinge them (as
we have said) is so great, that without the use of those means, the very
commandments them selves cannot be kept, and fulfilled, as all the learned
divines do affirm. Howbeit every christian that has an earnest desire of his
salvation, owght not to expecte, and delaie the seekinge for these remedies,
until the very last, and extreme danger, when the knyfe is already at his
throat: but he owght to make good provision, and to furnishe him self before
hand, by means of these for said spiritual exercises, that he may live the
more safe, and secure, from the peril of breakinge Gods commandments.

Again I confess, that these means (as we have said) do apperteine to the
religious, and to the lay people, after a diverse sort: and that prayer, and
consideration it self, which is one of these means, must be used of them in
diverse degrees. For the religious person must exercise the same, as a thing
appertening to his office, and dewtie of his profession, (because he walks
toward perfection) but the lay person, must exercise it, as a mean, whereby
he may the better fulfill his bounden duty of keeping the commandments of
almighty God. And therefore the lay person must take so much of this
medecin, (to wit of prayer, meditation etc.) as may suffice to cure his
disease: and so much must he take of these means, as may suffice to obtein
his end. It is sufficient for the lay person to withdraw him self
sometimes, for to enter, and take an inward vewe within him self, and then by
means of these, or any other spiritual exercises and prayers, to attend
unto the reparinge of his conscience, and to the reformation of his life: for
considering that this is the greatest of all our business, it is requisite that
this be not the last of our cares.

OF THE MATTER OF CONSIDERATION. XII.
HAVING now spoken both of the profit, and necessity of consideration, and our
hearts being now well affected herewith toward this virtue: let us begin
to treat of the matter of consideration, which consists of certain godly,
and devout considerations, which are of greatest force, to induce us to the
love and fear of God, to the abhorring of sin, and contempt of the world.
For which purpose, there be no considerations better, nor of greater force and
efficacy, then those that are taken out of the principalle articles, and
mysteries of our faith: as the bitter passion and death of our Savior: the
remembrance of the terrible day of judgment: of the horrible torments of
hell: of the glory of heaven: of the benefits of almighty God: of our
sins: and of our life, and death: For every one of these points being well
weied, and considered, be able to provoke our hearts very much to all the
effects above mentioned. These very points S. Bonauenture has treated in a
book, that he entitled, FASCICVLARIVS, and has divided them into the seven
days of the weke. And thus he did, that a man might have every day new
food for his soul, and new prouocations unto virtue, and so avoid the
tediousnes, that he should otherwise have in thinking always upon one same
matter. And for this cause, it seemed good unto me, to follow the same
division, which this renowned, and blessed holy father has made, who of all
others has treated most largely of these matters. And if there be any, that
shall not well like of this division, but will follow some other, he is at
free liberty so to do, and has also examples to follow therein. For it
imports not much, what order and division he follow in the same. And suerlie,
that is the best order, The word of god, and the consideration of heavenly
matters be the food of our soul.
to be used in these matters, that each man fyndeth to be best for him self,
and wherein he takes most profit and commodity.

Moreover I thowghte it expediente, considering that the food and sustenance
of our soul is the word of God, and the consideration of heavenly matters,
(for therewith is our soul sustained in the spiritual life, which consists
in the love, and fear of God,) that like as we give ordinarily to our body
his refection twice every day, to preserve it from feintinge in this life,
even so we should also give to our soul her ordinary refection, twice every
day, that she fail not in her life. howbeit this is not a thing of bounden
dewtie, nor of precept: but only of wholesome council: espetially
co^sideringe, that the Saints have used this exercise more often times. For
we read, Daniel. 6.
that the prophet Daniell with drew him self to this exercise, three times in
the day, Psalm. 118.
and the prophet David also used to praise God seven times in the day. After
whose virtuous example, our holy mother the Catholic Church, has instituted
the seven Canonical hours of daily service. Here be two kinds of
meditations assigned: the one for the morninge and the other for the eueninge.
And for this cause, have we here assigned two kinds of meditations: The one
for the morninge, which treats of the most bitter passion of our redeemer:
and the other for the evening, or night, which treats of the other points
and matters here before mentioned.

But if any man shall have such want of time, or of devotion, that he can not
withdraw him self unto this exercise twice in the day: let him yet find the
means, to withdraw him self thereunto, at the least once in the day. And
that he may not lose the fruit of all these meditations folowinge: he may
exercise him self one weke in the one sort: and an other weke in the other
sort. And in so doing he may taste, and take profit of all these godly
instructions, which we have here set fourth unto him.

OF THE FIVE PARTS OF PRAYER. CAP. II.
HERE I must advertise the devout Christian reader, that he must not spend all
the whole time of this exercise, in meditation only: For before meditation,
there may go two other parts of prayer, which be preparation, and readinge:
and after the same, there may follow other two, which be thanks geauinge,
and petition. For the first thing that we must do herein, is, to prepare our
hearts unto this exercise: and then it shall do well, 1. Preparation.
to read those points, that we intend to meditate upon. And after the
readinge, 2. Readinge.
we have to meditate upon such things, as we have read: the which being done,
3. Meditation.
we may then make an end with some devout geuinge of thanks unto almighty
God, 4. Thanks geuinge.
for all his benefits: and with a petition, 5. Petition.
or demand of al such things, as we shall think are necessary both for our
own sowles, and for the sowles of our neighbors. Of which five parts, we
mind godwillinge to treat hereafter more at large in their proper place. This
division, and order may be followed by them, that are as yet but young
beginners, and nouices in this trade.

As for those, that have had greater exercise, they stand not in so great
need, of these introductions and rules.

And it is to be noted, that the meditations that are here appointed to be used
at night, are first of all abridged into a brief sum, wherein I have set out
in order the principal points, that are to be considered in every one of
them: (and afterward I have added thereunto, a more large and ample
declaration of all the same points.) And this summarie abridgement I made, to
the intent, that after they have been red over diverse times, they may be the
better understood, and meditated upon. True it is, that of the meditations upon
the holy passion, I have not made the like abridgement at the beginning of
them, as I have done of the others: because I judge, that the text of the holy
Evangelists, which I have there set before, may suffice for that purpose.

And it is not needful for us at every time we go to meditation, to consider
all the principal points, that are there particularly noted: but it shall
suffice to take two, or three of them, more, or less, according as the
devotion, and time, that every one has, One mystery well considered and
meditated upon, profits more, then many sleightelie passed over in haste.
, shall require. For certeinlie there is more profit taken by one mystery, or
point, well thowght upon, and dewlye considered: then by many that are
sleightelie passed over in have. Howbeit I thowght good, to note diverse and
sundry points, to the intent, that emonge so great variety of
considerations, every one might make his choice of such things, as might best
serve his devotion.

HERE FOLLOW THE FIRST SEVEN MEDITATIONS FOR the seven days of the weke in
the morninges.
MONDAIE MORNINGE.
THIS day, when thou have made the sign of the cross, with such preparation
as shall hereafter be declared in the fourth chapter; thou have to meditate
upon our savior Christ's wass hinge of his Apostles feet: and upon the
institution of the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar.

depiction of Christ Discite a me quia mitis sum et humilis cord, et et
invenietis requiem animabus vestris, Math. 11.29.

The text of the holy Evangelists.
VHEN the hour of supper was come, Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. Joan. 13.
our savior Christ sat down at the table, and his twelve Apostles with him.
And he said unto them. I have had a great desire to eat this Passover with
you, before my passion. And as they were eatinge, he said: verily I say unto
you, that one of you shall betraie me. And they were exceadinge sorrowful, and
begane every one of them to say unto him. Is it I, Lord. And he answered,
and said. He that dippeth his hand with me in the dishe, he shall betraie me.
The son of man goes his way, as it is written of him. But woe be to that
man, by whom the son of man is betrayed. It had been good for that man, if he
had never ben borne. Then Judas that betrayed him, answered and said. Is it I,
master. And he said unto him, Thou have said.

When supper was done, Joan. 13.
he rose up from the table, and put of his garments: and taking a towell, he
girded him self with it. After that, he powered water into a basyne, and
began to wash his disciples feet, and to wype them with the towell,
wherewith he was girded. Then he came to Simon Peter. who said to him. Lord,
do thou wash my feet? Jesus answered, and said unto him: what I do, thou
know not now: but thou shall know it hereafter. Peter said unto him. Thou
shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered him. If I wash thee not, thou shall
have no part with me. Simon Peter said unto him. Lord, not only my feet, but
my hands, and head also. Jesus said unto him. He that is washed, needs not
to wash, sauinge only his feet: but he is clean every whit. And ye are
clean, but not all. For he knew, who should betraie him. And therefore he
said: year not all clean. So, after he had washed there feet, and had taken
his garments, and was set down again: He said unto them. Know ye, what I
have done to you? ye call me master, and Lord. And ye say well. For so I am in
deed. If I then, being your Lord, and master, have washed your feet: ye
owght also to wash one an others feet. For I have given you an example, that
ye should do, even as I have done to you.

After our Savior had thus washed there feet, he took bread, and when he
had blessed, he brake, and gave to his disciples, sainge. Take, and eat: this
is my body. He took the Cup likewise, and when he had blessed it, he gave it
them, sainge: Drink ye all of this. For this is my blood of the new
testament, which shall be shed for many, for the remission of sins. So often
as ye shall do this thing, do it in remembrance of me.

depiction of Christ Hic vir despiciens mundum, et terrena triumphans, divitias
caelo condidit ore, manu. Antiphona in natali confessoris, in officio ^eat^^
(...) virginis. MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
CONTEMPLATE now (O my soul) in this supper, upon thy sweet, and mylde
Jesus: And behold this wonderful example of inestimable humility, which he
here shows unto thee, in rysinge from the table, and wasshinge his disciples
feet? O good Jesus, what is this, that thou do? O sweet Jesus, what means
this so great abasinge of thy divine majesty? O my soul what would thou
have thowght, if thou had been there present, and had seen even
almighty God himself, kneelinge before the feet of men, yea before the feet
of Judas? O Cruel Judas, why does not this so great humility mollifye thy
stony heart: how is it, that it causes not even thy very bowels to burst,
and ryue in sunder, considering this so great and wonderful meekenes? Is it
possible thou traitor, that thou have conspired to betraye this most meek and
gentle la^be? Is it possible that thou should not feel some remorse of
conscience, in beholdinge this example? O ye white, and bewtifull hands, how
cowld ye vouchsaffe to towch such loathsome, and abominable feet? O most pure,
and clean hands, why disdayned ye not to wash those very feet, that were
all to be durted in foul ways, whiles they trauayled to sheed your blood?
Behold here o ye blessed spirits, what your creator does? Come ye, and
behold even from the heavens, and ye shall see even the almighty him self
kneelinge before the feet of men: and tell me, if ever he used the like kind
of courtesy with you. O Lord, I have hard thy words, and I was afraid: I
have considered thy works, and was wholly amassed. O ye blessed Apostles, why
quake and tremble ye not, at the wonderful sight of this so great humility?
Peter what do thou? what? Will thou condescende, that this Lord of majesty
shall wash thy feet?

Seint Peter when he beheld our savior kneeling before him, woundered
exceadingly, yea he was altogether astonished thereat, and began to say in
this wise? What means this o Lord. what? will thou wash my feet? art not
thou the son of the living God? art not thou the creator of the world? the
beauty of the heavens? the paradise of the angels? the redeemer of men? the
brightness of the glory of the father? the fountain of the wisdom of God,
which dwell in the highest? And will thou (all this notwithstanding) wash
my feet? what? will thou (being a Lord of so great majesty, and glory, take
such a vile and base office upon thee? will thou (I say) thus abase thy self,
that have laid the foundation of the earth, and bewtefied the same with so
many wonders, that have enclosed the wide world within thy hand, that mouest
the heavens, rulest the earth, diuidest the waters, ordeinest the times,
disposest the causes, bewtifiest the angels, directest men, and gouernest all
things with thy wisdom? Is it seemly, that thou shoudest wash my feet?
mine I say, who am but a mortal man, a little clode of earth and ashes, a
vessel of corruption, a creature full freight with vanity and ignorance, full
of infinite miseries, and (which exceeds all misery) full of sins and yet
all this notwithstanding, will thou o Lord wash my feet? what? will thou
being the Lord of all things, abase thy self under me, that am inferior to
them all? verelie the highness of thy majesty, and the profunditie of my
miseries, do, as it were enforce me, that I cannot consent to such a deed.
Leave therefore (o my Lord) leave (I pray thee) this base office for thy
servants: lay down the towell, and put on thy apparel again, and sit in
thy seat, and wash not my feet. Beware, that the heavens be not ashamed of
it, when they shall see how by this ceremony, thou do set them benethe the
earth. For by doing this seruyle office, those very hands, into whose power
the father has committed the heavens, and all other things, should be abased
under the feet of men. Take heed, that all natural creatures be not very
much agrieued, or rather in great disdain, to see them selves thus subjected
under any other feet, then thine. Take heed also, least the dawghter of king
Sawle despise thee not, 2. Reg. 6.
when she shall see thee girded about with this towell, after the manner of a
servant, and say, that she will not take him for her spowse, and much less
for her God, whom she sees to attend upon so base, and vile an office.

Such words, or the like, spoke Saint Peter, as a man, that had not as yet
any taste, or feelinge of things apperteininge unto almighty God: and as one
that understood not what great glory lay hid in this work, which showed to
the eye so base and vile. But our savior who knew it right well, and was with
all desirous to leave unto us for a memory at that time, such a wounderfull
example of humility, satisfied the simplicity of his disciple, and went
forward afterward in the good work he had begone. The great carefulnes
of our Savior to make us humble.
Here we have to note with all diligence, what a great and earnest care our
savior had, to make us humble, in that being now at the gate, and entry into
his most greuons, and bitter passion, wherein he knew, he should give us such
great and wonderful examples of humility, as might suffice to astonishe both
heaven, and earth, he thowght all that not enowgh, but would furthermore add
this notable example also, besides all the rest, whereby this virtue of
humility might the better be commended unto us. A commendation of the virtue
of humilie.
O wonderful virtue, how great must thy riches be, saying thou art thus
commended to us? how can thy treasures be but notoriously known, saying thou
art by so many ways set out unto us? O humility, that art preached, and
tawght, in all the whole life of our Savior Christ, song, Luc. 1.
and praised by the mouth of his own most blessed mother. O most bewtifull
flower emonge virtues. O divine adamant, that drawest unto the, even the
creator of all things? Whosoever he be that bannisheth the away, shall be
bannished away from almighty God, yea thowgh he be in the highest place of
heaven: And whosoever he be, that embraseth thee, shall be embrased of almighty
God, yea althowgh he be even the greatest sinner in the world. Great are thy
graces; and merueilous are thy effects. Thou please men, thou contentest the
angels, thou confoundest the diuelles, and byndest the hands of the creator:
thou art the foundation of virtues, the death of vices, the glass of virgins,
and the habitation of the most blessed trinity. Who so gathers without thee,
disparseth: who so builds, and not upon thee, pulls down: And who so
heapeth virtues together without thee, the dust carries them quite away,
before the face of the wind. Without thee, Math. 25.
the virgin is shut out of the gates of heaven, Luc. 7.
and with thee, even the public sinner is received at the feet of Christ.
Embrace this virtue of humility, O ye virgins, that hereby your virginity
may be availeable unto you. Ye that be religious persons, see that you seek
earnestly also for this virtue, for without it your religion is but vain, and
to no purpose. And ye of the laietie, seek no less for this virtue, then the
religious do, that by the same ye may be delivered from the snares of this
sinful world.

Of the wipinge of the Apostles feet with the towell.
This being done, consider also, how after our savior had washed there
feet, he wyped them clean, with that sacred towell, wherewith he was girded:
And lift up the eyes of thy soul somewhat higher, and there shall thou see
represented the mystery of our redemption. The mystery of our redemption is
represented in the washinge and wypinge of the Apostles feet.
Consider how that faier towell received into it, all the fylthe, and
uncleanness of those feet, which were altogether very foul and filthy. And
as the feet were made clean and fair, so the towell contrariewise (after he
had wyped their feet with it, was wholly bespotted and defiled. Now what is
more filthy, then a man conceived in sin? and what is more clean, and
bewtifull, than our Savior Christ conceued of the holy Ghost. My welbe loved
is white, Cantic. 5.
and well coulored (says the spowse) and chosen out emonge thowsandes. This
most sweet and louinge Lord then, that was so faier, and so clean, was
content to receive into him self, all the spots and filthynes of our souls,
(to wit, the pains which our sins deserved) and that he might leave our
souls clean and free from them, he himself remained (as ye see him upon the
cross,) all bespotted and defiled with the same. In so much that the very
angels were as it were astonished (and suerlie not without good cause) to see
their Lord, and creator, so beraied with this so strange fowlenes. And
therefore they demanded by the prophet Esaie. sainge wherefore do thou (o
Lord) wear garments dyed with the color of blood, Esa. 63.
all bespotted and beraied like unto them, that stamp grappes in the
winepresse? Now if this blood, and these foul spots, be of others (to wit
of our sins) tell me o king of glory, were it not more meet, that men
themselves should suffer according to there own deserts, then that thou O
most innocente Lord, should be thus defiled, and tormented, for there
sakes? had it not been more decent, that this filthiness should have remained
upon his own donghill, and not upon thee, the mirror of all beauty? What a
wonderful piety and compassion was it, that moved thee, to have such a
fervent desire of the cleannes of my soul, that thou would with so great
charge, and loss of thine own beauty, bestow it upon me? what man alive
would take a fine to well wrought with gold, and wype therewith a foul
sluttishe dishe, espetiallie such a dishe, as were greatdlie broken, and rent
in many places? Blessed art thou (o my most merciful, and louinge Lord.) All
the angels praise thee (o God) for evermore. For that it has pleased thee to
become, as it were; an outcast of the world, taking upon thee all our
filthiness, and miseries (which are, the pains dew unto us for our sins,) to
deliver us quite, and make us free from them.

After this, consider those words, wherewith our savior made an end of this
history: sainge: I have geueu you an example, that ye should do, even as I
have done to you. which words are to be referred, not only to this matter,
and example of humility, but even also to all the other works, and life of
our savior Christ. For so much as his whole life, is a most perfet pattern of
all virtues, espetiallie of that virtue which in this place is represented unto
us, The life of Christ is a most perfet pattern of all virtues and
especially of humility.
to wit humility, as the blessed martyr Saint Ciprian declares more at
large in these words. It was cheiflie (says he) a work of great patience,
and humility, that so high and excellent a majesty would vouchsafe to come
down from heaven unto the earth, and clothe himself with our claie: S.
Cyprian.
and that he would dissemble the glory of his immortality, and become
mortal, to the end, that being him self innocent, and faulltes he might be
punnished for such as were guilty. The Lord would be baptized of his seruante:
he that came to pardon sins, would be washed with the water of sinners: he
that feeds all creatures, fasted forty days in the wilderness, and in the
end suffered honger, which he did to this end, that all such as had a hongrie
appetite after gods word, and longed after his grace, might be satisfied and
furnished with the same. he fowght with the devil that tempted him, and
contentinge him self with the victory, offered his ennemie no further harm,
but by word only. His disciples he never despised, as a Lord does his
servants: but enterteined them with great charity, and benevolence: yea he
used them lovingly as brethern. Neither is it to be merueyled at, that he thus
behaved him self toward his disciples, being as they were obedient: saying
he could suffer that arrant traitor Judas so patienlie, and bear with him even
till the end, and suffer him being his ennemie, to eat together with him at
his own table, and knowinge full well, whereabowte he went, would never
discover him, but was content to receive a kiss of him, even of him (I say)
that had soulde him with such a traitorous peace.

Moreover, with what great patience did he bear with Jews until that present
hour? how painfully did he labor to move those unbelieving hearts with his
preachinge, to embrace the faith? what great trauaille took he, to allure
those ungrateful men unto him, with good works? how meekly answered he to
such as contraried him in his speech? with what clemency bare he with the
proud? with what a wounderfull humility yielded he to the furious rage of his
ennemies, and persecutors? How traueiled he even until the very hour of his
most bitter passion, to recover them, that had been the murderers of the
Prophets, and heinous rebels against almighty God. In like manner at the
very hour of his passion (before they came to the sheadinge of his most
cruel death) how great were the opprobrious injuries they offered unto him?
How patiently gave he them the hearing thereof? How great were the mockes,
and tauntes, he sufred? How patiently did he bear the vile spittinge of those
infernal mouths, that had him self, not long before, with the spittell of
his own mowthe restored a blind man to his perfet sight? How suffered he their
whippinges, whose servants are wont in his name with mighty power to whippe
the very diuelles? how was he crowned with thorns, that crowns his martirs
with everlasting garlandes? How was he smitten on the face with the palms of
men's hands, that gives the palm of victory unto such as be conquerors? How
was he spoiled of his earthly garments, that apparaileth the saints with
the garments of immortality? How was he proffered most bitter gaull, that
gives us the bread of heaven? How was he offered vyneger to drink, that
gives us the cup of salvation? he that was so innocent: he that was so just,
or rather very innocence and justice it self, was accounted emonge thieves,
the everlasting truth was accused with false witness, the judge of the whole
world was condemned bywicked men, and the word of god received the sentence
of death with silence? Consider moreover, at what time the Savior of the
world was nailed upon the cross, and at the very hour of his death, when
the sterres were obscured, the elements troubled, when the earth quaked, when
the light was darkened: when the son turned away his eyes, and would not
suffer his beams to shine upon the earth, least happily it might see such a
great cruelty: Consider (I say) how even at this time our Savior did not so
much as once open his mouth, or move him self: how he would not at the very
last hour, and point of death, discover the glory of his majesty, but
suffered continually that extreme, and violent conflict, even until the end,
intendinge thereby to leave unto us, an example of perfect patience.

Yea, moreover and all this, if those cruel blouddie ministers, that
crucified, and tormented his most blessed body, would have converted, and been
penitente, he was ready to receive them to his grace, and favor, even at the
very last instant: neither would he have shut up the gates of his church from
any man. Now therefore, what thing in the world can possibly be of greater
benignity, and patience, then the blood of Christ, that giuethe life, even
unto them, that shed the same blood? But such, and so great, is the patience
of our sweet Savior Christ, which if it had not been such, and of so great
power, the church had not had Saint Pawle in it at this day. Hitherto be the
words of Saint Ciprian.

OF THE MOST BLESSED SACRAMENT OF THE AVLTAR: and of the causes, wherefore it
was instituted. depiction of Christ Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro MUNDI
vita. Johan. 6.5^.

Accipite, et comedite: hoc est corpus meum Matthew. 26.26.

II.
ONE of the principal causes of the coming of our savior into this world,
was to enkendle the hearts of men in the love of almighty God. For so said he
by saint Luke. Luc. 12.
I am come to put fire in the earth, and what would I else, but that it should
burn? This fire did our savior put in the earth, when he bestowed upon men
such, and so many wonderful benefittes, when he wrowght so great works of
love emonge them, whereby he might steyle away there hearts from them, and
wholly inflame them in this fire of love. Now albeit that all the worckes of
his most holy life, do serve to this end: Yet of al other, those do most
effectually serve for this purpose, which he did in the end of his life:
according as Saint John the Evangelist signefieth sainge. His fryndes that he
had in the world, Joan. 13.
he loved them espetially in the end. For at that time he bestowed greater
benefittes upon them, and discovered unto them greatest pledges and tokens of
his love. Emonge which singular pledges, one of the most principal was the
institution of the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar: the which thing shall
appear very plainly unto him, that will consider with good attention the
causes of the institution of the same. But in this behalf I beseach thee (o
most merciful Lord) that thou will vouchsafe to open our eyes, and grant us
light, that we may see what causes they were, that moved thy louinge heart to
institute for us this so wonderful a Sacrament, and to leave it unto us.

Now that we may understand some what of this divine mystery, it is to be
presupposed (good Christian reader) that no tongue created, is able to express
the passinge great love, The passinge great love Christ bearethe toward his
Catholic Church, and to every soul that is in the state of grace. Ephesians. 3.
that our savior Christ bears toward the Catholic Church his spowse, and
consequently unto every soul, that is in the state of grace: For so much as
every such soul is also his spouse. For this cause, one of the things that
the Apostel Saint Paul requested, and desired, was that almighty god would
reveal unto us, the greatness of his love: which vndowtedlye is so great, that
it far passes all the wisdom, and knowledge created, yea thowgh it were
even that wonderful knowledge of the angels.

Wherefore this our most sweet Bridegroom, The causes of the institution of
this most holy Sacrament. The first cause.
when he minded to depart out of this life, and to absent him self from the
Catholic Church his dear spouse (to the intent, that this his absence might
not be any occasion unto her to forget him) he left unto her, for a
remembrance, this most blessed Sacrament, wherein he himself would remain:
for he could not bear, that between him and her, there should be any less
pledge to provoke her to be myndefull of him, then even himself. And therefore
he pronunced at that time those sweet words. Luc. 22.1. Cor. 11.
So often as ye shall do this thing, do it in the remembrance of me: that
is, do it, that ye may be always mindful, how much I am willinge to do for
you, and how much I go now to do, and suffer for your salvation. The second
cause.


Moreover, this most sweet and loving bridegroom intended in this his long
absence, to leave some company to his spouse, that she might not remain
solitary, and comfortles. And therefore he left her the company of this most
holy Sacrement, where even the bridegroom himifelfe is reallie present, which
is in very deed the best, and most delitefull company, that he could
possibly leave her.

At that time also, our savior would go to suffer death for his spowse, The
third cause.
and to redeem and enriche her with the price, of his own most precious
blood, and to the intent that she might, whenever she would, enjoy this
most precious, and divine treasure, he left her the keis thereof, in this most
blessed sacrament. For as S. Chrysostom says. S. chrisost.
So often as we come to receive this most blessed Sacrament, we must make
account, that we come to lay our mowthes to Christ's very side, to drink of
his most precious blood, and to be partakers of this sovereign, and divine
mystery. Consider therefore in what a dangerous case those men are, that for a
little slouthfulnes, do abstain to come unto this royal banquet, and to enjoy
such a great, and most inestimable divine treasure. These be those unfortunate
slouggardes, of whom the wiseman speaks. Proverb. 19.
sainge. The slouggard hides his hand in his bosom, and suffers him self
rather to die for honger, then he will lift it up to his mouth. Now what
greater slouthfulnes can there be imagined in a man, than this is, that because
he will not abide, to take so littell labor, as he should bestow in
preparinge him self for the receauinge of this most holy Sacrament, he will
rather want the benefit of so great, and inestimable divine treasure, which is
of greater valewe, then all that ever almighty God has created. The fower-the
cause.


This heavenly bridegroom desired also, to be loved of his spouse, with a
passinge great love, and therefore he ordained this divine mystical morsel,
consecrated with such words, that whosoever receaueth it worthelie, is
forthwith towched, and stricken with this love. O wonderful mystery, worthy
to be engraued even in the innermost part of our hearts. Tell me (o thou
ungrateful man) if a prince should bear such a great affection and love
toward a seely wenche, that were his bond slave, that he could find in his
heart, to take her for his spouse, and make her queen, and lady, of all he is
Lord of, how great would we say, that the love of that prince had been, that
would do such a deed? And if peradventure after the marriage solemnized, this
slave should show her self coldlie affected toward the prince her husband,
and he understanding the same, would as a man forlorn, go to seek with all
diligence for some precious morsel, and give it her to eat, whereby to win
her love unto him, how passinge great would we say that the love of that
prince were, that should be thus affected toward her? Now therefore (O king
of glory) what means this, that thou (for the entiere love thou bear unto
me) have vouchesafed not only to take my soul, to be thy spouse, (being as
she was the very bond slave of thine ennemie the devil,) but saying her
also, all this notwithstanding very coldlie affected toward thee, have
ordained for her this mystical and divine morsel, which thou have transformed
with such words, that it has virtue in it, to transform such souls into
thee, as shall feed thereon, and make them to burn with lively flames of
love? There is no one thing that declares the affection of love more
evidently, then when a man has a desire to be beloved. Considering therefore
that thou have been so greatly desirous of our love, that thou have sowght it
with such strange inventions, who shall from hence forth stand in dowte of thy
love? we be certain that if we love God, God will love us again.
Certain I am (o may most louinge and merciful Lord) that if I love thee,
thou also love me: And certain I am also, that I need not to seek any
inventions to allure thy heart to love me, as thou have sowght toi allure my
heart to love thee.

That most sweet bridegroom would also be absent from his spouse, The fifte
cause.
and yet because love cannot abide to be absente from the beloved, he would
depart in such wise, that he might not altogether depart from her, and he
would so go away, that he might also remain with her. wherefore consideringe
that it was not expedient for our Savior to tarry here still, and the spouse
might not as then go from hence with him, he devised a mean, that althowgh
he went his way, and his spouse remained still behind, yet should they never
be separated and set a sonder. For this cause therefore, he instituted this
divine sacrament, that by means thereof, the souls might be united, and
incorporated spirituallie with Christ, and that with such a strong bond of
love, that of them two, there should be made one thing. For like as of meat,
and of him that eats the meat, there is made one same thing: even so
likewise, after a certain manner, is there made of the soul, and of Christ:
sauinge that (as Saint Augustine says) Christ is not changed into our souls,
S. August.
but our souls be changed into him: not by nature, but by love, conformetie,
and likeness of life.

Moreover, our Saviors will and pleasure was, to assure his spouse, The sixte
cause.
and to give her a pledge of that blessed inheritance of eternal glory, that
she being fortified with the hope of this felicity, An assured hope to enjoy
the felicity in the kingedome of heaven, makes a man to despise all worldelie
things.
might pass cheerfully throwghe all the trowbles, adversities, afflictions
and persecutions of this life. For truly there is no one thing, that causes
us so much to despise all things, that are to be had in this life, as a
assured hope of that blessedness, and felicity, we shall enjoy in the life to
come. According as our Savior signified unto us in those words, he spoke to
his disciples, before his passion: Joan. 14.
If ye loved me (said he) ye would be right glad of my departure, because I go
to the father. As thowgh he had said, it is a great felicity to go to the
father: For althowgh the way to go to him, be throwgh whippes, thorns,
nails, crosses, and all other tribulations, and martirdomes of this life: Yet
all that notwithstanding, it is a thing of inestimable gain, and comfort, to
go unto him. Wherefore, to the intent that his spouse might have a very firm
and assured hope, of this felicetie, he left her here in pledge this
inestimable divine treasure, which is of as great vallue, as all that is there
hoped for, that she should not mistrust, but that almighty God will give
himself unto her in glory, where she shall live wholly in spirit: saying he
denies not himself unto her in this vale of tears, where she lives in
flesh.

Our Savior purposed also, The seuenthe cause.
at the hour of his death, to make his testament, and to leave unto his spouse
some notable legacy, to be as a releife, and comfort for her, at all times,
and so he left her this most blessed sacrament, (wherein Christ himself is
trewlie and reallie present) which was the most precious, and most profitable
bequest, that he could possible leave unto her. 4. Reg. 2.
Elias, when he would depart away from the earth, left his clooke to his
disciple Elizeus, as one that had none other riches, whereof to make him his
heir. But our most sweet louinge savior and master, when he would ascend
into heaven, left here unto us the clooke of his sacred body, in this most
holy sacrament, appointing us here to be his heirs (as by the right of
children) of this so great, and inestimable divine treasure. With that mantell
Elizeus passed the waters of the floude Iourdan, and was neither drowned, nor
wetshod: and with the virtue, and grace of this most blessed sacrament, the
faithful do pass the waters of the vanities, and tribulations of this life,
without sin, and without danger.

To conclude, The eighte cause.
our Savior intended to leave unto our souls sufficient provision, and food,
wherewith they might live: forso much as the soul has no less need of her
proper sustenance, The soul has as great need of spiritual food, as the
body has of corporal food.
to maintein her in the spiritual life, then the body has of his propre
food, for mayntenance of the corporal life. If thou think otherwise, tell me
(I pray thee,) why has the body need of his ordinary meat every day?
vndowtedlie the cause is, for that the natural heat continually wastes, and
consumes the substance of our bodies, and therefore it is needful, that that
be restored again with daielie sustenance, which is consumed with daily heat.
For otherwise the natural strength of man would very soon be at an end,
and his powers would quickly decaie. O that it pleased almighty God, that
men might by this understand the great necessity they have of this divine
sacrament: O that they could by this conceive the great wisdom, and mercy
of him, that has instituted and ordained the same for our behoufe. Is it not a
thing well known, that we have within these bowelles of ours, a certain
pestilent hear, that came unto us by the occasion of sin, with consumes all
the goodness, that is in man? This is that, which inclines us to the love of
the world, of our flesh, of all vices, of all sensual pleasures, and delites:
and so by these means seperateth us from almighty God, makes us to relente
and wax cold in the love of him, and causes us to become very dull,
slothful, and heavy to all good works, and very quick and lively to
work all wickedness. If than we have this continual waster and consumer so
rooted within us, were it not good reason (trow ye) that there should be some
restoratiue provided, to restore that always again, which is always wasting
and consuming? If we have a continual consumer, The cause of the great
ferue^cie, and zeal of Christians in the primetiue Church: and of the littel
or no zeal of Christians in our corrupt age.
and have not withal a continual repayrer, what may be looked for of us, but
a continual decaienge and with in sort time after, a most certain and
undoubted ruin? For proof hereof, it shall suffice to consider the course of
the Christian people: by comparinge the great feruencie, and zeal in religion,
of the Christians in the primetiue Church, with the littell, or rather no
zeal of the Christians in our corrupt age. For in the primitive Church, when
the Christians did eat contiuuallie of this divine meat, they lived therewith
a very spiritual life, and had thereby force, and strength, not only to
observe Gods laws, and commandments, but also even to die, and suffer
martyrdom for Gods sake. But now alas, in this our corrupt age, the Christians
for the most part are found, to be very weak, and feable, in their faith,
and very dissolute, and licentious, in their lives, because they eat not of
this divine food, and therefore in the end they perish and die for honger.
Esa. 5.
As the prophet signified, when he said. Therefore was my people carried away
into captiuetie, because they had no knowledge of God, and there nobles
perished for honger, and the multitude of them died for thirst. For this cause
therefore has that wise physician our Savior Christ (who had also felt the
pulses of our weakness) ordained this most holy and divine sacrament, and for
this purpose has he instituted the same in form of meat, that the very
form wherein he instituted it, might declare unto us, the effect it works:
and withal the great necessity our souls have of the same.

Consider then now, if there may be found in the whole world, any greater
show of love, then that almighty God himself should leave unto us his own
very flesh, and blood for our susteynance, and relief. We may read in
many histories, Josephus.
that some mothers being constrained with intolerable honger have embrewed
their hands in the flesh and blood of there own littell children, to
sustain them selves with feedinge upon them, and that for the great desire
they had to live, they have bereued their own very natural children of there
life's, thereby to preserve their own life. This have we red ofentimes. But who
has euerred, that any mother has fed her child, that was ready to perish,
and die for honger, with her own very flesh? or that she cut of one of her
own arms, to give her child to eat, and that she would be cruel upon her
self, to show her self pittiefull toward her child? Certeinlie there was
never mother living yet in the earth, that ever has done such a deed. But
our most louinge and sweet savior Christ, far passing any mother in love,
perceauinge thee to be ready to perish, and die for honger and saying withal,
that there was none other better mean to maintein by life, then to give thee
his own very sleshe to eat; comes down from heaven, and yeldeth himself
here to the cruel bouchers, and torme^tours, to be put to death that thou
might preserve and sustain thy life, with this divine meat; And this he
does, not at one time only, but his blessed will is, that it shall be done
continually, and therefore he ordeineth this most blessed sacrament, that thou
might hereby understand an other degree of greater love, which is, that as
he gives thee always the same meat, to wit, his own very body in this
most blessed Sacrament, so is he ready always to pay the same price, and
redemption, if it were necessary for thee.

Besides all this, thou must consider, Note that our savior has restored man,
unto his ancient dignity, so much by grace, as he had fallen by sin: that
so by grace, he may be able to live a holy and spiritual life.
that this most holy reformer of the world, intended to restore man unto his
ancient dignity, and to raise him up again so much by grace, as he had
fallen by sin. And therefore as his fall was from a life that he had of God,
(which life our first father Adam before his fall had enjoyed) to the life of
beasts (wherein after his fall he remained:) even so contrariewise, his will
was, that he should be raised up again from the life of beasts, in which he
remayed, to the life of God, which (throwgh sin) he had lost: and so for this
end, has our savior Christ ordained the communion of this most holy, and
divine sacrament, by means whereof, man atteyneth to be partaker of God, and
to live the life of God, as our savior himself signifies in those most high
words, which he said: He that eats my flesh, Joan. 6.
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, And like as by the
dwellinge of my father in me, the life that I live, is altogether conformable
to the life of my father (which is the life of God:) even so, he, in whom I
shall dwell by means of this divine sacrament, shall live as I do live, and so
shall he not now live the life of a man, but even the life of god. For this is
that most high divine sacrament, wherein God is received corporally, not that
he is changed into men, Note what a wonderful operation, this blessed
Sacrament works in him, that worthelie receaueth the same.
but men are changed into him by love, and conformetie of will: for so much as
this divine meat works the same operation in him, that does worthelie
receive it, that is wrowght and represented in it, when it is consecrated. For
like a^ by the virtue of the words of consecration, that which was bread, is
converted into the substance of Christ: even so by virtue of this holy
communion, he that was man, is by a merueilous manner transformed spirituallie
into God. So that like as that divine bread is one thing, and appears an
other, and was one thing before consecration, and is an other thing
afterward: even so, he that eats the same, is one thing before the
receiving, and an other thing afterward: and he appears one thing
outwardly but in very deed is an other thing, (and that far more high
and excellent) inwardly, for so much as he has the being and substance of
man, and withal the spirit of God. Now then, what glory can be geater than
this? what gift more precious? what benefitt of more valewe? what greater
show of love? let all the works of nature keep silence, A notable
comme^datio^ of this most blessed Sacrament, and of the wounderful effects it
works in him that receaueth it worthelie.
let all the works of grace give place. For this is a work excellinge all
works: and this is a singular grace above all graces. O most wonderful
sacrament, what shall I say of thee? with what words shall I commend thee?
thou art the life of our souls: the medecin of our wounds: the comfort of
our troubles: the memory of Jesus Christ: the testimony of his love: the most
precious legacy of his testament: the companion of our peregrination: the
consolation of our bannishement: the burninge cole to enkendle the fire of the
love of God in us: the mean whereby to receive grace: the pledge of
everlasting felicity: and the treasure of the christian life. By means of
this divine meat, the soul is united unto her spouse: by this the
understanding is illuminated: the memory quickened; the will ennamored: the
inward taste delighted: the devotion increased: the bowelles mollified: the
founteine of tears opened: the passions of the mind quieted: the good motions
awakened: our weakness fortified: and by mean of this divine meat we receue
strength and lustines, to ascend vp^euen to the hill of almighty God. What
tongue is able fully to express the excellency of this most blessed
sacrament? Who can give worthy thanks for so great a benefit? Who will not be
altogether resolved into tears, when he sees almighty God united unto him?
Assuredly the more we go about to consider the excellency, and virtues, of
this divine souereyne mystery, the more do we want words to express it: and
the more does our understanding fail us therein. Now what pleasure? what
sweetness, what delightful savors of good life does the soul of the just man
feel, at that time, when he receives this divine sacramant? There is none
other sownd hard at that time, but only sweet songs of the inward man,
vehement burstinge out of holy desires, yielding of thanks, and vtteringe
most sweet words, all tending to the praise of our sweet savior Christ her
beloved. There the devout soul throwghe the virtue of this most holy and
reverent sacrament, is altogether inwardly renewed, and replenished with joy.
There she is recreated with devotion: fed with peace; fortified in faith:
confirmed in hope: and tied fast with bands, and knottes of charity, unto her
most sweet savior and redeemer: Whereby she waxes daily more fervent in
love: more strong in resistinge temptation: more prompt and ready to sustain
labor, and travail: more careful and diligente to do good works: and more
desirous to frequent this most holy mystery.

Such are thy gifts (o sweet Jesus:) such are the works and delights of thy
love, which thou art wont to communicate unto thy friends, by means of this
divine sacrament. And this thou do, to the end that we being filled with
these so great and mighty delights, should despise all other vain and
deceitful delights. Now therefore (o most mellifluous love) open the eyes of
thy faithful Catholic people, open them, I beseach thee, o most divine
light, that with the bright beams of lively faith they may know thee, and
dilate there hearts, that they may receathee, ue thee into them, that being
instructed by thee, they may seek thee by thee, and repose and rest them
selves in thee, and finally by means of this most blessed sacrament be united
with thee, as members with their head, and as branches with their vine, that
so they may live throwgh thy virtue, and enjoy the influences of thy grace,
for ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

The meditation being ended, there follow immediatlye thanks geuinge, and
petition, as has been before declared.

THIS DAY (WHEN THOU have made the sign of the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto) thou have to meditate upon these two points: to wit: upon the
prayer of our savior in the Garden: and upon his apprehension.
depiction of Christ ^

The text of the holy Evangelists.
VHEN supper was done, Christ went with his disciples into a garden which is
called Gethsemanie. And he said unto them. Sit ye here, whilst I go and pray
yonder. And he took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee. And he
begane to be in a great fear, and heaviness. And he said unto them. My soul is
heavy even unto death. Tarry ye here, and watch with me. So he went a little
further from them, where he cast him self down prostrate on the earth, and
fell on his face, and prayed, sainge. O my Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will; but as thou will. This done,
he came to his Disciples, and fownd them a sleep. And he said to Peter: what?
could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation. The spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. Again he went
away the second time, and made the same prayer saying. O my Father, if this
cup cannot pass away from me, but that I must needs drink it, thy will be
done. And he came the second time, and found his Disciples a sleep: for
their eyes were heavy. So he left them, and went away again, and prayed the
third time, saying the same words. Luc. 22.
And there appeared an angel to him from heaven, comfortinge him. And being
in an agony, he prayed more at length. And his sweat was like drops of
blood, trickeling down to the grownde. Math. 26.
Then he came to his Disciples, and said unto them. Sleep from hence forth,
and take your rest. Behold the hour is at hand, and the son of man shall be
delivered into the hands of sinners. Arise, let us go, behold he is at
hand, that shall betraie me. And whiles he yet spoke, lo, Judas one of the
twelve came, and with him a great multitude, with swords, and staves, and
torches, and lanternes, being sent from the high preistes, and elders of the
people. Now he that betrayed him, had given them a token: saying: whom so ever
I shall kiss, that is he, lay hands on him. And forthwith he came to Jesus,
and said: hayle master, and kissed him. Then Jesus said unto him. Freynd,
Joan. 18.
wherefore art thou come? And Simon Peter drew out his sword, and struck a
seruante of the high preiste, and cut of his right ear. This servant was
called Malcus. Then Jesus said unto Peter: put up thy sword into the scabbord.
The cup that my Father has given me, will thou not, that I drink it? And he
towched the ear, and forthewith made it whole. At that time Jesus said to the
high preistes, Luc. 22.
and to the officers of the temple, and to the elders, that came unto him. Ye
be come out, as it were, Math. 26.
against a thief, swoordes and staves. I sat daily emonge you teachinge in
the temple, and ye laid no hands on me. But this is your hour, and the power
of darkness. Joan. 18.
Then the soldiers, and the captain, and the officers of the Jews took
Jesus, and bound him, and led him away, to Annas first (for he was father in
law to Caiphas, who was the high priest for that year. Math. 26.
Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
VHAT do thou o my soul? what think thou? It is no time now to sleep:
Come with me I pray thee into the garden of Gethsemanie, and there shall thou
hear, and see great mysteries. There shall thou see, joy stricken with sadness:
fortitude waxen afraid: strength discomfited: majesty and omnipotency
confounded: greatenes, and mightines, very narrowly streytened: and glory it
self obscured, and darkened.

Of Christ's prayinge in the Garden.
Consider now first, how after that supper (which was so full of mystery) was
ended, our savior went with his disciples unto the mownte Oliuet, to make his
prayer, before he would enter into the combat of his passion: In all troubles
and temptations of this life: we must have recourse to prayer, as to a holy
ancker and refuge.
to give us thereby to understand, that in all troubles, and temptations of
this life, we must always have recourse unto prayer, as it were to an holy
ancker, by virtue whereof, the burden of tribulation shall either be taken quite
away from us: or else we shall have strength given us to be able to bear it:
which is a far greater grace. For (as S. Gregory says) our Lord does us a
greater benefit, S. Gregory.
when he gives us force, and strength, to be able to sustain troubles, and
temptations, then when he takes the same troubles and temptations away from
us.

Our savior took with him (to accompany him in this way) three of his best
beloved Disciples: to wit: S. Peter: S.James, and S. John: which three a
little before, had been witnesses of his glorious transfiguration. And this he
did, that the very same persons might see, what a far different shape he
took now upon him, for the love of men, from that glorious shape, wherein he
had showed him self unto them at his transfiguration. And because they should
understand, that the inward troubles, and agony of his soul, were no less
then those, that begane to be discovered outwardly, he spoke unto them those
sorrowful words. My soul is heavy even unto death: tarry me here, and
watch with me. That very God, and true man, that man that far excellethe
both our humane nature, and all things created, whose de alinge, and
conference, was with the very breast of the high Deity it self, with whom
only he communicated his secrets, is now fallen into so great sorrow, and
heaviness, that he is contented to give part of his pains unto his creatures,
and to require of the^ their company: saying: tarry me here, and watch with
me. O treasure of heaven? o perfet felicity? who has browght thee o Lord unto
such a narrow straight? who has driven thee to seek at other men's gates? who
has caused thee to become a beggar, even of thine own creatures? who has
done all this, but only the very great love, thou have to make them rich.

Tell me o most sweet and merciful redeemer? wherefore art thou now so much
afraid of death, which before thou did so much desire: saying the
fulfilling of the desire, is a cause rather of joy, then of fear? Verelie the
Martirs had neither the fortitude, nor yet the grace, that thou have. They had
only a little, portion, which thou (being the fountain of grace) did
impart unto them: and yet they with that only small quantity of grace,
entered very cheerfullie into the combat of there martirdomes, and atcheiued
the victory. And art thou (o Lord) being the geuer of strength and grace, sad
and fearful now, The very cause both of Christ's fear, and of the fortitude
of the Martyrs.
even before the battle begin? Assuredly (o Lord) this thy fear, is not
thine, but mine: as likewise the strength, and fortitude of thy Martirs, was
not theires, but thine. The fear that thou have, comes of that, thou have of
us, and the strength and and fortitude that the martyrs had, came of that, they
had received of thee. The weakness of my humane nature is discovered in that
God was afraid: and the strength of thy godhead is showed in the fortitude of
man. So that this fear is mine, and that fortitude is thine. And therefore thy
reproach is mine, and my praise is thine.

There was taken a ribbe bone out of the side of our forefather Adam, Genesis 2.
to form a woman thereof: and in steed of the bone, that was taken away;
there was put weak and feeble flesh. Now what else is signified hereby, but
that the everlasting father took from thee, being our second Adam, the force
and strength of grace: to place the same in thy spouse the Catholic Church:
and took from her the feeble flesh, and weakness, to place it in thee? by
means whereof thy spouse remained strong, and thou weak: she strong, by
reason of thy strength: and thou weak, by reason of her weakness. Thou have
herein (o heavenly Lord) bestowed a dowble benefit upon us, in that thou have
vouchsaffed, not only to clothe us with thee, but even also to clothe thy
self with us. For these two so singular benefittes the angels praise thee
for evermore, for that thou have been no niggarde in communicatinge thy
benefittes unto us, nor yet disdayned to take upon thee our miseries. Now when
I consider these things (o Lord) what else should I do, but saying my self,
as it were laden with thy mercies, glory in thee, and saying thee to be
likewise replenished with my miseries for my sake, take compassion upon thee?
For the one I will rejoice, and be glad, and for the other I will sorrow, and
lament. And so with joy and lamentation together, I will singe and bewail the
mystery of thy most dolorous passion, and I will study continually in that
book of Ezechiell the contents whereof ar^ songs, Ezechiel. 2.
and lamentations.

When our savior had spoken these words he departed from his disciples a
stones cast, where lyenge prostrat upon the ground, he begane his prayer with
very great reverence: saying, O father, if it be possible, Matthew 26.
let this cup pass from me, howbeit not as I will, but as thou will. Lucae.
22.
and after he had made this prayer three times, at the third time, he was in
such a great agony, that he began to sweat even drops of blood, which
ran down all a long his sacred body, and trickeled down to the grownd.
The causes of our Saviors gre^ te agony and swe^tinge drops of blood, while
he was prayinge in the garden.


Consider now attentively, in what a dolorous case our savior was, and how
there were then represented unto him, all the cruel pains and torments he
had to suffer, even as thowgh they had been then presently in doing before
his eyes, all which he apprehended after a most perfet manner in his most
excellent imagination, each one in such sort, as they were prepared for his
body, which was certeinlie more tender, and delicate, then ever any other
body was in the whole world. He set also at that time before his eyes, all
the sins of the world, or which he should suffer, and withal the great
unthankfulness and ingratitude of so many souls, as (he knew) would never
acknowledge this his singular benefit, nor further aid help themselves with
this most precious, aid so costly remedy. These things being profoundelie
wayed, and considered by our savior at this time, his soul was vexed in such
sort, and his senses, and most tender flesh, were so wounderfullie troubled,
that all the forces, and elements of his body were distempered, and his
blessed flesh opened on every side, and gave place to the blood, that it
might pass and distille throwgh all parts of his body in very great
abundance, and stream down to the grownde. Now if the flesh suffered such
grievous pains with the only remembrance, and imagination, of that which as
then was to come, in what a doleful case then, trow ye, was his soul, that
suffered those pains even directly in it self.

In other men we see, when they are disquieted with any sudden, and great
anguishe, the blood uses commonly to have recourse unto the heart, leauinge
the other members of the body cold and destitute of their stre^gthe, to
comfort the most principal member. Our Savior suffered his greauous pains
without any manner of comfort.
But our sweet Savior Christ contrariewise, (because he would suffer without
any manner of comfort, thereby to make our redemption more abundant,) such was
his passing love toward us, that he would not admit so much, as that little
relief and comfort of nature.

Behold our sweet savior now in this dolorous agony, and consider not
only the paynefull anguishes, and greifes of his soul, but also the form of
his sacred, and reverent countenance.

The swear is wont to have his most chief, and principal recourse to the
forehead, and to the face. If then the blood issued out through all the body
of our Savior in such sort, that it trickeled down to the very earth: in
what plight then was that goodly clear forehead think you, that gives light
to the very light it self? And how was that face beraied, which is so
reverenced of the heavens, being as it was all in drops, and covered over
with a blouddie sweat. If such as be kind and louinge, are wont when they come
to visit their friends, being sick, and in danger of death, to behold their
countenance advisedly, and to mark the color, and other accidents, that
proceed of the disease, tell me o my soul, that beholdest the face of our
sweet savior, what think thou, when thou beholdest in the same such
wonderful, strange, and deadly signs? What painful fittes and dolorous
greifes, are those like to be hereafter, if in the very beginning of the
disease, he suffer such a great agony? In what dolorous panges is he like to
be, when he shall feel those most grievous pains, and cruel torments
themselves, if in the only thinkinge of them, he sweateth even drops of
blood? If thou be not moved to take compassion of our sweet savior, saying
him in this doleful case for thy sake: If now when he sweateth drops of
blood throughout all his body, thou can not sheede any tears from thine
eyes, think verelie with thy self, that thou have a very hard and stony
heart: and if thou can not weep for want of love toward him, yet at the
least weep for the multitude of thy sins: for so much as they were the very
cause of this his agony, Our sins were the very cause of our Saviors
blouddye swear.
and grief. Now the tormentors do not whippe him: neither do the souldiars
crown him with thorns: It is not now the nails, nor the thorns, that do
cause the blood to gushe out of his body at this time: but it is thy very
sins and offenses: those are the tormentors that do torment him: those are
the heavy burden, that cause him to sweat this so strange and wonderful
blouddye sweat. O my sweet savior, and redeemer, how redemption? O my true
Adam, that art comme our of paradise for my sins, and labourest here in earth
with thy blouddie sweat, Of our Saviors agony and watchinge about our
salvation, whilst his disciples be in a heavy sleep.
to get the bread that I must feed upon.

Consider also in this place, on the one side, the great agony, and watchinge
of our Savior Christ, and on the other, the sownde and deep sleepinge of his
disciples: and thou shall see here represented a great mystery. For truly
there is nothing more to be lamented in the world, then to see how careless
and negligent men be in there lives, and how little account they make of a
matter of so great importance, as is their own salvation. What thing is more
to be bewailed, then to see men so careless in such weighty afaires? Now if
thou will understand both the one, and the other, consider in this matter, the
doings of our savior, and withal the doings of his disciples. See how our
savior, applieng his mind earnestly to this business of our redemption, is in
such a great care, and agony therewith, that it makes him to sweat even
drops of blood: and see on the other side, how his disciples do lie a long
on the grownd, and are so heavy a sleep, that neither their masters
rebukynge of them, nor their ill favored and hard lodginge on the bare
ground, nor yet the obscure and darcke dewie night, are able to awake them out
of their heavy and drowsy sleep. Note also of what importance the salvation
of mankind is, since it is able, to make him to sweat drops of blood, by
whose power the heavens are sustained. And consider on the other side, how
little account men them selves make of their own salvation, since at such time
as almighty God him self, is so careful, and watchful for them; they are in
a deep heavy sleep, and utterly careless thereof. Assuredly, nothing could
more lively express both the one and the other, than the consideration of
these two points, being so strange as they are. For if almighty of others,
how happens it, that the very persons them selves, to whom even the charge
and traueille of the affairs apperteineth, (together with the profit,
commodity, loss and damage of the same) do live with such carelesnes, and
negligence therein?

By this same care of our Savior, and carelesnes of his disciples, thou may
understand, how trewlie this Lord is our father, and how he has indeed
toward us the very bowelles, and heart of a true, and louinge father. How
often times chances it trow ye, that the daughter sleeps very sowndlie
and quietly, when her father watches all the night, carckinge and carynge for
her relief and provision. And even so does this our most louinge and merciful
father for us, whiles we be soheauie a sleep, and are utterly careless of our
own salvation, as by this example is lively set out before our eyes, in that
he continues all the night watchinge, and sweatinge, and in great agony to
take order for the redemption, he intended to bestow upon us.

HOW OUR SAVIOVR WAS APPREHENDED. depiction of Christ Non est seruus mayor
domino suo: si me persecuti to sunt, et vos persequentur. Johan. 15.20.

II.
Of Judas pressinge before all the rest to apprehende our Savior.
CONSIDER moreover, how when our savior had finished his prayer, Judas that
counterfeit, and false friend of his, came thither with that hellishe
company, where renouncinge the office of an Apostle, he became now the very
principal ringeleader and Captain of Satan's army, Consider how without all
shame he pressed, and set himself even the very foremost, before all the rest
of his malicious rowte: and coming to his good master, sold him with a
kiss of most treyterous, and deceitful fryndeshippe. It is certaynelie a
great misery, that a man should be sold for money, but yet it is much more
miserable if he be sold of his friends, and of such, as to whom he has been
greatly beneficial before. Now our sweet Savior Christ is sold of him,
whom he had made not only his disciple, but also his Apostle: yea, he is
sold of him by deceit ad plain treason, he is sold of him to most cruel
merchantes, that couete (you may be sure) nothing else of him, but only his
blood and life, to satisfy their greadie honger. But for what price trow ye,
is he sold? the baseness and smalnes of the price, increases the greatness and
malice of the injury. Tell me, O Judas, thou nowghtie traitor, at what price
do thou set the Lord of all creatures? At thirty pence. O what a vile and
slender price is this, for a Lord of such majesty. Certeinlie, a very beast
in the shambles is commonly sold for more. And do thou o traitor, sell for
so small a price, almighty God him self? He settethe not thee at so small a
price, for so much as he byeth thee, with his own most precious blood. O what a
great price and estimation was that of man, and how base an estimation and
price was this of God? God is sold for thirty pence, and man is bought even
with the very pretiouse blood of almighty God him self.

At the same time, our savior said unto them that came to lay hands upon
him: Luc. 22. Math. 26.
Ye become out, as it were against a theife, with swords and speeres, and I
satte daily emonge you teachinge in the temple, and ye never laid hands upon
me, but this is your hour, and the power of darkness. This is suerlie a
mystery of great admiration. For what thing is more to be wondered at, then
to see the very son of almighty God to take upon him the Image and shape,
not only of a sinner, but even also of a condemned person? Our savior was
given up to the power of the diuelles, from the time of his apprehension,
until his death upon the cross. Job 2.
This (sayethe he) is yowr hour, and the power of darkness. The which words
give us to understand, that from that time, that most innocent lamb was given
up into the power of the princes of darckenes, which are the devils, to the
intent that by means of their members, and cruel ministers they might
execute upon him, all the furious torments and cruelties they could devise.
And like as holy Job, was by the permission of almighty God given up into the
power of Satan, that he might use upon him all the cruelty, he would, this
only excepted, that he should not bereiue him of his life: even so was there
power given to the princes of darkness, without any exception, either of life,
or death, that they might fully extend upon that sacred humanity all their
surie and rage to the uttermost they cowld. Hereof rose those despightfull
tauntes: those slanderous and reproachful words, such as the like were never
hard before that time, wherewith the devil pretended to satisfy his
insatiable rancre and malice, to revenge his injuries, and to cast that blested
soul down into some kind of impatiencie, if it had been possible. Almighty
God (says the Prophet Zachary) showed Jesus the high priest unto me, Zach. 3.
apparelled with a spotted garmente, and Satan stood at his right hand,
ready prepared to speak against him. But our Savior answered for his part,
saying: I did always set God before mine eyes, Psalm. 15.
who stands at my right hand, that I be not removed.

Consider then now o my soul, how much that high and divine majesty abased
himself for thy sake, sithence he vowchesaffed to come to the last extremity
of all miseries, which is to be given up to the power of deuilles. And because
this was the pain, that was due to thy sins, it pleased him to put even
himself to this pain, that thou might remain quite and free from the same.
Psalm. 8.
O holy Prophet, why do thou wonder, to see almighty God, become inferior
to his angels? thou have now far greater cause to wonder, to see him given
up into the power of deuilles. Vndowtedlie both the heavens, and the earth,
trembled, and quaked, at this so passinge great humility, and charity of our
Savior. So soon as these words were spoken, forthwith all that hellishe
rowte, and malitiouse rabble of raueninge wolves assaulted this most meek and
innocent lamb, and some very furiouslye haled him this way, and some that
way, each one to the uttermost of his power. O how vngentlie did they handle
him? How vncourteouslie spoke they unto him? How many blows and buffettes
gave they him? What a vile clamorous cryinge and showtinge made they over him,
even as conquerors use to do, when they have obtained there pray. They lay
hold upon those holy hands (which not long before had wrought so many
wonderful miracles) and do bind them very hard, and fast, with certain
roughe, and knottie cords: and that in such sort, that they gawle the skin
of his arms, and make the very blood to spring out. Our savior being thus
bound, they lead him openly throwgh the high common streates, with great
despite, and ignominy. O what a strange and wonderful sight is this? Consider
now with thy self what thou would think, if thou knew some man of great
awthoritie, and worthiness, and should see him led ope^lie by the officers
throwghe the common streets, with an haulter tied about his neck, his hands
manicled and fast bound, in a great hurlye burlye, and concourse of people,
with great classhinge and noise of men of arms, and souldiars gardinge him:
Imagine (I say) with thy self, what thou would think in this case; and
then lift up thine eyes, and behold this Lord, worthy of so great
reverence, and honor, that had wrought such wonders in that land, that had
preached such divine sermons emonge them, whom all the sick and impotent
persons, did honor and reverence, and besought to have remedy for all there
diseases, and greiffes. Consider now, how they lead him, as one depryued of
all awthoritie, and put to open shame: partly goinge, and partly haled
forwards, and enforced to hasten his pase: not in such wise, as became a man
of his gravity, and personage, but as it liked the outrageous fury of his
unmerciful ennemies, and the desire they had to pleasure the Pharasies, who
had so great a lo^ginge to have that pray within there grypes. Consider our
savior well, how he goes in this doleful way, abandoned of his own
disciples; accompanied with his ennemies: his pase hastened and disordered: his
breathe in a manner gone: his color changed: his face chafed, and inflamed, by
reason of his so quick, and hasty passage. And yet in all this evil
entreatinge of his person, behold the modest behahauiour of his countenance,
the comelye gravity of his eyes, and that divine resemblance which in the
midst of all the discourtesies in the world could never be obscured.
Ascend also yet a little higher, and consider diligently what he is, whom
thou see thus led, and carried away, with such great contumely and dishonor.
This is he, that is the word of the father: the everlasting wisdom: the
infinite virtue: the chief goodness: the perfet felicity: the true glory: and
the clear fountain of all beawtie. Consider then, how for thy salvation and
redemption, virtue is here tied with bands: innoce^cie apprehended: wisdom
flowted, and lawghed to scorn: honor contemned: glory tormented: and the
clear welspringe of all beauty trowbled with weepinge, and sorrow. If Helie
the priest felt such an inward greiffe, 1. Reg. 4.
when the Arcke of the testament was taken, that being astonished therewith,
he fell from the seat, whereupon he sat, and brake his neck, and forthwith
gave up the Ghost? How owght a Christian soul to be greiued, when he sees the
arcke of all the treasures of the wisdom of almighty God, led, and taken in
the possession of such unmerciful and cruel ennemies? Psalm. 68.
The heavens and earth praise him therefore, and all that is in them, for he
has hard the cries of the poor, and has not despised the sorrowful
bewailinges of his afflicted, that were in captivity, but was content to be
taken captive him self, to deliver them out of their thraldom, and to set
them at liberty.

OF THOSE THAT DO SPIRITVALLIE BIND THE Hands of our Savior Christ. III.
VHEREFORE (o most gentle, and sweet savior) sithence it was thy blessed will,
and pleasure, to be bownde, to the intent, thou might by thy bands loose
us, and deliver us from our captiuetie: I most hu^blie beseach thee, eue^ by
the bowels of thy tender mercy, that caused thee to abase thy self after
this sort, that thou will not suffer me to commit any such great wickedness, as
to bind thy hands, as the Jews did.

For it is not the Jews only, that do bind thy hands, but whosoever makes
resistance against thy holy inspirations, and will not go whither thou will
gwyde, and conduct him, but refuses to accept that grace, which thou do
most mercifully offer unto him.

who so gives any sca^dale to his neighbor, bindethe Chrides hands.
That man likewise binds thy hands, that gives any scandalous offense unto
his neighbor, and by his evil example, and nowghtie cownsell, withdraws him
from his godly purposes, and so hinders the good work, that thou did
begin to work in him.

The mistrustfull, and incredulous persons also, do bind O Lord the hands
of thy liberality, and clemency. For like as confidence opens the hands of
thy grace: euenso does incredulity, and mistrustfulnes close the^ up, and
bind the^: according to the saying of the Evangelist, Math. 13.
that thou could not do many virtues, and miracles in thy country, by
reason of the incredulity of the inhabitants therein.

Moreover, the ungrateful, and negligent persons, do bind thy hands o Lord,
and do put an impediment to let the workinge of thy grace: the one, because
they render not thanks unto thee, for the grace, The ungrateful and
negligente persons do bind Christ's hands.
they have received: and the other, because they will not use the grace, that
is given unto them, but do keep it idell, and unoccupied, without taking any
benefit, or commodity of the same.

Last of all, those that become vainglorious, and proud, by reason of the
graces, thou have given them, do also most strongelie bind thy hands. For by
this offense they make themselves altogether unworthy of thy grace. wherefore
it is not reason, that thou should continewe to be beneficial unto such
persons, as take occasion thereof, to become more vain: neither is it semelie,
that thou should bestow the treasures of thy grace upon such a one, as
yields not to thee again the tribute of glory: but does rather like a
traitor, and robber, wax insolent, and vauntinge, with the same, and usurps
to himself the right, and prerogative of glory, that apperteineth unto thee
alone.

I might say also, O Lord, that those talkers, and pratlers, that keep not
secret such consolations, and spiritual fealinges, as thou geuest them, do
likewise bind thy hands: for like as wise, and discrete men, will not
communicate their secrets any more unto them, whom they have fownde
unfaithful in publishinge them abroad: even so do thou also many times
leave, to make those persons partakers of thy secrets, who without any cause
do publishe, and reveal the^ to others, and take occasion thereby, to make
them selves more vain.

Christogram I H S



WENSDAIE IN THE MORNINGE.
THIS Day, (when thou have made the sign of the Cross and prepared thy self
hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the presentation of our savior before
the busshopes, and Judges. First, before Annas. Secondly, before Caiphas.
Thirdly, before Herod. Fourthlie, before Pilate. And afterward, how he was
most crewellie whipped and scourged at the pillar.

depiction of Christ Omnis qui pie vosunt ^^^re in Christo Jesu, persecutionem
patientur. 2. Timoth. 3.1.2.



The text of the holy Evangelists.
VHEN our savior was brought before Annas the high priest, Joan. 18.
he demanded him of his Disciples, and of his doctrine. Jesus answered him,
and said: I spoke openly to the world, I ever tawght openly in the sinagoge,
and in the temple, whither all the Jews resort continually, and in secret
have I said nothing. why ask thou me? Ask them that hard me, what I said
unto them. when he had spoken these words, one of the officers, that stood
by, smote Jesus with his hand, saying. Answerest thou thus the high priest?
Jesus answered him. If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: But if I
have well spoken, why smytest thou me.

And Annas sent him bownde unto Caiphas, Marc. 14.
where the doctors of the law, Math. 26.
and the auncientes of the people were gathered together. And the high priest,
and the Scribes, and the whole council, sowght for false witness against Jesus,
to put him to death, but fownde none, thowghe many false witnesses came
thither, but their witness agreed not together. But at the last, came two false
witnesses, and said. This man said. I can destroy the temple of God, and
build it up again in three days. Then the chief priest 'arose, and said to
him: I conjure thee, in the name of the living God, that thou tell us, whither
thou be Christ the son of God. Jesus said to him. Thou have said it.
Nevertheless I say unto you. Hereafter shall ye see the son of man sittinge
at the right hand of the power of God, and come in the clouds of the heaven.
Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying: He has blasphemed, what need
we any more witnesses? Behold, ye have now hard his blaspemie. what think
ye? They answered, and said, he is worthy to die. Then spat they in his face,
and buffeted him, and others gave him blows on his face, saying. Areede O
Christ, who is he, that smote thee.

The next day in the morninge, Luc. 23.
the whole multitude of them arose, and led our savior unto Pilate. And they
began to accuse him, saying: we have fownde this man peruertinge the people,
and forbiddinge to pay tribute to Caesar: saying: that he is the king
Messiah. And Pilate asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? And he
answered him, and said: Thou say it. And when he was accused of the chief
preistes, and elders, he answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto him. Hear
thou not, how many things they lay against thee? But he answered him not to
one word, insomuch that the president meruailed greatly, Then said Pilate to
the high preistes, and to the people. I find no fault in this man. But they
were more fierce, sayeinge: He moves the people, teachinge throwghout all
Judea, beginning at Galilee even to this place.

Now when Pilate heard of Galilee, Luc. 23.
he asked whether the man were of Galilee borne. And when he knew he was of
Herodes jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also at Jerusalem in those
days. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceidinglie glad. For he was
desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many things of
him, and trusted to have seen some sign done by him. The high Preistes and
the Scribes stood forth, and accused him vehemently. And Herod with his men
of war contemned and mocked him, and put a white garmente upon him, and sent
him again to Pilate.

And by reason of the solemnity of the feast of Easter, Math. 27.
the president was wont then of custom to deliver unto the people a prisoner,
whom they would demand. And there was at that time a notable malefactor in
prison, called Barrabas. When they were then gathered altogether, Pilate said
unto them: Whether of the two will ye that I let lose unto you, Barrabas, or
Jesus, that is called Christ? And they answered: Not this man, but Barrabas.
Luc. 23.
This Barrabas was cast into prison for a certain insurrection, and murder,
committed in the city. Then said Pilate unto them: What shall I do then with
Jesus, that is called Christ. Math. 27.
They cried all: let him be crucified. Then Pilate took Jesus, and scourged
him.

Christogram I H S



MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
MANY things have thou (O my soul) this day to contemplate, and consider.
This day must thou accompany our Savior to many stations, unless thou
intend to run away with his disciples: or else feel thy feet over heavy
to tread those paths, which our Savior vowchsafed to tread for thy sake.
This day is he browght five times before diverse Judges, and for thy sake is
evil entreated in each of their howses, and paieth that, which thou have
deserved. In one house he is buffetted: in an other spitted upon: in an other
mocked, and scorned: in an other whipped, and crowned with thorns, and
condemned by an unjust sentence to a most cruel death. Consider whether these
stations be not of force to break and ryue thy heart, and to make thee to go
barefoote with him, with the blood runninge about thy feet.

Let us go then to the first station, which was in Annas house, How our
Savior was led to the house of the Bishop Annas.
and marcke there, how whilst our Savior answered very courteously unto the
demand, that the Bisshoppe made unto him concerning his disciples, and
doctrine, one of those wicked caytifes that stood there by, gave him a great
blow upon the face, sayeinge: Joan. 18.
Answerest thou thus the Bisshoppe. Unto whom our savior very gently
answered: If I have spoken evil, show me wherein, and if I have spoken well,
why strykest thou me?

Consider here now (o my soul) not only the myldnes of this gentle answer,
but also that divine face, which bears the print, and is changed very red
in color with the force and violence of the blow. Consider also that most
constant and modest look of his clear eyes, which were nothing at all
distempered in that so feirce and shameful assault. Consider withal that most
holy soul, that was inwardly so humble and ready to have turned the other
cheek, if the nawghtie wretched caitiffe had required it. O cursed and
unfortunate hand, that durst thus stryke and beraye that divine face, before
whose reverent aspect the very heavens do stowpe, and bow! At whose majesty
even the Seraphines and all things created do tremble. and quake! What saw
thou in him, that thou should thus be provoked to disfigure him, who is the
lively Image of the glory of the father? What moved thee to use this
dispitefull kind of most villeynous reproach unto him, Psalm. 44.3.
who is the most bewtifull emonge all the sons of men.

How our Savior was led to the house of bishop Caiphas.
But this was not the last injury our Savior suffered that night: For from
the house of Annas, they lead him to the house of the Bisshoppe Caiphas,
whither reason would that thou should go with him to keep him company:
and there shall thou see the son of justice darkened with an Eclipse, and
that divine countenance defiled most irreverently with spittell, 1. Pet. 1.12.
which the Angels desire to behold. For when our Savior was coniured in the
name of the father to tell them what he was, he answered treulie unto their
demand, as it was meet he should: but those wicked men that were so
utterly unworthy to hear such a high and excellent answer, being blinded
with the brightness of so great light, assaulted him like mad dogs, and
disgorged upon him all their malice, and fury. There each one to the uttermost
of his power geuethe him buffettes, and strokes: There they spitte upon that
divine face with their diuelishe mowthes: There they hoodwinke his eyes, and
strike him on the face, scoffinge and Iestinge at him, sayeinge: Areede, A
wou^derfull example of humility, and patience in our Savior.
who has smitten thee? O marvelous humility and patience of the son of
almighty God? O beawtie of the angels! Was that a face to spit upon? Men use
commo^lie when they are provoked to spit, to turn away their face toward
the fowlest corner of the house: and is there not to be fownde in all that
palace a fowler place to spit in, than thy face O sweet Lord? O earth, and
ashes, why do thou not humble thy self at this so wounderfull example? How
is it that there should yet remain in the world any token of pride, after
this so great and marvelous example of humility? Almighty God holds his
peace whilst he is spitted upon, and buffetted; the angels and all creatures
hold their hands, and revenge not the injuries done unto their creator,
beholdinge him thus contemned and reuyled with most dispitefull reproach, and
villainy: and yet thou being a poor seely miserable worm, turmoilest the
world up side down, with malicious chydinge, brawlinge, and fightinge, in
case thou be but touched in any small point apperteyninge to^ thy
estimation? Why wonderest thou (o man) to see Almighty God thus beaten, and
evil entreated in the world: since the very cause of his coming was to cure
the pride of the world? If the sharpenes of the medecin do cause thee to
wonder: consider the greatness of the wound, and thou shall see, that such a
wound required so sharp a medecin as this was: espetiallie consideringe that
all this notwithstanding, the wound is not yet whole. Thou wonderest to see
how almighty God has humbled himself: And I wonder to see thee (for all this
example) so proud and insolent in all thy talk, dealinges, and behavior,
saying almighty God has so humbled himself, to teach thee to be humble.
Thou wonderest to see almighty God thus to abase himself under the dust of
the earth, and I wonder to see, that dust and earth for all this aduaunceth
it self above the heavens, and would be honored above almighty God himself.

How is it then, that this so wonderful example suffices not to subdue the
pride of the world? The humility of Christ was sufficient to overcome the
heart of God, to procure his favor, and to make him become gentle and mylde
toward us. And shall it not suffice to overcome thy heart, and to make it
humble and meike? The angel said to the Patriarcke Jacob: Genesis 32.28.
Thou shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. For saying
thou have been mighty against God, how much more shall thou be mighty against
men? If then the humility and meikenes of our Savior Christ prevailed against
the fury, and wrath of almighty God: why does it not prevail against our
pride? If it were able to pacify and appease so mighty a heart, as the heart of
almighty God, being then angry with us, why does it not alter and mollify
our stubborn hearts? Suerly I am at my wits end, and very much astonished,
yea it passes my reason to consider how this so great patience overcomes not
thy anger, how this passinge great abasinge aswageth not thy pride, how these
violent buffettes beat not down thy presumption, and how this deep silence
emonge so many injuries is not of force to make thee leave of thy
quarrelinges, and troublesome sewtes in law, wherewith thou vexest and
turmoylest thy neighbors about the vile mucke and transitory pelf of this
world. It is a marvelous great wonder to see how almighty God would by
means of these so terrible injuries overthrow the kingdom of our pride: and
it is also greatly to be meruailed at, that notwithstanding all this, there
remains yet a fresh lively memory of Amelec under the heavens, 4 Reg. 15.
and that to this day the relikes of this wicked generation do for all that
remain, and continewe.

Now therefore o sweet Jesus I beseech thee to cure in me with the example of
thy great humility, the folly of my vain arrogancy, and pride. And
for so much as the greatness of thy wounds do give me playnlie to understand,
that I have great need of a helper, let it evidently appear by the operation
of thy grace and remedy in me, that I do now presently enjoy the benefit of
the same.

OF THE VEXATIONS AND TROUBLES OUR SAVIOVR SVFfered the night before his
Passion: and of the denial of S. Peter. II.
CONSIDER after this, what troubles our savior suffered in that doleful
night, when the souldiars that had him in custody, mocked and lawghed him to
scorn (as S. Luke says, Luc. 22.63.
) and used as a mean to pass away the sleepines of the night to scoff and
ieste at the Lord of majesty. Consider now (o my soul) how thy sweet spowse
is set here as a marcke, to receive all the strokes and buffettes they could
give him. O cruel night! O unquiet night, in which thou (O good Jesus) tookest
no rest at all, neither did the souldiars repose them selves, but accounted it
even a pastyme and recreation to vex, and torment thee! The night was ordained
for this end, that all creatures should therein take their rest, and that
the senses and members that are wearied with the toils and labors of the
day, might be refresshed, and relieved: but these wicked men use it now as a
fit time to tormente all thy members, and senses, strykinge thy body,
afflictinge thy soul, bindinge thy hands, buffettinge thy cheeks, spittinge
in thy face, and lugginge thee by the ears, that at such time as all members
are wont to take their rest, all thy members might be in great pain, and
trouble. O how far do these mattins differ from those, which the orders of
angels sounge at the same time in heaven unto thee! There they sing, Holy,
Holy: but here these caitifes cry out: put him to death: put him to death:
crucify him: crucify him. O ye angels of Paradise, that heard both these
voices, what thowghte ye, when ye saw him so despitefullie contemned in
earth, whom ye honor with so great reverence in heaven? What thowght ye,
when ye saw almighty God himself suffer such despites even for their sakes,
who did all this villainy unto him? Who has ever heard of such a kind of
charity, that one would suffer death to deliver the very same persons from
death, that were the procurers of his death? Assuredly, the malice of man
could not any further extend it self in committinge a more wicked deed,
than thus to presume to lay hands upon almighty God him self: neither
could the goodness and mercy of almighty God appear more plainly in any
thing, than in this, that he was content to suffer such a cruel death for
that very creature that conspired his death.

The painful greifes and turmoyles of this troublesome night were increased
far the more by the denial of S. Peter. For he, Of the denial of S. Peter.
who was so familiare a friend of our Savior: he, whom our Savior chose to
see the glory of his transfiguration: and he, who above all the rest of his
Apostles was honored and chosen by our Savior, Christ promised S. Peter in
Math. 16. verse. 18. that he would build his Church upon him. And in Luke. 22.
verse. 32. he was bid (after he should repent his denial) to confirm his
brethren. And in John. 21. verse. 17. Christ after his resurrection made S.
Peter pastor of all his sheep.
to have the pincipalitie and chief rule of the whole Christian Church: this
very chief Apostle (I say,) first before all others, not once, but three
several times together, even in the very presence of his Lord and master,
swears and forsweareth that he knows him not, and that he wist not who he
is.

O Peter, is he that stands there by thee so wicked a man, that thou
accomptest it so great a shame only to have known him? Consider, that this
is a condemnation of him by thee, before he be condemned by the high preistes:
sithence by this denial thou geuest the world to understand, that he is such
a manner of man, that even thou thy self do account it as a great reproach
and dishonor unto thee ever to have known him. Now what greater injury
could be done than this?

Our Savior then hearing this denial turned back, and beheld Peter, and
cast his eyes upon that sheep, which there was lost from him. O look of
wounderfull virtue! O silent look, but yet full of mystery, and
signification! Peter understood right well the langwage and voice of that
look, and althowgh the crowinge of the Cock was not able to awake his
spirits, yet was this able, as indeed it did. For the eyes of our Savior
Christ do not only speak, but also work, as it plainly appeared by the
tears of Peter, which albeit they gushed from the eyes of Peter, yet did they
much more proceide from the look and eyes of Christ.

Wherefore when thou shall at any time awake again out of thy sinful life,
and with grief and sorrow call thy sins to mind wherein thou have offended
almighty God, thou must understand, that this benefit proceideth from the
merciful eyes of our Lord, which do then look upon thee. The Cocks had
already crowed, but Peter remembered not himself, because our savior had not
as yet looked upon him. But when our Savior Christ looked upon him, then he
remembered him self, and repented and bewailed his offense. For the eyes of
Christ do open our eyes, and those are the eyes that do awake such as are
a-sleepe.

The holy Evangelists S. Matthew and S. Luke say, that Peter went out
forthwith, Math. 26.75 Luc. 23.62. Peter after his denial of Christ went
forthewith out of the place, and wept bitterly.
and wept bitterly: to give thee to understand, that it is not enowghe for
thee to be sorry, and bewail thine offense, but that it is requisite also to
avoid and eschew the very place and occasions of sin. For otherwise to
lamente and be sorry always for thy sins, and always to reiterate and
commit the same sins again, is to provoke always the wrath and anger of
almighty God against thee.

And note well and diligently this point espetiallie, A disciple of Christ
must not be ashamed, nor afearde, openlic to confess Christ, and his Catholic
religion.
that the principal sin that Peter had committed, was for that he shronke
back, and feared to be accounted one of Christ his disciples: and in this his
doing he is said to have denied Christ. Now if this be to deny Christ, how
many Christians (trow ye) may ye now find in the world, that do after
this sort deny Christ? Alas! how many be there at this day that refuse to
confess their sins, to communicate, to pray, to talk of God, and of
spiritual matters, to use conversation with such as be good, and virtuous,
and to suffer injuries, and trowbles, because the world should not the less
estieme them, or have them in contempt for the same? And what is this else, but
even to be ashamed to appear to the world to be a disciple of Christ, and a
keeper of his commandments? And what is this else, but to deny Christ, as S.
Peter denied him, when he was ashamed to be accounted his disciple? What other
thing may those that behave them selves after this sort hope and look for
at the dreadful day of Judgment, but that punnishement and sentence
threatened by our savior Christ himself: sayeinge: He that is ashamed to be
accounted my disciple before men, Luc. 9. and 12. Math. 10. Marc. 8.2. Tim. 2.
the son of the virgin will be ashamed to acknowledge him as one of his, when
he shall come in his majesty, and in the majesty of the father, and his holy
Angels.

HOW OUR SAVIOVR WAS BROWGHT BEFORE KING Herod, and mocked and accounted for
a fool by him, and his cowertiers.
depiction of Christ Si mundus vos odit. scitote quia me priorem vobis odio
habuit. Johan. 19.28.

A^t^ Reges et praesides stabitis propter me in testimonium illis. Marc. 13.9.



VHEN this painful and troublesome night was ended, they led our Savior
forthewith to the house of Pilate the president. And Pilate (understanding
that he was borne in Galilee,) sent him unto Herod, that was king of that
country, who took him for a fool, and as such a one caused him to be
appareiled in a white garmente, and so returned him back to Pilate again.

Whereby it appears, that our Savior was taken in this world not only for
a malefactor, but also for a very fool. O mystery worthy of great
reverence! The principal virtue of a Christian man is not to make any
account of the judgments and reputations of the world. Our savior Christ
is a good example unto us, not to make any acco^pte of the judgments and
estimations of the world.
Wherefore thou have here (good Christian brother) an occasion given thee,
whereby to learn this heavenly philosophy, and by this example to comfort
thy self, whenever thou shall see thy self to be unjustly despised,
mocked, and persecuted of the world. For the world cannot do thee any
injury, nor bear false witness against thee, but it has done the like unto
our Savior Christ before. He was accounted as a malefactor, and stirrer of
sedition, and for such a one they accused him before the judges, Luc. 23.2.
and accordingly demanded sentence of death upon him: He was taken to be a
nigromancer, and as one possessed with a devil, Luc. 11.15.
and so they said, That in the power of Bel-Zeb^b he cast out diuelles: Math.
9.34.
He was taken for a glutton, and great eater, and so they reported him,
sayeinge: Behold this man is a glutton, Math. 9.34.
and a drincker of wine. He was taken for a man of evil behavior, Math.
11.19. Joan. 8.48. Marc. 2.7.
and as one that kept evil company, sayeinge: That he kept company with
publicans, and sinners, and that he did eat with them. He was taken as one,
that was come of a wicked generation, and of a nawghtie race: and so they
termed him; sayeinge: Thou art a Samaritane, and art possessed with a devil:
He was taken for an heretic, and blasphemer: and so they said, that he made
him self God, and forgave sins as God. There wanted nothing else, but after
all this, to account our Savior as a fool, and so is he now taken: And that
not of every common person, but even of the rufflinge nobility, and
gentilmen, ye and of the chieffest counselors, magistrates, and officers, in
king Herodes cowert. And so they apparel our Savior like a fool, that he
might be also taken of all men for such a one. O wounderfull humility of our
sweet savior Christ? O example of all virtue? A singular comfort for all
troubled and persecuted Catholics.
O comfort of all troubled, and persecuted Catholics? Wherefore o thou
Christian, that art persecuted by Turckes, Moors, or heretics, for thy
public zealous profession of the Catholic religion, be of good comfort, as a
true Christian ought to be, in bearinge patiently, and willingly, thy cross
in this world, as a faithful disciple of our Savior Christ. And to the
intent thou may make the less account of the judgments, and estimations of
the world, and very evidently perceive, how foolish, and frantic the
world is, in his sayeinges, doings, opinions, and iugmentes, fix thine eyes
upon this lively purtraiture of all virtues: look upon this general comfort
of all miseries: and behold here, how the wisdom of almighty God is holden
for folly: virtue for vice: truth for blasphemy: temperance for glottonie:
the peace maker of the world, for a seditious disturber of the world: the
reformer of the law, for a breaker of the law: and the Iustifier of sinners,
for a sinner, and a follower of sinners.

In all these goinges, and comminges, and in all these demaundes, and answers
made before the Judges, consider diligently, and note the constancy, and
modesty of our savior: the gravity of his countenance: and the integrity of
his mind: which was never overcome, nor once dismayed, for all these great
conflictes. And when he saw him self in the presence of so many officers, and
Judges, sittinge in their Iudgmente seats: when he saw him self in the
midst of so many injurious villainies, and furious blows, and in such a
confusion of outcries, and clamowrs, thundered out vehemently by the accusers,
and conspirers of his death: when he saw him self in such a thronge of
outrageous and cruel ennemies, his death and Cross standinge (as it were)
present before his face: when our savior (I say) saw himself thus tossed,
and turmoyled, up, and down, with so many tempesteous waves, and blusteringe
storms of all adversity, and persecution, it was wonderful to behold his
constancy, his patience, and his temperance, insomoche as what so ever he did,
or spoke, made a plain demo^stration of a noble heart, and courageous mind in
him. There came no one bitter, or sharp word, out of his mowthe: He never
yielded, or submitted himself so much as to frame any manner of supplication,
or entreaty to his ennemies for his life: neither shed he any one tear, or
made any lamentation unto them, in that behalf. But in all points, and
respects, he observed such a comely gravity, and majesty, as was seemly
for the dignity of so high, and worthy a personage. What silence kept he
emonge so many, and those so false accusations? How circumspecte was he in his
words, when so ever he spoke? How wisely behaved he him self in all his
answers? To conclude, such was the form and show of his countenance, and
mind, in these his trowbles, that even that alone, with out any further
testimony might have suffised to iustefie his cause, if the grossenes of
their wicked, and malicious understandings, had been able to conceive the
highness, and excellency, of such a proof.

OF THE CREWELL SCOVRGINGE, AND WHIPPINGE OF our Savior at the pillar.
depiction of Christ Communicantes Christi passionibus gaudete; vt et in
reuelatione gloriae eius gaudeatis exultantes 2. Petr. 4.13.

III.
AFTER all these injuries, consider what scourginges and whippinges our savior
suffered at the pillar. For when the Judge perceived that he was not able to
pacify the furious rage of those his most cruel ennemies, he determined to
punnishe our savior with such a severe kind of punnishement, as might suffice
to satisfy the malicious outrage of such cruel hearts, that they being
contented therewith should cease, and seek no more after his death.

This is one of the greatest, and most wonderful sightes, that ever was seen
in the world. Who would ever have thowght, that whippes, and lasshes, should
have been laid upon the shoulders of almighty God. The Prophet David says:
Psalm. 90.
that the place of thy habitation o Lord is most high, and that there shall
none evil approach near unto thee: he says that there shall no whippe be
felt in thy tabernaele. Now what thing is farther from the high majesty and
glory of almighty God, than to be villaynously whipped, and scourged? This is
suerlie a ponnishement rather for bondslaues, and thieues: yea it was accounted
generally so vile, and infamous, that in case the offender were a Citezin of
Rome, though his offense were never so heinous, he was thereby quitte, and
exempted, from that most slauishe, and villeynous kind of ponnishement. All
which notwithstanding, behold here, how the Lord of the heavens, the creator
of the world, the glory of the angels, the wisdom, power, and glory of
the living God, vowchesafeth for our sakes to be ponnished with whippes, and
scourges? Certainly I do believe, that all the orders of angels were wholly
amassed, and astonished, when they beheld this so strange, and wonderful
sight: and that they adored and acknowledged the unspeakable goodness of
almighty God, which was very manifestly discovered unto them in this act.
Luc. 2.
Wherefore, if they filled the aier with high lawdes, and praises, upon the
day of his nativity, when as yet they had seen nothing else, but only the
swadlinge clowtes, and the manger, where he was laid. What did they now (trow
ye) when they beheld him so villainouslie and most cruelly whipped, and
scourged at the pillar. Consider thou therefore (o my soul,) unto whom this
business apperteyneth much more, than to the angels: Consider I say, how much
more ought thou to be inwardly moved in thy very heart, with this so
wonderful, and most pietifull doleful sight of thy sweite savior, and to
acknowledge unto him much more humble thanckes, and praises, for his so
passinge great love showed hereby unto thee.

Go now therefore, and enter with thy spirit into Pilates concistorie, and
carry with thee great store of tears in a readiness, which in that place
shall be very needful, to bewail such things, as there thou shall both hear,
and see. Consider on the one side, with what rudenes those cruel, and blouddie
tormentors, do strippe our Savior of his garments: and see on the other side,
with what humility he suffers himself to be stripped by them, never so much
as once openinge his mowthe, or answeringe one word to so many despitefull
scoffs, and blasphemous speeches, as they uttered there against him. Consider
also what have they make to bind that holy body to a pillar, that being
fast bound, they might fetch their full strookes more at pleasure, and
stryke him where, and how they list? Consider, how the Lord of angels,
stands there post alone, emonge so many cruel tormentors, having on his
part neither frynde, nor acquaintance to entreat, or defend him from
injury, no not so much as eyes to take compassion upon him. Marcke now with
what furious cruelty they begin to discharge their whippes and scourges
upon his most tender flesh, and how they lay on lasshes upon lasshes,
strookes upon strookes, and wounds upon wounds.

There might thou see that sacred body, swollen with wheales, all black,
and blewe, the skin rented and torn, the blowde gusshinge out, and
streaminge down on every side, throwghout all parts of his body.

But above all this, what a pittiefull sight was it to behold that so great,
and deep open wound, that was given him upon the shoulders, where chiefly
all their lashes and strookes did light? Verelie I am persuaded, that that
wound was so large, and deep, that if they had laid on a little longer, they
had discovered the white bones, between the blouddie flesh, and made an end
of his holy life at the pillar, before he had come to the Cross. To be short,
they so struck, and rent, that most amyable, and bewtifull body: they so
boude him, and laid on such loode of strypes, and lasshes, upon him: they so
tormented and filled his blessed body, with most cruel strookes and wounds,
that he had now clean lost the form, and shape, he had before: yea (and to
say further) they so fowlie disfigured him, that he scarselye seemed to have
the shape of a man. Consider now o my soul, in what a doleful plight that
goodly and bashefull young man stood there, being as he was in that
pittiefull case, so evil entreated, so reprochefullie used, and set out so
nakedlie to the utter shame of the world. Behold, how that most tender, and
bewtifull flesh, yea even the flower of all flesh, is there most cruelly
rent, and torn in all parts of it.

The law of Moses commanded, that malefactors should be beaten with
whippes, Deuteronomy. 25,
and that according to the quality of their offenses, so should the number
of the lasshes be: Howbeit with this condition, that they should never pass
fowertie lasshes, to the end (says the law) that thy brother fall not down
before thee fowlie torn and mangled: seeminge to the law maker, that to
exceed this number, was a kind of punishment so cruel, that it could not
stand with the laws of brotherly love. But against thee (o good Jesus,) that
did never break the law of justice, were broken all the laws of mercy:
yea, and that in such sort, that in steed of fowertie lasshes, they gave thee
five thowsande, and above, as many holy fathers do testify. If then a body
would seem so fowlie beraied, being scourged not passinge with fowertie
strypes: in what plight was thy body my sweet Lord, and savior, being
scourged with above five thowsande strypes? O joy of the angels, and glory
of the saints, who has thus disfigured thee? Who has thus defiled thee with
so many spots, being the very glass of innocence? The love and mercy of
our Savior toward us, moved him to suffer such cruel pains.
Certain it is o Lord, that they were not thy sins, but mine, not thy
robberies, but mine, that have thus evil entreated thee. It was even love, and
mercy, that compassed thee abowte, and caused thee to take upon thee this so
heavy a burden. Love was the cause, why thou did bestow upon me all thy
benefittes: and mercy moved thee, to take upon thee all my miseries.
Wherefore, if love, and mercy, have caused thee to enter into these so cruel,
and terrible conflictes? Who can now stand in dowte of thy love? If the
greatest testimony of love, be to suffer pains for the beloved, what else are
each one of thy pains, but a several testimony of thy love? What' else are
all these wounds of thine, but as it were certain heavenly voices, Each one
of our saviors pains be a several testimony of his love toward us.
that do all preach, and proclaim unto me thy love, all require me, to love
thee again. And if the testimonies be so many, as the strypes, and blows
were, that thou sufferedst for my sake, who can then put any dowte in the
proof, being as it is so playnelie auowched, and proved, by so many
witnesses? What means then this incredulity of mine, that is not yet
convinced with so manifold and so great arguments. S. John the Evangelist
wondered at the incredulity of the Jews, Joan. 12.
for that our Lord wrowght so many miracles emonge them, for confirmation of
his doctrine, and they nevertheless would not believe in him. O holy
Euangeliste, wonder no more at the incredulity of the Jews, but rather at
mine. For So Much as to suffer pains is no less argument to cause me to believe
the love of Christ, than is the worckinge of miracles to cause me to believe in
Christ. If then it be a great wonder, that after so many miracles wrowghte
by our savior Christ, his words are not yet believed: how much more
wonderful is it, that having suffered for our sakes above five thowsande
strypes, we believe not yet that he loves us.

But what shall we say, if to all these strookes, and wounds, which he
received for us at the pillar, we add moreover all the other pains, and
trauaylles of his whole life, all which proceeded of love? What browght thee
down o Lord from heaven unto the earth, but only love? What thing pulled
thee out of thy fathers bosom, and lay de thee in thy mothers womb? What
thing caused thee to take the garmente of our frail nature upon thee, and to
become partaker of our miseries, but only love? What thing placed thee in an
ox staulle, and swaddeled thee in a manger, and chased thee into strange
countries, but only love? What thing made thee to carry the yooke of our
mortality for the space of so many years, but only love? What thing made
thee to sweat, to traueill, to watch, to continewe wakinge all the long
night, and to pass over both sea, and land, seakinge after lost souls, but
only love? What thing bound Sampson hand and foot, shaued his hear,
Iudic. 16.
spoiled him of all his force, and caused him to be mocked, and scorned, of his
ennemies, but only the love of his spouse Dalida? And what thing has bound
thee our true Sampson, and shaued thee, and spoiled thee of thy force, and
strength, and given thee into thine ennemies hands, to be so reprochefullie
lawghed, spitted, and scoffed at, but only the love, that thou bear unto
thy spouse the Catholic Church, and unto each one of our sowles? Finally,
what thing has brought thee to be crucified upon the tree of the cross,
there to stand so cruelly tormented from top, to toe, thy hands nailed,
thy side opened, thy members racked one from an other, thy body all of a goore
blood, thy veins exhausted, and void of blood, thy lips pale, and wanne,
thy tongue bitter: to be short, all thy body wholly rent, and torn? What
thing could have wrought such a most cruel foul mangelinge, and boucherie
of thee, as this was, but only love? O passinge great love? o gracious love? o
love, seemly for the great unspeakable mercy, and infinite goodness of him,
who is infinitlie good, and louinge, yea wholly love.

Having therefore so great, and so many testimonies of thy love (o my sweet
Lord, and savior) as these be, how can I but believe, that thou love me?
Since it is most certain, that thou have not changed that most charitable
louinge heart, being now in heaven, which thou had when thou did walk
here upon the earth? Thou art not like that cup bearer of king Pharao,
Genesis 40.
who when he saw him self in prosperity, forgot his poor friends, that he
had left in prison: but rather the prosperity, and glory, that thou do now
enjoy in heaven, moves thee to have greater pity, and compassion, upon thy
children, whom thou have left here in earth. Now then, since it is certain,
that thou love me so much, as I see very evidently thou do, why do not
I love thee again? why do not I put my whole trust, and affyance, in thee?
why do not I esteime my self very happy, and rich, having even almighty
God him self, so constante, and louinge a frynde unto me? It is vndowtedlie a
great wonder, that any thing in this life does make me careful, and heavy,
having on my side so rich, and so mighty a lover, throwghe whose hands all
things do pass.

Christogram I H S



THVRSDAIE MORNINGE.
THIS day, (when thou have made the sign of the Cross, and prepared thy
self hereunto) thou have to meditate, and consider: How our Savior was
crowned with thorns: how Pilate said of him to the people, ECCE HOMO: Behold
the man: and how he bare the Cross upon his shoulders.

depiction of Christ Christus passus est pro nobis, vobis relinquens exemplum,
vt sequamini vestigia eius: 1 pet. 2.21.



The text of the holy Evangelists.
VHEN our Savior had been thus whipped and scourged, Math. 25. Marc. 15.
the souldiars of the president took him into the common haull, and there
gathered about him the whole band. And they stripped him, and put upon him a
purple roobe, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and a
reed in his right hand. And they bowed their knees before him, and mocked
him, sayeinge: Haill o king of the Jews: and spitted upon him, and took the
reed, that he held in his hand, and smoote him on the head therewith. Joan.
19.
Then Pilate went forth again, and said unto them: Behold I bring him
forth to you, that ye may know, that I find no fault in him at all. Then
came Jesus forth, wearinge a crown of thorns, and a purple garmente. And
Pilate said to them: Behold the man. Then, when the high preistes, and
officers, saw him, they cried sayeinge: Crucify him, Crucify him: Pilate
said unto them. Take ye him, and crucify him. For I find no fault in him.
The Jews answered, and said: we have a law, and by our law he owght to die,
because he made him self the son of God. Then when Pilate haerde that word,
he was the more afraied, and went again into the common hall, and said unto
Jesus. Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. Then said Pilate unto
him. Speak thou not unto me? know thou not, that I have power to crucify
thee, and have power to loose thee? Jesus answered: Thou could have no power
at all against me, except it were given thee from above: Therefore he that
delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin. From thenceforthe Pilate late
sowght to loose him. But the Jews cried out, requiringe to have him crucified,
and their cries prevailed. And Pilate determined to accomplish their
request. And he let loose unto them him, Luc. 23.
that for an insurrection, and murder, was cast into prison, whom they desired,
and delivered Jesus unto them, to do with him, what they would.

And they took Jesus, Joan. 19.
and led him away. And he bare his Cross, and came into a place, that was
called Caluarie. Luc. 23.
And there followed him a great multitude of people, and of women, which
bewailed, and lamented him. But Jesus turned back unto them, and said:
Daughters of Ieruzalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children. For behold, the days will come, when men shall say. Blessed
are the barren, and the wombes that never bare, and the pappes that never gave
suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains: fall upon us: and to
the hills: Cover us. For if they do these things to the green tree, what
shall be done to the dry?

Christogram I H S



MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
COME forth O ye dawghters of Sion, and behold king Solomon with the
crown, wherewith his mother crowned him at the day of his espousels, and upon
the day of the joyfulness of his heart. O my soul, what do thou? O my
heart, what think thou? O my tongue, how is it, that thou art become domme?
What heart is not broken? What hardness is not mollified? What eyes can abstain
from tears, and lamentation, beholdinge such a pittiefull and doleful sight,
as this is? O my most sweere savior, and redeemer, when I open mine eyes, and
do behold this dolorous Image, which is here set before me, how is it, that
my heart does not even cleave and rent in sunder, for very anguishe and
grief? I see the most tender head of my Lord, and savior, pierced with
crewell thorns, at whose presence the powers of heaven do tremble, and quake:
I see his divine face spitted upon, and buffeted: I see the light of his
goodly brighte forehead, obscured: I see his clear eyes dimmed, or rather
blinded with showers of blood: I see the streams of blood, tricklinge down
from his head: which faulle over over his eyes, and stayne the beauty of his
divine face. How happens it (o Lord,) that the cruel whippinges, thou
did suffer before, and the death that ensues, and the great quantity of
blood that was so cruelly shed, did not suffice, but that the sharp thorns
also should now perforce let out the blood of thy head, which the whippes and
scourges before had pardoned? If thou did receive those reproaches, and
buffettes, to make satisfaction by them for such blows, and buffettes, as I
through my sins have laid upon thee, had thou not received enowghe of
them all the night before? If thy death alone was sufficient to redeem us,
what neded so many kinds of most shameful villainies, and reproaches? To what
end were all these new inventions, and strange devises of contemptes and
mockeries? Who has ever hard, or red of such a kind of crown? or of such
manner of torments? Out of what heart came this new invention into the world,
that one punnishement should serve in such wise as both to tormente a man, and
withal to dishonor him? Were not those cruel torments sufficient, that had
been used in all former ages, but that they must also invent these new and
strange punnishementes at the time of thy most bitter passion? I see well (o
Lord) that these so manifold injuries were not necessary for my redemption,
(for even one only drop of thy most precious blood was sufficient for the
same,) The causes why out savior would suffer so manyfolde pains, and
injuries, for our redemption.
howbeit it was very conueniente, that they should be so many, and so
great, that thou might thereby declare unto me, the greatness of thy love,
and by means of them lincke me unto thee with chains, and fetters of
perpetual bond, and dewtie, and confound the gaye braueries, and fond
shows of my pride, and vanities, and teach me thereby to despise the pomp,
and glory of the world.

Wherefore o my soul, that thou may conceive, and have sum feelinge of
this so doleful passage, set first before thine eyes, the former shape of this
Lord, and withal the excellency of his virtues: and then incontinently
turn thy self, and behold him in such pitiefull forte, as he is here
represented unto us. Consider therefore the greatness of his former beawtie: the
modesty of his eyes, the sweetenes of his words, his awthoritie, his meeknes,
his mylde behavior, and that goodly countenance of his, so full of gravity,
and reverence. Behold how humble he was toward his disciples: how fair
spoken toward his ennemies: How stowte toward the proud: How sweet
toward the meike: and how merciful toward all sorts of persons. Consider
how mylde he has always been in sufferinge, how wise in answeringe, how
pittiefull in his judgments, how merciful in receauinge sinners, and how
free, and bountiefull in perdoninge their offenses.

When thou have thus beholden our Savior and delighted thy self with
beholdinge such a perfect form: turn thine eyes and behold him in this
pitiefull plighte, wherein he is here set out to the world, clad in most
scornful wise with an old purple garmente, holdinge a reed in his hand in
steed of a royal scepter. Behold that horrible and paynefull diadem of
thorn on his head, those hollow and wanne eyes, and that dead countenance.
Behold that strange form of his, wholly disfigured, and begored with blood,
and defiled with the spittle, which they had besmered all over his face.
Behold him in all parts, both inwardelie, and outwardelie, his heart pierced
with sorrows: his body full of wounds: forsaken of his own disciples:
persecuted of the Jews: scorned of the soldiers: contemned of the Busshoppes:
baselie rejected of the wicked king: accused unjustly: and utterly destitute
of the favor of all men.

And think upon this, not as a thing past, but as a thing present: not as
thowghe it were an other man's pain, but as thowghe it were thine own. Imagine
thy self to be in the place of him, that suffers, and think with thy self
what a terrible pain it would be unto thee, if in so sensible and tender a
part as the head is, they should fasten a number of thorns (yea and those
very sharp) which should pearce even to the sculle. But what speak I of
thorns? If it were but one only prick of a pynne, thou could hardly
abide the pain of it. And therefore thou may well think what a sore grievous
pain that most tender, and delicate head of our savior felt at that time,
with this strange kind of tormente.

Wherefore o brightness of the glory of the father, who has thus cruelly delte
with thee? O unspotted glass of the majesty of almighty God, who has thus
wholly bespotted thee? O River that flowest out of the paradise of delights,
and with thy streams reioycest the City of God, who has troubled these so
clear, and sweet waters? It is my sins (o Lord) that have so troubled
them, Our sins were the only cause of all our saviors pains.
and my iniquities have made them so muddie. Alas poor wretch and miserable
caityffe, that I am. Woo is me, how have my sins bespotted mine own soul,
saying the sins of others have here so fowlye bespotted and troubled the
very clear fountain of all beauty? My sins o Lord, are the thorns that
prick thee: my folies are the purple, that scorn thee: my hipochresie and
feigned holiness are the ceremonies, wherewith they despise thee: my gaie
garments, and vanities, are the crown, wherewith they crown thee. So that I
o Lord am thy tormentor, and I am the very cause of thy pains, and greiffes.
2. Pa^^l. 29.
The king Ezechias, purified the temple, that had been profaned by wicked
persons, and commanded that all the filthe, that was therein, should be cast
into the river of Cedron. I O Lord am this lively temple, that is profaned by
the devils, and defiled with infinite sins: and thou art the clear river of
Cedron, that do with thy ronninge streams sustain all the beauty of
heaven. In this river o Lord are all my sins drowned: In this river are my
iniquities washed away, in so much as by the merit of that unspeakable
charity, and humility, with which thou have humbled thy self, to take upon
thee all my sins, thou have not only delivered me from them: but also made
me partaker of thy graces and treasures. For in taking upon thee my death,
thou have given me thy life, in taking upon thee my flesh, thou have given me
thy spirit, and in taking upon thee my sins, thou have given me thy grace.
So that (o my merciful redeemer) all thy pains, Our saviors pains are our
treasures, and riches.
are my treasures, and riches: thy purple clotheth me: thy crown honoreth me:
thy strookes bewtifie me: thy sorrows comfort me: thy angwishes sustain me:
thy wounds heal me: thy blood enricheth me: and thy love makethe me drunk.
And what wonder is it, if thy love make me drunk, saying the love thou barest
toward me, was able to make thee also dronken, and to leave thee like an
other Noe to appear dishonored, and naked, Geness.
to the open sight of the world The purple of bourninge love causes thee to
sustain the purple of shame, and reproach: the earnest zeal thou have of my
profit, and furtherance, causes thee, to be content to hold this reed in
thy hand: And the compassion thou have of my loss, and damnation, moves thee
to bear this dolorous crown of ignominy upon thy head.

OF THOSE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL, ECCE HOMO: Behold the man. depiction of
Christ Opprobrium hominum, et abiectio plebis psalm. 21.7. J^.

(...) presturam hab^bitis: sed (...), ego (...) Johan. ^6.33.

II.
VHEN they had thus crowned, and scorned our Savior: the Judge took him by
the hand, in such evil plight, as he was, and leadinge him out to the sight
of the furious people, said these words unto them: ECCE HOMO, Behold the man.
Which is as much as if he had said. If for envy ye seek his death,
behold him here in what a pitiefull, and doleful case he is. A man
vndowtedlye not to be envied, but to be pitied. If you were afraid least he
should have become a king, behold him here so wholly disfigured, that
scarcelye he seems to be a man? Of these hands so fast, and strongly
bound, what cause is there, why ye should fear? Of a man in this wise so
sore whipped, and scourged, what would ye require more?

By this may thou understand (o my soul) in what a lamentable case our
Savior was at his goinge out of the judgment haulle, saying that even the
Judge himself verelie believed that the pittiefull case in which he was,
might have suffised to mollify, and break the unmerciful cruel hearts of
his ennemies, Whereby thou may well perceive, what a dangerous, and
unseemly thing it is, for a Christian, not to have compassion of the most
grievous, and bitter pains, and sorrows, of our savior: who so loves Christ
takes grief and compassion of his bitter pains and sorrows.
saying they were so great, that they were able (as the Judge was persuaded) to
mollify those most savage and cruel stonye hearts of the Jews. Where love
is, there is also sorrow. How can he then say, that he loves our Savior
Christ: that beholdinge him tormented in this most pittiefull, and doleful
plighte, has no compassion of him?

And if it be so wicked a thing not to have compassion of our Savior Christ,
what a heinous matter is it to increase his pains, and martirdomes, and to
add thereunto sorrow, upon sorrow? Suerlie there could not be any greater
cruelty in all the world, than after that the Judge had showed our savior
Christ unto them so pittiefullye berayed, for his ennemies to answer with such
cruel words: Crucifige: Crucifige: Crucify him: Crucify him: Now if this
was so great a cruelty in the Jews, what a cruelty is that in a Christian,
who in his deeds and works says even as much as the Jews did, althowgh he
express it not in words. Heb. 6. The wicked Christians do as it were
crucify Christ again, by their evil and synnefull works.
For does not S. Pawle say? That he that sins, crucifieth the son of God
again. For So Much as towchinge his part, he does a thing whereby he would
bind him to dye again, if his former death had not been sufficient. How is it
then (o Christian) that thou have thy heart, and hands, ready bent, to
crucify our Lord and redeemer, so often times in this wise with thy sins?
Thou owghtest to consider, that like as the Judge presented that so pittiefull
form to the Jews, supposinge there was none other more effectual mean, to
withdraw them from their fury, than that doleful sight: even so the
heavenly father presents that same doleful sight daily unto all sinners:
meaning thereby, that in very deed there is none other more effectual mean,
to withdraw them from sin, than to set before them this so pittiefull a
form. Make acompte therefore, that even now the heavenly father lays also
the same pittiefull form of his most dear, and only begotten son before
thy face, and that he says unto thee: ECCE HOMO: Behold the man: As thowghe
he should say: Behold this man, in what a dolorous case he stands, and
remember withal, that he is God almighty, and that he stands in this most
doleful, and lamentable plighte, as here thou see him, not for any other
cause, but for the very sins of the world. See into what plighte God is
browght by the sins of man. Consider, how necessary it was to satisfy for
sin. And consider also, How abominable a thing sin is, in the sight of
God.
how abominable and horrible a thing sin is in the sight of almighty God:
saying it so disfigured his own only son, to destroy it. Consider
moreover, what a sore revenge almighty God will take of a sinner, for such
sins as he himself commits, sith he has so sharply punnished his own
most dearly beloved and innocent son, for the sins of others. Last of all
consider the rigor of the justice of almighty God, and the foul stayninge
malice of sin, which appears so dreadfullie even in the very face of
Christ the son of God. Now what thing could possibly be done of greater
efficacy, both to cause men to fear God, and also to abhor sin?

It seems hereby, that almighty God has showed him self toward man, as a
good louinge mother is wont to do toward her wicked dawghter, that seeks
lewd means to play the harlot. For when neither words, nor punnishement be
able to diswade her from her wicked devilish purpose, she tourneth her rage
against her own self, she beats her own face, and teareth her hear, and
when she is thus disfigured, she sets her self before her dawghter, that
thereby she may understand the greatness of her offense, and that at the least
for very pity, and compassion of her mother, she may be moved to leave her
wicked purpose.

Now it seems that almighty God has used the very same remedy here, for
the chastesinge of men, settinge before them his own divine Image, to wit: the
face of his own most dearly beloved son, so evil used, and disfigured, to
the end, that where as they had been so many times admonished and rebuked by
the mowthes of his Prophettes, and yet would not forsake their wickedness,
they might at the least be moved for very compassion to forsake the same,
beholdinge that divine form of our Savior Christ in such pittiefull wise
disfigured for their sins. So that before, he laid his hands upon men, but
now he came, to lay them upon him self: which truly was the last refuge that
could be devised, to withdraw men from sin. And therefore as it has been
at all times accounted a very great wickedness to offend almighty God, so now
after that he has taken such a shape upon him to destroy sin, it is not
only a great wickedness, but also a very great ingratitude and horrible
cruelty to offend him with any deadlye sin.

If thou will continewe in the contemplatio^ of this point, (besides that thou
may learn hereby to abhor sin) thou may also take great cowrage to put
thy whole trust and affyance in almighty God, by consideringe this very
doleful form of our savior Christ, the which as it is of great sorce, to
move the hearts of men, even so has it no less force, but rather far
greater, to move the heart of almighty God. And therefore thou must think,
that what doleful form our Savior took at that time upon him, in the sight
of the furious people, the very same he presents now before the divine eyes,
of his most pittiefull and merciful louinge father, so fresh, and in such
bleadinge wise, as it was that very same day. Now what image and form can
there be of greater efficacy to pacify the eyes of the heavenly father, than
the pale, and wanne countenance (so pittiefullie disfigured) of his only
begotten son. This is the golden propiciatorie: this is the rainbowe of
diverse colors, placed emonge the clouds of heaven, with the sight whereof
almighty God is pacified. With this, were his eyes fed, with this, was his
justice satisfied, here was his honor restored. Here was such service done unto
him, as was answerable, and seemlie unto his divine majesty.

Tell me now then, o thou weak, and mistrustfull man, if the shape, and form,
of our savior Christ, was such at that time, that it was able, as the Judge
verelie believed to mitigate the cruel eyes of such ennemies, how much more
able is it to pacify the eyes of the most merciful heavenly father?
espetiallie consideringe that whatsoever our savior there suffered, was for
his honor, and under his obedience. Compare then eyes, with eyes: person, with
person: and thou shall see, how much thou art more assured of the mercy of the
heavenly father, by presentinge unto him this doleful form of our Savior
Christ, than Pilate was of the mercy of the Jews, when he showed our Savior
thus pittiefully disfigured unto them. Wherefore, in all thy prayers and
temptations, take this Lord for thy sheilde, and buckeler: set him between
thee, and almighty God: and present him before his divine majesty, saying:
ECCE HOMO: Behold the man: I have here (o almighty God) the man, whom thou
have so many years sowght for, to be a mean between thee, and sinners. I
have here the man, whose justice is such, that it answers thy godnes in
every point. I have here the man, who is so much punnished, as our sins and
offenses required. Wherefore o most merciful louinge Lord, look mercifully
upon us, I most humbly beseach thee. And that thou may so do, fix thine
eyes upon the face of thy Christ. And thou (o our sweet Savior, and mediator)
cease not to present thy self before the eyes of thy father for us. And
for so much as thy love toward us was so great, that thou would offer up thy
body to the tormentors to be tormented for our sakes: vouchsaffe (o Lord)
with the same love, to present it unto the heavenly father, beseachinge him,
that it may please him, for thy sake, to pardon us all our sins, and
offenses.

HOW OUR SAVIOVR CARRIED THE CROSS UPON HIS SHOVLDERS. depiction of Christ
Christo ig^^^ur pas^a in carna, et vos eadem cogitationa arma^^ini. 1 Patr.
(...)

III.
NOW when Pilate saw that all those extreme punnishementes that had been so
cruelly executed upon that most innocent lamb, were not able to assuage the
fury of his ennemies, he entered forthwith into the judgment hall, and sat
him down in his tribunal seat, to give final sentence in that cause. The
Cross was in the mean time prepared, and made ready at the gate, and that
dreadful banner was hoysed up on high in the aier, which threatened the
terror of a most cruel death to our Savior. Now when that sentence was given,
and published, althowghe it was of it self both unjust, and cruel, yet did
his ennemies add an other further cruelty unto it. to wit: they laid upon
those tender shoulders, that were so pittiefullie rent, and torn, with
unmerciful whippes, and scourges, the heavy tree of the cross. All which
notwithstanding, our most merciful Lord, and savior, refused not to carry
that heavy burden, (where upon were laid all our sins,) but embraced the
same with an unspeakable great charity, and obedience, for the very love he
bare unto us. And so went on his way, as an other true Isaac, Genes. 22.
with the cross on his shoulders, to the place of his sacrifice. The cariadge
was divided between two. The son carried the wood, and the body, that
should be sacrificed: These two virtues, love, and justice, did put the son
of God upon the cross
and the father carried the fire, and the knife, wherewith the sacrifice should
be made. For truly it was the fire of love, which he bare toward mankind,
and the sharp knyfe of the divine justice, that put the son of God upon the
cross. These two virtues contended together within the heavenly fathers
breast, each one demaundinge his right. Love requested him to pardon mankind,
and justice required that sinners might be punnished. Whereupon, to the end
that men might be pardoned, and sin punnished, a mean was found, that an
innocent (to wit the son of God) should die for all mankind. This was the
fire, and knife, that the Patriarch Abraham carried in his hands, to sacrifice
his son. For it was the love of our salvation, and the zeal of justice, that
cause the heavenly father, to offer his own most deerlie beloved son to the
cross.

Now goes the sweet innocent Jesus forwards on his way, with that so heavy
dolorous burden upon his weak, and torn shoulders, great multitudes of
people folowinge after him, and many a pittiefull, and sorrowful woman
accompanienge him with grievous tears, and lamentations. What stony heart had
been able to abstain from most bitter weepinge, beholdinge the king of
angels, to go thus faintlie, with such a great, and weighty burden: his
knees tremblinge under him: his body crowchinge under the cross: his modest
eyes, and face, all blouddye: with that dolorous garlande of thorn upon his
head: and besides all this, annoyed with those most shameful opprobrious
exclamations, and outcries, which they gave out in the way against him?

But now in the mean time (o my soul) withdraw thine eyes a little while
from this cruel sight, The sorrowful tydinges hereof, to the blessed virgin
Marie.
and hye thee with quick speed, with heaviness of heart, and great store of
tears trickelinge down by thy checkes, toward the house of the blessed
virgin Marie. And when thou art come thither, cast thy self down at her
feet, and speak these words in most doleful, and lamentable wise unto her.
O Lady of angels, and Queen of heaven? O gate of paradise, and advocate of
the world? O refuge of sinners, and health of the just? O joy of the
Saints, and teacher of virtues? O mirror of cleannes? O pattern of
patience, and example of all perfection? Woe is me (O blessed lady) woe is me,
why am I preserved alive, to see this present hour? How can I live, having
now seen with mine eyes, that doleful sight, which I have seen? What need
more words? Alas dear virgin, and most blessed mother: I have left thy only
begotten son, my sweet Lord and Savior in the cruel hands of his
malicious ennemies, with a cross upon his shoulders, where upon he shall be
crucified.

Now what understanding is able to comprehend how deeply these sorrowful
news pierced the most tender heart of that most blessed virgin? Here her soul
began to wax fainte. Her face, and all the parts of her unspotted maidenly
body were covered all over with a deadly sweat, which might have sufficed to
end her life, sauinge that by divine dispensation, she was reserved for
greater angwishes: and so consequently for a greater crown, and reward, in
the kingdom of heaven.

Now the holy virgin walkethe toward her sweet son, and the great desire
she has to see him, restores unto her again the force, and strength, which
sorrow, and grief, had taken away. She hearethe a far of the classhinge of
armor, the trowpes of the people, and those most shameful exclamations, and
outcries, which in most dispitefull wise were thundered by his outrageous
cruel enemies against him. And incontinently she seethe the glisteringe
spears, and halbardes, which were holden up a loft. She fyndethe in the way,
the drops and traces of blood, whereby she might easelie tracke him, which
way he had gone, and she needs none other gwide to conducte her unto him.
She approaches nearer, and nearer, unto her deerlie beloved son, she opens
her eyes, which were very sore dymmed with sorrowful weapinge, to prove
whether she might see him, whom her soul so exceadinglie loved. O what a
strange combatte was there now of fear, and love, in the dolorous heart of the
most blessed virgin Marie? In one respect she had a desiere to see him, and in
an other, she was unwilling to see him thus miserably and most cruelly
disfigured. At the length, when she was come where she might see him indeed:
then those two lights of heaven, do behold one an other, and their hearts
embrace sweetly together by means of their eyes. How beit the sight of one an
other in this doleful wise was a very great corsie to both their afflicted
souls. Their tongues were do^me, so that neither of them both for a while
spoke one word, but the natural affection of that most sweet son, spoke
privily to the heavy heart of the most blessed virgin, and said unto her. Why
come thou hither my dove, my beloved, and my dear mother? Thy sorrow
increases mine, and thy torments do augment my pains, and be a great torment
unto me: Depart my dear mother, depart I beseach thee, and retourn home
again to thy house. For it is not seemly for thy virginal shamefastnes, and
puretie, to be here in the company of murderers, and thieves. And if it would
please thee so to do, it would certainly assuage both thy sorrow, and mine.
And I will remain here to be sacrificed for the world. For this office
apperteineth not to thee, but unto me, and thy innocence deserves not this
torment. Genes. 8.
Return therefore my dove to the arcke, until such time as the waters of the
floude do cease: for so much as here thou shall find no place, where thou may
rest thy feet. There may thou attend to thy accustomed diuout prayer, and
contemplation. And there, by liftinge up thy soul in godly meditations above
thy self, thou shall pass over more easily this thy doleful sorrow and
greiffe.

Now this being said, the sorrowful heavy heart of the holy mother made
answer to her son, and said unto him. Why do thou command me to do
thus my dear son? Why would thou have me to depart away from this place?
Thou know (o my Lord God) that in thy presence each thing is lawful unto
me, and that there is non other Oratorie but where thou art. How can I then
depart away from thee, unless I should depart from my self? This grief and
sorrow so possesses my heart, that trewlie I can not think upon any other
thing. I can go no whither without thee; neither can I seek, or receive
comfort of any other, but of thee. Upon thee, is fixed all my whole heart.
Within thee, have I made my habitation. And my life wholly depends of thee.
Saying therefore thou have vowchesaffed for the space of nine months to
inhabit within my bowels, and to take my body for thy dwellinge place, why
may not I for these three days, take thy bowels for my habitation? If thou will thus receive me within thee, when thou art crucified, then shall I be
crucified with thee: and when thou art buried, then shall I be buried also
together with thee. With thee would I drink of the gaul, and vinegar. With
thee would I suffer upon the cross. And with thee would I yield up my ghost.

Such words as these spoke the blessed virgin in her doleful heart as she
went: And after this sort, she passed over that painful and ircksome way,
until she came to the place of the Sacrifice.

Christogram I H S



FRIDAIE MORNINGE.
THIS day (when thou have made the sign of the cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto) thou have to meditate upon the mystery of the cross: And upon these
seven words, which our Savior spoke being crucified on the same.

depiction of Christ Vere filius dei erat iste Math. 27.54.

Peccata nostra ipse pertulit in corpore suo super lignum ut peccatis mortui
iustitiae viveremus pet. 2.24.



The text of the holy Evangelists.
THEY came (says the holy Evangelist) to the place called Golgotha, Math. 27.
that is to say: the place of dead men's skulles. And they gave him vinegar to
drink mingled with gaul. And when he had tasted thereof, he would not
drink. It was then three a clock. And they crucified him, and with him two
thieves, one at the right hand, and the other at the left. And so was the
scripture fulfilled, that says. And he was reckoned emo^ge the wicked. And
Pilate wrote also a title, and put it upon the Cross. And it was written:
Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. This title many of the Jews did read.
For the place where Jesus was crucified, was near to the city: and it was
written in Hebrewe, Greek, and Lattin. Then said the high preistes of the
Jews to Pilate: write not: the king of the Jews, but that he said, I am
king of the Jews. Pilate answered: what I have written, I have written.

Then the souldiars when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and
made four parts, to every soldier a part. And they took his coat also,
which was without any seame, wouen from the top throwghout. Therefore they
said one to an other. Let us not divide it, but cast lottes for it, whose it
shall be. This was done, that the scripture might be fulfilled, Psalm. 21.
that says. They parted my garments emonge them, and upon my coat they cast
lottes. So the souldiars did these things indeed.

And they that passed by, Math. 27.
reuyled him, wagginge their heads, and sayeinge: Fie on thee, thou that
destroiest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self. If thou
be the son of God, come down from the cross. Likewise also the high
preistes, mockinge him with the Scribes, and elders, and Pharisees, said. He
saved others, but he cannot save him self. If he be the king of Israel, let
him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. He trusts in God.
Let him deliver him now, if he will have him. For he said: I am the son of
God. The very same words also, did the thieves, who were crucified with him,
cast in his teethe. But Jesus said. Father pardon them, for they know not
what they do.

And one of the malefactors, Luc. 23.
that was crucified with him, blasphemed, sayeinge: If thou be Christ, save
thy self, and us. But the other answered, and rebuked him, saying: Neither
do thou fear God, being in the self same condemnation? We are iustlye
punnished: for we receive according to our doings. But this man has done
nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus. Lord remember me, when thou come
into thy kingdom. Then Jesus said unto him. Verelie I say unto thee, This
day shall thou be with me in paradise.

There stood by the Cross of Jesus, Joan. 19.
his mother, and his mothers sister, Marie the wife of Cleophas, and Marie
Magdalene. And when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved
standinge by: he said unto his mother: Woman, behold thy son. Then he said
to the disciple: behold thy mother. And from that hour, the disciple took
her for his mother. Math. 27.


Abowte the ninthe hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice: saying: Eli, Eli,
Lamasabacthani: that is: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And some of
them that stood there, when they hard it, said. This man called Elias. Some
other said: let us see, if Elias will come and save him.

Afterward Jesus knowinge that all things were fulfilled, Joan. 19.
that the scripture might be accomplished, said: I am a thirst. And there was
set a vessel full of vinegar, and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put
it about an hisope stalk, and put it to his mouth. Now when Jesus had
received of the vinegar, he said: It is finished.

And he cried again with a loud voice, Luc. 23. Matthew. 27.
and said: Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. And from the sixte
hour, there was darkness over all the earth until the ninthe hour. And the
veil of the temple was rent in two parts, from the top to the bothom. And
the earth quaked, and the stones were cloven. And the graves opened them
selves, and many bodies of the Saints, which slepte, arose. And there were
many of his fryendes and acquaintance, and women beholdinge him a far of.
Emonge whom, was Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James the younger, and
of Iosephe, and Salome, who had followed him out of Galilee, ministringe unto
him: with many other women, that came in his company to Jerusalem.

MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
VE are now come (o my soul) to the holy mount Caluarie, and we be now
arrived at the top of the mystery of our redemption. O how wonderful is
this place? Verelie this is the house of God, the gate of heaven, the land of
promise, and the place of salvation. Here is planted the tree of life. Here is
placed that mystical ladder that Jacob saw, Genes. 28.
which joins heaven with the earth, whereby the angels do descend unto
men, and men do ascend unto almighty God. This is (o my soul) the place of
prayer. Here ought thou to adore, and bless our Lord, and give him most
humble, and hearty thanckes for this his most high and excellent benefit:
saying thus unto him.

We worship and adore thee o Lord Jesus Christ, and we bless thy holy name,
for so much as thou have by means of this holy Cross redeemed the world.
Thanks be given unto thee O most merciful Savior, for that thou have thus
loved us, and wass head away our sins with thy most precious blood, and have
offered thy self for us upon the same Cross: to the end, that with the most
sweet savor of this noble sacrifice, enkendeled with the fire of thy most
fervent love, thou might satisfy, and appease the wrath of almighty God.
Blessed be thou therefore for evermore, which art the Savior of the world:
the reconciler of mankind: the reparer of Angels: the restorer of the
heavens: the triumphant conqueror of hell: the vanquisher of the devil: the
awthor of life: the destroier of death: and the redeemer of them, Luc. 1.
that were in darckenes, and in the shadow of death.

All ye therefore that be a thirst, Esaias. 55.
come unto the waters, and ye that have neither gold, nor silver: come, and
receive all these precious treasures freely, without payinge any thing. Ye
that desire the water of life, this is that mystical rock, that Moses
struck with his rod in the wilderness, Exodus 17.
out of which there sprange water in great abondance, to satisfy the thirst of
his afflicted people. Ye that desiere peace, and amity with alinightie God,
know ye that this is also that rock, Genes. 35.
that the patriarch Jacob anointed with oil, and erected up for a title of
peace, and amity, between almighty God, and men. Ye that are desirous of
wine, to cure your wounds, Number. 13.
this is that cluster of grapes, that was browght out of the land of promise
into this vale of tears, which is now crusshed, and pressed upon the press of
the Cross, for the remedy and redress of our offenses. Ye that desire the
oil of the grace of God: know ye likewise, 4. Reg 4.
that this is that precious vessel of the widow of Elizeus, full of oil,
wherewith we must all pay our dettes. And albeit the vessel seem very
little to serve so many, yet look not to the quantity, but to the virtue
thereof: which is certeinlie so great, that so long as there be vessels to
fille, so long will the vain of this sacred licour always run, and never
cease.

A CONTEMPLATION UPON the mystery of the Cross. I.
AWAKE, I pray thee now (o my soul,) and begin to contemplate upon the
mystery of this holy Cross, by the fruit whereof the hurt of that poisoned
fruit is repared, which the forbidden tree caused unto us, throwgh the offense
of the first man Adam. As the bridegroom has signified to his spouse in the
canticles. When he said: cantic. 8.
I have raised thee up my spouse, from under the tree, because under an other
tree thy mother was corrupted, when she was deceived by the ancient serpente.

Consider then, how when our Savior came to this place, his cruel ennemies to
make his death the more reprochefull, stripped him of all his apparel, even
to his innermost garment, which was wholly wouen throwghout without any seame.
Behold now here, with what meekenes this most innocent lamb suffers
himself to be thus stripped of all his garments, without openinge his mowthe,
or speakinge so much as one word against them, that handeled him with such
villainy: But showed himself rather very willinge, and ready, to be spoiled
of his garments, and to remain naked to the shame of the world: to the
intent that the nakedness of such, as had throwgh sin lost the garmente of
innocence, and grace received, might be be covered after a better sort,
Genes. 3.
than with the leaves of the figtree. Some holy fathers report, that the
tormentors in pluckinge of our Saviors garments, took of his crown of
thorn, which then stuck fast on his head, and that afterward when they had
stripped him starcke naked, they set it on again, and fastened the sharp
thorns to the brain pan afreshe, and so made new holes, and wou^des
therein, which was an exciedinge great grief, and pain unto him. And
vndowtedlie it is to be thought, that they would use this kind of cruelty
against him, for so much as we are well assured, that they used many others, and
those very strange in all the process of his passion: especially consideringe,
that the holy Evangelist says, Lucae. 23.
that they did unto him, whatsoever they would.

Again, by reason of his garment, that stuck fast to the wounds of his
scourginges, and blood, which was now congealed unto the same: at what time
they plucked it of from his body, (as those caitiffes were far from all
piety, and mercy) they haled it of with such furious haste, and force, that
they loosed, and renewed, all the soores of his whippinges in such ruefull
wise, that his blessed body was in all parts open, and as it were flaine, and
became all one great wound, out of which distilled blood on all parts.

Consider now here (o my soul, The nakedness of our Savior upon the cross.
) the excellency of the goodness, and mercy of almighty God, which shows it
self so euidentlye in this mystery. Consider, how he that clotheth the
heavens with clouds, and adorneth the feildes with flowers, and beauty, is
here spoiled of all his garments. Consider how the beauty of the Angels is
here defiled: how the height of the heavens is here browght low: how the
majesty and omnipotency of almighty God is here abased and put even to open
shame, and reproach. Behold, how that royal blood distillinge out from his
brain, trickeleth down all alonge by the hear of his head, and by his sacred
bearde, insomoche as it waters, and dies the very grownde under him.
Consider what extreme cold that holy tender body of his suffered, standinge
as he stood, all rent, and spoiled, not only of his garments, but also even
of his very skin, having withal so many gappes and wide holes of open
soores, and deep wounds, throughout all his blessed body. For if S. Peter,
Joan. 18.
notwithstanding he was both clothed, and shodde, felt cold the night before:
how far greater smarte and cold did that most tender body of our savior
abide, being so naked, and full of soore bruses, and wounds as it was?

Whereby it appears, that albeit our Savior in all the whole cowerce of his
life gave unto us so wounderfull examples of nakedness, Our Savior Christ was a
most perfect pattern of poverty unto us upon the cross.
and poverty: yet at his death he gave himself unto us, as a most perfect
pattern and spectacle of this virtue. For So Much as at that time he was in such
a poor case, that he had no place, whereupon to rest his head. And to give us
to understand, that he had taken nothing of the world, he died naked upon the
cross, and had nothing of the world to cleave unto him.

According to this example, S. Francis was a perfect follower of the poverty of
our Savior Christ.
we read of the blessed holy father S. Francis, who was such a perfect and
true follower of this poverty of our Savior Christ, that at what time he
should give up the ghost, he stripped him self starcke naked of all he had
upon him, and threw himself from his bed upon the bare ground, and being
thus naked, he embraced the earth, to imitate herein (as a faithful seruante)
the nakedness, and poverty, of his Lord, and Savior. Awake therefore (o my
soul) awake now I pray thee, and learn thou also hereby, to imitate our
Savior Christ, poor and naked. Learn to despise all such things as this
transitory world may give unto thee, that thou may be worthy to embrace
our Lord naked, with naked arms, and be united unto him by love, which ought
also to be naked, without mixture of any other strange love.

HOW OUR SAVIOVR WAS NAILED UPON THE CROSS. II.
CONSIDER after this, how our Savior was nailed upon the Cross, and how
passinge great grief, and tormente, he suffered at that time, when those
great, and square nails were driven in, and pierced through the most sensible,
and tender parts of his most blessed body, which was of all bodies most
tender, and delicate. And consider also, what an extreme grieffe it was to the
blessed virgin, when she saw with her eyes, and heard with her ears, the
mighty, and cruel hard strokes, which were so often, and so thick laid on,
and iterated one after an other upon his divine members. For certainly those
hammers, and nails, as they passed throwghe the hands of the son: so did
they also pearce the very heart of his most tender, and louinge mother.

Consider moreover, how they lifted up the Cross on high, and how when they
went about to ram it in the hole, which they had made for that purpose (such
was the cruelty of those tormentinge raginge ministers) that at the very time
of rearinge it up, and placinge it therein, they let it fall furiously from
them, with a iumpe into the hoole, with all the weight thereof: and so all his
blessed body was sore shaken, and iogged up and down in the aier, and thereby
his wounds were wydened and enlarged, and his pains, and grieffes more
increased.

Now therefore (o my sweet Savior, and redeemer) what heart is so stony
hard, that will not ryue in sunder for very sorrow, and grief, since the
very stones them selves were ryuen the same day, consideringe the extreme
pain, that thou sufferedest on the Cross.

The sorrows of death o Lord, Psalm. 17. Psalm. 68.
have compassed thee about, and the waves of the Sea have over whelmed thee:
Thou art myred in the depthe of the bothomles goulfes, and fyndest nothing
whereupon to stay thy self. Thy father (o Lord) has forsaken thee: what
hope may thou have of men? Thy ennemies make outcries against thee: thy
fryendes break thy heart: thy soul is afflicted: and for the love thou
bear to me, thou will not admit any manner of comfort. Vndowtedlie (o Lord)
my sins were very great, and heinous, and that does thy penance well
declare. I see thee o my king fastened to a tree, and there is nothing to
sustain thy body, but only three iron nails, whereupon thy sacred fleas he
hangs, without any other stay or comfort. When the weight, and swaie of
thy body staieth upon thy feet, then are the wounds of thy feet the more
torn, and enlarged, with the nails wherewith they are pierced. Again, when
the weight of thy body staieth upon thy hands, then are the wounds of thy
hands the more rent, and enlarged also, with the poyce of thy body. One of
thy members cannot succor an other, but with equal prejudice, either of the
one, or of the other. Now as touching thy holy head, being thus tormented,
and weakened with the sharp crown of thorns, what pillowe has it to rest
upon? O how well might thy arms (o most excellent virgin) be here employed to
supply this office? But alas thine arms may not serve at this present, but
only the arms of the Cross. Upon them must our Savior stay his sacred
head, when he will rest: and yet so, that the ease he takes thereof is
nothing else, but a further driuinge in of the thorns, and fasteninge of the
same deeper into the brain. Besides all this I see those four principal
wounds, as it were four fountains, always distillinge out blood. I see the
grownde all besprinckled and bedewed round about with blood. I see that most
precious licour all betrampled, and shed upon the earth, which cries much
better, then did the blood of Abell. Genesis 4. Heb. 12.
For his blood cried for vengeance against the murderer; but this most
precious blood of thine O sweet Jesus, craves pardon for sinners.

OF THE COMPASSION, THE SONNEHAD UPON HIS mother: and the mother upon her
son, hanginge upon the Cross. III.
THE sorrows of the son were much increased, by reason of the presence of his
most blessed mother, wherewith his doleful heart was no less crucified
within, than his holy body without. Two crosses be here prepared for thee (o
good Jesus) this day. The one for thy body, and the other for thy soul. The
one is of passion, and the other of compassion: The one pearcethe thy most
blessed body with nails of iron: the other pearceth thy most holy soul, with
nails of sorrow. Who is able to declare (o sweet Jesus,) what an unspeakable
grief it was unto thee, when thou did consider the great anguishes of the
blessed soul of thy holy mother, which thou knew so certeinlie was
crucified with thee on the cross? Luc. 2.
When thou saw her pittiefull heart pierced, and thrust through with the
knife of heaviness, and sorrow? When thou did open thy blouddie eyes, and
beheldest her divine face, wholly ouercast with palenes, and wannes of death.
When thou saw those most grievous pains, and anguishes of her mind, which
was not resolved with death, and yet abode greater pains, then the very
pains of death it self. When thou beheldest those rivers of tears, which
gusshed out from her most pure eyes, and hardest those so lamentable deep
sighs, and sobbes, which burst out of her sacred breast, being enforced with
the vehemency of her most grievous heaviness, and sorrow. Certeinlie, o Lord,
it can not be expressed with words, how much this invisible cross tormented
thy most pittiefull heart.

And who is able to declare also (o most blessed mother,) the greatness of the
sorrows, and anguishes of thy doleful heart. When thou saw him dye with
such grievous torments, whom thou saw borne with so great joy? When thou
saw him scorned, and blasphemed of men, whom there thou saw praised of
the angels? When thou saw that holy body, which thou had handeled
with so great reverence, and browght up with such motherlie tenderness, and
cheres hinges, so cuill entreated and tormented by most wicked persons? When
thou beheldest that divine mouth of his, (which thou had nourished with
the milk of heaven) distempered with the bitter taste of gaulle, and vynegar?
When thou did also behold that divine head, (which thou had so often
times laid and rested on thy virgins breast,) all to begored now with blood,
and crowned with thorns? O how often did thou lift up thine eyes on high,
to behold that divine shape, that had so often times reioysed thy soul in
beholdinge the same? And how often again, did thine eyes turn aside from him,
because the tenderness of thy heart could not abide to see that doleful sight.

What tongue is able to express the greatness of this sorrow? If the souls
that love our Savior Christ truly, and unfeignedly, when they meditate upon
these sorrows being now past, have such a tender compassion upon him, what
did thou then o most blessed virgin, being his mother, yea and more than a
mother, when thou saw presently with thine eyes, such a son, suffer such
a most cruel, and painful passion? If those women that accompanied our
savior when he went with his Cross toward his death, being neither of
kin, nor of acquaintance unto him, did weape, and lamente, to see him go
after such a pittiefull sort: How great then was the abondance of tears that
fell from thine eyes O blessed mother, when thou saw him, who was so
dearly beloved unto thee, not only carryenge the Cross on his shoulders,
but nailed also fast unto it, and hoysed up alofte upon the same?

And albeit these thy griefs, and sorrows were so great, yet did not thou
(o blessed virgin) refuse the company of the Cross, neither would thou
turn thy back, but stoodest there even hard, and fast by the same; and not
fallinge down in sowndes, nor yet overthrown to the ground, but like a
strong pillar standinge upright upon thy feet, Genes. 3.
beholdinge with inestimable sorrow, and heaviness of mind thy dear son
crucified on the cross: to the end, that like as Eve by beholdinge with
delight that fruit, and tree of death, was the occasion of the perdition of
the world: even so thou (o blessed Lady) by beholdinge with great grief,
and sorrow, the fruit of life, which then was hanginge upon that tree of the
Cross, might with thy presence, and eyes, there see the remedy, and
redemption of the world.

AN OTHER MEDITATION OF THE DOCTRINE, THAT MAY be learned at the foot of the
Cross. IIII.
THE holy Evangelist says, Joan. 19.
that there stood hard by the Cross, Marie the mother of Jesus: and his
mothers sister, Marie the wife of Cleophas: and Marie Magdalene. O that I were
so happy, that I might stand in the company of these three blessed Mary's
always at the foot of the Cross? O ye blessed Mary's, who has caused you
to stand so constantly at the foot of the cross? What cheyne is this, that
thus holdethe you so fast lincked unto this holy tree? O sweet Christ which
being dead, do mortify the living, and geuest life to the dead? O ye
Angels of paradise, be not offended with me, thowghe I a sinner, and a very
wicked person, be so bold to come, and join with this holy company: because
the love I bear to my sweet savior draws me unto them, and the very same
love enforces me, to embrace this cross. If these three Mary's, will not
depart from the cross? How can I depart from thence, knowinge that all my
wealle, and salvation, consists in the same?

Assuredly the fire shall first wax cold, and the water shall naturally
become hoate, before my heart shall depart from this cross: sythence I
understand, what a lesson the love of God teaches me: to wit: How happy a
thing it is, to stand always at the foot of the cross. O holy cross,
thou drawest the hearts of men unto thee more strongly, than the Adamante
stone draws iron. Thou geauest a more clear light to our understanding,
tha^ the son does to our eyes. Thou enke^delest a more fervent heat in our
souls, than fire does in the very cooles. Draw me therefore (O holy cross)
unto thee, with great force and might. Illuminate me continually, and inflame
me with thy mighty power, that my thought and mind may think upon none
other thing, but only upon thee, and may never depart from thee. And thou o
good Jesus, illuminate the eyes of my soul, that I may understand how to
look and fix mine eyes, and thoughts, upon the cross: to the end, that I
may not only behold the cruel pains, and torments, thou have suffered
for me, and so by beholdinge them, take compassion of them: But also consider
the examples of so many wonderful virtues, as thereby thou have discovered
unto me, and invited me to imitate, and follow the same.

Wherefore O most wise master, and instructor of the world. O physician of
souls. Here I come to the foot of thy cross to present unto thee my soores,
and wounds. Heal me o my most merciful, and omnipotent Lord, and teach me
what I ought to do. we may learn to overcome our sensuality and self love
by beholdinge our Savior Christ upon the cross.
I do confess, and acknowledge playnelie unto thee (o Lord) that I am very
sensual, and given ouermuche to the love of my self, and I see well that this
greatly hinderethe my profitinge, and proceadinge in virtue, and godliness.
Many times for my recreation, and pastimes sake, or for fear of the pain of
fasting, and risinge up early in the morninge, I pass over, and do leese the
godly and diuout exercises of prayer, and meditation, with other holy
spiritual exercises: by the loss whereof, I leese my self also. This
sensuality of mine is very importune upon me. It would feign eat and drink
very finely, and delicately, at such hours, and times, as it likes: and
after dinner, and supper, it would gladly have some idle talk, or else some
pastyme, and recreation. It delights at such times to be walkinge in a fair
green garden, or orcharde, and there to take some sollace, and pleasure.
Teach me now (o my most louinge Savior, and redeemer,) what I ought to do,
whereby to follow thy example; and help me with thy grace, that I may
perform my dewtie in this point. O what a great shame is it unto me, to see
after what sort thou did handel thy blessed body, which was more tender,
and delicate, than all other bodies. In the midst of the most bitter
angwishes, and grievous torments of thy death, thou did not give unto thy
body any other food, or electuarie, but such as those cruel apoticaries had
compounded of bitter gaul, and sower vinegar for thee. Who then will from
henceforthe have any tongue to complain, that the meat set before him, is
either to cold, or to salt, or to freashe, or not well dressed, or that it
was over late, or to tymelie made ready: consideringe what a table was here
prepared for thee, o my almighty God: and that in the time of so great
necessity? In steed of the mirthe, and pleasante talk, and entertaynmente,
which I seek to have at my suppers, and feasts, thou had none other, but
only outcries and clamorous noices of them, which shakinge their heads at
thee, scorned, and blasphemed thee: saying: Matthew. 27.
Fie on thee, that destroiest the temple of God, and in three days buildest it
up again. This was the music, and mynstrelsie of thy bankette: and thy
walkinge in a garden, was to be fast nailed hands, and feet, to the cross.
And albeit there was an other garden, into which thou wentest after thou
had ended thy supper, yet was it not to walk in for pleasure, but to
pray: not to take the aier, but to sheide blood: not to recreat thy self,
but to be pensive, and sad, and in a great agony of death. Now what shall I
say of the other ease, and refresshinges, which thy blessed flesh had? My
fleashe would gladly have a soft bed, curious and costly apparel, and a
large and wide house. Tell me now (o my sweet Savior,) what manner of bed
have thou? What manner of house have thou? And what is thy apparel? Thy
apparel is nakedness, and a purple coat of mockery, and reproach. Thy house
is none other, but to stand openly abroad in the son, and aier. And if I
seek for any other, I find it to be nothing else, but only a stable for
beasts. The foxes have their holes, Math. 8.
and the birds of the aier their neistes, and thou that art the creator of
all things, have no place where to rest thy head. O curiosity, and
superfluity? How are ye two crepte in, and so usually, and universally
received in this our corrupt age, throwghout all the countries, and nations,
of Christendom? A notalbe admonition against the vices of deyntienes, and
superfluity.
O what manner of Christians be we, that do not utterly abandon from us, all
manner of fine deyntienes, curiosity, and superfluities, knowinge that our
Lord, and master, utterly abandoned from him, not only all manner of
deyntienes, and superfluities, but also even such things, as were of
necessity.

I desire now O Lord to see also what manner of thing thy bed is. Tell me (o
sweet Savior) where do thou lodge? Where sleep thou at noone day? Here
I set my self at thy feet: Cant. 1.
Teach me I most humbly beseech thee, what I ought to do. For this my
sensuality will not suffer me to understand well this language of thy cross.
I desire a soft bed, and if I awake early in the morning at the hour of
prayer, and divine service, I suffer my self to be overcome with slouthe, and
drowsienes, we desire to lie on soft fether beds and our savior Christ
lay on the hard bed of the cross.
and I expect duly for the morninge sleep, that my head may take an other
nappe, and so have his full ease, and rest. Tell me o my most gracious, and
louinge Lord, what rest had thou on that hard bed of the cross? When
thou wast weary in lienge on the one side, how did thou turn thee on the
other, to take the better rest? What heart is not overcome and broken in sonder
herewith? What? Is not this enoughe to kill all sensuality in us? O what a
comfort is this to the poor? What a confusion to the rich? What an
encouragement to the penitentes? And what a condemnation to nice, delicate, and
sensual persons? Certainly the bed of our Savior Christ is not for such
fine delicate wantons, neither is his glory in heaven prepared for them. Give
me grace (o Lord) that I may by thy example mortify this my sensuality. And
if it be not thy blessed will to grant me this request, I beseache thee then
even now out of hand to end my life. For it is not meet, nor seemly, that
thou, (o my omnipotent Lord, and redeemer) being upon the cross, and having
none other comfort, nor refress hinge, but only bitter gaulle, and sower
vinegar, I shoude seike for sweet sauoures, delicate fare, sugered sawces,
with other curious deynties, pleasures, and ease, in this miserable life. It is
not meet that thou being thus poor and naked, I should go wanderinge and
leesinge my self after the transitorye goods and riches of this world? It is
not reason that thou having none other bed, but only the hard and painful
cross, I should seek to have a soft bed, and other delicacie, and ease,
for my wretched body.

Be thou therefore greatly ashamed, How our Savior Christ rebukethe from
the cross, our pomp, delicacie, curiosity and superfluity.
o my soul, beholdinge our Lord, and Savior, on the hard paynefull tree of
the cross: and make account, that from the same cross he preaches unto
thee, and rebukes thee: saying: O man I have for thy sake worn a crown of
thorns: and do thou in contempt of me, wear a garlande of flowers, with
golden chains, aglettes, bruches, and gaye oystreche feathers? I for thy sake
have stretched forth my arms to be nailed, and tormented upon the cross: and
do thou stretche forth thine to pleasante games, and pastimes? I being a
thirst at my very death, had not so much as a little cold water, and seek
thou after precious wynes, delicate meats, and deyntie sugered sawces? I was
on the cross, and in all my whole life time, full of dishonors, reproaches, and
grievous labors and pains, and do thou spend all the days of thy life
seekinge after dignities, offices, promotions, estimations, pleasures, and
delites? I was very willingly contented, that my side should be opened to
give thee my very heart, and have thou thine open to vain and dangerous loves
of the world?

WHAT PATIENCE WE OUGHT TO HAVE IN ALL TROUBLES, and adversities, followinge
the example of our Savior Christ. V.
THOU have taught me now o Lord from the chair of the Cross the laws of
temperance: teach me also at this present the laws of patience, whereof I
have suerlie very great neide. Thou have cured that part of my soul, which
is called concupiscible: Cure also I beseech thee, that part, which is called
irascible. For So Much as thy cross is a medicine for all the whole man, and the
leaves of that holy tree, are the health of all nations.

Sometimes I have said, and purposed with in my self: I will never from
henceforthe fall out, or be angry again with any man: I will surely keep
peace with all persons: and therefore I think it good for me, to avoid all
company, and thereby to eschew all occasions of trouble, contention, and
anger.

But now, o Lord, I understand my weakness in this point. For to flee from
company, is not a mean to subdue anger: but rather to cover, and hide mine
own imperfection. And therefore I will from henceforthe carry ever with me, a
mind ready prepared, to live not only with the good, but even with the
wicked also, and to keep peace with such colericke, waywarde, and froward
contentious persons, as do abhor peace. Thus I purpose from henceforthe to
do: grawnt me thy grace therefore o almighty God, that I may dewlie
accomplish this my good intent. If others shall take my lands, or goods
away from me, grant me thy grace o Lord, that I be not angry nor grieved
therewith: saying I see thee thus spoiled, and naked, upon the Cross. If they
shall take my credit, honor, and estimation from me, let not that cause me to
break peace with them: saying I see thee here, o Lord, so despised,
dishonored, and contemned. If my fryendes and acquaintance shall forsake me;
let me not therefore be confounded, saying I see thee thus left alone, and
forsaken not only of thy disciples, and fryendes, but also of thine own
heavenly father. And if it shall seem to me at any time, that I am forsaken
of thee, yet let me not for all that lose my confidence, and trust in thee:
saying thou did not loose thine, but after thou had made an end of
saienge those words. Math. 27.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Did forthewith recommende thy
spirit into the hands of him, who had forsaken thee: saying? O father into
thy hands, I commend my spirit. Marc. 15. Psalm. 21.
And therefore even now at this instant I request, that from henceforthe all
troubles, and persecutions may come and fall upon me, and not to spare me,
for so much as all such things con do nothing else unto me, but give me
occasion to be a follower of thee my sweet Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

But now (o my Lord) what if the troubles and persecutions shall be very great
and long, wherewithal shall I then comfort my self? For thy passions
although they were very great, yet it seemed that they continued not any
long time, for so much as all the martyrdom of thy passion, did not continewe
altogether twenty hours. Now he that has been ten years bedridden, or
lain in fetters in hard prison, or in continual necessity, trouble, and
dissension, within his own house, and famylie, what comfort shall he find in
thee, for so long a combatte and tribulation? Answer (o Lord) I beseache
thee, unto this demand, for so much as thou art the word, and the wisdom of
the father. Tell me whether thou be the universal comforter in all miseries,
be they never so long? Or else whether we need to seek any other comforter
for them? Verelie o Lord, we have no need of any other comfortor, but only
thee. For vndowtedlie, the cross whereon thou did suffer, was not a
martyrdom of one day only, but it continued all thy whole life. Our savior
had his cross and passion very lively represented daily before his eyes,
from the very first hour of his conception, until his death.
For even from the very first hour, and instant of thy most holy conception,
there was represented unto thee, both the cross, and withal, all the cruel,
bitter pains, and torments, that thou should suffer upon the same: and so
thou had them all continually very lively set before thine eyes all the
days thou did live here on earth. For like as all things both past, and
to come, were present before the eyes of thy divine understanding: even so
also were all the martirdomes, and instruments of thy passion. There were the
cross, the nailles, the scourges, the thorns, the cruel spear, with all
other thy most bitter pains, and torments, at all times as lively present
before thy sight, as when thou saw them with thy eyes the very same
frydaie, that thou wast crucified on the Cross. We, though we suffer never so
great, and extreme pains, yet we have always some time of ease, either by
means of physic, or other comfort: but thy pain was always in a manner
continual, or at the least it did very often times torment thee in thy soul,
duringe the time thou did live here in this world. And albeit this
consideration of thy bitter torments, and passion, had not tormented thee, yet
was the very zeal of thy fathers honor, and desire of the salvation of our
souls, a continual torment unto thee, which vndowtedlie did eat, and rent
thy pittiefull louinge heart, and was a more cruel martyrdom unto thee, than
the very death it self. Whereunto was also added the obstinate malice, which
thou saw in that rebellious people, (the Jews:) and with all the
stubbornnes and ingratitude of all other sinners, (for whose remedy and
redemption thou wast sent) which would not help themselves with the benefit
thereof, nor yet acknowledge the time of their visitation. This was the cause
of those pittiefull tears, L^c. 19.
thou did sheide upon Jerusalem: and hereof rose the complainte thou made
by thy Prophet Esaie, saying: In vain have I traueyled, Esa. 49.
and in vain have I consumed my strength.

Wherefore O my soul, thou have here with whom thou may keep company, and
take comfort in thy long pains and troubles. For although the last pains,
and torments, of the holy body of our Savior were short, yet were the
greifes, and pains, of his pittiefull heart and soul very long, and
continual.

SATTVRDAIE MORNINGE.
THIS day(after thou have made the sign of the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto:) thou have to meditate upon the pearcinge of our Saviors side with a
spear. Of his taking down from the Cross. And withal of the pittiefull
bewaylinge, and lamentation of our blessed Lady. And of our Saviors burial.

Christogram I H S



depiction of Christ Factus est omnibus obtemperantibus sibi causa salutis
aeternae. Hebr. 5.9.



The text of the holy Evangelists.
THEN the Jews (because it was the feast of Easter) that the bodies should
not remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath day, Joan. 19.
(for that day of the Sabbath was very sollemme emonge them) besoughte Pilate
that there legs might be broken, and that they might be taken down from the
Cross. Then came the souldiars, and brake the legs of the first, and of the
other, that was crucified with Jesus. But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was alredie dead, they brake not his legs. But one of the souldiars
with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith there issued out blood, and
water. And he that saw it, bare witness, and his witness is true.

And when the eueninge was come, Marc. 15.
there came a certain worshipful knight, Math. 17.
called Joseph of Arimathia, Luc. 23.
(one that looked for the kingedome of God) and entered boldly unto Pilate, and
demanded the body of Jesus. And Pilate merueiled, if he were already dead:
and called unto him the Centurion, and asked of him, whether he had been any
while dead. And when he understood the truth of the Centurion, he gave the
body to Joseph.

There came also with him, Joan. 19.
one called Nicodemus, who was wont to resort to Jesus by night: and he
brought with him of Myrre, and Aloes mingeled together, about a hundred
powndes. Marc. 15.
And Joseph bought a lynnen clothe, and took him down from the cross, and
wrapped him in that lynnen with those sweet savors, according to the
custom, which the Jews observe in the burial of the dead.

And in that place where Jesus was crucified, Joan. 19.
there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulcher, wherein was never man
yet laid. There they laid Jesus, by reason of the Passover of the Jews: for
the sepulcher was near.

And Marie Magdalene, Luc, 23.
and Marie the Mother of Joseph marked the place, where they laid him.

MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
HITHERTO (o my soul) thou have celebrated the death and grievous pains of
the son: It is now time for thee to begin to celebrate, and bewail the
grievous sorrows of the mother. Wherefore sit down a while at the feet of
the prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 1.
and taking the words out of his mowthe, and sighinge deeply with a bitter,
and sorrowful heart, say thus unto her. How happens it (o most innocent
virgin) that thou art now alone? How is it (o lady of the world) that thou
art become a widow? What? have they set so sore a penalty upon thee, without
having committed any offense at all? O most holy virgin, I would gladly
comfort thee, and I know not how? I would gladly ease some part of thy great
greifes, and anguishes, and I know not which way? O Queen of heaven, if the
cause of thy sorrows, were the sorrows of thy blessed son, and not thine
own, (for that thou did love him more then thy self,) his sorrows are
now ended, for so much as his body suffers no more, and his soul is now
altogether glorious. Cease therefore (I beseach thee) the multitude of thy
sorrowful sighs, and bewailinges, saying the cause of thy sorrow is already
ceased, and gonne. When he wept, thou did weep also: reason it is
therefore, that thou should rejoice with him, now that he rejoices. Cantic.
7.
Shut up the springes of thy most pure eyes, more clear than the waters of
Esebon, and now sore troubled, and dymmed with the showers of so many tears.
Genes. 8.
The wrath and anger of almighty God, is now pacified with the sacrifice of
the true Noe. Cease therefore the floude of thy most holy eyes, and let the
earth be cleared again with new brightness.

The dove is now departed out of the arc, and when she retourneth, she will
bring with her signs of the mercy, and clemency of almighty God. Rejoice
therefore o blessed virgin, and comfort thy self with this hope, and cease
now I pray thee, these thy mournful sobbinges and sighs. Thy own dearly
beloved son him self puts thy doleful mourninge, and tears, to silence,
and inuiteth thee to a new joy in his Canticles: sayeinge: Cant. 2.
The winter is now past, the showers and tempesteous storms are ceased, the
flowers do appear in our land. Rise up therefore my well-beloved, my darlinge,
and my turtle done, that abidest in the holes of the rock, and in the cleiftes
of the wall. That is to say, in the strookes and wounds of my body. Leave
now this habitation, and come and dwell with me.

I see well o blessed Lady, that none of all these things are able to
comfort thee: because thy sorrow, and grief is not hereby taken away, but
only changed. One martyrdom I see is ended, and an other now begins. The
torments of thy heart are renewed continually, and thowgh some go away, yet
others do succeed with new kinds of torments: that by such changes, the
torment of the Passion may be dowbled unto thee. Hitherto thou have lamented
his pains, and sorrows: now thou lamentest his death. Hitherto thou have
lamented his passion: now thou lamentest thine own solitarines. Hitherto thou
have lamented his greifes, and troubles: and now thou mournest for his absence.
One wave is past, and an other comes on to ouerwhelme thee. So that the end
of his pain, is a beginning of thine.

And as though this thy pain were to little, I see that these cruel tormentors
prepare yet an other pain for thee, no less then this, Close up thine eyes
therefore o blessed Lady: close them up out of hand I beseach thee: and look
not upon that long terrible spear, which goes with great violence in the
aier, to strike the place whereunto it is leuelled, Now have thou o holy
virgin thy desire fulfilled. For now art thou become a buckler to thy son,
for so much as this blow strikes not him, but thee. Thou did desire the
nails, and thorns, and they were ordained for his body: but the pearcinge
spear was reserved for thee. O ye cruel ministers? O ye hearts of iron?
Were the pains, and torments to little (trow ye) which his body suffered
being alive; that ye would not pardon it even after it was dead? What fury
and rancor of enmity is there so outrageous, but that it is pacified when it
sees his enemy dead before him? Lift up your cruel eyes a little o you
unmerciful and cruel ministers, and behold our savior? Behold I say his
deadly face, his dymme eyes, his fallinge countenance, his pale and wanne
color, and shadow of death. For though you be more hard, than either iron, or
the Adamante stone: yea though ye be more hard, than your own selves, yet it
may be, that in beholdinge him, your fury and malice will be appeased.
Wherefore are ye not contented with the wounds ye have given to the son,
but that ye will wound his blessed mother also? Her ye do wound with that
spear: unto her ye give the struck: and against her sorrowful heart
threateneth the sharp point of that cruel lawnce.

Now comes the wicked minister with a long sharp spear in his hand, and
pearceth the very naked side of our savior with great fury. The cross
shaked in the aier with the mighty force of the struck: and from thence
issued water, and blood, wherewith are washed the sins of the world. O
river that ronnest out of paradise, and waterest with thy streams all the face
of the earth! O wound of the precious side of my sweet Savior, made rather
with his fervent love toward mankind, than with the sharp iron of the
cruel spear! O gate of heaven! o window of paradise! o place of refuge! o
tower of strength! o sanctuary of just persons: o sepulcher of pilgrims! o
neist of clean doves! o florishinge bed of the spouse of Solomon! Alhaile o
wound of the precious side of our Savior, that woundest the hearts of devout
persons? O struck that strikest the souls of the just? O rose of inspekeable
beauty? O rubie of inestimable price! O entrance into the heart of my sweet
Savior Jesus Christ! O witness of his love, and pledge of everlasting life!
Throwghe thee do all living things enter into the Arcke of the true Noe, to
be preserved from the floude. Unto thee do all such as are tempted repair: In
thee do all those that are heavy, and sad find comfort: Joan. 4.
by thee are the sick persons cured: throwgh thee do sinners enter into
heaven: and in thee do all banished persons, and pilgrims, sleep sweetly,
and take their rest. O furnace of love? O house of peace? O treasure of the
Catholic Church? O vein of lively water, that springest up even unto life
everlasting. Open o most louinge Lord, I beseache thee, this gate unto me:
receive my heart into this most delitefull habitation: give me passadge through
the same unto the tender bowels of thy love: let me drink of this sweite
fountain: let me be washed with this holy water: let me be made drunk with
this most precious licour. Let my soul sleep in this sacred breast. Here let
it forget all the cares of the world: here let it sleep: here let it eat:
here let it singe sweitly with the Prophet: sayeinge: Psalm. 131.
This is my resting place for ever, and ever: here will I dwell: for this place
have I chosen for my habitation.

HOW OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST WAS TAKEN DOWN from the Cross: and of the pittiefull
lamentation and bewailinge of the blessed virgin Marie. depiction of Christ
Semper mortificationem Jesu in corpore nostro circumferentes, vt et vita Jesu
manifestetur in corporibus nostris. 2. Corinthians. 4.10.

II.
AFTER this, consider how the holy body of our Savior was taken down from
the cross: and how the blessed virgin received it in her arms.

Now the very same day in the eueninge, there came those two holy men,
Joseph, and Nicodemus, who reared up their ladders unto the cross, and took
down the blessed body of our Savior into their arms. The holy virgin then
perceiuinge that the torment of the cross was now ended, and that the sacred
body of our Savior was coming toward the earth, she settethe her self
in a readiness to give him a secure haven in her lap, and to receive him from
the arms of the cross, into her own arms. And so she wryngeth her hands
very pittiefullie, and requesteth of those noble men with great humility, and
instancie, that for so much as she had taken no leave of her dearly beloved
son, nor received those last embracinges of him upon the cross at the time
of his departure, they would now suffer her to come unto him, and not encrase
her discomforte on every side. She beseacheth them, that they would not deal
so straightly with her, as the enemies had done, taking her sweet son from
her being now dead, as the enemies did, whiles he was yet alive. O blessed
Lady, how void of comfort arre thou on every side? For if they deny thee
thy request, thou will be sore discomforted: and if they grant thee thy
petition (according to thy earnest desire) yet shall thy discomfort be never a
whit diminished. Thy miseries have no comfort at all, but only in thy
patience. If thou go about on the one side to diminishe thy sorrow, on the
other side it increases dowble. Now ye holy men, what will ye do in this
case? What is your best advice, and counsel, in this matter? To give a flat
denial unto such lamentable tears, and to so blessed a Lady, in so just and
reasonable a request, were certainly an unseemly act: and to grant her the
thing she demands, were to end her life. You are afraid on the one side to
discomfort her: and on the other side you fear also least perhaps you should
be murderers of the mother, as the enemies were of the son. In conclusion the
pittiefull earnestnes of the holy virgin overcomes them, and those noble men
thought best, that consideringe her great doleful bewailinge, and lamentation,
it should be a greater cruelty to take her own dear son from her, than to
bereiue her of her life. And so they were enforced to grant her request.

Now when the blessed virgin had by her pittiefull intercession gotten the
body of her dear son into her arms, what tongue is able to express the
great inward anguishe and sorrow which then she felt? O ye angels of
peace, weep with this holy virgin. O ye heavens, lament with her. O ye
sterres of heaven, and all creatures of the world, accompany the blessed
virgin Marie in her great heaviness and doleful lame^tation. The blessed mother
embraces the torn, and rent body of her sweet son. She huggeth, and
clippeth him fast to her breast, (her strength seruinge her to this thing
only:) She puts down her face between the thorns of his sacred head. She
joins countenance with countenance. The face of the mother is embrued with
the blood of the son: and the face of the son is bathed with the tears of
the mother. O sweet mother, is this happly thy sweet son? Is this he, whom
thou conceauedst with so great glory, and broughtest fourth with so great
joy? Where are now thy former joys become? Whither is thy wonted gladness
gone? Where is now that mirror of beawtie, wherein thou did so often times
behold thy self? Now thou take no pleasure to behold him in the face,
because his eyes have lost their light? Now it avails thee not to speak, and
talk with him, because his ears have lost their hearing? Now that tongue
moves not, which was wont to utter the words of heaven. Now are those eyes
dimmed, which were wont with their sight to rejoice the whole world. How is
it, that thou speak not now (o Queen of heaven?) How happens it, that
very sorrow, and heaviness, has thus tied up thy tongue? True it is, that the
tongue of the blessed virgin was as it were domme for a time: but her heart
might secretly with inward grief speak unto her sweet, and dearly beloved
son, and say unto him.

THE PITTIEFVLL LAMENTATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARIE.
depiction of Christ Tuam ipsius animam pertransiet gladius reuelentur ex
multis cordibus cogitationes. Luc. 2.35.



O life dead, o light obscured, o beauty defiled. Note, that the intention of
the awthor is not to represent here exactly and precisely the affections of the
blessed virgin: but only by expressinge her doleful griefs, to move the
readers to devotion, and piety.
What blouddie hands were those, that have so disfigured thy divine shape?
What crown is this, that my hands do feel upon thy head? What wound is
this, that I see in thy side? O high priest of the world? What doleful
marks, and signs, are these, that my eyes do see in thy body? Who has
bespotted the clear glass, and beauty of heaven? Who has disfigured the face
of all graces? Are these the eyes, that were wont to dymme the son with
their beauty? Are these the hands, that raised up the dead, whom they
towched? Is this the mowthe, out of which the four Rivers of paradise issued?
Have the hands of men such power against God? O my sweet son, and blood of
my body, from whence arose this terrible tempest? What raginge storm has
this been, that has so bereued thee from me? O my dear son, what shall I
do now without thee? Whither shall I go? Who shall be able to help me? Many
fathers, and brothers, when they were afflicted, came to entreat thee for
their children, and brethen that were dead, and thou with thy infinite virtue,
and clemency, did comfort, and help them: But I (alas,) that see mine
own dear son, my father, my brother, and my Lord, here dead before me, to
whom shall I make sure for him? Who shall comfort me? Where is the good Jesus
of Nazareth, the son of almighty God, which comforts the living, and
restores life unto the dead? Where is that great Prophet, so mighty both in
words and worckes.

O my sweet son, which heretofore have been my comfort, and rest, but now a
very sharp knyfe to my sorrowful and heavy heart. What have thou done, why
the Jews should thus crucify thee on the cross? What cause had they to put
thee to so cruel and shameful a death? Is this the thanks for so many good
works, as thou have wrought emonge them? Is this the reward, that is given
unto virtue? Is this the recompense, for such divine doctrine? Has the
wickedness of the world extended it self so far? Has the malice of the
devil been so furiously bent? Has the goodness, and clemency of almighty
God yealded so far forth? Is the horror, and hatred, which almighty God
bears against sin so passinge great? What? was so great a satisfaction
requisite, to satisfy for the sin of one? Is the rigor of gods justice so
streit? Does almighty God make so great account of the salvation of men?

O my sweet son, what shall I do with out thee? Thou art my son, my
father, my spouse, my master, and all my company? I am now become, as it were
an Orphan without a father: a widow without a husband: I am now alone, and
deprived of such a master, and of such a sweet companion. Now shall I not see
thee any more to enter in at my gates, wearied with the discources, and
preachinge of the gospel. Now shall I no more wype of the sweat from thy
face, which was so oftentimes sonneburned, and tired with painful travels, and
Iourneis. Now shall I see thee no more sittinge, and eatinge at my table, and
ministringe food to my soul with thy divine presence. Now Alas, this glory
is finished: this day is this joy ended, and my solitarines begins
presently.

O My dear son, why speak thou not unto me? O tongue of heaven, that have
comforted so many with thy words, and given speech, and life, to so many
persons: who has put thee to such a great silence, that thou speak not to
thy louinge mother? How is it, that thou have not at the least left me some
legacy, wherewithal I might comfort my self? Well, I will take it by thy
license. This Royal crown shall be my legacy. Of these nails, and of this
spear will I be thy heir. These so precious Jewels will I keep always in my
heart. There shall thy nails be knocked in. There shall thy crown, thy
scourges, and thy cross, be kept, and preserved. This is the inheritance
which I have chosen to enjoy all the days of my life.

O how little while do the joys of the earth endure? And how soore does that
grief smarte, which commethe after much prosperity? O Bethelem, o Jerusalem,
how far do these days differ from those, which I have had in you? What a
clear night was that, and what an obscure day is this? What a great joy, and
riches and I then: and what a great grief and penury have I now? The loss
of so great a treasure, can not be little. O blessed Angel, where are now those
great praises of thy old salutation? It was not in vain, that I was in such a
great trouble, and fear, at that time. For after great praises, there must
needs follow, either some great faulle, or some great cross, and
tribulation. Our Lord will not have his gifts to be in vain, Idle, and
without exercise. He never gives honor without charge: nor superiority
without servitude: nor great abondance of grace, but to make us able to suffer
great trouble, and persecution. Then thou did call me, Full of grace: Luc.
1.
and now am I full of sorrow. Then thou did call me, Blessed emonge all
women: and now am I the most afflicted of all women. Then thou did say,
our Lord is with thee: now he is also with me, howbeit not alive, but dead, as
I now hold him here in mine arms.

O my sweet redeemer and savior, was it any offense in me, to hold thee in
my arms, with so great joy, when thou wast but newely borne, that I should
now come to hold thee in them so soore tormented? Was it any fault in me, to
take so great pleasure in geuinge thee the sweet milk of my breasts, that now
thou should give me to drink of such a bitter cup? Was it any fault in
me, to behold my self in thy face, as in a bright glass: that thou have thus
ordained that I should now see thee thus cruelly rent, and tormented? Was it
any offense in me to love thee so entierly, that thou should now cause my
love to become my tormentor? And that I should now suffer so much the greater
grief, be how much I loved thee more entierlie?

O heavenly father, o lover of men, which art merciful toward them, and
rigorous toward thine only and deerlie beloved son. Thou know how
great the waves, and tempesteous sourges are, which lie beatinge at this
present against my doleful heart. Thou know that this heart of mine has
abidden so many deaths, as there have been whippes, and strookes, geauen unto
this holy body of thy sweet son. Howbeit, although I be the most
afflicted of all creatures, yet do I give thee infinite thanks for this
great sorrow, and grief, that I sustain. It is a sufficient comfort unto
me, to understand that it is thy blessed will that it should so be. Any
thing that comes from thy hands I must needs take in good worth, though
it were a sharp knyfe, and would thrust it even into my bowels. I give thee
most humble, and hearty thanks, both for my prosperity, and adversity: and
as well and even in as equal wise for the one, as for the other. And for the
use, and commodity of thy benefittes, which I have hitherto enjoyed, I bless
thee: And I am nothing discontented, that thou do now take them away from
me. I mislyke not of that, but I do rather restore to thee the thing again,
that was committed to my custody, and do yield unto thee most humble and
hearty thanks. Both for the one, and the other, the angels bless thee, and
with them my tears also bless thee for evermore. Howbeit I beseach thee o my
most louinge and merciful father (if it may stand with thy blessed will, and
pleasure) that the martyrdom which I have already suffered for these thirty
and three years may content thee. Luc. 2.
Thou know o Lord, that from the day, that holy Simeon signefied this
martyrdom unto me, all my pleasures have been mingled with bitter gaul. And
from that time hitherto, I have had that sorrowful day ever lyenge
ouerth-warte my heavy heart. In the midst of my Joys, I have been always
assaulted with the remembrance of this dolorous sorrow: and I never had any
Joy so pure, but that it was myngled with the terrible sorrows, and fears of
this day. I know well, that all this was directed by thy divine providence,
and that it was thy blessed will, that from that time I should have knowledge
of this mystery, to the end, that as the son carried the cross evermore
before his eyes, (even from the very day of his conception:) so should his
mother carry it also. Our Lord will have them that be his servants, ever to
suffer, and be afflicted in this life.
For thy will, and pleasure is, that those that be thine should always
suffer, and be afflicted in this transitory life: And thou will not that our
joys should be great or perpetual in this vale of tears, though they be
such as we take in thee.

Wherefore o my king, vouchsaffe now I beseach thee, if it may so stand with
thy blessed will, that this may be the very last of my martirdomes: if not,
thy holy will be fulfilled both in this, and in all other things. If thou
think one martyrdom be to little for a poor seely woman, thou know very
well o Lord, that I have been so oftentimes a Martyr, as there have been
wounds, and strookes, given to the most blessed body of my savior. His
martirdomes are now al ended, but mine in beholdinge him thus cruelly
tormented do begin a fresh. Command death to return again, to take
the spoil, which he has left behind him: and let him carry the mother also
with the son to the grave. O happy sepulcher, that succiedest me in mine
office. The crown that they take from me, they give unto thee, for so much as
thou enclosest him within thee, whom I have had enclosed in my bowelles. My
very bones would rejoice, if they might see them selves laid up there, and
certainly there should my life be laid also. My heart, and my soul, will I
bury there, (for that may I do) but as for my body, bury thou it there
also (o Lord) I beseech thee, for that I may not do without thee. O death,
why art thou so cruel, as to separate me from him, in whose life my whole
life consists? Thou art sometimes more cruel in pardoninge, tha^ in
killinge. Suerly thou had showed thy self very pittiefull toward me, if
thou had taken us both together: But now alas, thou have been cruel in
killinge the son, but far more cruel in sparinge the mother.

Such words as these, would the blessed virgin speak priuelie in her heart:
and the like might those holy Mary's, that accompanied her speak also. All
that were present wept very tenderly with her. Those holy Matrones wept:
those noble Gentilmen wept: heaven and earth wept: Yea all creatures
accompanied the tears of the blessed virgin Marie.

The holy Evangelist also wept very lamentably, The lame^tation of S. John
the Evangelist.
and embracinge the blessed body of his master, said: O my good Lord, and
master, who shall be my teacher from henceforthe? To whom shall I resort to
be resolved in my dowtes? Upon whose breast shall I rest my self? Who shall
imparte to me the secrets of heaven? O what a straenge change, and alteration
is this? The last eueninge thou sufferedst me to rest upon thy holy breast, and
gave me the Joys of life: and now do I recompense that great benefit, with
holdinge thee dead on my breast. Is this the face, which I saw transfigured
upon the mownte Thabor? Is this that figure, which was more clear, than the
son at noone day?

Likewise that holy sinner, Marie Magdalen wept full bitterly also, The
lame^tation of S. Marie Magdalene.
and embracinge the feet of our Savior said: O light of mine eyes, and
redeemer of my soul: if I shall see my self ouercharged with sins, who
shall receive me? Who shall cure my wounds? Who shall answer for me? Who
shall defend me against the Pharisees? O how far otherwise held I these
feet, and washed them, when thou receauedst me, lyinge prostrate at them? O my
sweet heart root, and most entierly beloved, who could bring to pass, that
I might now die with thee? O life of my soul, how can I say, that I love
thee, saying I see thee here dead before mine eyes, and yet do remain alive?

After the like manner did all that holy company weep, and lamente, The
burial of our Saviors body in the sepulcher.
wateringe and wasshinge his holy body with there tears. Now when the hour
of his burial was come, they wind his holy body in a clean lynnen clothe:
They bind his face with a napkin: And layinge his body upon a beer, do
carry it to the place of his burial, and there they lay in that most precious
treasure. The sepulcher was covered with a stone: and the heart of the blessed
mother with a dark cloud of heaviness, and sorrow. There is she once again
bereued of her son. There begins she a fresh to lamente her solitarines.
There she sees her self dispossessed of all her treasure. And there her heart
remainethe buried, where her treasure was left.

A DECLARATION, WHY THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARIE, AND all just persons, are
afflicted in this present transitory life, with diverse adversities, and
tribulations. III.
O Heavenly father, since of thy infinite goodness, and mercy, thou would that
thy blessed son should thus suffer for our sins: why would thou that
this holy virgin his blessed mother should suffer also, who neither deserved
death for the sins of others (forsomuche as thy sons death suffised for
the^:) neither yet for her own, saying she never committed any manner of sin
in all her whole life? How easelie might this her tribulation have been
tempered, if at that time she had been forth of the city of Jerusalem, where
if she had been absent, she should not have seen with her eyes the cruel
death of her only and dearly beloved son, neither have so greatly
augmented her sorrow, and grief, with the sight of the present obiecte, and
with beholdinge him sufferinge his so manifold, and cruel torments upon the
cross. O wonderful dispensation, and counsel of almighty God! Thy will was
o Lord, that the blessed virgin should suffer, not for the redemption of the
world, but because there is nothing in the world more acceptable unto thee,
than to suffer for the love of thee. Emonge all things created there is
nothing more precious than in heaven the glorious love of the blessed
Saints, Note that nothing is more precious in earth, tha^ the love of God,
tried in just persons with sufferinge affliction, and tribulation, for Gods
sake.
and in earth the troubled and afflicted love of just persons. I mean: than
the love of just persons, that is tried with adversity, affliction, and
tribulation. In the house of almighty God, there is no greater honor, than to
suffer for the love of God. Emonge all the good works, and services, that our
Savior did unto thee in this world, this was that which thou have appointed,
and accepted, for the most chief, and principal work, to be the mean of our
reparatio^ and redemption. This was the jewel, and precious stone, that emonge
all the riches of virtues, which that rich merchant laid before thee, liked
thee best: for the which thou gave unto him whatsoever he demanded, which
was the redemption of the world. Now then, if this jewel be of so great
valewe, and estimation, in the sight of almighty God, it were not meet, that
such a rich piece, as this is, should be wantinge in our blessed Lady, who
was of all perfect women, the most perfect, and most acceptable in the sight
of almighty God.

Moreover, The most manifest, and perfect show, and proof, of true virtue,
is to suffer tribulatio^s for the love of God.
there is no work in this world that makes a more manifest, and perfect^
show of true virtue, than to suffer for the love of God. For the proof, and
trial of true love is to have true patience for the beloved. And there is no
trial, and proof, so far from all suspicion, as this is, And like as
almighty God him self did never discover the greatness of his love unto men so
clearelie, and perfectly, (though his other benefittes which he bestowed upon
the^ were very great) until he came to suffer for the^: even so shall they
never discover their love toward him fully, and perfectly, (be there other
services they do unto him never so many, and great,) until they come to
suffer tribulations for his sake. Romans 5. Patience is the proof of true
virtue, if it be exercised it sufferinge for defense of a just, and godly
cause: and not for herese, or other unjust causes. Eccles. 27.
Tribulation (as S. Paul says) is the occasion, and matter of patience: And
patience is the proof, and trial of true virtue. And this proof gives us a
hope of glory. For this cause therefore, a man ought always to suspecte all
virtue, and holiness, which he perceaueth in him self, until it be tried and
proved with the testimony of tribulation. For as the Wise man says: The
vessels of claye are tried in the furnace: but the hearts of the just, in the
furnace of tribulation.

Almighty God in all the works of nature has not made any one thing that
should be idle, or in vain: much less would he, that in the works of
grace, his gifts should be idle, and in vain, And therefore he deuideth to
every one of his elect, the burden, and charge, which he must bear,
according to the forces, and talente of the grace, he has received. So that
here in this short transitory life, it is not to be esteemed for the greater
love, and friendship, if almighty God do give us greater pleasure and ease:
but rather, if he give us greater tribulation, and adversity. Thou shall give
us o Lord, Psalm. 79. He that is greatest and most singular in the love, and
favor of God, is comonlie most afflicted with tribulatio^s in this life. Exodus
24.
(says the Prophet) to drink tears by measure. And the measure is this,
that he that is most and greatest in thy grace, and favor, is commonly most
afflicted, and troubled in this transitory life. When Moses made that peace
and accord, between almighty God, and his people, the holy scripture says,
that he sprinckeled all the people with an Isope dipped in blood, and this
being done, the rest of the blood that remained, he sprinckeled upon the
altar. Wherefore let all those, that determine to be the friends of almighty
God understand hereby, that their love, Note, how our love, and frendeship,
with almighty God, must be celebrated, and dedicated with blood.
and friendship with him, must be celebrated, and dedicated with blood: and
not only with the blood of Christ, but even also with the proper blood of
every one: to wit: with patience, and sufferinge of troubles, and adversities.
Our Savior Christ at that last supper which he made with his disciples, drank
first him self of the Cup, but after he had dro^cke him self thereof, he
gave the remnant unto his ghestes, which he had invited, and commanded them,
to divide the same emonge them, and that every one of them should also drink
his drawght of that cup. So that it apperteineth to all persons to have
their part of this cup: All Christians must drink their part of Christ's
cup, and as members of Christ conform the^ selves with Christ their head in
sufferinge.
and it is also requisite, that they all, as members of Christ, do conform
them selves with our savior Christ in sufferinge. Howbeit herein stands the
difference, that as concerning the common sort of people, and those, that are
Imperfecte, it is sufficient if they be sprinkled with blood: but those
devout godly persons, that are more nearly approached, and joined unto
almighty God, and be such, as are worthy to be called his aulters, these must
not only be sprinckeled with blood, but they must also be dyed, A notable
comfort for all Catholics that be persecuted by heretics. There were never
any persons more tossed with adversities, and tribulatio^s in this world:
tha^ our savior Christ and his blessed mother.
and bathed in blood: forsomuche as to the strong are reserved the strongest
battles, and so consequently a greater reward and a greater crown in the
kingdom of heaven.

Our savior Christ, and his blessed mother, were the two persons, that of all
others in this world, were most entierly beloved of almighty God. Now these
two, as they far passed, and excelled all creatures in virtue: so did they
likewise in sufferinge. And vndowtedlie there were never in the world two
better persons, nor more tossed, and turmoyled with adversities, afflictions,
and tribulations, than these two were.

Be of good comfort therefore all ye Catholics that are in tribulation,
assuringe your selves, that the more troubles, afflictions, emprisonmentes, and
crosses you sustain, the more like you are unto our Savior Christ, and his
holy mother. Be of good comfort, all ye Catholics that are troubled. For you
are not therefore the more forsaken of almighty God, but rather (if you have
patience in your troubles,) you are certainly the more in his grace, and
favor, and more singulerlie, and dearly, beloved of him. Be of good comfort,
again, and again, I say, Psalm. 50. There is no sign more certain of the
love, and favor of God, than to have patience in tribulation.
all ye Catholics that are afflicted, and troubled: For there is no sacrifice
more acceptable unto almighty God, than a troubled and afflicted heart:
neither is there any sign more certain of his love, and friendship, then
patience in tribulation. Let no man therefore sclaunder tribulation, for that
were to sclaunder our savior Christ, and his blessed mother: yea it were to
bring a sclaunder upon almighty God him self, who always sends
tribulations and afflictions to his friends.

What thing is tribulation, but only a cross? And therefore what other
thing is it, to defame tribulation, To fly from tribulation, is to fly from
the cross.
but to defame the cross? Again what is it else to fly from tribulation, but
to fly from the cross? Now if we worship the dead Cross, which is the
figure of the Cross, why fly we than from the lively cross, which is, to
suffer by the cross of tribulation? This is to Imitate, and follow the Jews,
of whom our savior says, Luc. 11.
that when they had persecuted the Prophettes, they made for them afterward
very great, and sumptuouse sepulchers: honoringe them after they were dead,
and persecutinge them, whilst they were alive. And even so it siemeth that
those wicked Christians do likewise in a sort imitate them, which on the one
side do worship the dead Cross, and on the other side do deny, and spit
at the lively Cross: Which is the sufferinge by the cross of tribulation.

And let no man be discomforted, and say, that he suffers for his sins, or
without sin: for howsoever thou suffer, all is finallye in effect to suffer
upon the cross. For if thou suffer for thy sins, (and do hartelie repent
them) thou suffer upon the cross of the good theiffe: But if thou suffer
without sin, and without deserte, thou ought to take the more comfort
thereof, because this is to suffer even upon our Saviors own Cross.

SONDAIE MORNINGE.
THIS day (after thou have made the sign of the Cross, and prepared thy
self hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the mystery of the holy
Resurrection: in which thou may consider these four principal points: to
wit: of the descendinge of our Savior into that place of hell, which is
commonly called by the Learned divines: Limbus Patrum. Of the Resurrection of
his holy body: Of his appearinge first to our blessed Lady, and afterward
to S. Marie Magdalene, and to the disciples.

depiction of Christ ^



The text of the holy Evangelists.
UPON the Sondaie next ensuinge after this Fridaie of the Passion, Joan. 20.
very early in the morninge before the break of the day, Marie Magdalen
came to the sepulcher: and saw the stone removed from the tomb, and perceived
that the body was not there. The which, when she fownde not, she stood
without the sepulcher in the garden weepinge. And as she wept, she bowed her
self down into the sepulcher, and saw two Angels in white, sittinge the one
at the head, and the other at the feet of the place, where the body of Jesus
was laid. And they said unto her: Woman, why weepest thou? She made answer,
and said: They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him. When she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus
standinge, and knew not that is was Jesus. Jesus said unto her: Woman, why
weepest thou? Whom seek thou? She supposinge that he had been the gardener
of that garden, said unto him: Sir, if thou have taken him away, tell me where
thou have laid him, and I will take him away. Then said Jesus unto her: Marie.
And she said unto him, Master. Jesus said unto her. Towche me not, but go,
and tell my brethern, that I ascend to my father, and your father, to my God,
and your God. Marie Magdalen came forthwith away, and told these things unto
the Disciples, saying: I have seen our Lord, and he told me these, and
these things, that I should tell them unto you.

The same day, late in the eueninge, when the doors were shut, where the
disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, Jesus came, and stood in the
mids of them, and said unto them. Peace be with you, And when he had so
said, he showed unto them his hands, and his side. Then were the disciples
glad, when they had seen our Lord. Then said Jesus again unto them: Peace be
with you. As my father sent me, so send I you. And when he had said those
words, he breathed upon them, and said: Receive the holy Ghost. Whose sins
so ever ye shall forgive, they be forgiven unto them: and whose sins so ever
ye shall reteyne, they are retained.

At that time, Thomas one of the twelve, who was also called Didimus was not
with the disciples when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore (when he
came) said unto him: We have seen our Lord. But he said unto them. Except I
see in his hands the prynte of the nails, and put my finger into the holes of
them, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it. And eight days
after, his Disciples were again within, and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus
again, when the doors were shutt, and standinge in the mids of them: said:
Peace be with you. And after he said unto Thomas. Put thy finger here, and see
my hands, and bring hither thy hand, and put it into my side, and be no more
incredulous, but faithful. Thomas answered, and said: My Lord, and my God.
And Jesus said unto him. Thomas, because thou have seen, thou beleuest.
Blessed are they, that have not seen, and have believed. Many other signs did
Jesus work also in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in
this book: but these things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus
Christ is the son of God, and that beleuinge, ye might have life by him.

MEDITATIONS UPON THESE POINTS OF THE TEXT.
THIS is the day that our Lord has made, Psalm. 117.
let us rejoice, and be merry in it. why the day of Christ's resurrection is
specially called our Lords day.
Our Lord who is the maker of all times, has made every day: but this day,
especially he is said to have made; forsomuche as on this day he finished the
most excellent of all his works, to wit, the work of our redemption. Now as
this work is called (by way of excellency) the work of God, by reason that
it far passes all his other works: even so also this day is called the
day of God, for that upon this day he finished this work, which was the most
excellent of all his works.

It is also said that our Lord made this day, because whatsoever was done in
it, was done only by his own hand. In other feasts and mysteries of our
Savior, there is ever some thing that we have done our selves, because there
is always in them some thing of pain, which pain grew of our sin, and
therefore there is some thing belonginge unto us. But this day is not a day
of travel, nor of pain, but a puttinge away, and bannishement of all pain,
and a fulfillinge of all glory, The ioyefull day of Christ's Resurrection.
and therefore it is wholly and purelie the day of God. Who is he then that
will not rejoice upon such a day as this is? This day all the humanity of
Christ rejoiced: The blessed mother of Christ rejoiced: the disciples of Christ
rejoiced: heaven and earth rejoiced: yea hell it self had his part of this
joy. This day the son shyned more clearly than it did any other day,
because it was meet that it should serve our Lord with his light on this
day of his reioycinge, as it had served him before with his darkness on the
day of his Passion. The heavens which before in the day of his passion became
dark, because they would not see their creator naked, do now on this day
shine with a singular clearnes, to see him how he comes fourth as a
conqueror out of the sepulcher. Let the heavens therefore rejoice, and thou o
earth take part of this joy: because this day there shyneth a greater
brightness out of the sepulcher, than from the very son it self, that gives
light in the heavens. A certain holy Father given much to comtemplation
says, that every Sondaie morninge when he rose to mattins, he took so great
joy by calling to mind the mystery of this day, that it seemed to him,
that all creatures both of heaven, and earth, did singe at that hour, with
loud voices, and say: In thy resurrection o Christ, Alleluia. The heavens and
earth rejoice, Alleluia.

Now to understand somewhat of the mystery of this day, consider first of
all, how our Savior having finished that painful iourneye of his passion,
as he ascended with passinge great charity upon the cross for our sakes, even
so did he descend down into hell with the like love and charity, to finishe
the work of our reparation. For as he took death as a mean to deliver us
from death: even so did he likewise go down to hell, vsinge that as a mean
to deliver such as be his from hell.

Now therefore let us consider, how this noble triumphant conqueror goes down
into hell, clothed with brightness and stre^gthe, whose entry Eusebius Emisenus
describes in these words. O beawtifull light, which shininge from the highest
part of heaven, did geaue light with a sudden and unwonted brightness to
them that were in darckenes, and in the shadow of death. For at the very
instant, that our Savior descended thither, immediately that everlasting
dark night shyned very brightlie, and the noise of them, that there lamented
ceased forthwith, and all that cruel route of tormentors trembled, Exodus 25.
to behold our Savior Christ present. There were the princes of Edom
troubled, and the mighty of Moab quaked for fear, and the inhabitants of the
land of Canaan were sore amassed, and astonished. Incontinently all those
infernal torme^tors began in the midst of their obscure darkness to
murmr emo^ge themselves, and to say: Who is this, that is so terrible, so
mighty, and withal so bright? There was never seen any man like unto this
in our quarters. There was never the like person sent into these dens from
the beginning of the world unto this day. What? he looks as one that would
rather assault us, than pay here any debt: and as one that would sooner give
us an overthrow, than be punnished as a sinner. He seems to be a Judge, and
no guilty person. He comes with great might to fight, and not to suffer any
pain. Where stood our guard, and the porters of our gates, when this
conqueror brake our strong enclosures, and entered thus perforce upon us? What
may he be, that is of such a mighty puissance? If he were faulty, he would
not have been so hardy? And if he had brought with him any obscurity of
sin, he could never have thus given light to our darkness with his
brightness? If he be God, what has he to do in hell? If he be a man, how is it
that he is so bold? If he be God, what has he to do in the sepulcher? If he
be a man, how happens it, that he has spoiled our strong prison of Limbus?

O Cross that have after this manner defeyted our hopes, and been the cause of
this our great loss, Genes. 3.
and damage. Upon a tree we gained all our riches, and now upon a tree we lose
them all again.

Such words as these murmured those infernal feindes emonge themselves, at
what time the noble triumphant conqueror our Savior Christ entered therein,
to deliver his prisoners. There stood all the souls of the just gathered
together, that had from the beginning of the world, until that hour
departed out of this life. There might ye have seen, one Prophet sawed a
sonder: an other stoned: an other having his neck broken with a bar of
iron: and others that had with other kinds of death glorified almighty God. O
gloriouse company? O most noble treasure of heaven? O most magnificent, and
rich part of the triumph of our Savior Christ? There were those two first
persons (to wit: Adam, and Eve) who in the beginning peopled, and increased
the world: which two, as they were the first in sin, so were they the first
also in faith, and hope. Genes. 6.
There was that holy old man Noe, who by buyldinge of the great Arc,
preserved seed that the world might be replenished, and peopled again, after
the ceasinge of the waters of the floude. There was the Patriarch Abraham the
first father of the beleeuynge people, who deserved before all others to
receive the testament of God, and the sign, and separation of his familye from
others, by the mark of Circumcision in their fleashe. Genes. 22.
There was his obedient son Isacke, who in caryenge upon his shoulders the
wood wherewith he should be sacrificed, represented the sacrifice, and
redemption of the world. Genes. 27.
There was Jacob the holy father of the twelve trybes, who by puttinge upon
him an others apparel, and strange garments, gained his fathers blessinge:
which figured the mystery of the humanity and incarnation of the everlasting
word. Luc. 2.
There was the holy S. John Baptist also, as a guest, and new inhabitor of
that land: and likewise the blessed old man Simeon, who would not depart out
of this world, until he had seen with his eyes the redeemer of the world,
and received him in his arms; and song like a swanne before his death that
sweet song: Nunc dimittis: etc. Luc. 15.
There had the poor seely Lazarus mentioned in the gospel his place also,
who by means of his soores, and patience, deserved to be partaker of that so
noble company, and hope.

All this quyer, and assembly of holy souls were there mourninge, and
sighinge for this day. And in the midst of them (as master of the chapel)
was that holy king, and Prophet David, who without ceassinge repeted his
ancient lamentation. As the heart longethe after the fountains of waters,
Psalm. 41.
even so does my soul long after thee my God. My tears were bread unto me
day, and night, whiles they say unto my soul, where is thy God? O holy
king David, if this be the cause of thy lamentation, now may thou cease from
singinge this song: for here thy God is now present, and and here is thy
Savior, whom thou may now enjoy. Change this song therefore, and singe
that other song which thou did singe long before in spirit. Psalm. 84.
Thou have blessed thy land (o Lord,) thou have delivered Jacob out of
captivity. Thou have pardoned the iniquity of thy people, and have dissembled
the multitude of their sins. And thou holy Jeremy that wast stoned to
death for the same Lord, shut up now thy book of lamentations, which thou
did write, when thou beheldest the destruction of Jerusalem, and the ruin
of the temple of God. For even within these three days, thou shall see an
other temple builded up, far more beawtyfull than that was, and thou shall
see an other more goodly Jerusalem renewed through out the world.

Now when those blessed fathers saw their darkness changed to a goodly
bright light: The great joy of the old fathers, in Limbo patru^ at the
descendinge of our Savior thither, to deliver them from thence. Exodus 14.
Exodus 15.
when they saw the time of their bannisheme^t expired, and their glory now
begone, what tongue is able to express the passinge inward joy that they
felt? O how glad were they to see themselves now delivered out of the
captivity of Egypt, and their enemies drowned in the red Sea? How hartelie
did they singe altogether, and say: Let us singe unto our Lord, for he has
gloriously triumphed. He has overthrown both the horse, and the horsemen
into the sea. With what inward affection (trow ye) did the first father of
all mankind prostrate him self before the feet of his son, and Savior,
and say unto him. Thou art now come my dearly beloved Lord, whom I have so
long time looked for to redeem my sin. Thou art come to fulfill thy promise,
and have not forgotten them that did put their trust in thee. The difficulty
of the way thou have overcome with thy great pity and mercy: and with thy
passinge great love thou have overcome also the painful trauailles, and
torments of the Cross.

No tongue is able to express the great joy of these holy fathers. But the
joy that our Savior had to see such a multitude of souls redeemed by the
merits of his passion was far greater without all comparison. O sweet
Lord, how well would thou then account the great labors, and pains of
thy cross employed, when thou saw what goodly fruit, that most blessed and
sacred tree began to yeilde. Genes. 42.
The Patriarch Joseph when he had two sons borne unto him in the land of
Egypt, made none account of all his pains, and traueils past: and in
signification thereof, he called the first son that was borne in th^^
country. Manasses, saye^^^e: God has caused me to forget all my ^^^^^illes,
and the house also of ^^^^er. (...) ^^seph rejoiced so much at the birthe of
^^e son: What might our Savior now think, when he saw him self be^et on
euer^e side, with such a number of sons, after the end of his torments, and
Martyrdom upon the cross? What might that precious o^^^^ think, when it saw
rownde abo^^e her ^o many, and such goodly branches shootinge out on every
side?

OF THE RESVRRECTION OF THE BODY OF OUR SAVIOVR. depiction of Christ CHristus
resurrexit a mort^^^, pr^^itiae dormientium. ^ Corinth. ^^ 20.

II.
BUT O my Savior what meanest thou, that thou geuest no part of this thy
glory to thy most holy body, that lies waytinge for thee in the sepulcher?
1. Reg. 30.
Thou know well (o Lord) that the law, that was made concerning the
division of spoils says, that there should be given as great a portion to
him, that remains in the tents, as to him that enters into the battle.
Thy holy body has remained waytinge for thee in the sepulcher, whilst thy
most holy soul entered into hell to give the battle. Make therefore an
equal division of thy glory to thy body, for so much as thou have now won
the battle.

The holy body of our Savior lay in the sepulcher in such a pittiefull
form as he had left it, stretched out alonge upon that cold stone; wound up
in his wyndinge sheet: his face covered over with a napkin: and all the parts
of his body wholly rent, and torn. It was now after midnight, and the
dawninge of the day approached near at hand, when the son of justice had
determined to prevent the son of the morninge, and to be before him in this
days journey. In this blessed time therefore entered that glorious soul into
his sacred body. And how (think you) did it adorn the same? Suerly there is
no tongue able to express it in words: Howbeit by an example we may perceive
somewhat thereof. We see sometimes toward the west a very obscure, and dark
cloud: and if happlye the son do take it before his goinge down, and beat
upon it, and cover it all over with his beams, it is wont to cause it to
appear all beautiful, all goodly, and all glisteringe like gold: insomuche
as it seems to be the very son it self. Now in like manner did that
glorious soul after it was inuestured in that holy body, and entered into
the same. For it converted all the darkness of the body into light, and all
his filthiness into beauty, and caused the body that was the fowlest of all
bodies, to become the fairest, and most beautiful of all bodies. After this
sort our Savior rises again out of the sepulcher, altogether perfectly
glorious, as the first begotten of the dead, and the figure of our
resurrection.

This is that holy Patriarch Joseph, Genes. 41.
who is now delivered out of prison, the hear of his mortality being cut
of, and apparailed with the garments of immortality, and made Lord of the
land of Egypt. Exodus 2.
This is that holy Moses, who was taken out of the waters, and out of the
poor rushe basket, and is now come to destroy all the power, and chariottes
of king Pharao. Hester. 6.
This is that holy Mardocheus, who after he had put of his sackeclothe, and
ashes, and was apparailed with royal garments overcame his enemy, and
crucified him upon his own cross, and delivered all his people from death.
Daniell. 14.
This is that holy Daniell, who is now come forth out of the lions den, and
has not received any damage at all of the furious, hongrie, and ravenous
beasts. This is that strong Sampson, Iudic. 16.
who being environed about with his enemies, and enclosed within the city
ryseth up at midnight, and breaks up their strong gates, and locks, and so
defeyteth the malicious purposes, and designementes of his adversaries. Jonas.
2.
This is that holy Jonas, that was allotted to die, to deliver his companions
from death, who entering into the belly of that great beast, is the third
day cast up again upon the coast of Ninyue.

Who is this, that being between the hongrie Jaws of the deuowringe beast,
could not be eaten of her? Who is this, that was swallowed down into the
bothom of the waters, and enjoyed nevertheless the air of life? Who is this,
that being sonke down into the deapth of perdition, caused even death it
self to serve him? This is our glorious Savior, who was snatched away by
that cruel beast, which is never satisfied (to wit, by death) which after she
had him in her mouth, and perceived the worthiness of the pray, trembled, and
quaked for fear, and could not hold it. For although the earth swallowed
him after he was dead, yet findinge him free from all fault, and sin, she
was not able to detain him in her house. For it is not the pain, that makes
a man guilty, but the cawse, which could not be found in him.

HOW OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST AFTER HIS RESVRRECTION appeared to the holy virgin his
blessed mother. III.
NOW have thou o lord glorified, and rejoiced thy most holy fleashe, that
suffered with thee upon the cross. Remember likewise, that the fleashe of thy
mother is also thy fleashe, and that she also suffered with thee, when she saw
thee suffer upon the cross. She was crucified with thee, it is reason
therefore that she also rise again with thee. Romans 6.8.
It is a sayeinge of thy Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.
that whosoever have been thy companions in thy pains, shall be thy companions
likewise in thy glory. Forsomuche therefore, as this blessed Lady has been
thy faithful companion in all thy pains, even from the maunger, to the
cross, reason it is, that she should be now partaker of thy joys also.
Wherefore clarify that heaven, that is now obscured: discover that moon, that
is now eclipsed: dissolve those clouds of her heavy soul: dry up the tears
of her maidenly eyes: and now after the stormy winter of so many floudes,
command the florishinge spring to return again.

At this time of the resurrection of our Savior, the holy virgin had
withdrawn her self into her oratorie, expectinge there the coming of this
new light. She cried inwardly in her heart, and called like a pittiefull
liones the therde day unto her dead son, Psalm. 56.
saying: Arise up my glory, arise my harp and my vyole. Return (o
triumphant conqueror) unto the world. Gather together o good pastor) thy
dispersed flock. Give ear (o my dear son) unto the clamours of thy heavy
and afflicted mother. And saying by these clamours thou wast moved to descend
down from heaven into the earth, let the same move the now also to ascend up
again from hell into the world. In the midst of these clamours, and cries
of the blessed virgin, behold that poor cotage of hers was suddenly
brightened all over with a heavenly light, and her son being now gloriously
risen again from death to life, presents him self to the sight of his
holy mother. The morninge sterre appears not so beautiful, the brighte
son at noone day shines not so clear, as did that face full of all graces,
and that unspotted glass of divine glory in the eyes of his holy mother. She
beholds the body of her sweet son, risen up again from death and
glorified, all the disfigures of the former deformity being clean wyped
away, the comely grace of those divine eyes returned, and his former beauty
was restored again, and increased.

She also beholds those gappes of his wounds, which as they were before
very swoordes of sorrow to her heavy, and tender heart, so are they now
become fountains of love. Whom she saw before to suffer between two thieues,
she sees now accompanied with Saints and Angels. Whom she saw before to
commend her from the cross unto his disciple, she sees now stretchinge
forth his louinge arms, and geuinge unto her the sweet kiss of peace. Whom
she held before dead in her arms, she sees now risen up again before her
eyes. The blessed mother now holdethe him, and will not leave him, she
embracethe him, she desires and prays him most instantly, not to depart
away from her. Heretofore she was made speecheles for sorrow, and knew not
what to say: But now she is become speecheles for very joy, and cannot utter
her inward gladness unto him.

Now what tongue can tell, or what understanding is able to comprehend, the
exceedinge joy that this blessed virgin conceived inwardly in her mind? We
cannot understand the things that do exceed our capacity, unless we
compare them to other less things, and frame by them as it were a ladder, to
ascend by degries from the lower unto the higher, and so make a conjecture of
the one, by the other. Now that we may understand somewhat of this her
exceedinge joy, consider what a great joy the Patriarch Jacob felt, when
after he had bewailed his dearly beloved son Iosephe with so great abundance
of tears, supposinge him to be dead, tydinges were browghte him, that he was
alive, and Lord over all the land of Egypt. The holy scripture says,
Genes. 45.
that when these news were told him, he conceived so great joy, and
astonishement therewith, that as a man newly awaked out of a heavy sliepe, he
could not call his wits perfectly together, nor yet believe the news that
his sons had told him, no more than if it had been a very dream. But
afterward, when he was fully resolved, that it was true: the holy scripture
says, that his spirit reuyued again, and that he spoke these words
folowinge. It is enoughe for me, if my son Joseph be yet a live: I will go,
and see him, before I die: Now then, tell me I pray you, if Jacob that had
eleven other sons in his house, conceived yet so great a joy in his heart to
understand that even one only, whom he supposed to be dead, was yet alive,
what an exceedinge great joy conceived the blessed virgin, who having no more
but one son, and that one such a son as our blessed Savior was, so
notable, and so dearly beloved, as he was unto her, after she had seen him
with her eyes both dead, and buried, saw him now again risen up from death,
and withal glorified, and made Lord not only of all the land of Egypt, but
also of all things created? Is there any understanding able to comprehend
this? Undoubtedly her joy was inwardelie so great, that her heart had not been
able to sustain the force thereof, had it not received some supernatural
strength, and comfort, by special miracle of almighty God for that end. O
blessed virgin, this benefit alone may suffice thee. It is enoughe for thee,
that thy dear son is alive, and that thou have him in thy presence, and
see him before thy death: so as now there remains nothing else for thee to
desire. O Lord how well know thou how to comfort them, that suffer for thy
sake? The former pain of thy blessed mother seems not now to be great,
being compared with this passinge great joy. If thou o Lord, do comfort
such as suffer for thee after this sort, blessed and happy are their
persecutions and troubles, saying they shall be thus rewarded.

In like manner we have to consider, how our Savior appeared unto his
disciples, and especially to S. Marie Magdalen, whereof presently we do not
entreat, because we would not make this meditation over long.

The end of the first seven meditations, for the seven days of the weke in
the morninges.

HERE BEGIN THE OTHER SEVEN MEDITATIONS FOR THE SAME SEVEN days in the
nights. And althowghe these Meditations be placed in the second place, yet
are they first to be used in the order of exercise: Forsomuche as with them
they must first begin, who are but newly converted to the service of
almighty God.
depiction of Christ Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata
remittuntur eis, et quorum retinueritis detenta sunt. Johan. 20. verse. 22.

Multi (...) consi^^tes et (...) act^s suos. Act. 19. verse. 18.

OF SINS.


MONDAIE NIGHT.
THIS day (after thou have made the sign of the Cross, and prepared thy
self hereunto,) thou must atte^de to the knowledge of thy self, and thou must
use diligence to call to mind thy sins and offenses. And this is the way to
obtain true humility of heart, and repentance, which are the two first
gates, and foundations of a Christian life.

For the better performance whereof, Of the multitude of the sins of thy
former life.
thou must think firs;t of all upon the multitude of the sins of thy former
life, and espetially upon those offenses, that thou did commit, at what
time thou had least knowledge of almighty God. For if thou can well vewe
and examyne them, thou shall find that they have exceeded in number the very
hears of thy head, and that thou did live at that time like an heathen,
that knows not what God is.

This done, run over breefelie the ten commandments, and the seven
deadly sins, and thou shall see, that there is no one of them, wherein
peradventure thou have not offended more or less, diverse and sundry times, by
thought, word, or deed. Our first father Adam did eat but of one only tree
forbidden him, Genes. 3.
when he committed the greatest sin of the world? But thou have set thy
eyes, and hands infinite times upon all sins.

How thou have used the benefits of almighty God.
In like manner run over all the benefits of almighty God, and all the times
of thy life past, and consider wherein thou have employed them, forsomuche as
thou must vndowtedlie give an account at the very hour of thy death of all
these things. And therefore it were well done, that thou should first take
an account of thine own doings, and enter into judgment with thy self, 1.
Cor. 11. verse. 31.
that thou be not afterward judged of almighty God.

Of mysspendinge thy time.
Wherefore tell me now, wherein have thou spente thy childehoode? Wherein thy
infancy? Wherein thy youth? To be short, wherein have thou spente all the
days of thy life past? Wherein have thou occupied thy bodily senses, and the
powers of thy soul, which almighty God has given thee to this end, Of the
bodelie senses and powers of the soul.
that thou should know him, and serve him? Wherein have thou employed thine
eyes, but in beholdinge of vanities? Wherein thine ears, but in harkeninge
after lies? Wherein thy tongue, but peradventure in all kind of swearinge,
backbytinge, and most dishonest talk? Wherein have thou occupied thy rast, thy
smellinge, and thy touching, but only in pleasures, and delites, and in
sensual and fleashly allurementes? What benefit have thou taken by the
Sacraments, which almighty God has ordained for thy remedy and comforre?
How thankful have thou been unto him for his benefits? How have thou
answered unto his inspirations? Wherein have thou spente thy health, thy
natural forces, and habilites? How have thou employed the goods, which are
termed the goods of fortune? How have thou used the means and oportunities,
which almighty God has given thee to lead a holy, and virtuous life? What
care have thou had of thy neighbor, whom almighty God has commended unto
thee? And of those works of mercy, which he has appointed thee to use
toward him? Now what answer will thou make at that dreadful day of thine
account, (to wit, at the hour of thy death) when almighty God shall say
unto thee. Luc. 16. verse. 2.
Give me an account of thy stewardshippe, and of the lands, and goods, that
I have committed to thy charge: For now I will that thou shall have no more to
do therewith? O dry and withered tree, ready for the everlasting horrible
torments in hell fire! What answer will thou make at that terrible day, when
an account shall be required of thee, of all the time of thy life, and of all
the minutes, and momentes of the same?

And assure thy self, that it will so certainly come to pass: for even our
savior Christ himself (who shall be our Judge) has plainly protested it, and
forwarned us beforehand thereof: Math. 12.36.
saying: Every idell word that men have spoken, they shall render an
account of the same at the day of Judgment.

Of the sins that thou have committed, since the time thou have had more
knowledge of God.
Secondly, call to mind what sins thou have committed, and do commit
every day, since the time thou art come to a further knowledge of almighty
God. And thou shall find that even now presently (all that knowledge
notwithstanding) old Adam lives in thee, with many of thy lewd corrupt
manners and ancient customs. Whereupon thou may take occasion to run over
the negligences, and defectes, wherein thou do daily offend against
almighty God, against thy neighbor, and against thy self. For in each of
these points, thou shall find thy self to have failed very much in thy
duty. Consider then how vnreuerent thou art toward almighty God: how
unthankful for his benefits: how rebellious, and stife necked to yield to
his inspirations: how slothful, and negligent in matters apperteininge to his
service: which either thou had left undone, or else if thou have done them, it
was not with such a readiness, and diligence, as the things required, nor with
such a pure intention as thou ought to have had: but the very true cause
why thou did them, was for some other respect of worldly commodity.

Consider likewise how hard and severe thou art toward thy neighbor, and
contrariewise how pittiefull and favorable toward thy self: what a lover of
thine own proper will, of thy fleashe, of thy estimation, and of all thy
worldly profits, and commodities. Consider moreover, that whereas thou say
in words, that thou art now converted unto almighty God, thou art yet
notwithstanding in thy deeds very proud, ambitious, angry, rash,
vaineglorious, envious, malicious, delicate, inconstant, light, sensual, a
great lover of thy pastymes, of pleasante company, laughter, jesting, idell
talk, and of vain babbling, and pratlinge. Consider also, how unconstant thou
art in thy good purposes: how unadvised in thy words: how headlonge in thy
deeds: how cowardly, and faynte hearted to do any matter of weight, and
importance.

Thirdly, Of the greeuousnes of sin.
when thou have considered in this Three circumstances to be considered in sin.
if thou consider these three circumstances in all such sins, as thou have
committed in thy former life: to wit: Against whom thou have sinned: For what
cause thou have sinned: And in what manner thou have sinned. If thou consider
against whom thou have and majesty is infinite: whose benefittes and mercies
toward mankind do exceed the sands of the Sea: in whom alone are all
excellencies, and titles of honor to be fownde: and to whom all duties and
homagies dew to any creature, are due in the highest degree Ezech. 13.
saienge: They have dishonored me, in the presence of my people, for a handful
of barlie and for a piece of bread. But if thou consider after what manner thou
have sinned? Suerlie it has been done with such facility, with such boldness,
so without all scruple, so without all fear, yea sometimes with such
contentation, and joy, as if thou had sinned against a God of straw, that
neither knew, nor saw, what passes in the world. Now is this the honor
that is due unto so high a majesty? Is this the thanckfulnes that thou
yeeldest for his so manifold, and so great benefits? Is this the recompense
that thou make unto him for the precious blood, which he has shed for thee
upon the cross? Is this the repaiment for those lashes, and buffettes, which
he suffered for thy sake? O miserable and wretched creature that thou art!
Wretched vndowtedlie in consideration of that thou have lost: and more wretched
in respect of the sins thou have committed: but most wretched and miserable,
if thou be so blinded, that even yet for all this thou perceive not thine own
perdition, and damnation.

Consider moreover what a wonderful

When thou have considered all these things aforesaid, the next point is, we
must think very basele of our selves.
that thou think of thy self as basely, as thou can possibly. Think that
thou art no better than a very waueringe reed, which is blown up and down
with every light blast of wind. without weight, without strength, without
firmenes, without stay, and without any manner of being. Joan. 11.
Think that thou art a Lazarus, that has lain dead four days together, and
that thou art a stinckinge and abominable carcas, so full of worms, and of so
vile a stentche, and savor, that as many as pass by thee, do stop their
noses, and shut their eyes, that they may not behold thee. Think with thy
self, that thou do stincke in this wise in the sight of almighty God, and
of his holy angels. And esteem thy self, as unworthy to lift up thy eyes
toward heaven: unworthy that the earth should bear thee: unworthy that
any creature should serve thee: unworthy of the very bread that thou
eatest: and unworthy even of the light, and aier, that thou receauest. And if
thou be unworthy hereof: consider how much more unworthy thou art to speak
and talk with almighty God: Luc. 15. Luc. 18.
yea and far more unworthy of the comfortes and consolations of the holy
Ghost, and of the cheryshinges, and delights of the children of God. Account
thy self for one of the most poor, and miserable creatures of all the world:
and that none does so much abuse the benefits of almighty God, Marc. 11.
as thou do. Think that if almighty God had wrought in Tire, and Sidon
(that is, in other very great sinners) those things, which he has wrought
in thee, they would have done penance ere this, even in sackclothe, and ashes.
Acknowledge thy self to be far more wicked than thou can imagine, and that
notwithstanding thou do sincke very deep into this myer, and howsoever
thou imaginest thy self to be at the very bottom, yet may thou find
every day, how to sincke deeper and deeper therein. Cry out therefore
earnestly unto almighty God, and say unto him: O Lord I have nothing, I am
worth nothing, I am nothing, and nothing can I do without thee. Luc. 7.
Cast thy self down prostrate with the public sinner at our Saviors feet,
and coueringe thy face for very shame, and confusion, look with what shame a
woman will appear before her husband, when she has committed treason, and
adultery against him, with the very same present thy self before that
heavenly spouse, against whom thou have committed so many, and so shameful
adulteries. And with great sorrow, and repentance of heart, desire him to
pardon thy sins and offenses, and that it may please him of his infinite
pity, and mercy, to receive thee again into his house.

THE FIRST TREATISE: OF THE CONSIDERATION OF Sins. Wherein this former
meditation is declared more at lardge.
THE first table after shipwreck, (as S, Jerome witnesses) is penance. This
is the first step of this ascendynge, and the first stone of this spiritual
buildinge,

Now to obtain this virtue of penance, (besides the grace of God, whose gift
true penance is, it helps very much, to consider the multitude of our
sins, as well present, as past: and withal the greiuousnes and malice of
them. For of this consideration proceeds the compunction, and repentance for
sins.

And out of this consideration proceeds not only the virtue of penance, but
also many other virtues, yea and those very excellent. For hereof comes the
knowledge of our selves (of which point we mind to treat in the meditation
next followinge.) Of this consideration also comes the contempt of our
selves: the fear of God: the abhorringe of sin: with diverse and sundry
other like affections, wherein consists a very great part of perfection.
Now that this exercise may be the more profitable unto thee, thou must apply
and direct the same unto all these ends: and labor to suck all these sweite
fruits out of the bitter root of this consideration. But because toward the
obteyninge of such fruits, it is needful to have the grace of God, (which is
principally given to such as be humble and devout) it shall be requisite for
thee, to desire of our Lord this gift of humility, and devotion, to the end
that recollectinge thy self in the inward part of thy heart, Esa. 38.
thou may imitate that holy king, who said: I will recite before thoe, o
Lord, all the years of my life, in the bitterness of my heart.

OF THE MVLTITVDE OF THE SINS, THAT THOU HAVE committed in thy former life. I.
NOW if thou will know the number of thy sins, that thou have committed in
times past, ronneouer briefly all the commandments, and deadly sins: and
undoubtedly thou shall find, that there is scarsely a commandment, that thou
have not broken, nor a deadly sin, wherein thou have not offended.

Of breakinge the commandments.
The first commandment is to honor almighty God, who (as S. Augustine
says) is honored with those three Theological virtues: FAITH: HOPE: AND
CHARITY. Faith.
Now what manner of Faith had he, that has lived so loosely, as if he had
believed that all those things which his faith teaches him had been stark
lies? What Hope had he, Hope.
that neither remembered the life to come: neither knew what it was to call
upon almighty God in his troubles and adversities: nor yet how to put his
assured trust, Charity.
and affiance in him? What Charity had he, that has more loved a point of
honor, more accounted of the chafe of his worldly lucre, and commodity, and
more regarded the filthiness of his pleasures, and delites, than almighty God
him self: sith that for every one of these things he has contemned, and
offended almighty God? Of reverence unto almighty God.
What reverence has he borne to that most high, and divine majesty, that
has been accustomed to rent that name of so great reverence, and to tear it
in pieces; in swearinge, Of swerynge and forswerynge.
and forsweringe by it upon every light occasion, and that for every trifle,
and matter of none importance? How has he sanctified and kept holy his
Feasts, that has gaped for these days to none other end, Of not obseruinge
the Sondayes and holy days.
but only to offend almighty God the more in them: to use dysinge, cardinge,
playenge at tables, bowlinge, and other games: to iette and gase up and down
in the streets: to give scandal and offense to innocent young maidens and
virgyns: and to keep evil company and conversation?

After this, consider how froward, and obstinate thou have been toward thy
parents? How disobedient to thy superiors? How negligent in ouerseinge thy
family and servants, to instruct them in Catholic doctrine, and prayers: to
train them up in honesty, virtue, and goodness: and to direct them with thy
good counsel, and virtuous example, in the way of God? As for the hatreds,
displeasures, grudges, passions, and desires of revenge, which thou have had,
who is able to number them? And if these things cannot fully be expressed, who
is then able to declare the number of the dishonesties, and uncleanness, wherein
thou have fallen by works, words, and desires? What has thy heart been, but
a filthy puddle, and stynckinge dungehill, meet for beastly swyne? What has
thy mouth been, Psalm 5.
but (as the Prophet says) An open sepulcher, from whence have issued the
evil savors of thy soul, that lie dead within thee? What has thine eyes
been, but as it were certain windows of perdition, and death? What thing
has been presented to the sight of thine eyes, that thou have not covered.
and procured, never so much as once remembringe that almigtie God was present,
and lokinge upon thee, and that he had given thee an inhibition that thou
should not taste of that tree? Eccles. 23.
Unto the fornicator (the Wise man says) all bread is sweet. Because his
appetite, and griedie desire is so insatiable, that he tastes all things, and
fyndeth savor in all things, never reme^bringe that there is a God unto whom
he must be accomptable for them. Moreover, who is able to declare the greatness
of thy covetousness, and the robberies, and theftes of thy desires, which have
been so far of from being contented with that, that almighty God has given
thee, that all the whole world has seemed to little for the^. And if he that
desires an other man's lands, or goods, be (as in very deed he is) a very
theyfe in the sight of almighty God, how often times have thou deserved to be
hanged, that in thy heart have committed so many theftes? Now as towchinge thy
lies, thy backbytinges, and rash judgments, as hardly may they be nombred,
as the rest. For in a manner thou never had scarsely communication with
others but that the principal part of thy talk has been of other folks
lives, of the widow, of the virgin, of the priest, and of the lay man,
without sparinge any order or estate whatsoever.

How thou have refrayned from sin.
After this sort have thou observed the commandments of almighty God. Let
us now see how thou have refrained thy self from sin. The pride of thy
heart, how great has it been? Thy desire of honor, and praise, how far has
it extended? Thy presumption, thy estimation of thy self, and thy contempt of
others, who is able to express? Now what shall I say of the vain glory, and
lightness of thy heart, since that even a light fether in thy cappe, or a strait
pair of hose on thy legs, or a guard of velvet upon thy clooke, or a few
silk cuttes, and iagges, have been able to make thee to strowte, iette, and
aduanuce thy self very proudly, fondelie, and peacoklike in the streets?
yea, and to make thee desirous to be gased upon of all men? What steps have
thou made, what work have thou done, what word have thou spoken, that has
not been set forth with vanity, and desire of thine one estimation? Thy
apparel, thy service, thy conversation, thy table, thy bed, thy
enterteynmente, to be short in a manner all thy dealinges, and demayneure, have
sauored of pride, yea, they have been wholly clothed with mere vanity.
Furthermore thy anger has been like a Serpent: thy glotonie, like a raueninge
woulfe: thy sloth, like a lasie Ass: thy envy, far passinge any viper:
And herein finally (if thou do well consider thy self) thou shall find that
thou have gone very far wanderinge out of the way, and lived in a very
dangerous state. Of mysusinge thy senses and benefits of almighty God.


Consider likewise of thy senses, and not only of them, but also of all the
gifts, graces, and benefits, that almighty God has given thee. And consider
after what sort thou have employed them, and vndowtedlie thou shall find, that
of all these things, (wherewith thou should have done the more service unto
him, who is the geuer of them all,) thou have made weapons, and instruments,
wherewithal to offend him the more. Herein have thou consumed thy strength,
thy health, thy substance, thy life, thy understanding, thy memory, thy
will, thy sight, thy tongue, with all the rest.

These and many other worse wicked acts, have thou committed in thy life
past. Wherefore thou may very well say with that great sinner, (who as he
was a great sinner, so was he also a repentant sinner: 2. Paral. 36.
) I have sinned (o Lord) above the number of the sands of the sea: my
transgressions (O Lord) are multiplied, my offenses are exciedinge many. And
whereas there were so many things, that might somewhat have brideled thee,
and made the affraied of almighty God: as the multitude of his benefits: and
his exceedinge great goodness, and justice: yet for all his benefits thou
would never acnowledge him, nor for his goodness love him, nor for his
justice fear him, but utterly forgettinge all these things, and closinge
fast thine eyes from beholdinge the^, as one that had been stark blind, thou
have wilfully wallowed thy self in all kind of vices. Now if it had so been,
that the commodities, and prouocations, thou had to allure thee to sin
had been great, then peradventure thine offenses might have had some pretensed
color of excuse. But what can thou say for thy self, saying that even for
triflinge matters of no importance, for childishe toys, yea many times
without any commodity at all, thou have voluntarily sinned, as it were
only in mere contempt, and despite of almighty God? Other men when they
sin, are wont to do it with some fear, and remorse of conscience, or at
the least after the sin is committed they are very sorry for it. But thou
perhaps have been so blind, and so insensible, that thou have committed a
thowsande sins without any kind of fear, or remorse of conscience, even as
if thou had thought that there had been no God at all. Or if thou had
believed that there was a God, yet thy belief was like unto theirs, Psalm. 93.
that said. Our Lord shall not see our doings, neither shall the God of
Jacob understand them. This is one of the greatest wickedness in all the
world. For emonge those six things, which (as Solomon says) are abhorred
of almighty God, Proverb. 6.
one is: To have swifte feet to run to do wickedness: That is: to have a
facility, and swiftnes, which the wicked have in offendinge almighty God.

OF THE SINS AND DEFECTES, THAT A MAN MAY fall into, after he is come to
the knowledge of almighty God. II.
IN these and many other sins it is certain that thou have fallen before
thou knew almighty God. But after thou did come to the knowledge of him
(if happlie thou have yet known him) desire him that he will a little open
thine eyes, and thou shall find that even still for all this knowledge there
are many relics of the old man, and many Iebusees yet remayninge in the
land of promise: Iosuae. 15. Iudic. 1.
because thou have dealt so favorably with them, and have been so well affected
toward them.

Consider then how in all things thou art full of defectes, to wit: in thy
duty toward God, toward thy neighbor, and toward thy self. Consider
how little thou have profited in the service of thy creator, being so long a
time as it is, since he called thee. Consider how lively thy passions are even
yet to this day: How little thou have increased in virtues: And how thou have
continewed evermore at one same stay, even like unto an old knottie tree,
that never thryuethe, but rather perhaps thou have turned backwarde The not
goeinge forwards in the way of God, is a tourninge backewardes.
For So Much as in the way of God, the not goeinge forward, is a tourninge
backwarde. At the least wise consider as towchinge thy fervor, and devotion of
spirit. Is it well (trowest thou) that thou art now very far of from that
fervent devotion, which peradventure thou have had in times past?

Consider also, how little penance thou have done for thy sins, and how little
love, fear, and hope, thou have had in almighty God. Thy little love toward
him is seen by the little pains thou have taken for his sake. Thy little fear
of him is perceived by the manifold sins, thou have committed against him.
Thy little confidence, and trust in him, is well declared in the time of
tribulation, by the great raginge storms, and troubles of mind, which thou
sufferedst in that tempest, for that thou have not perfectly stayed and settled
thy heart with the anckers of hope.

Furthermore, consider how evil thou have answered to his divine inspirations:
how unwilling thou have showed thy self to receive the light of heaven: Ephesians.
4.
how thou have grieved the holy Ghost, and suffer him to cry and call upon
thee so often times in vain. For in that thou art loathe to gainesaie and
resist thine own will, thou do gainesaie and resist the will of almighty
God. we must serve God according unto his will, and not according to our own
will.
He calls thee to one way, and thou followest an other. He would have thee
to serve him in one work, and thou will serve him in an other work. And
although thou see clearlie what the will of almighty God is: yet if happily
thine own will be set on the contrary, thou seruest him in such things, as
thine own will lyketh, and not in such things as he would have thee to serve
him. He peradventure calls thee to inward exercises, and thou turnest to
those, that be outward. He calls thee to prayer, and thou geuest thy self
to readinge. His will is that thou should first attend to thine own souls
health before any others: but thou forgettest thy self, and set a side
thine own profit to profit others. Whereupon it comes to pass, that thou
neither do profit thy self, nor them. To conclude, as often as thy will is
contrary to the will of almighty God, thine always preuayleth, and is the
co^querour, and the will of almighty God has the overthrow.

How to examyne the defectes and imperfections of thy good works.
And if perhaps thou do any good work, (good Lord) how many defectes are
there intermingled therein? If thou be given to prayer, how often times art
thou there distracted, heavy, ircksome, drowsy, and slothful, without any
reverence to the majesty of almighty God, unto whom thou speak. And thou
think the time of prayer very long, and tedious unto thee, and art never
in quiet until thou have given it over, that thou may attend to thy other
business, that be more agreeable to thy taste, and likinge. Now when thou do
any other good work, o with what coldness and faintnes is it done? With how
many defectes and imperfections is it fraighted? If this be certain that
almighty God looks not so much unto the substance of the good work that is
done, as to the intention wherewith it is done, how many good works (I pray
thee) have thou done in such sort, as they passed away pure and clean, from
dust, and chafe: and that neither vanity, nor the world have plucked at the
least one lock of wolle from them? How many have thou done moved only by the
importunity of others, or for custom, or manners sake? How many have thou
done only in regard of thine own estimation, and credit? How many for the
pleasinge and lykinge of men? How many only to satisfy thine own taste, and
contentation? And how few have thou done sincerely and purelie for the love
of God, without having some kind of vain respect to the world?

Of thy dewtie toward thy neighbor.
Now if thou consider how thou have done thy duty toward thy neighbors,
thou shall find, that thou have neither loved them as almighty God
commands thee, nor been sorry for their adversities as for thine own, nor
endeavored to help them in their troubles, neither yet have thou had so much as
even pity and compassion upon them: yea peradventure instead of taking
compassion upon them, thou have disdayned and grudged at their doeinges, True
Justice takes compassion, and false Justice indignation. Ephesians. 4.
though it be certain that true justice takes pity, and compassion, and
false and counterfeit justice disdain, and indignation. At the least as
towchinge that bond of love which the Apostle so often times requires of us,
commaundinge us to love one an other, as members of one same body, (since we be
all partakers of one same spirit) consider how far of thou have been from
having that love? How oftentimes have thou omitted to relieve the poor, to
visit the sick, to help the widow, and to be a proctor and mediator for
him, who could do very little for himself? Unto how many persons have thou
given offense with thy words, with thy deeds, and with thy answers? How
oftentimes have thou preferred thy self before thy equales, despised thy
inferiors, and flattered thy superiors, crowchinge, and creepinge down like a
seely emmet to the one sort, and strowtinge and aduancinge thy self very
prowdlie like an Elephante to the others?

But now if thou will take a vewe of thy self, and put thine hand into thine
own bosom, o how leperouse shall thou pluck it out again? and what deep
festered wounds shall thou find within thee? How greine and lively shall
thou find within thee the roots of pride, the love of honor and estimation,
the tycklinge of vain glory, and hypochrisie priuelie dissembled, wherewith
thou labourest to cover thy defectes, and would gladly seem to be an other
manner of man, than in very deed thou art? What a lover art thou of thine
own worldly gain, and commodity, and of the pleasures, and delights of thy
fleashe? Whereunto oftentimes under the color of necessity, thou do not
only provide, but also serve: thou do not only sustein it, but also pamper
and cherishe it with great delicacie: Again, if one of thine equales do but
take the right hand of thee, or set his foot somewhat before thee, or sit
above thee at the table, how quickly do the roots of envy bud forth, and
show themselves? And if an other do but a little touch thee in a point of
estimation (good Lord) what a sudden, and furious choleric rage do thou
fall into.

But emonge all other evils, who is able to express the losenes of thy tongue,
the lightness of thy heart, the stubbornes of thine own will, and thy
inconstancy in good purposes? How maine waste, and void words do issue from
thy tongue? How much vain, and needles language do thou fondelie lauishe out
in a day? How much do thou babble and talk to the derogation and
hinderance of thy neighbor, and to the praise and commendation of thy self?
How seldom times do thou deny thine own will, and give over the pray
whereupon it feeds, to fulfill either the will of almighty God, or of thy
neighbor? Consider this point attentively, and thou shall find that it is
very rare and seldom that thou have obtained the victory over thy self, and
thine own perverse will. It is necessary to have the victory over our
selves, if we mind to be perfectelie virtuous.
Whereas in very deed it is always necessary for thee to have this victory,
in case thou mind to be perfectly virtuous. Now what shall I say of thy
inconstancy in thy good purposes, but (to conclude in few words) that there
is no wethercocke that so lightelie turns with every wind as thou do
with the least puff of every tryflinge occasion, that is offered unto thee?
What else is all thy whole life but very childishe toies, and as it were a
weauinge, and vnweauinge? Purposing a thing in the morninge, and breakinge it
at eueninge, yea and sometimes thou tariest not so long, but changest and
alterest thy determinations, if not out of hand, yet the very same hour? Now
what other thing is this, Math. 17.
but to be like unto that Lunatike man mentioned in the gospel, whom the
disciples of our Savior could not heal, for that this disease was so great.

In like manner the lightness of thy heart, the fickelnes, mutabilitie,
unsteadfastness, and pusilanimitye thereof are such, as they can as hardelye be
expressed. For it is manifest, that thy heart changes and varieth into so many
diverse shapes, and forms, as there chances diverse occasions and accidents
unto it every hour of the day, and that without any firmenes or constancy
at all. How soon is it distracted with every triflinge business? How lyghtelye
powers it out all that it has? And how little trouble and adversity is able
to vex and tormente it, yea and utterly to ouerwhelme it?

To conclude, when thou have well examined and made thine account arighte, and
see what thou have, and what thou want: thou shall surely find, that
thou have good cause to be afraid, least all that thou have, be but only a
very deceit, and a mere shadow of virtue, and even a false and counterfeit
justice: forsomuche as thou have no more in thee, but a little taste of
almighty God, which may perhaps savor more of the fleash, than of the
spirit. And yet it may so be, that herewith thou think thy self to be
safe, and secure: yea peradventure thou will not stick to say with the proud
Pharasie: Luc. 18.
That thou art not as other men be: Because they have not that taste and
feelinge that thou have. Whereas on the other side, thou have the bosom of thy
soul full of self love, and of thine own obstinate will, and of all the
other foul defectes, and inordinate passions before mentioned. So that all the
substance of this thy gaye show of virtue, and goodness, is no more in effect,
but to say, Lord! Lord! and not to do the will of our Lord. This is to
imitate the counterfeit Justice of the Pharasees, and to be that lukewarm man,
(to wit: neither hoate nor cold in the service of God) which is spoken of in
the Apocalipes, Apocalip. 3.
whom almighty God vometeth out of his mowth.

All these things (Christian brother) thou owghtest to consider very
diligently with thy self, and to direct this consideration to this end, that
thou may hereby procure sorrow, and grief for thy sins, and atteyne to
the knowledge of thine own misery, that by the one thou may desire pardon
of our Lord for thine offenses past, and by the other virtue, and grace, never
to offend him any more.

Of the accusation of a man's own conscience: And of the abhorrynge and
contempt of him self. III.
VHEN a man has thus considered the multitude of his sins, and seen
himself how he is on every side very sore laden, and ouercharged with the
burden of the same, his part is to humble himself, and to have as great a
sorrow and compunction as he may possiblye, and to desire to be contemned,
and despised of all creatures, for that he has thus despised the creator of
them all. For the furtherance of which desire he may help him self with a
very devout consideration of S. Bonauenture, wherein speakinge of this
confusion of conscience, and of the contempt of our selves, he says thus.

Let us consider my brethern our own great vileness, and how greatly we have
offended almighty God, and let us humble our selves before him, as much as we
can possibly: let us be affrayde to lift up our eyes toward heaven, and let
us strike our breasts with that publican of the gospel, Luc. 18.
that almighty God may take pity and compassion upon us: let us enforce our
selves, and take arms against our own malice and wickedness: 1. Cor. 11.
let us become judges over our selves: and let every one of us say within
himself. If our Lord has been so reprochefullie handeled for my sake, if he
have suffered so great torments and most grievous pains for the sins that I
have committed, why should not I abase and despise my self, being the very
person that has sinned? God forbid, that I should ever presume any thing
more of my self than of a most vile, and filthy dongehill, whose horrible
stenche even I my self cannot well abide. I am he that has despised almighty
God: I am he, that has sought means to crucify him again upon the cross:
and me thinks that all the whole frame of this world, cries out with open
voice against me: saying: This is he, that has offended and despised our
common Lord. This is that wicked and ungrateful wretched creature that has
rather been moved with the guylefull baits of the devil, than with the great
benefits of almighty God. This is he, that has been more delighted with the
malice of the devil, than with the bountiefull goodness and favor of almighty
God. This is he, that could never be induced to virtue and goodness with the
fatherly louinge cherishinges, and entertaynementes of almighty God: neither
could he ever be made affrayed with his dreadful and terrible judgments.
This is he, that has (so much as lies in him) defaced the power, wisdom,
and goodness of almighty God, and brought them in contempt. This is he, that
has been more affraide to offend a seely weak man, than the omnipotency of
God. This is he, that has been more ashamed to commit a filthy act before a
rude plough man of the country, than before the presence of almighty God.
This is he, that has rather loved, and chosen to enjoy a little stinckinge
donge and mire here upon the earth, than the everlasting chief felicity in
the kingdom of heaven. This is he, that has fixed his eyes upon rotten, and
corruptible creatures, and utterly neglected the creator. What shall I say
more? There is nothing so filthy, nothing so abominable, that he has
refrayned to commit in the presence of almighty God, without having any
respect, or shame, of so great a majesty.

Wherefore all creatures do cry out after their manner against me, and say:
This is that leude Caitiffe, that has abused us all. For whereas he owght to
have employed us in the service and glory of our Creator, he has made us to
serve the will and pleasure of the devil, peruertinge all such things to the
injury, and reproach of the creator, as he had created for his service. His
soul was beawtified with the image of God, and he has disfigured this divine
image, and clothed it with our vile image and likeness. He has been more
earthly than the earth it self: more slipperie than the water: more mutable
than the wind: more enkendeled in his appetites, than the fire: more hardened
than the very stones: more cruel against him self, than the wild beasts:
more spiteful and venomous against others, than the very Cockatrice. What
need I to use many words? He has neither feared almighty God, nor made
account of men, and therefore he has cast abroad his poison (as much as in
him lay) upon many persons, alluringe them to bear him company in his
sins and wickedness. He has not been content to be him self alone
injurious, and reprochefull against almighty God, but would have many others
also to be parteners, and companions with him in his sinful, wicked, and
injurious doeinges. Now what shall I say of his other abominable naughtines?
His pride has been so great, that he would not be subject unto almighty
God, nor submit his neck under the sweet yoke of his obedience, but would
rather live as he him self thought best, and fulfill his own will in each
point, rebellinge (so much as lay in him) against almighty God. If almighty
God did not fulfill his appetites and desires, or if he sent him any troubles,
or adversities, he was in as great an anger, and rage against him, as he would
have been against one of his own servants. In all his doeinges he would be
praised, as well in the wicked, as in the good, as though he had been
almighty God himself, to whom only it appertains to be praised in all his
works: forsomuche as all that he does is good, or ordained to goodness. What
shall I say more? He has been more proud in some degrie than lucifer: more
presumptuous tha^ Adam: For they being (as they were) full of clearnes and
beauty, had some motive and provocation to presume of them selves, but this
ungracious sinful caytyfe being in very deed a filthy, and stinckinge
dongehill, what should move and provoke him to estieme him self in any
respect?

All creatures do therefore justly cry out against me, and say: Come let us
destroy this wicked sinful wretch that has done such great wrong and
villainy to our creator. The earth says: Why do I bear him? The water
says: why do I not drown him? The air says, why do I give him breathe?
The fire says, why do I not burn him? Hell says, why do I not swallowe him
up, and tormente him? Alas! alas! miserable wretch that I am, what shall I
do? Whither shall I go? Saying all things are in arms against me? Where
shall I hyde my self? Who will receive me, saying I have offended all things?
Almighty God I have despised: the Angels I have made angry: the saints I
have dishonored: men I have offended and scandalized: and all creatures I have
most wickedly abused. But to what end do I make so long a discourse? For in
that I offended the Lord and creator of all things, I have also offended all
creatures together in him. I know not therefore (poor wretched sinful
caitiffe that I am) whither I may go: for so much as I have made all things to
become enemies against me. Amongst all the things that I see about me, I can
find nothing that will take my part, insomuch as even mine own very
conscience barcketh against me, and all my bowels do accuse me, and rent me
in pieces.

Wherefore I will weep continually: I will lament my wretchedness like a poor
miserable creature: I will never cease weepinge, so long as I live in this
vale of misery: I will expecte if perhaps my most merciful Savior will
vowchesaffe to turn his pittiefull eyes toward me: I will cast my self
down at his feet: and with all the humility, and shame that I can, I will
say unto him. O Lord I am that great enemy of thine, which in presence of
thy divine eyes have committed most wicked, and abominable offenses. I
acknowledge my self to be guilty here before thee. I confess my wickedness to
be so great, that although I alone should suffer all the pains and torments
that both the deuiles, and damned persons do suffer in hell, yet should I
not be able with all this to make a sufficient satisfaction for that, which my
sins have deserved. Wherefore I beseech thee (o Lord) to cast the clooke of
thy mercy over me thy poor, wretched, and sinful creature: and let the
greatness of thy goodness overcome, and cover my wickedness. Luc. 15.
Let the most sweet louinge father rejoice at the coming home again of his
prodigal son. Let the good shepherde rejoice at the recovery of his lost
sheep. Let the pittiefull woman rejoice at the fyndinge of her lost grote. O
how happy and ioyefull shall that day be, when thou shall cast thine arms
about my neck, and give me the sweet kisses of peace!

Howbeit to obtain this gracious benefit, I know now what I will do. I will
take arms even against my self: And I will be more cruel, and rigorous against
my self, than any other. I will afflicte and punnishe my self all manner of
ways with labors and pains: and I will despise my self as a most
stinckinge, and filthy dongehill. Yea I will rejoice when so ever I shall be
despised, and dishonored, how soever the same shall happen unto me. I will be
glad also, when my shame shall be descouered, and published abroad. And because I
alone am not sufficient to abhor, and despise my selse, I will join all
creatures in the whole world unto me, and will desire to be punnished, and
despised by every one of the^, forsomuche as I have despised the Creator of
them all. This shall be unto me a treasure, which I will very earnestly desire;
to wit: to heap pains and despites against my self, and to love them with
hearty affection, that shall help me herein. All the consolations, and honors
of this life, shall be a tormente unto me: and I will account them all to be my
most deceitful, and flatteringe enemies. I believe assuredly, that in case I
shall thus do, I shall provoke all things (notwithstanding I have offended
them) to take pity, and compassion upon me: and that those creatures, which
before cried out against me will now after their manner pray, and entreat in
my behalf. Wherefore I am contented that all dishonors, reproaches, and
punnishementes do run upon me on every side, so that by them I may be
brought to my most sweet, and merciful Lord. And as for all honor,
pleasure, and delighte, they shall be bannished away quyte from me, insomuch as
the very names of them shall no more be hard in my house. In all things I
will seek nothing else, but only the honor of my Lord God, and the contempt
and confusion of my self.

Hitherto are the words of S. Bonauenture. Which will vndoutedlie be a very
great help unto him, Four noble affections.
that shall deuowtlie meditate upon them, to procure, and engender in him these
four noble affections. To wit, sorrow for sin: the fear of God: a holy
hatred of him self: and a desire to be contemned and despised for gods sake.
Of the first affection what effects are caused by having a holy hatred and
contempt of a man's self.
and such like considerations. But espetiallie hereby is obtained this holy
hatred of a man's self, whose office is, not only to eschew the cherishinges,
and delicacies of the body, and to procure to himself pains and labors, but
also much more to despise all manner of dignity, honor, and estimation of the
world, and to love all kind of contempt and dishonor for Gods sake. And
this affection apperteineth properly unto humility, which is a very inward^,
and hearty contempt of our selves: Which contempt comes of the true
knowledge of our selves, and of the consideration of our own sins. I speak
this, to the intent that such as be lovers of true humility may understand,
that out of this very same fountain, All virtues do spring out of humility.
from whence that water is drawn that may cause in us an hatred and
abhorringe of our selves, is that other water drawn also, that susteineth, and
waters the tree of true humility, out of which tree all virtues do spring.

TEWSDAIE NIGHT. OF THE MISERIES OF THIS LIFE. depiction of Christ ^ miseriis
Jo^ ^^


THIS DAY (WHEN THOU HAVE MADE THE SIGN OF the Cross, and prepared thy
self,) thou have to meditate upon the condition, and miseries of this life:
that thou may by them understand, how vain the glory of this world is,
saying it is built upon so weak a foundation: and how little account a man
ought to make of him self, being as he is subject unto so many miseries.

NOW for this purpose thou have to consider first of the vylenes of the
original, and birthe of man, to wit: the matter whereof he is co^pounded: the
manner of his conception: the greifes, and pains of his birthe: the frailty,
and miseries of his body: according as hereafter shall be entreated.

Then thou have to consider the great miseries of the life, that he lives, and
cheiflie these seven.

First consider how short this life is, saying Of the shortness of this life.
Psalm. 89.
For all the rest (if any man's life be drawn a little longer) is but labor
and sorrow. And if thou take out of this the time of our infancy, which is
rather a life of beasts, than of men, and withal the time, that is spent in
sleepinge, at which time we have not the use of our senses and reason, thou
shall find that our life is a great deal shorter, than it seems unto us.
Besides all this, if thou compare this life with the eternity of the life to
come, that endures for evermore, it shall scarsely seem somuche as a minute:
Whereby thou may perceive, how far out of the way those persons are, who
to enjoy the little blast of so short a life, do hazard to loose the quiet
rest of the blessed life to come, which shall endure everlastingly.

Of the uncertainty of our life.
(which is an other misery besides the former. For it is not only of it self
very short, but even that very small continuance of life that it has, is not
assured, but dowtfull. For how many (I pray thee) do come to the age of
those threescore and ten, or four score years, which we spoke of? In how
many persons is the web cut of, even at the first, when it is scarsely
begone to be wouen? How many do pass away out of this world, even in the
flower (as they term it) of their age, and in the very blossomynge of
yowthe. Marc. 13.
Ye know not (says our Savior) when our Lord will come, whether in the
morninge, or at noonedaie, or at midnight, or at the time of the cock
croweinge: That is to say: Ye know not whether he will come in the time of
infancy, or of childhoode, or of youth, or of age. For the better perceauinge
of this point, it shall be a good help unto thee, to call to mind, how many
of thy fryendes, and acquaintance, are dead, and departed out of this world.
And espetially remember thy kynsfolke, thy companions, and familiars, and some
of the worshipful and famous personages of great estimation in this world,
whom death has assaulted, and snatched away in diverse ages, and utterly
beguyled, and defeyted them, of all their fond designementes and hopes. I
know a certain man, that has made a memorial of all such notable
personages, as he has known in this world in all kind of estates, which are
now dead: and sometimes he reedeth their names, or calls them to mind, and
in reheresall of every one of them, he does briefly represente before his
eyes, the whole tragedy of their lives, the mockeries, and deceites of this
world, and withal the conclusion and end of all worldly things. Whereby he
understands what good cause the Apostle had to say: That the figure of this
world passes away. 1. Cor. 7.31
In which words he gives us to understand, how little grownde, and stay, the
affairs of this life have, saying he would not call them very things
indeed, but only figures, or shows of things, which have no being, but
only an appearance, whereby also they are the more deceitefull.

Thirdly, consider how frail, and bryckle Of the frayletie and brycklenes of
this life.
that there is no vessel of glass so frail as it is. Insomuche as a little
distemperature of the aier, or of the son, the drinkinge of a cup of cold
water, yea the very breathe of a sick man is able to spoil us of our life,
as we see by daily experience of many persons, whom the least occasion of
all these that we have here reheresed, has been able to end their lives, and
that even in the most florishinge time of all their age.

Of the mutabilitie of this life.
and how it never continues in one self same stay. For which purpose, thou
must consider the great and often alterations, and chaunges of our bodies,
which never continewe in one same state, and disposition. Consider likewise,
how far greater the chaunges, and mutations of our minds are, which do ever
ebb and flow like the Sea, and be co^tinuallie altered and tossed with diverse
wyndes, and surges of passions, that do disquiet, and trouble us every hour.
Finally, consider how great the mutation in the whole man is, who is subject
to all the alterations of fortune, which never continues in one same being,
but always turns her wheel, and rowleth up and down from one place to
another. And above all this, consider how continual the mouinge of our life
is, saying it never rests day nor night, but goes always shorteninge from
time to time, and consumes it self like as a garment does with use, and
approaches every hour nearer and nearer unto death. Now by this reckenynge
what else is our life, but as it were a candle that is always wastinge and
consuminge, Our life wastethe away like a burninge candle.
and the more it bourneth, and gives light, the more it consumes and wastes
away? What else is our life, but as it were a flower, that buddeth in the
morninge, and fades away at noone day, and at eueninge is clean dried up?
This very comparison makes the Prophet in the Psalm, where he says. Psalm.
89.
The morninge of our infancy passes away like an herb, it blosommeth in the
morninge, and sodeinlie fades away: and at eueninge it decaieth, and waxes
hard, and withers away.

Fifthly, consider how deceitful our life is Of the deceytefulnes of this life.
For by this mean it deceaueth us, in that being in very deed filthy, it
seems unto us beawtifull: and being but short, every man thinks his own
life will be long: and being so miserable (as it is in deed) yet it seems so
amiable, that to maintain the same, men will not stick to run through all
dangers, trauells, and losses, (be they never so great) yea they will not
spare to do such things for it, as whereby they are assured to be damned for
ever and ever in hell fire, and to loose life everlasting.

Sixthly, consider how besides this that our life How that little time we have to
live is also subject to many miseries both of body and mind.
as of the body: insomuche as all the same being dewlie considered, and laid
together is nothing else, but a vale of tears, and a maine Sea of infinite
miseries. S. Jerome declares of Zerxes that most mighty king, (who threw
down mountains, and dried up the Seas, that on a time he went up to the top
of a high hill, to take a vewe of his huge army, which he had gathered
together of infinite nombers of people. And after that he had well vewed and
considered them, it is said that he wept, and being demanded the cause of
his weepinge, he answered, and said: I weep because I consider that within
these hundred years, there shall not one of all this huge Army, which I see
here present before me, be left alive. Whereupon S. Jerome says these
words: O that we might (says he) ascend up to the top of some tower, that
were so high, that we might see from thence all the whole earth underneath our
feet. From thence should thou see the ruins and miseries of all the world:
Thou should see nations destroyed by nations: and kingdoms by kingdoms. Thou
should see some hanged, and others murdered: some drowned in the Sea, others
taken prisoners. In one place thou should see marriages and myrthe, in an
other doleful mourninge and lamentation. In one place thou should see some
borne into this world, and carried to the Church to be christened, in an other
place thou should see, some others die, and carried to the Church to be
buried. Some thou should see exceadinge wealthy, and flowinge in great
abundance of lands and riches, and others again in great poverty, and
begginge from door to door. To be short, thou should see, not only the
huge army of Zerzes, but also all the men, women, and children of the world,
that be now alive, within these few years to end their lives, and not to be
seen any more in this world.

Consider also all the diseases and calamities Of the diseases and calamities
that happen to men's bodies, and of the afflictions, and cares of the mind.
and withal all the afflictions, and cares of the mind. Consider likewise the
dangers, and perilles, that be incident as well to all estates, as also to all
the ages of men: and thou shall see very euidentlye, the manifold miseries of
this life. By the saying whereof thou shall perceive how small a thing all
that is, that the world is able to give thee, and this consideration may
cause thee more easily to despise and contemn the same, and all that thou
may hope to receive from it.

After all these manifold miseries, and calamities, Of death.
that is death, which is as well to the body, as to the soul, of all terrible
things the very last and most terrible. For the body shall in a momente be
spoiled of all that it has. And of the soul there shall then be made a
resolute determination what shall become of it for ever and ever.

THE SECOND TREATISE CONTEYNINGE A CONSIDERAtion of the miseries of man's life,
wherein the former meditation is declared more at lardge.
HOW great the miseries are, that the nature of mankind is subject unto by
reason of sin, there is no tongue able to express. And therefore S. Gregory
said very well, Our two first parents only (Adam and Eve) understood
perfectelie the miseries wherein mankind remains through sin.
that only our two first parents, Adam, and Eve, (who knew by experience the
noble condition, and state, wherein almighty God created man,) understood
perfectly the miseries of man. Because they by calling to mind the felicity
and prosperous estate of that life, which they had once enjoyed, saw more
clearly the miseries of the bannishement, wherein they remained through sin.
But the children of these our two miserable parents, as they never knew what
thing prosperity, and good hap was, but were always fostered, and brought
up in misery: so they know not, what thing misery is, because they never
knew what prosperity was. Yea many of them are as it were persons in a mere
frenzy, so far void of sense, as they would (if it were possible)
continewe perpetuallye in this life, and make this place of bannissement their
country, and this prison their dwellinge house, because they understand not
the miseries thereof. Wherefore like as they that are accustomed to dwell in
places of unsavory and stinckinge aier, do feel no pain nor trouble of it,
by reason of the custom, and use, they have thereof: even so these miserable
persons understand not the miseries of this life, because they are so enured,
and accustomed to live in them.

Now that thou may not likewise fall into this foul deceit, nor into other
greater inconveniences that are wont to follow hereof: Consider (I pray thee
with good attention) the multitude of these miseries: and before all other,
consider and weighe the miseries, that are in the first beginning, and birth
of man, and afterward the conditions of the life he lives.

Of the original and birth of man.
To begin this matter therefore at the very original, Consider first of what
matter man's body is compounded. For by the worthiness, or baseness of the
matter, oftentimes the condition of the work is known. The holy scripture
says, Genes. 2.
that almighty God created man of the slyme, or dyrte of the earth. Now of all
the elements, earth is the most base, and inferior: and emonge all the parts
of the earth, slyme is the most base, and vile. Whereby it may appear, that
almighty God created man of the most vile, and basest thing of the world.
Insomuch as even the Kings, the Emperors, and the popes, be they never so
high, famous, and royal, are eue^ slyme, and dyrte of the earth. And this
thing understood the Egiptians right well, of whom it is written, that when
they celebrated yearly the feast of their nativity, they carried in their
hands certain herbs, that grow in myrie and slymie diches? to signify
thereby, the likeness and affinity, that men have with weeds, and slymye
dyrte: which is the common father both to weeds, and to men. Wherefore if the
matter of which we are made, Slymye dyrte is the common father, both to weeds
and to men.
be so base, and vile, whereof art thou so proud, thou dust, and ashes?
Whereof art thou so loftye, thou stinckinge weed, and dyrtie slyme?

Now as concerning the manner, and workmanshippe, wherewith the work of this
matter is wrought, it is not to be committed to writing, neither yet to be
considered upon, but to be passed over with silence, and closinge up our eyes,
that we behold not so filthy a thing as it is. If men knew how to be
ashamed of a thing which they ought of reason to be ashamed of, suerlie they
would be ashamed of nothing more, than to consider the manner how they were
conceived. Concerning which point I will towche one thing only, and that is,
that whereas our merciful Lord, and Savior, came into this world to take
upon him all our miseries, for to dischardge us of the^, only this was the
thing, that he would in no wise take upon him. And whereas he disdained not
to be buffeted, and spitted upon, and to be reputed for the basest of all men,
only this he thought was vnsiemely, and not meet for his majesty, to wit,
if he should have been conceived in such manner, and order, as men are. Now as
towchinge the substance and food wherewith men's bodies are nourished, before
they be borne into this world, it is not so clean a thing, as that it ought
once to be named. No more ought a number of other unclean things, that are
daily seen at the time of our birthe.

Of the birth of a man, and of his first entry into this world.
Let us now come to the birthe of a man, and first entry into the world. Tell
me I pray thee, what thing is more miserable, than to see a woman in her
travel, when she brings forth her child? O what sharp agonies and bitter
panges does she feel? What painful tossinges and throws does she make? What
dangerous grypes and quames is she in? What pittiefull skrykes and growninges
does she utter? I omit here to speak of many monstrous, strange, and
overthwart birthes. For if I should make reheresall of them, I should never
make an end. And yet all this notwithstanding when the seely creature
comes into the world, it comes (God wotte) weepinge, and cryenge, poor,
naked, weak, and miserable: it is utterly destitute and in necessity of all
things, and unable to do any thing. Other living things are borne with
shows upon their feet, and apparel upon their back: some with wolle: others
with scales: others with feathers: others with leather: others with shells:
insomuche as the very trees come forth covered with a rynde or bark, yea and
sometimes for failinge they be dowble barked: only man is borne starcke
naked, without any other kind of garment in the world, but only a skin,
which is all riueled, foul, and loathsome to behold, wherein he comes lapped
at the time of his birthe. With these ornaments creeps he into the world,
who after his coming, grows unto such fond ambition, and pride, that a
whole world is scarcely able to satisfy him.

Moreover, other living things at the very hour of their coming into this
world, are able immediately to seek for such things as they stand in need
of, and have ability to do the same: Some can go: others can swyme: others
can fly: to be short, each one of them is able without any instructor to
seek for such things, as it has need of: only man knows nothing, neither
is he able to do any thing, but must of necessity be carried in other folks
arms. How long time is it before he can learn to go? And yet he must
begin to crawle upon all four feet, before he can go upon two. How long
time is it, before he can speak so much as one word? And not only before he
can speak, but also before he can tell how to put meat into his own mowth,
unless some others do help him? One thing only I must confess he can do of
him self, that is, he can cry and weep. This is the first thing he doethe,
A man weepethe so soon as he is borne into this world, but he laugheth not
until fourtye days after his birth.
and this is the thing only he can do without any teacher. And although he
can also laughe of him self, yet can he not do it, before he be fowrtie days
old, notwithstanding that he is ever more weepinge from the first hour of
his coming into this world. Whereby thou may understand, how far more
prompt, and ready our nature is to pewlinge, and weepinge, than to joy, and
mirthe. O mere follye, and madness of men, (says a Wise man) who of so poor,
naked, and base beginning, do persuade themselves, that they are borne to be
proud.

Now as concerning the very body of man, Of the body of man.
(whereof men esteime them selves so much, and take such a vain conceit) I
would thou should consider with indifferent eyes, what our bodies are in
very deed, how gaye and beawtifull soever they appear to our outward
sight. Tell me (I pray thee) what other thing is the body of a man, but
only a corrupt and teynted vessel, which incontinently sowreth, and
corrupts what soever lycour is powered into it? What other thing is man's
body, but only a filthy donghill, covered over with snow, which outwardly
appears white, and within is full of filth, and uncleanness? What muckhill is
so filthy? What sincke auoideth out of it such filthy gear through all his
channells, as a man's body does by several means, and ways? The trees, the
herbs, yea and certain living beasts also do yield out of them very
sweet and pleasant savors: but man yields, and auoydeth from him, such
loathsome, and foul stynckinge stuff, as he seems trewlie none other thing,
but only a fountain of all sluttishnes, and filthiness.

It is written of a great wise philosopher called Plotinus, Plotinus.
that he was ashamed of the condition, and baseness of his body, insomuch as he
was very unwilling to hear any talk of his lignage, and pedigree: neither
could he ever be induced with any persuasions to give his consent that any
man should purtraite him out in picture: sayeinge, that it was sufficient,
that he him self carried with him all the days of his life a thing so filthy
and so unworthy of the noblenes of his soul, although he were not bownde to
leave behind him a perpetual remembrance of his own dishonor.

It is written also of the holy Abbot Isidorus, Isidorus.
that upon a time whilst he was at meat he was not able to refrain from
weepinge, and being demanded why he wept, he answered: I weep, because I am
ashamed to be here feedinge upon the corruptible meat of beasts, whereas I
was created to be in the company of Angels, and to feed upon heavenly food
with them.

Of the myseries and conditions of this life: and first of the shortness of the
same. II.
AFTER this, consider the great, and manifold miseries of man's life, and
espetially these seven: to wit: How short this life is: Hou uncertain: Hou
frail: Hou inconstant: How deceitful: and finally, how miserable it is. This
done think upon the end thereof, which is death. Of the shortenes of our
life. Job. 1.14.


Consider then first of the shortness of our life, which thing the holy man
Job considered, when he said: O Lord the days of man are very short, and
thou know the number of the months, that he has to live. We see at this
day, what a great matter it is for one to live three score and ten, or four
score years, and this is commonly the ordinary rate of ma^s life: Insomuch as
when they live so long, they account them selves, not to be evil dealt
withal. As the Prophet signifies, when he says: Psalm. 89.
The days of man are at the uttermost but threescore and ten years: and if
the strongest do reach to fourscore, all that that follows is but labor and
greiffe.

Now if thou will deuyde this acco^pte into parts, and not reckon it thus in a
gross sum, it seems unto me, The tym^ of infancye.
that thou can not well reckon the time of our infancy for any part of our
life, and much less the time, that is consumed in sleep, because the life of
infancy when we are not as yet come to the use of reason, (which only
shewethe us to be men,) can not well be called the life of men, but rather the
life of beasts, even as it were the life of a young goat, that goes here and
there skippinge, and leapinge: espetiallie because we see that in all that age,
there is nothing either learned, or done, The time consumed in sleep.
that may well beseem the dignity of a man. Now as towchinge the time that
is spent in sleep, I see not how it may be called the time of life, saying
the principal part of our life is to have the use of our senses and reason,
which as then both the one and the other are suspended in us, and as it were
dead.

And therefore a certain Philosopher said, that in the half of a man's life
there is no difference between the happy man, and unhappy: for so much as
duringe the time of sleep all men are equal, because they be then as is were
dead. It is clear, that if a king should be detained as a prisoner for the
space of one or two years, we can not say (and say truly) that he reigned
duringe that time, saying he enjoyed not the kingdom, nor governed the same
like a king. How then can it be said, that a man lives whiles he sleeps,
saying duringe that time, the Seignorie and use of his reason, yea and of his
senses also, by which he lives, stand as it were in suspense? For this cause
a certain Poet termed sleep the cousin germayne of death, and an other called
it the brother of death, for the likeness and resemblance, which he perceived
to be between the one, and the other. Now then if so great a part of our life
be spent in sleep, what a great part is that wherein it cannot be said that
we do live at all. And if it be the common custom of men to sleep the third
part of the day, and night, which is eight whole hours, (although there be a
great sort, The third part of our life is consumed in sleep.
that do not content them selves therewith) it follows by this account that
the third part of our life is consumed in sleep, and so consequently, that
duringe that time we do not live. So that hereby thou may perceive, what a
great part of our short life is spent in sleep every day. This account
therefore being thus made, (which undoubtedly is a very true account) how much
is that, that remains of a man's very life in deed, even of such I mean,
as live longest?

Certainly that philosopher had very great reason to do as he did, who
being demanded what he thought of the life of a man, turned him self about
before them that made the demand, and sodeinly departed out of their sight.
Geuinge them thereby to understand, that our life is no more, but only a
turn about, and of short continuance. Our life is no more, but as it were
the shotinge of a sterre, that passes at a tryce, and flassheth quickly away,
and within a little while after, even that very sign that was left behind,
vanishes out of sight also. For within very few days after a man is
departed out of this life, the very remembrance of him dies with his life, be
the personage never so great, or honorable. To conclude, this life seemed so
short to many of the ancient wisemen, that one of them termed it a dream:
and an other not contented therewith, called it the dream of a shadow,
seeminge to him that it was overmuch to call it the dream of a true thing in
deed, being as he thought it none other than a dream of a vain and
frivolous thing.

To compare this small remanente of our life with the life everlasting that
is to come. Eccles. 18.
Again, if we compare this small remanent of the life that we here live, with
the life to come, how much less will it yet appear? Ecclesiasticus says
very well: If the number of a man's days be an hundred years, it is much.
Now what is all this (being compared with the life everlasting) but as it
were a drop of water compared with all the whole Sea? And the reason hereof
is evident. For if a sterre (which is far greater than all the whole earth)
being compared with the rest of heaven, seems so small a thing, how small
shall this present life, (which is so short) seem to be, being compared with
the life to come, that shall never have end? And if (as the astronomers
affirm) all the whole earth in comparison of heaven, be but as it were a
little pinnes point, because the inestimable greatness of the heavens, causes it
to seem so small a thing, what shall this little puff of our short life
seem to be, if it be compared with life everlasting, which is infinite?
Undoubtedly it will seem nothing at all. For if a thowsande years in the
sight of almighty God, Psalm. 49.
be no more but as it were yesterdaie, which is now past, and gone, what shall
the life of one hundred years seem to be in his sight, but only a very
nothing.

And thus it seems unto the damned persons, when they make comparison
between this life, which they have left behind them, with the eternity of the
torments, which they shall suffer for evermore. As they themselves do
confess in the book of wisdom, in theyse words: Sap. 5.
What has our pride auayled us and the pomp of our riches? All these things
are past away, as it were a shadow that flies, and as one that rides
swyftelie in post, or as the ship that passes by the waters, and leaves no
sign where it has gone, or as an arrowe shot at a certain mark, which so
sone as the aier has once opened and made him his way, forthwith it closes
up again, and it is not known which way it went. Even so it fares with us.
For at that very instant when we are borne, we begin to decaie, and we leave
no memory or sign of virtue behind us. Consider then how short all the time
of this transitory life shall seem there to all those miserable damned
wretches, saying they do playnelie confess, that they lived not at all, but
that so sone as they were borne, forth with they began to fade and vanishe
away. Now if this be so, what greater folly, or madness, can be imagined, than
that a man for the enioyinge of this short dream of so vain pleasures, and
delights, should go to suffer everlasting damnation and torments in hell
fire for ever and ever. It is a mere folly to make so great provision for
this short life, and not to provide for the everlasting life to come.
Furthermore if the time and space of this life be so short, and the life to
come so long, to wit, everlasting, what a mere folly is it, to take so
great labor and pains to provide so many things for this life being so
short, and not to make any provision at all for the life to come, which is so
long, that it shall never have end? What a fond part were it for a man that
minded to live in Spain, to spend, and consume all he has in byenge roots,
and buildinge howses in the Indees, and to make no provision for the country,
whereunto he goethe to dwell and make his abode? Now how much more foolish
and mad are they, that spend all their goods, and substance, in making
provision for this present life, where they shall live so short a time, and
make no provision at all for the everlasting life to come, where they must
dwell, and make their abode for evermore? Espetially consideringe, that they
have so good means for their provision there, by transportinge all their
goods thither by the hands of the poor. As the Wiseman witnesses, Eccles.
11.
sayeinge: Throw thy bread upon the ronninge waters, for a long time after
shall thou find it again.

Of the uncertainty of our life. III.
BUT although our life endure but a short space, yet if this short space
were so certain, Esaias. 38.
that we might be assured thereof (as king Ezechias was, unto whom almighty
God granted fyftiene years of life) our misery were the more tolerable. But
truly it is not so. For as our life is very short, even so that very time we
have to live (how short or long so ever it be) is also uncertain, and
doutfull. For as the Wise man says: Eccles. 9.
Man knows not the day of his end, but like as fisshes when they think
them selves in most saftie are taken with the hook, and as birds are cawghte
in a snare, when they think nothing less: even so death assaulteth men in an
evil season, when they think least of it. Truly that is a very wise and
approved sentence which is commonly said. A notable sentence.
That there is nothing more certain than death, nor nothing more uncertain
than the hour of death. And therefore a certain philosopher compared the
lives of men to the belles, or bubbles, that are made in water pittes, when it
raineth: of the which, some do vanishe away sodenlie even at their very
risinge, others do endure a little longer and out of hand are decayed, others
also do continewe somewhat more, and others less. So that although they do
all endure but only some little time, yet in that littell there is great
variety.

Wherefore if the end of our life be so uncertain: If it be so uncertain also
when the dreadful hour of our account shall come: why do we live with such
loosenes, and negligence? Why do we not consider those words of our Savior,
where he says unto us: Matthew. 24.
watch, because ye know not, when the son of man shall come. Marc. 13.
O that men would waighe the force of this reason. Luc. 12.
Because ye know not the hour (says our Savior) watch ye, and be always
in a readiness. As if he had said in express words: because ye know not the
hour, watch every hour: because ye know not the month, watch every
month: and because ye know not the year, be still in a readiness every
year. For although ye know not certainly what year he will call you, yet
most certain it is, that a year shall come in which vndowtedlie he will call
you.

But that the force of this reason may the better be perceived, let us put an
example. Tell me if there were set before thee upon a table thirty or forty
several disshes of meat, and thou had a certain warninge given thee by
some of thy friends, that in one of them there were poison: durst thou give
the adventure to eat of any one of them, although thou were very much a
hungered? Vndowtedlie thou would not do it. For the very fear thou
would have, least thou might peradventure light upon that dishe that were
poisoned, would make thee to abstain from all the rest. Now let us examine how
many years at the uttermost thou may hope yet to live. Thou will say
peradventure (after thou have well considered the matter) that thou may live
thirty or forty years. Well then if it be certain, that in one of these
years thou art assured to die, and thou know west not in which of them, why
art thou not then affraide in every one of them, saying thou art well assured,
that in one of them thy life shall be taken from thee? Thou would not be so
hardy, as to put thy hand into any one of the foresaied forty disshes,
although thou were in a very sore honger, because thou know that in one of
them there is death present. And will thou not also be affraide of every one
of these forty years, saying thou art so well assured, that thou shall die
in one of these years? What answer can thou make to this reason?

Harken yet to an other reason, which is of no less efficacy than the other.
Tell me, why do men keep a continual watch in a Castle that stands in
the frontiers upon the enemies? Is it for any other cause, but only for that
they know not when the enemies will come to assault it? Assuredly for none
other. So that because they know not certainly at what time the enemy will
come, therefore do they continually watch it at all times. For if they knew
certainly the time of their coming, they might be careless in the mean
while, and reserve the diligence of their watch until that very time. Now I
require thee heartily for the love of God, to be an indifferent Judge towchinge
that, which I shall say unto thee. Let us consider well this point. If thou
watch thy Castle every night, because thou art uncertain when thy enemy
will come, whether to day, or to morrow, this year, or the next: why do
thou not then keep a continual watch over thy soul, saying thou know not
what hour death shall come to give the assault upon thee? The very same
uncertainty that is in the Castle, is in thy soul also: yea this uncertainty
is far more, and the matter is without all comparison of greater importance.
Now what judgment have they that are always so vigilant in watchinge their
castle, and so careless always about their souls: so careless I say, as to
sleep always, without ever thinkinge upon them? What thing can be more
against reason? Consider that thy soul is of greater valewe, than all the
castles and kingdoms in the world. Yea if thou consider the price wherewith it
was bought, thou may well judge that it is of more valewe than all the
angels in heaven. Consider also that thou have greater enemies, that do
endeavor co^tinuallie both day and night to assault it. Consider that thou
can by no means understand the day, or the hour of assault. Consider that
the whole substance of the salvation, or damnation of thy soul, consists in
this point, whether thou be taken provided or unprovided at that dreadefull
hour. For So Much as according to the parable of the Gospel, the virgins which
were found ready, and prepared, entered into the marriage with the bridegroom,
Math. 25.
and such as were found unprovided tarried without. To conclude therefore, what
cause is there why thou should not always watch as well over thy soul, as
over thy castle, saying the uncertainty is greater, the danger greater, the
cause greater, and all the rest without any comparison far greater, and of
more importance?

Of the frailty of our life. IIII.
HOWBEIT our life is not only uncertain; but also very frail, and brickle.
For I pray thee, what glass is so brickle and so subject to knockes and
breakinge, as the life of man? Some times the very aier, and heat of the son
(if it be vehement) is able to spoil us of our life. But what speak I of the
son? saying the very eyes, yea the only lookinge of some person is able
sometimes to bereave a creature of his life. It shall not need to draw any
sword, or to use any kind of armor or munition for the matter, saying the
only look of some one man is able to bereeue an other of his life. Consider
now what a sure castle this is, wherein the treasure of our life is kept,
saying the only beholdinge of it a far of, is able to batter it clean
down to the grownde.

But this were not so much to be wondered at in the age of infancy, when the
buildinge is as yet but new, and griene: but the greater wonder is, that after
that the work is settled, and has continued many years together, there
happens some accident of no greater importance than these beforenamed that is
able utterly to overthrow it. If thou enquire and ask whereof dyed this man,
or whereof died that man, they will answer thee, that he died by drinkinge a
cup of cold drink in a sweat: or by surfetinge at a supper: or of some
other great pleasure, or grief: and some times they can give no cause at all,
but that he went to his bed saffe, and sound, and the next day in the
morninge was found stark dead at his wives side. Is there any glass or
earthen vessel in the world more brickle or subject to breaking than this?
And certainle it is not to be wondered at, that man is so brickle, consideringe
that he is also made of earth: but it is rather to be wondered at, that being
of such stuff, and making as he is, he is able to endure so long a time as
he does. Why is a clock so often times disordered, and out of frame? The
reason is because it has so many wheels, and points, and is so full of
artificial work, that although it be made of iron, yet every little thing is
able to distemper it. Now how much more tender is the artificial composition
of our bodies, and how much more frail is the matter of our fleashe, than is
the iron, whereof a clock is made? Wherefore if the artificial composition of
our bodies be more tender, and the matter more frail, why should we wonder if
some one point emonge so many wheels have some impediment, by reason of
which defect it stops, and ends the course of our life? Trewlye, we have
rather good cause to marvel, not why men do so quickly end their lives, but
how they endure so long, the woorckmanshippe of their bodies being so tender,
and the matter and stuff whereof they be compounded so frail and weak.

This is that miserable frailty, which the Prophet Esaie signifies in these
words. Almighty God said unto his Prophet: Cry: Esaias. 40.
the Prophet answered: what shall I say? God said unto him: All fleash is
haie, and all the glory thereof is like unto the flower of the field. the haie
wythereth, the flower fades away, but the word of God continues for ever.
S. Ambrose.
Upon which words S. Ambrose says thus. Truly it is even so, for the
glory of man florisheth in the fleashe like unto haie, which although it
seem to be great, it is in very deed but little like an herb: it buddeth
like a flower, and fades like haie. So that it has no more, but a certain
florishinge in appearance, and no firmenes nor stabilitie in the fruit. For
what firmenes can there be in the matter of fleashe, or what good things of
any long continuance are to be found in so weak a subject? To day thou
may see a young striplinge in the most florishinge time of his age, with
great strength, lusty, and iettinge up and down in the streets in great
bravery, with a iolye lofty countenance: and if it so fall out that this
very next night he be taken with some disease, thou shall see him the next
day with a face so far altered, and changed, that whereas before he seemed
very amiable and beautiful, he will now seem evil favored, miserable, and
very irck some to behold. Now what shall I say of the other accidents, and
alterations of our bodies? Some are sore broken with troubles, and adversities:
others are weakened with poverty: others are tormented for want of good
digestion: others are distempered with drinkinge of wines: others wax feeble
with age: others become tender, and over delicate by much cherishinge them
selves: and others mar their complexion with vsinge ryotous behavior. Now
then according to this reckeninge, is it not true (trow ye) that our fleash
withers like haie, and that the flower thereof fades, and vanishes away?

Thou shall see some other, who being descended of a very honorable
parentage, what great alteration and inconstancy is in this world.
of noble blood, and of a very ancient house, and family, well friended, and
having good store of kindred both by father and mother, and keepinge a great
house, and attended upon with a great train of his tennantes and servants,
and rulynge the whole country where he lives, and who there but he? yet
nevertheless if a contrary wind of fortune blow but a little against him,
then is he forthwith utterly forsaken of his friends, evil entreated of his
equales, and little regarded of all the world: insomuch as then very few or
none will put of a cappe unto him, but rather comtemne him. Thou shall see an
other that has now abundance of lands, and riches, and is generally reported
in all men's mowthes to be a very courteous, liberal, and bountiful man, and
of great renown, and estimation, exalted to honorable dignities, and
promotions, and preferred so high in the common wealth that he is a great
ruler, and mighty governor, and has the commendation of all persons to be a
very wise, happy, and fortunat man: thou shall see (I say) the times so to
alter and change, that even this man who is now so highelie exalted to great
dignities, and offices, and magnified in the mowthes of all men, shall be
utterly disgraced, and thrust into that very prison, where he himself had
heretofore imprisoned many others, and shall there end his life in very
great infamy, misery, and wretchedness. Unto how many also does it happen to
be waited upon, and brought home to their howses this day with a number of
golden chains, footeclothes, and seruinge men, and with all the gaye pomp in
the world, and the very next night followynge, either by means of treason of
some one of his own howsholde, or familiar acquaintance, or by other
misfortune, to have all this glorious pomp obscured? yea it may so fall out,
that even a little stitche coming in his side, may mar the fashion of all
this gaie ruffelinge show, wherein he took so great delighte. O how
deceitful are the hopes of men (says Tully,) how frail is fortune, how
vain are all our contentio^s, and strifes, which many times do break and
fall in the middle way, and are overwhelmed, and drowned in saylinge, before
they can come to the sight of the haue^. Now what a fond madness is this in the
children of Ada^, upon so weak foundations to build such high castles, and
towers? They consider not, that they build upon sand, and that even when the
weather is most fair a wind, will come, and blow down all that stands not
upon a sownde and strong foundation. O what fond accomptes do men make often
times, because they will not turn their eyes, and look into their own
consciences, and take first an account of them selves!

And if this be thought so great a blindness, how much greater is the blindness
of those wicked persons, that are so bold, as to continewe many years in
sin, knoweynge that there is no greater distance between them and hell gates,
There is no more distaunce between vnrepenta^t sinners and hell fire, but
only this brickle and short life.
but only this brickle and short life? Let us imagine now, that there were a
man hanginge by a small twyned threede and that there were directly under him
a very great deep well, and he hanginge in such wise over it, that when the
threede happened to break he should forthwith fall into it. In what evil
case (trow ye) would this man think himself to be? O how fearful, and how
sore troubled would he be? How willingly would he offer all the substance he
has, to be delivered of that danger? Now thou miserable wretch that dare
continewe so many days and years in sin, contrary to the laws of
almighty God, why do thou not consider, that thou hangest in the like
danger? Do thou not plainly see before thy face, that when soever the
threede of this frail, and short life breaks in sonder, thou art assured
(continueinge still in this thy wicked and sinful life) to fall into the deep
bottomless pit of hell fire? How can thou then sleep? How can thou play?
How can thou lawghe, or be in any quiet? How is it, that thou art so stone
blind, as not to see such a terrible peril and danger as hell and
everlasting damnation, to be ready every hour to fall upon thee?

Of the mutabilitie of this life. V.
OVRE life has yet an other defect, which is to be mutable, and never to
continewe in one stay: according as the holy man Job affirms in a
pittiefull discourse which he makes of the miseries of man's life in these
words. Job. 14.
A man borne of a woman, living but a small time, is replenished with many
miseries, he comes forth like a flower, and withers away out of hand:
his days pass away like a shadow, and he never continues in one state. But
now to pass over all other miseries, what thing is there in the world more
fickle and mutable than man? They say that the Cameleon changes him self in
one hour into many and diverse colors: And the Sea called Euripus is by
reason of his often chaunges accounted very infamous: The Moon has likewise
for every day a peculiar form and shape: But what is all this in comparison
of the alterations of man? What protheus was ever changed into so many forms,
as man changes every hour? Sometimes he is sick, sometimes whole:
Sometimes contented, sometimes discontented: sometimes sorrowful, sometimes
merry: sometimes in good hope, sometimes in despair: sometimes suspicious,
sometimes secure: sometimes pleased, sometimes angry: sometimes he will, and
sometimes he will not: yea many times he knows not himself what he would
have. To be short, he alters, and changes himself so often as there be
accide^tes happeninge unto him every hour. For all such accidents do toss
and turmoyle him, each one in his several kind. That which is past is
ircksome unto him: that which is present troubles, and molesteth him: and that
which is to come, vexes, and disquieteth him. If he have neither lands, nor
goods, he lives in travel. If he have them he lives in pride: And if he
lose them, he lives in great grief, and sorrow. Now what Moon, or Sea, is
subject to so many chaunges, and alterations, as the life of man? The Sea
changes not but when the winds turn contrary unto it. But in man's life
whether it be wyndie, or calm weather, there be evermore diverse alterations
and storms.

Now what shall I say of the continual mouinge and wastinge of our life: Of
the continual mouinge and wastinge of our life.
What minute of an hour passes, but that we go one step forewarde toward
our death? What other thing (trowest thou) is the mouinge of the heavens, but
as it were a very swifte wheel, which is continually spynninge, and windinge
up our life? For like as a roole of wolle is sponne upon a wheel, of the which
at every tourninge about, some part is wound up, at the first turn a
little, at the second turn a little more, and so forth at every turn,
until all be ended: so does the whiele of the heavens continually spynne,
and wind up our life, in that at every tourninge that it makes, a piece of
our life is sponne, and wound up. And therefore holy Job says: That his
days were more swyft, Job. 9.
than one that rydeth in ^^st. For he that rides in post, though his m^^^^ge
require never so much haste, yet some^^^^^ necessity causes him to stay. But
our ly^^ ^euer staieth, neither will it give us so much liberty, as the space
of one hour of rest.

Whereunto S. Jerome agrieth very well sayeinge: S. Jerome.
Whatsoever I go about, what soever I write, what soever I read over again,
and correct, each thing takes away from me some part of my life. And look
how many points and minumes the notarie writes, so many are the losses and
decreasinges of my life. Insomuche that like as they that sail in a ship,
whether they stand or sit, are always goeinge and sailinge, and do ever
approach nearer, and nearer to the end of their navigations: even so in this
life all the time that we live, we walk, and sail still forwards approchinge
nearer, and nearer, to the common haven and end of our navigations, which is
death.

Our life is a continual walkinge toward death, and the hour of our death
is the dreadful hour of our judgment.
Now then if our life be nothing elz, but a continual walkinge toward
death? If the hour of death be also the dreadful hour of our judgment? What
other thing is our whole life, but only a continual walking toward the
tribunal seat of almighty God, and an approchinge every hour nearer and
nearer unto his judgment? Now what greater madness may there be, than for us
goeynge actually to be judged, to offend him (as we be goeynge in the way
thitherwardes) that must give sentence upon us: and so by our offenses provoke
his anger more and more against us? Open thine eyes therefore (o thou miserable
man) and consider the way that thou take: think well with thy self whither
thou art goeynge: and be ashamed, or at least take compassion of thy self,
and consider how evil this that thou do, agrieth with that which thou go
to do.

Of the deceitfulnes of our life. VI.
I cowlde well bear with all these miseries of our life, if it had not yet an
other misery (in my judgment) far greater and worse than all these: which
is, that it is deceitful, and seems in appearance otherwise, than it is in
very deed. For as it is true, that is commonly said, that Feigned holiness is
a double iniquity: even so is it also most certainly true, that Deceitful
felicity is a double misery. For if this life would show it self plainly
as it is in deed, and make no lie at all unto us, undoubtedly we would
neither loose our selves for it, nor yet trust unto it, but would always live
ready prepared against it. But verily it is so full of hypocrisy and deceit,
that whereas it is indeed filthy, it is nevertheless sold unto us for
beautiful, and being short, it seems unto us very long, and whereas it
changes it self every hour, it bears a countenance, as though it
continued always firm and stable in one same state. Do thou perceive
(says S. Jerome) when thou wast made an infant? S. Jerome.
Can thou tell when thou wast made a striplinge? or when thou came to man's
state? or when thou begannest to wax an old man? Good Lord what a wonder is
this, that every day we die, and every day we alter and change, and yet
for all this we persuade our selves very fondelie that we shall live here for
evermore.

Upon this affiance were those proud, and sumptuous buildinges of the
Magare^ces built, of whom a certain Philosopher says, that they builded as
though they should live for ever, The cause why many be so careful to
provide for this world, and so careless and negligent to prepare them selves to
dye.
and they lived as though they should dye the next day. Whereof (I pray you)
comes so great forgetfulness of almighty God? so great covetousness? so great
vanity? so great carefulnes in purchasinge, and heapinge together of lands
and riches? and so great negligence in preparinge our selves to die? but that
we believe and persuade our selves that our life shall be very long and endure a
great time? This false imagination makes us to believe, that we have time
enough for all things: for the world, for pleasures, for vanities, for vices,
and for many other vain, and curious exercises: and that yet after all this,
we shall have time enough also before we dye, to provide our account ready,
and to make our attonemente with almighty God. Insomuch that like as we make
our account of a piece of clothe when it lies upon a table before us,
appointinge one piece for one purpose, and an other piece for an other: even so
do we make an account of our lives, as though we our selves had the seignorie
and government of times, and might dispose both of them, and of our life, at
our own will and pleasure. This fond deceit growethe of a secreat persuasion
and affiance, that every man has within himself, grownded not upon any
reason, or true foundation, but only upon self love. The which as it hates
and abhors death exceadinglie, so will it in no case have any remembrance of
it, nor be persuaded, that it will come so soon to his house as to other men's.
And all this is for auoydinge of the great pain, and grief, which he would
conceive if he believed it in very deed. we can easelie be persuaded that
others will dye within a short time but we will not believe but that we our
selves shall live very long.
And hereof it comes, that he is easily induced to believe, that other folks
shall die within a short space. For as he is not greatly in love with the^, so
is not the knowledge of that truth so sowere, and vnlikinge unto him, but that
he can easelie believe it. But as towchinge himself, he makes an other manner
of account. For as he loves himself exciedingly, so is he very loathe to
believe a thing, that may be occasion of so great pain, and grief unto him
as the same would be. But we see daily that such persons are oftentimes fowly
deceived, and that their dreams turn clean contrary to their fond
imaginations. For as towchinge others, of whose lives they had small hope that
they should have any long continuance, they live a longer time, than they
ever imagined they could have done: And they themselves that thought to live,
and remain here a long while, do lead the dance, and depart out of this
world before the^. So that it fares with the^, as with young sea men, that
begin to sail in the Sea, who when they come forth of the haven mowth, it
seems unto them, that the land and howses do depart away from them (which
is nothing so) but contrariewise, it is they themselves that move, and depart
away, and the land remains still in his old place.

Of the miseries of man's life. VII.
ALTHOUGH our life be subject to all these miseries before rehearsed, yet if
that little time of life, were wholly life indeed, it were somewhat: but the
greatest misery of all is, that the life which a man has to live, whether it
be short, or long, is altogether subject to such a number of miseries, and
calamities, both of body, and mind, as it may more truly be termed death
than life.

Wherefore according as a Poet said very well: Not to live, but to pass the
life well, is life. So that although this life be very sparynge, and short in
all other things: yet in troubles and miseries it is very plentiful, and
long. Undoubtedly our life is but short, respectinge the life it self: and
if we respect the time of enioyenge it, it is yet much shorter: but if we
consider, how insufficient it is toward the atteyninge of wisdom, it is
little, or nothing at all. Howbeit although it be indeed very short for all
good things, yet in one thing only I find it long, that is, in bearinge of
pain, and misery. O dangerous strait, in which the less time thou have to
pass the more peril and danger thou have in the passage! Certainly if we
had eyes to consider our selves, and to see our own case, we should always
go weepinge, and lamentinge our own state, as men condemned by the just
judgment of almighty God to suffer such great miseries. But that our misery
might be yet more increased on every side, this misery is added to all the
rest, that being in miserable case, we live like men in a frenzy, and do
neither feel nor understand our own misery, and wretchedness. Heralitus.
Domocritus.
Those two Philosophers Heraclitus, and Democritus, although they were infidels
perceived the same better than we do, of whom it is reported, that the one
passed his life always weepinge, and the other always laughinge, for so much as
they saw clearly that all our life was nothing else, but mere vanity, and
misery.

If thou dowte of this, tell me (I pray thee) what mean all these carkes, and
cares, wherein men do live? What a number of infinite sorrows, griefs,
anguishes, fears, passions, suspicions, malices, with other the like
tribulations, and afflictions, is the soul of man subject unto? Unto all which
passions man is so prone, that many times he is in a passion without any
cause: and fears, where there is no cause at all to fear: and when there is
no other man to vex and tormente him outwardly, he then vexes, and
tormenteth himself inwardly: as holy Job confessed in these words when he
said: why have thou (o Lord) set me against thee? Job. 7.
I am become ircksome, and burdensome even to mine own self.

Of the external miseries of the body.
Now as towchinge the external miseries of the body, who is able to number
them? How great labor and pain must we take to gain a piece of bread,
whereby to sustein our lives? The very birds and brute beasts are fed
without any occupation, labor, or pain: but man is constrained to sweat day
and night and to turmoyle both by Sea, and land, to get his living. This is
that misery, which the Prophet lamented, when he said: Psalm. 89.
The days of our life consume away like the spyders web. For like as the
spyder labors day and night, in spynninge of her web, wastinge even her
own bowels, and consuminge her self to bring it to an end, and all this
long and costly travel is ordained to none other purpose, but only to make a
fine and tender nett, to catch flies withal: even so the seely miserable man
does nothing elz, but labor, and toil, night, and day, both with body and
mind: and all this his travel serves to none other end, but only to catch
flies: I mean to procure vain and trifelinge things, and of very small
valewe. And sometimes it falls so out, that after much trauailinge up, and
down, and great labor, and pains taken therein, when the web is fully
finished and browght to an end, there comes suddenly a blusteringe blast of
wind, that carries away the web, and the owner with all: and so both the
work, and the workman perish who lie together at one instant.

And yet were it so, that with all these paynfull travels, and labors, Our
short life is not safe and secure, (...) ^^^^nite dangers, and diseases.
our life were safe and secure, then our misery should not be so great as it
is, but though our life be secure from famine, and honger: yet is it not from
the plague, and pestilence, and from infinite other dangers, and diseases,
that do daily and howrelie assault us. Who is able to number how many kinds
and diversities of diseases nature has ordained for man's body? The books of
the physicians are full fraught with the declaration of diverse diseases, and
remedies for the same. And yet we see, that their science increases every
day with the coming of new and strange diseases, insomuche as the number
of the diseases, whereof we have presently experience, were utterly unknown
unto the ancient physicians, that were in times past. And yet emonge all these
remedies scarcely shall ye find one, that is pleasant or delectable: yea, and
there be many of them that are more irckesome and painful, than the very
sickness, or diseases them selves. Insomuche as one great tormente can not be
remedied, without an other greater than it.

And if there be any complexions so happy, as they have not been assaulted
with these kind of miseries, yet are they not secure and exempte from other
calamities, and mischaunces, wherewithal we see those men to be daily
molested, that have not been much vexed with sickness and diseases. How many
thowsandes of men (trow ye) are drowned every day in the Sea? How many are
deuowred in wars? How many are endaungered by earthequakes? How many with
ouerflowinges of rivers, and great waters? How many with fallinge down of
howses? How many with the stinginge and strikinge of venomous beasts? How
many woeful women in travail of their children do purchase full dearly
their childrens lives, with their own painful deaths?

Now although it be so, that the brute beasts do fight against us, and
although in a manner all things that were made to serve us, be no less noisome
than serviceable unto us, (yea rather it seems that they all have as it were
conspired against us:) yet for all this I say there might be some remedy
found, if men would accord and agree together emonge them selves, and were
as conformable in peace, as they are in nature. But alas it is far otherwise.
For eue^ they themselves are in arms against them selves: Emonge all creatures
man is most cruel against the companion of his own nature.
and emonge all creatures in the world, there is none against whom man is more
cruelly bent, than against the companion of his own nature. How many kinds of
engines, artillarie, munition, and weppons have men invented to defend them
selves, and to offend others? How many are daily spoiled of their lives by
the cruel swoorde of their enemies? How many threatninges, robberies,
injuries, wounds, deaths, reproaches, sclaunders, and emprisonmentes, do men
daily sustain by the malice, and cruelty of other men? We see that neither
the land, nor the sea, nor the high ways, nor the common streets, are free
from theiues, robbers, murderers, pirates, and enemies. The cruel anger and
rage of the furyous man is at all times ready to be revenged of his enemy, yea
and he takes great pleasure in it. What mean so many kind of weapons? Such
diversity of artillarie? Such store of munition? Such abundance of gonpowder?
So many deuisors and inuentors of new kinds of stratagemes, and cruel
practices of war, but only to multiply, and increase on every side the
miseries, and calamities of ma^kinde? Insomuch as when we are not molested with
the aier, nor with the elements, we are persecuted by the companions of our
own very nature. It is written of one only man called Julius Caesar, Julius
Caesar.
(who emonge all the Emperors was most commended for clemency) that even he
alone with his armies slew in diverse battles, above a million, and a hundred
thousand men. Consider now how many more would he have slain, if he had been
cruel, saying he slew so many being commended, and praised for a very
gentle, and merciful prince?

Tullye also makes mention of a notable Philosopher who wrote a book
concerning the deaths of men, Tullye.
wherein he rehearses many occasions of men's deaths, that have happened in
the world: as by fluddes, plagues, pestilences, destructions of Cities,
concourse of wild beasts, which coming suddenly upon some nations, have
utterly slain and deuowred them. And yet after all this he concludes, that a
far greater number of men have been destroyed by men, than be all the other
kinds of calamities, though they were all joined together. Now what thing can
be more ruethfull, and of greater grief and admiration than this? This is that
politic and sociable creature, that is borne without nails, without weapons,
and without poison, to live in peace and concord with other living creatures:
and yet he is full of hatred, cruelty, and desire of reuengement.

Of the miseries incident unto all the ages and states of this life.
But now if we would make a discourse, and run throughout the miseries that
are incident to all the ages, and states of this life, we should find our
selves to be yet in far worse case. How full of ignorance is the time of our
infancy? How light, and wanton are we when we grow to be striplinges? How
rash, and headlonge be we in the time of our youth? How heavy, and unwieldy,
when we wax old men? What else is an infant, but a brute beast in the form of
a man? What is a young boie but as it were a wild untamed colte and unbridled?
What is a heavy, and unwieldy old man, but even a sack stuffed with greifes,
and diseases? The greatest desire that men have, is to live until they be
old: at which age a man is in far worse case, than in all his lyfetime
before, and then he stands in most need, and has least help, and succoure.
For the old man is forsaken of the world: He is forsaken of his own
kinsfolk, friends, and acquaintance: He is forsaken of his own members, and
senses: yea he forsakes himself, in that the very use of reason forsakes
him. And he is only accompanied with his paynefull aches, greifes, and
diseases. For his company and conversation is then very ircksome and
troublesome to the whole house where he dwells. This is the marcke for sooth
whereupon the eye of man is so earnestly fixed: this is the happy state,
which all men do so griedelie desire: and hereunto tends the worldly
felicity, and the ambition of long life.

As concerning the states of men we should never make an end, There is little
conte^tation in the states of men, and each one desires to change his state
with the states of others.
if we should rehearse the little contentation that is to be found in each of
them, and the great desire that every one has to change his own state, and
condition, with the state of others: thinkinge that he should have greater
hearts ease in an other man's state, than he has in his own. And thus do men
continually vex, and turmoyle themselves like unto a sick man, that does
nothing else but tomble and toss in his bed from one side to an other,
perswadinge himself that by means of these often chaunges and remouinges, he
shall find more ease and rest than he had before, and yet he finds in very
deed that he is fowlie deceived: For So Much as the cause of his disquietnes
rests within him self, which is his own grief, and disease.

To conclude, such is the miserable state and condition of this life that the
Wise man had good cause to say: Eccles. 40.
Great and heavy is the yooke, that the children of Adam carry on their
necks, even from the day they come forth of their mothers womb, until the
day of their burial, which is the common mother of all. S. Barnarde.
And S. Barnarde was not affraied to say, that he thought this life little
better than the life of hell it self, were it not for the hope we may here
have to atteyne unto the kyngedome of heaven.

The miseries of this life are ordained as a punnishmente for sin, and to
withdraw our hearts from the inordinate love of this life.
And albeit all these miseries do come unto us as a punnishement for sin:
yet was it a very merciful and medicinable punnishement. For the providence
of almighty God did so ordain it, meaning thereby to withdraw and separate
our hearts from the inordinate love of this life. The very cause why he put so
much bitter mustarde upon the breasts of this life, was to weane us from it.
The cause why he suffered our life to become so filthy, was that we should
not set our love upon it. The cause why he would have us to be molested and
vexed so often times in this life, was that we might the more willingly
forsake it, and sighe continually for the true life, which is in the world
to come. For if we be so unwilling to forsake this life, Exodus 16.
being wholye so miserable as it is: if we be now ever whymperinge, and
whyninge for the fruits, and fleashpottes of Egypt, what would we do, if al
our life were sweet, and pleasant? And what would we do, if it were wholly
likinge and delitefull to our taste, and appetite? Who would then (trow ye)
contemn it for Gods sake? Who would then exchange it for heaven? Philip. 1.
Who would then say with S. Paul, I have a desire to be loosed from this
fleashe, and to be with Christ?

Of the last misery of man: which is death. VIII.
AFTER all these miseries, succeeds the last, and of all others most
terrible, which is death. This is that misery, whereof a certain Poet
lamented, sayeinge: The best days of mortal men are those that pass first
away, and then succedeth a number of sicknesses, and diseases, and with them
heavy and doleful age, and continual trouble, and above all the sharpenes of
cruel death. This is the lodge and end of man's life, whereof holy Job
said: I know well o Lord, Job, 30.
that thou will deliver me over to death, where there is a house prepared for
all men living.

How many the miseries are that be included in this misery alone, I will not
take upon me to declare at this present. Only I will rehearse what a certain
holy father says by way of exclamation against death in this wise. O death
how bitter is the remembrance of thee? How quickly and suddenly stealest thou
upon us? How secret are thy paths and ways? How doutfull is thy hour? And
how universal is thy seignorie, and dominion? The mighty can not escape thy
hands: the wise can not hide them selves from thee: and the strong loose
their strength in thy presence. Thou accomptest no man rich, for so much as no
man is able to ransom his life of thee for money. Thou go every where,
thou searchest every where, and thou art every where. Thou witherest the
herbs: thou drinkest up the winds: thou corruptest the aier: thou chaungest
the ages: thou alterest the world: thou stickest not to sup up the sea: all
things do increase and diminishe, but thou continuest always at one stay.
Thou art the hammer that always strikes: Job. 1^^.
thou art the sword the never blunteth: thou art the snare whereinto every
one falls: thou art the prison wherein every one enters: thou art the sea
wherein all do perish: thou art the pain that every one suffers: and the
tribute that every one paieth.

O cruel death why have thou not compassion of us, but come stealinge
sodenlie upon us, to snatche us away in our best times, and to interrupt our
affaieres when they are well begone and brought to a good forwardnes? Thou
robbest from us in one hour, as much as we have gained in many years. Thou
cuttest of the succession of kinredes, and families. Thou leauest kingdoms
without any heirs. Thou fillest the world with wydowes, and orphans: thou
breakest of the studies of great clerckes: thou ouerthrowest good wits in
their rypest age: thou ioynest the end with the beginning, without geuinge
place to the myddle. To conclude, thou art such a one, as almighty God
wassheth his hands of thee, and clears himself in plain words, saying:
Sap. 1. and 2.
That he never made thee, but that thou had thine entry into the world by
the very envy and craft of the devil.

What fruit, and commodity, may be taken of the foresaied considerations. XI.
THESE are the miseries of our life with infinite others: the consideration
whereof a man ought to direct unto two principal ends emonge others: in word
what the glory of this world is? Mark and consider with attention the state
and condition of man's life, and thereby shalt thou perceive, what the glory
of this life is. Tell me (I pray thee) can the glory of man be more long or
more stable than the life of man? It is most certain that it can not. For this
glory is an accident, which is grownded upon this life, as upon his subject,
or foundation, and therefore when the foundation and subject fails, the
accidents must needs fail withal. The riches pleasures and delites of this
life cannot contynewe any longer than the life it self.
And for this very cause no riches, no pleasures, not delights can co^tinewe
any longer time with a man than until his grave. For So Much as then fails the
foundation, whereupon all these things are built, and have their stay, which
foundation is our life. Now tell me then, if this life be such as thou have now
heard described unto thee: to wit: short, uncertain, frail, inconstante,
deceitful, and miserable, how long can the buildinge endure, that shall be
framed upon this foundation? How long can the accidents continewe, that
shall be grounded upon so weak a substance? When thou have considered this point
well with thy self, thou must needs say, that they shall endure no longer
than the foundation and substance it self endures: and thou must needs
confess, that many times they endure not so long: as we see by daily
experience in the goods of fortune, which with many men have an end before
their life ends.

Now if that sayeinge of the Poet Pindarus be true: to wit, That this life is
no more, but a dream of a shadow, What think thou then is the glory of
this world, which is of shorter continuance than our life? What account
would thou make of a goodly buildinge, in case it stood upon a false
foundation? What account would thou make of an image of wax, very richly
and curiously wrought, in case it were set against the son, where it is
certain that so soon as the wax should be molten, forthwith the form of
the image would utterly be defaced, and leese his beauty? Why do we make
so little account of the beauty of a flower, but because it grows upon so
weak a subject? For so soon as it is nypt of from the stalk, incontinently
it loses his fair gloss and beauty? It is not possible to have beauty of
any firm continuance in a matter so frail, and corruptible. It follows
therefore that the glory of man is such as the life of man is. For although
glory do continewe after the end of our life, yet what shall that glory
avail him that has no sense, nor feelinge thereof? What does it avail
Homere now whilst thou so highelie praisest and commendest his Iliades?
Undoubtedly no more but as S. Jerome says speakinge of Aristotle, Woo be unto
thee Aristotle, that art praised where thou art not, to wit, here in the
world: and art tormented where thou art indeed: to wit, in hell.

Other inestimable commodities may thou gather out of this consideration.
For if thou do consider all these miseries with good attention, thine eyes
shall be opened forthwith, and thou shall wonder at the great blindness of men,
yea the very straungenes of it shall cause thee to say to thy self: Good
Lord, what cause is there, why this miserable lignage of Adam should wax
proud! From whence comes such puffinge and arrogancy of mind, such hawtie
and lofty courages, so great contempt of others, such estimation of our
selves, and so great forgetfulness of almighty God? What cause have thou to be
proud thou dust, and ashes? Why do thou magnify, and advance thy self
thou seely wretch of the earth? Why do thou not hold down thy peacockes
tail, beholdinge thy foul feet, to wit, the vylenes of thy state and
condition? What cause have thou to seek so carefully for the glory of this
world, saying it is myngled with so many miseries? What thing is there so
sweet, but that it may be made bitter with the mixture of so many sower, and
bitter sawces?

Moreover, if this life be a vale of tears, a prison of guilty persons, and a
bannishement of them that be comdemned, how can thou settle so great
vanity, so great pomp, and pride of the world, such gaye ornaments, and
stately furniture of houses, and families, in the place of tears? How can
thou imagine to make this a place of pastymes, and pleasures, of feasts, and
bankettes? How can thou be so diligente to heap so greidelie together for
the provision of this world, and be so forgetful of the world to come, as if
thou were borne only to live here in earth with brute beasts, and had no
part in heaven with the Angels. Suerlie I must neides say, that thou art very
much wedded to misery, and that thou came out of a meruaylous miserable
stock, if so many arguments of the miseries of this world be not able to
open thine eyes, and make thee to discern so gross and so palpable a
blindenes,

Christogram I H S



WENSDAIE NIGHT. OF THE HOUR OF DEATH. depiction of Christ O mors quam amara
est memoria tua homini pacem habenti in subst^^^ suis. Eclesi. 4^.1.

Gens absque consilio est, et sine prudentia, vtinam saperent. et
intelligerent, ac nouissima prouiderent. Deuter. 32. 28.


THIS DAY (WHEN THOU HAVE MADE THE SIGN OF the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the hour of death: which is one of the
most profitable consideratio^s, that a Christian man may have, as well for the
obteyninge of true wisdom, and eschewinge of sin: as also to move him to
begin to prepare him self in time for the hour of death.

BUT to the intent that this consideration may be proffitable unto thee, it
shall behoue thee to make thy petition unto almighty God, beseachinge him to
grant thee some feelinge of such things as are wo^t to pass in this last
conflicte: that thou may dispose of thy lands, and goods accordingly, and
direct thy life in such sort, as at that time thou would wish thou had
done. Now therefore that thou may have the better feelinge in this matter,
think upon it, not as thou would of a thing that were to come, but as it
were even now present: and think upon it, not as of a thing, that
apperteyneth to others, but as of a thing that belongs properly to thine
own self, making this account, that thou lie now very sickly, and weak
in thy bed, and in such a dangerous case, that thou art utterly forsaken of
thy physicians, and that they are all persuaded that thou will die within few
hours.

Of the uncertainty of the houer of our death.
in which death will assault thee. For thou know not, neither what day, nor
in what place, nor how thou shall be disposed when death shall come unto thee.
Only this thou know for most certain, that die thou shall: all the rest is
uncertain, sauinge that ordinarily this hour is wont to steal upon us at
such a time, as a man is most careless, and thinks least of it.

Secondlye, consider what a separation shall Of the separation from all
worldly things, and of the partinge of the soul from the body, at the hour
of our death.
not only between us and all the things we love in this world, but also even
between the soul and the body, which have been such ancient, and louinge
companions. If it be thought so grievous a matter, to be banished out of our
native country, and from the natural aier in which a man has been bredde and
brought up, although the banished man might carry away with him what soever
he loves: how much more grievous then shall that universal bannishement be
from all things that we have, from our lands, from our goods, from our
house, from wife, father, mother, children, kinsfolk, friends, and
acquaintance, from this light, and common aier, yea to be short from all
things of this world? If an ox make so great a bellowinge at what time he is
separated from an other ox, with whom he has been used to be yoked, and to
draw in the ploughe: what a bellowinge will thy heart then make, when death
shall separate thee from all those things, wherewith thou have been yoked, and
carried the burdens of this life?

Consider also what a grievous pain it shall Of the pain that is at the hour
of our death, to consider what shall then become of our body and soul.
when a certain representation shall be made unto his mind foreshewinge in what
case his body and soul shall be after his death. For as towchinge the body, he
knows for certain already, that though it has been heretofore neuersomuch
cherished and honored, yet there shall no better provision be made for it, but
only a hoole seven foot long, where it shall remain in company of other
dead bodies. But as concerning the soul, he knows not certainly what shall
becomme of it, what considerations may move us at the houer of death both to
hope, and fear.
nor what lotte shall fall unto it. For although the hope which he has in the
mercy of almighty God may strengthen and comfort him: yet the consideration
of his own sins may dismaie him, and make him afraied: especially if he
consider withal the great justice of almighty God, and the profoundnes of
his judgments, who uses oftentimes to cross his hands, and to alter the
lottes of men. Luc. 23.
The theiffe went up from the cross to paradise: Math. 27.
and Judas fell down from the honorable dignity of Apostelshippe into hell
fire. Manasses also after his so many abominations, 2. Paral. 33.
and wickedness, obtained grace to become repentant: And as yet we know not
whether Solomon obtained the like for all his virtues. This is one of the
greatest grieffes, and angwishes, that men are commonly trowbled withal at
the hour of death: to understand, that there is to ensue glory everlasting,
and pain everlasting, and that then a man is so near both unto the one, and
to the other, and yet knows not whether of these two lottes being so far
different as they are, shall fall unto his share. Of the particular accounte we
must make to almighty God at the houer of our death of all our whole life.
Arsenius.


After this angwishe there follows an other no less then this: to wit: the
particular account of all our whole life which at the very hour of every
man's death must be made unto almighty God. This account is so dreadful, that
it causes even the most stowtest men that are to tremble and qwake for very
fear. It is written of the famous holy father Arsenius, that being at the
point of death, he began to be afraied, whereat his scholars meruayled and
said unto him: What father are you now afraid of your account? Unto whom he
answered: yea yea my sons, this fear is no new thing in me: for I have
always lived with the same. At that time all the sins of a man's former life
are represented unto him, like a squadrone of enemies ready set in battle
arrye to assault him. Then are the greatest sins and those wherein he has
taken greatest delight represented most lively unto him, and are the cause of
greater fear. Then comes the young virgin to his mind, which he has
dishonored: Then come the maids and howsholde servants, whom he has
solicited and provoked to lewdnes: Then come the poor folks whom he has
iniuried and evil entreated: Then come his neighbors whom he has offended:
Then shall there cry out against him, not the blood of Abell, Genes. 4.
but the precious blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, which he shed when he
gave scandale and offense to his neighbor. And if his cause must be adjudged
according to the law, that says: Eye, for eye: Exodus 21.
tooth for tooth: and wound, for wound: what shall he look for, that by his
evil counsel or lewd example has been the occasion of the loss of a
Christian soul, if he be judged by that law? O how bitter shall the
remembrance of the delights and pleasures past be at that time unto him, which
at other times seemed so sweet? Undoubtedly the Wiseman had very good cause to
say: Proverb. 23.
Look not upon the wine when it is read, and when it shewethe his coullour in
the glass: for although at the time of drinkinge it seem delectable, yet at
the end it will byte like a serpent, and poison like a cockatrice. O that men
would understand, how true a saying this is, that we have here rehearsed!
What serpents stinge is there that does so prycke and and vex a man, as the
dreadful remembrance of his pleasures past shall do at the hour of his
death? These are the dregs of that poisoned cup of the enemy. Ierem. 51.
These be the leauinges of the cup of Babylon, Apoc. 14.
that seems so gaylie gilted in outward appearance.

After this there follows the Sacrament of How the Catholic Church
comforts and helps the sick person with Sacraments, and prayers, at his
departure our of this world.
which is the last succor, and relief that our mother the Catholic Church
may help us withal in that troublesome time. And as well herein, as in the
other things, thou have to consider what great greiffe and anguishe of mind
the sick person shall then abide in calling to mind his wicked and sinful
life: and how gladly he wishethe at that time that he had taken a better way:
and what an awstere kind of life he would then determine to lead, if he
might have time to do the same: and how feign he would then enforce himself
to call upon almighty God, and to desire him of help and succor. Howbeit the
very pain, grief, and continual increasinge of his syckenes and death will
scarcely permit him so to do.

Consider then also those last accidents, Of the pa^ges of death.
(which be as it were the messingers of death) how fearful and terrible they
be. How at that time the sick man's breast pants: his voice waxes hoarce:
his feet begin to die: his knees wax cold, and stiff: his nostrels run
out: his eyes sincke into his head: his countenance looks pale, and wanne:
his tongue faultereth, and is not able to do his office: finally by reason of
the have of the departure away of the soul out of the body, all his senses
are sore vexed, and troubled, and they do utterly leese their force, and
virtue.

But above all, the soul is then in most Of the great pain and agony the
soul abides at her departure out of the body.
and suffers greatest greifes, and troubles. For at that time she is in a
very great conflicte, and agony: partly for her departure from the body:
and partly for fear of her dreadful account, which is then to be made.
Because she is naturally loathe to depart from the body, and she likes well
her lodginge, and is in very great dread to come to her account before
almighty God.

Now when the soul is thus departed out of the fleashe, yet there remain two
voiages for thee to make with him: the one, to accompany the body until it
be laid in his grave, the other, to follow the soul until her cause be
determined. And thou have to consider diligently what shall become of each
one of these two parts.

Of the funeralles and buryenge of the body.
Consider now in what plight the body is after the soul has forsaken it: and
what a worthy garment they provide to wind it in, and what haste his friends
and executors do make to get him quickly rydde away out of the house.
Consider also the funerals, with all the other circumstances that are wont to
happen therein: The often ringinge of the belles: the goinge about of the
belman cryinge unto the people to pray for his soul: the questionynge in the
streates one of an other, who is dead: the diriges, and doleful service of the
Church: the accompanyinge of his corpse to the Church: and mourninge of his
wife, children, kynsfolke, servants, and friends for him: and finally all the
other particulars, that are then wont to happen until the body be laid and
left in the grave, where it shall lie buried until it be raised again by the
terrible sownde of the trompet at the general day of judgment. And such is
the great change and alteration in worldly affairs that it may so come to
pass, as a time may happen, when some buildinge may be made near unto thy
grave, (be it never so gaie, and sumptuous,) and that they may dig for some
earth out of the same to make mortar for a wall, and so shall thy seely
body (being now changed into earth) become afterward an earthen wall,
although it be at this present the most noble body and most delicately
cherished of all bodies in the world. And how many bodies of Kings and
Emperors trowest thou have come already to this promotion.

Now when thou have left the body in the what beco^methe of the soul, after
it is departed out of the body.
go from thence forthwith and follow after the soul: and consider what way
it takes through that new region: whither it goes: what shall everlastingly
become of it for ever, and ever: and what judgment it shall have. Imagine that
thou art now present at this judgment, and that thou see all the whole
cowert of heaven to expecte the end of this sentence, Eccles. 12. verse. 14.
Job. 14.13. Job. 31.14.23.
where the soul shall give a particular acco^pte, and be chardged and
dischardged of all that he has received, even to the valewe of a pinnes
point, yea, Math. 12.36. Math. 19.17. Romans 2.6. 1. Co. 4.4. 1. Cor. 9.27. 2.
Cor. 5.10. Ephesians. 6.8. Philip. 2.12. Haeb. 9.27. 1. Peter. 4.18. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Apoc. 2.23. Apoc. 14.7.13.
and (as our Savior himself affirms) of every idell word. There an
account shall be required of his life, of his lands, and riches: of his
howseholde, and family: of the inspiratio^s of almighty God: of the means
and opportunity he has had to lead a virtuous and godly life: and above
all, he shall be streitelie examined what estimation he has made of the most
precious blood of our savior Christ: and of the use of his Sacraments. And
there shall every man be judged according to the account he shall make of the
gifts and graces he has received of almighty God.

THE THIRD TREATISE, WHEREIN IS TREATED OF THE consideration of death: Where
the former meditation is declared more at lardge.
THE consideration of death is very profitable for many purposes, and
espetially for three. First for the obteyninge of true wisdom: that is, to
know how a man ought to govern, and frame his life. For (as the Philosophers
do say) in things that are ordained to any end, The consideration of death
causes a man to govern and frame his life.
the rule and measure whereby to direct them, is to be taken of the same end,
and therefore when men do either build, or Sail, or do any thing, they
have always their eye fixed upon the end which they pretend, and according
to the same do frame and direct all the rest of their doings. Now
consideringe that emonge the ends and terms of our life, death is one of
them (whither we go all to take our rest) he that will endeavor to direct his
life in good order, let him fix his eyes upon this mark, and according to
the same let him dispose and direct all his affairs. Let him consider how
poor, and naked he must depart out of this world, and what a strait judgment
he must pass at the hour of his death, and how he shall lie in his grave all
betroden, and quyte forgotten of all men: and according to this end let him
consider how to frame and direct the whole order and course of his life. By
this rule a certain Philosopher governed, and directed his life that said:
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, Job. 2.
and naked must I return again to my grave: To what purpose then should I
lose my time, in purchasinge and heapinge together lands, and riches, seeing
nakedness shall be my end. For want of consideration of this our end do grow
all our errors, and deceites. Hereof comes our presumption, our pride, For
want of consideration of our death do grow all our fond errors and
deceites.
our covetousness, our pleasures, our nicenes, and delicatenes, and the vain
castelles and towers of wind, which we build upon sand. For if we would
consider, in what case we shall be after a few days when we are once lodged in
that poor selie cottage of our grave, we should be more humble, and more
temperat in our life. How cowlde he possiblye have any sparcke of presumption,
that would consider, that he shall be there dust, and ashes? How cowlde he
find in his heart to make a God of his belly, that would consider that he
shall become there worms meat? Who could ever be persuaded to occupy his
brain in such lofty and fantastical thoughts, and devices, if he did but
consider and wayghe how frail and weak the foundation is, whereupon all his
fond designementes are grownded? Who would endaunger the loss and
destruction of himself, in seekinge for riches both by land, and Sea, if he
considered that at his death he should carry no more with him, but a poor
windinge sheet? To conclude, all the works of our life would be dewlie
corrected and framed in good order, if we would measure and square them out by
this rule.

The life of a wise man, is a contynuall thinkinge of death.
For this cause the Philosophers said, that the life of a Wiseman was nothing
else but only a continual cogitation and thinkinge of death: for so much as this
consideration teaches a man what thing is somewhat, and what is nothing,
what he ought to follow, and what to eschew, according to the end whereunto
he must certaynelye arrive. It is written of those Philosophers called
Brackmanni, that they were so much given to think upon their end, that they
had their graves always open before the gates of their howses, to the intent
that both at their entry and goinge forth by them they might always be
mindful of this journey and passage of death.

Almighty God said unto the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 18.
that he should go down into a house where earth was wroughte, for that he
would there speak with him. Almighty God could have spoken with his Prophet
in any other place, but he chose to speak with him in that place, to give us
to understand, that the house of earth (which is our grave) is the school of
true wisdom, where almighty God is wont to teach those that be his. There
he teaches the^ how great is the vanity of this world: There he shows unto
the^ the misery of our fleashe, and the shortness of this life. And above al,
there he teaches them to know themselves, which is one of the most highest
points of Philosophy that may be learned. Wherefore (o thou man) descend
down with thy spirit into this house, and there shall thou see, To know a
man's self, is one of the highest points of philosophy.
who thou art: whereof thou art come: where thou shall rest: and wherein the
beauty of thy fleashe and glory of this world do end: so shall thou learn
to despise all those things, that the world has in reverence for want of
dew knowledge how to consider it. Because the world considers no more but
only the painted face of Iezabel, that shyned very bewtifully and gaylie at
the window: 4. Reg. 9. 3. Reg. 21.
It considers not the miserable extreme parts of her, which after that her
body was devoured with dogs, almighty God would have to remain whole,
that thereby we might see, that the world is an other manner of thing in deed
than it appears in outward show, and that we should in such wise consider
the face of it, as to be mindful also of the extreme greifes, and sorrows,
wherein the glory of it ends.

Secondlye, this consideration is a great help to cause us to eschew and
forsake sin, according as Ecclesiasticus witnesses, sayeinge: Eccles. 7.
Remember the last end and thou shall never sin. It is a great matter not to
sin, and a great remedy also for the same is for a man to remember that he
must die. S. John Climacus.
S. John Climacus writes of a certain monk, that being sore tempted with
the beauty of a woman, whom he had seen abroad in the world, and
understanding that she was dead, went to the grave where she was buried, and
rubbed a napkin in the stinkinge body of the dead woman. And he used always
afterward whenever the devil troubled him with any evil thought of her
to take the stinkinge napkin, and to put it to his nose, and say to him self:
Behold here thou miserable wretch the thing thou love, and behold here,
what end the delights and beawties of the world have. This was a great
remedy to overcome this sin. And the deep consideration of death is of no
less importance than it, S. Gregory.
as S. Gregory says: There is nothing that does so mortify the appetites
of this our perverse fleash, as to consider in what plight the same shall be
after it is dead.

The same holy father rehearses a like story of an other monk, who having
his table ready provided to go to dinner, to eat somewhat for the
refresshinge of his weak and weary body, chanced suddenly to have a
remembrance of death, which cogitation (even as though it had been a constable
or other like officer there ready to attache him) put him in such a terror,
and fear, that it caused him to refrain from his meat. Consider therefore
how much the remembrance of the dreadful acco^pte that we must make at the
hour of our death is able to work in the heart of a just man, saying it
caused this holy monk to abstain from a thing that is so lawful and
necessary to be done.

Certainly this is one of the most wonderful things in all the world, that
men knowinge so assuredly, Math. 12.36. Hebr. 9.27. 1. Pet. 4.18. Apoc.
14.7.13.
that at the very hour of their death, a particular account shall be required
of them of all their whole life, yea and of every idell word, will
notwithstanding run headlonge with such facility into sin. If a
waiefaringe man, having but one farthinge in his purse, should enter into an
inn, and placinge him self down at the table, should require of the host to
bring in Partridges, Capons, Phesauntes, and all other delicates, that may be
found in the house, and should suppe with very great pleasure, and
contentation, never remembringe that at the last there must come a time of
account: who would not take this fellow, either for a iester, or for a very
fool? Now what greater folly or madness can be) devised, than for men to give
them selves so looselye to all kinds of vices, and to sleep so sowndlie in
them, without ever remembringe, that shortly after at their departinge out of
their Inn, there shall be required of them a very strayt and particular
account of all their dissolute and wicked life?

Wherefore it is verelye to be thought, that the devil labourethe all he can
to make us utterly to neglecte and forgette the remembrance of our account,
The devil labors all he can to make us neglecte and forgette the account
we must make of all our whole life at the hour of our death.
that we must make at the very hour of our death, because he knows full
well, what great proffit and commodity would arise unto us by the continual
remembrance of the same. For otherwise how were it possible that men should
forget a thing that is so terrible, and fearful, yea such a thing, as they
know most assuredly will come, and steal very shortelie upon them at their
own howses. If we have but the least doubt or suspicion in the world of
losing a little wordly riches, or of some other like thing, it makes us
oftentimes very careful, and watchful, and causes us to lose both our
sleep, and our health. How happens it then that the remembrance of death
which as well to the body, as to the soul, is the most horrible and dreadful
thing that may come unto us, causes us not to be likewise very careful and
watchful in making provision beforehande for the coming of it? Suerlie it
seems unto me a thing very much to be meruayled at that men should be so
careful as they be in tryfles, and matters of small importance, and live so
negligently, and without all care in things that are of so great importance
unto them as is their everlasting salvation or damnation.

The consideration of our death provoke us not only to live a good life,
but also to dye well.
Thirdly, this consideration of our death is a great help not only to provoke
us to live a good life, (as it has been saiede,) but besides that to die well.
In things that be hard, and difficult, foresighte and preparation beforehande
is a very great help to bring them well to pass. Now so great a leap as is
the leap of death, (which reaches from this life to the everlasting life to
come) can not well be leaped unless we make a great course, and fetch a long
race to run the same. No great thing can be well and perfitlie done at the
first time. Saying therefore it is so great a matter to die, and so necessary
to die well, it shall be very expedient for us to die oftentimes in our life,
that we may die well at the very time of our death. The soldiers that be
appointed to fight do first practice themselves in such feats, and exercises,
as whereby they may learn in time of peace, what they must do in time of
war. The horse also that must run at the Tilte trauerseth all the grownde
before, and tries all the steps thereof, that at such time as he comes to
make his cowerse he be not found new and strange in doyinge his feate.
Wherefore since we all must needs run this cowerse (for so much as there is no
man alive but must die,) consideringe also that the way is so obscure and
stony (as all men know,) and the danger so great that whosoever falls
shall be tombled down headlonge into the bottomless pit of hell fire, it shall be
requisite that we do now tread diligentelie beforehand all this way, and
consider particularly all the steps and places thereof one by one, for so much
as in every one of them there is much to be considered.

And let us not think it enoughe to consider only what passes outwardelye
about the sick man's bed, but let us endeavor much more to understand what
passes inwardly within his heart.

Of the uncertainty of the hour of death: And what a grief it is at that
time to depart from all things of this life. I.
TO begin now even from the beginning of this conflicte: Consider how when
death shall come upon thee, Deyth steals upon us at such a time as we think
least of it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
it will come at such a time, as when thou think thy self in most safety,
and suspectest least of the coming thereof, as we see by experience it is
wont to happen unto many. The day of our Lord (says the Apostle) shall come
like a thieffe: Which watches always to come at such times, as men are most
careless, and think themselves in most safety, that it may take us upon a
sodeine at unawares. And so we see it happens most often, that even at that
time when men do least think to dye, and when they are least mindful of
their departure out of this life, yea when they cast their accomptes before
hand to make great purchases, and buildinges, and to set upon great
enterprises of many days, and years, then comes death suddenly upon them,
and disapointeth them of all their vain hopes, and designementes, and utterly
overthrows all their fond imaginations and buildinges, which they made in
the aier. And so is that saying fulfilled of the holy king. Esa. 38.
My life (says he) was cut of like as the weauer cutteth of his thread:
while I was as yet in the beginning he cut me of: from morninge to eueninge
thou will make an end of me.

The first stroke of death is the fear of death.
The first stroke wherewith death is wont to strike, is the fear of death.
Suerlie this is a very great anguishe unto him that is in love with his life:
and this forewarninge is such a great grief unto a man, that oftentimes his
carnal frie^des do use to dissemble it, and will not have the sick man to
believe it, least it should vex and disquiet him: and this they will do
sometimes although it be to the prejudice and destruction of his miserable
soul. King Saul had a very stowte and valiant courage: but after that the
shadow of Samuel appeared unto him, and had told him, that he should die in
the battle, addinge moreover these words: 1 Reg. 28.
Tomorrowe both thou and thy sons shall be here with me: The fear and terror
which he conceived at these tidinges was so great, that at that very instant he
lost all his force and courage, and fell down to the ground as a dead man.
Now what a grief will it be to a man, that is in love with this life, when
such like news shall be signified unto him? For immediately upon this
denuntiation there shall be represented unto him his departure and perpetual
bannishement from this world, and from all things that be in the same. Then
shall he see that his hour is now come, and that the dawninge of that
dreadful day appears now at his house, wherein he shall depart from all
things that he has loved in this life. His body shall die but once, but his
heart shall die as often as he shall remember the loss of all those things
whereunto it bears love and affection. For So Much as death shall put the knife
between him, and them all, and make an everlasting division. The deeper roots
the toothe has in the iawe, the greater grief it causes at what time it is
plucked out. Now the heart of a wicked man being so fast rooted in the love of
the things of this life, The more we be in love with worldelie things, the
more grief it will be unto us, to depart from them at the hour of our death.
S. Augustine.
it cannot be, but that it must needs be a very great grief unto him, when he
sees the hour is now come wherein he must depart from the^ all. At that time
those things whereunto he bears most affection shall wound his heart most
greiuously: and that thing which was wont to be a comfort unto him in his
trouble shall be then a most cruel torment in vexing him. S. Augustine
declares that at what time he determined to seperat him self from the world,
and from all the pleasures and delights thereof, it seemed unto him that they
all represented themselves lively unto him, and said: What will thou leave us
for ever? and will thou never have any more to do with us? Consider now then
with thy self, what a grief it will be to a carnal heart, when those things
that he has most loved, do represent themselves at that hour unto him, and
when he sees that he shall be spoiled of them all in such wise, that he shall be
enforced to say. Now shall this world have no more to do with me, neither
this aier, nor this son, nor this element. Now shall I have no longer
conversation and comfort of my children, my wife, my house, my lands, my
goods, my pleasures, and delights. Of all things I am now left naked, and
bare. Now will death spoil me of them all. Now is my old age at an end: now
is the number of my days fulfilled: now shall I die unto all manner of things,
and they all unto me. Wherefore o thou world, I bid thee farrewell: ye my
lands, my goods, and riches, I bid you farewell: my friends, my acquintance,
my kinsfolk, my dear wife, and my louinge children I bid you all farewell.
For now shall we never see one an other any more in this mortal fleash.

There is yet an other separation after this more terrible and dreadful then
this is: to wit: between the soul, and the body, which have kept company so
long time together, and have been such hearty friends. The devil had spoiled
the holy man Job of all manner of things sauinge only of his life, and it
seemed unto him, that in comparison of the spoil thereof, all the rest were of
none account: and therefore he said: Skin for skin, and all that a man
has he will give for his life. This is the thing that naturally is most
loved, Job. 2.4.
and the separation whereof causes most grief. If the separation of one
waifaringe man from an other, when they have trauayled in journey together any
time, do cause such grief and solitarines: what a grief shall it be, when
two such entier friends, and companions, as the soul, and the body have
been, are separated the one from the other, which have traueyled together from
their mothers womb until that very hour, and have had so many knottes, and
bonds of friendship between them? What a grief will it be when the spirit
shall say unto the fleash. I must now remain all alone without thee. And the
fleash shall likewise make answer unto the spirit, sayeinge: and in what case
then shall I be without thee, saying all the being I have, I have received of
thee?

Of the horror and lothsomenes of our Grave. II.
AFTER this it comes naturally to a man's mind, to think what shall become
of his body, when his soul is departed out of it. And in thinkinge hereupon,
he sees that the best hap his body may have, can be no better than to be
laid in a little grave of earth. The baseness of which condition makes him to
be as it were astonnied. For co^sideringe on the one side what great estimation
he has made of his body in times past, and saying on the other side what a
base and vile place that is, wherein it must now be laid, he cannot but wonder
excedinglie at it. He considers and waygheth with himself, that the lodginge
which they will prepare for him in the earth, shall be strait, and narrow, that
it shall be also obscure, stinkinge, full of worms, maggottes, bones, and dead
men's skulles, and withal so horrible, that it shall be very ircksome to the^
that be alive only to look upon it. And when he sees that his body which he
was wont to make so much of, his belly which he esteimed for his God, his
mowth for whose delights the land and sea could scarcely serve, and his
fleash for which gold and silk was wont to be wouen with great curiosity,
and a soft bed prepared to lay it in, must now be laid in such a filthy and
miserable donghill, where it shall be trodden upon, and eaten with foul worms,
and maggottes, and within few days be of as owglie a form, as a dead Carrion
that lies in the feildes, insomuch that the waiefaringe man will stop his
nose, and run away in great have to avoid the stinkinge savor of it: when
(I say) he considers all this, and sees that in steed of his soft bed, he
must lie there upon the hard grownde: and in steed of his precious and
gorgious apparel he must have there but only a seely poor windinge sheite,
and in steed of his sweet odoriferous parfumes and muskes, filthy rottonnes
and horrible stenches, and in steed of his multitude of delicate dishes, and
waitinge seruinge men, he must have there such an infinite number of crawling
worms, and fylthie maggottes feedinge upon him, he cannot choose (if he have
any sense or Judgment remaininge in him) but merueill to see unto how base a
condition such a noble creature is now come, and to consider with whom he must
now keep company there, eue^ fellow, and fellow like, who in his life time
had no fellow, nor equal. It is not the part of wise men to wonder at things:
and the customable saying of things every day, takes away from them (be
they never so great) all admiration and wounder. And yet all this
notwithstanding, the great Wiseman wondered at this misery (though it be a
matter whereof we have daily experience) when he said: If man and beast do
die both after one sort, Eccles. 2.3.
what avails me that I have travailed so much in seekinge for wisdom? If it
were so, that the body in this separation should end in some thing that
were of any price or proffit, it would be some kind of comfort unto us. But
this is a thing to be wondered at, that so excellent a creature shall end in
the most dishonorable and loathsome thing in the world. This is that great
misery whereat the holy man Job wondered (and suerlie not without good cause)
when he said: Job. 14.
The tree after it is cut, has hope to revive, and spring again, and if the
root of it do rott in the grownde, and the stock be dead in the earth, yet
with the freshenes of water it springs again, and brings forth leaves, as
if it were newly planted. But man after he is once dead, withered, and
consumed, what is become of him? Great (vndowtedlie) was the tribute that was
laid upon the children of Adam for sin. And the everlasting Judge
understood very well, what penance he gave unto man, when he said: Thou art
dust, Genes. 4.
and into dust thou shall return again.

Of the great fear and dowte the soul has at the hour of death, what shall
happen unto it after it is departed out of the body. III.
HOWBEIT this is not the greatest cause of fear, that a man has at the hour
of his death, but there is yet one far greater, and that is, when the soul
casts her eyes further, and begins to think upon the dangers of the life
to come, and imagines what shall become of her hereafter. For this is now as
it were to depart from the haven mowth, and to launche into the main Sea,
where none other thing is to be seen on what side so ever ye look, but only
heaven, and the water, the which is wou^te to be occasion of greater fear in
such as are but new Seamen. For when a man considers that eternity of
worlds, which follows after death: and withal casts his eye into that
new and strange region, which was never known nor traueyled by any man
alive, where he must now begin to take his journey, when he considers also
the everlasting glory or pain which there must fall to his lotte, and sees
that wheresoever the tree falls, Eccles. 11.
there it shall remain for evermore, and knows not on which of the two sides
he shall fall, when he considers (I say) all these things, he cannot but be
in a very great fear, and trouble of mind. We read that when Benadad king
of Siria was sick, 4 Reg. 8.
he was in so great anguishe and grief of mind, for that he knew not whether
he should die of that sickness or not, that he sent the general of his army
with fowertie Camels laden with treasure unto the Prophet Elizeus, requestinge
him with words of great humility, to rid him out of that perplexity he was
in, and to put him out of all dowt, whether he should recover of that sickness,
or not. Now if the love of so short a life as this is be able to cause a man to
be in such a great care and pensiuenes, how great care will a Wiseman take,
when he perceives him self to be in such a case, as that he may truly say,
that within two hours he shall have one of these two lottes: to wit, either
life everlasting, or death everlasting, and that he knows not certainly
whether of these two shall come unto him? What martyrdom may be compared to
such a painful angwishe and grief as this is? Put the case now that a king
were taken prisoner emonge the Turckes, and when his Ambassadors should come
to ransom him, the Turckes would propounde, that the matter should be
determined by castinge of lottes, and that if he happened to have a good lotte,
he should be raunsomed, and go home with his Ambassadors to his kingdom,
but if contrariewise, that the^ immediately he should be throwe^ into a great
fyerie furnace, which were there prepared burninge and flaminge before him.
Tell me I pray thee, at the time when they should be castinge the lottes, and
puttinge their hand into the vessel to take them out, and all the world in
great expectation, waitinge what should be the end thereof, and the king him
self standinge there present, beholdinge the doutfull hap that must be
allotted unto him: in what a doleful case (think thou) would he then be?
How troubled? How fearful? How quakinge and tremblinge? And how ready to
promise and vow unto almighty God all he cowlde possiblye do, to be quite
rid out of that terrible angwishe? Now what is all this (be it never so
great) but as it were a shadow, if it be compared with this danger that we
speak of? How far greater is the kingdom that we seike? How far greater
is the fierye furnace that we do fear? How far more greiuouse is the
perplexity and doutefulnes of this matter, tha^ of the other? For on the one
side the angels shall be there expectinge for us, to carry us to the kingedome
of heaven, and on the other side the devils, to cast us into the horrible
furnace of hell fire, and no man knows whether of these two lottes shall
happen unto him, which shall be determined either the one way or the other
within the space of one hour after his death. Consider therefore in what a
heavy plight thy heart shall be at this last instant: how fearful, how humble,
how abased before the face of him, who only ca^ deliver thee out of this
danger. Suerlie I am of this opinion, that there is no tongue in the world
able to declare this matter as it is indeed.

How we come to understand hereby the errors and blindness of our life past.
IIII.
AFTER this anguishe there follows yet an other as great as it, (namelye in
such persons as have lived a wicked and dissolute life) which is, to come so
late to think upon the account they have then forthwith to make of all the
disorders, and offenses of their former life. At the houer of deythe it is a
great grief to a sick man if he have lived licentiously, that he thinks so
late upon his account.
O how wo^derfullie shall the wicked be confounded at that time, when the
grief of their pain shall cause them to open their eyes, which heretofore the
delight and pleasure of sin had closed up: insomuch as they shall then
clearlie perceive what false gods those were which they have served, and how
deceitful those riches were which they have so greidelie gaped after, and how
by followinge that way, whereby they thought to have fownde rest, they find
in conclusion their utter ruin and destruction. The servants of the king of
Siria came to apprehende the Prophet Heliseus, and when almighty God had
stricken them all blind by means of the prayer of the Prophet, the Prophet
said unto them: Come go with me, and I will show you him whom you seek. 4.
Reg. 6.
And when he had thus said, he carried them with him unto Samaria, and brought
them into the market place of the city, in the mids of al their enemies.
And then made his prayer again, and said. O Lord open the eyes of these
miserable men, that they may see where they are. Now tell me I pray thee,
when those men opened their eyes, and saw whither they were come, (beleuinge
certainly before, that they went to find the party they sought for,) how
amassed and ashamed were they when they saw how fowlie they were deceived. Now
what thing in the world could make a more lively resemblance of the process
and deceites of our life? We all do walk here in this world by the way of
our appetites, and desires. Some seek after gold: others to purchase lands:
others to make great buildinges: others seek for pleasures, and delights:
others for offices, and dignities: and each one is fully persuaded, that he
takes the best and wisest way to obtein the thing he disiereth. But when the
terrible presence of death, and the danger of our account discovers the
vanity of our hopes, then findinge our selves to be in arrerages for our
account, we shall clearlie perceive how fowlie we have been deceived: and we
shall see that by followinge that way, whereby we thought to have found
quietness, and rest, we find our perdition. O what miserable men are we? How
blindly do we now wander up and down in the world? What eyes shall we then
have? How shall our judgment be then altered? How far different shall it be
from that it was before? Then shall we playnelie see how all the things of
this world are miserable, her goods false, her ways crooked, her hopes
vain, her promises lyinge, her pleasures bitter, her glory short, and vain:
Then shall we perceive (though to late) how her riches were thorns, and her
delights poison. To be short, then shall we see how our eyes have been closed
up, and that we never knew whither we went: and at the end of our journey we
shall find our selves in the streites of Samaria, and in the snare of the
judgment of almighty God, and compassed about with all our enemies, to wit:
the devils and our sins. O how shall the wicked be confounded at that hour,
and how fowly shall they see them selves beguiled! How truly may every one
of them say at that time: O miserable wretch that I am, what other commodity
have I now by all my pleasures past, but only that I have provoked at this
dreadful hour the indignation of the judge against me, who must give sentence
upon me? Now my pleasures are all ended, and gone, and there remains of them
neither relic nor memory to comfort me withal, no more than if they never
had been: yea contrariewise they remain as thorns that lie prickinge all
about my heart, they make my cause doutfull, they torment my woeful soul now
presently, and peradventure shall torment it everlastingly for ever and ever.
This is the fruit that I have gathered of my dissolute and wanton life, and of
all my carnal delights: This is the settinge of my teeth on edge, that my
gluttonies past do cause me now to have. My pleasures and delights have now
forsaken me: They are quite gone away, and will never return again: yea
perhapps in steed of pleasures that continued but a momente, there are
prepared for me everlasting horrible torments in hell fire. Now what blindness
can be greater than this? How much better had it been for me never to have been
borne, than to have offended him, of whose help and favor I have at this
present so great neide? How much better had it been for me, that the earth had
opened, and swalowed me up, before I had once thought to offend him? O
unfortunate day! O cursed hour, wherein I offended thee o Lord! Why did I not
consider beforehande of this dreadful hour? Why was I not sooner mindful of
this terrible judgment? How were mine eyes blinded with so small a glimse? Is
this the way that I took to be so certain and sure? Is this the end that
all the honors of the world come unto? What? are all those things which I
have so greatly estiemeed heretofore of so little account at this present?

Of the terror of the deadfull account we must make at the howere of our death
unto almighty God of all our life past. V.
AFTER this grief there follows also an other as great as this: which is,
the fear of the account that shall then be required of us.

This is one of the greatest troubles, and greifes, we shall have at that time.
For besides this that it is so terrible a matter to enter into judgment with
almighty God, the very devils also, and fyendes of hell will increase this
fear at that hour, which before they were wont to extenuate, and diminishe
unto us, with the hope and color of gods mercy. Then will they put us in
mind of the greatness and profoundenes of the iudgeme^ntes of almighty God,
and of his justice, which they will then show to be so great, that he pardoned
not his own only son for the sins of others. Luc. 23.
If this then be done in greine wood, what shall be done (say they) in dry
wood? Then the wicked man shall begin to tremble, and qwake for fear, and
say to him self. O miserable wretch that I am! If that be true, which all the
scripture reports, to wit, that almighty God will give to every one
according to his works, what may I hope to receive at his hands, that have
done so many wicked works? If the Gospel say, Math. 6. verse. 27. Romans 2.6.
2. Cor. 5.10. Math. 3.10. Math. 7.19.
That the tree shall be judged according to the fruit that it yeldeth? What
judgment may I look for, that have brought forth so many wicked fruits?
If it be true, which the Prophet says: That none shall ascend up to the hill
of God, unless he have innocent hands, Psalm. 23.3.4,
and an undefiled heart: whither shall I then go, that have had such wicked
hands, and such a filthy harthe? If the sayeinge of the Wiseman be true:
Prou. 28.9.
That whosoever shuts his ears and will not hear the law, shall cry, and
not be hard: what may I look for, that have had mine ears shutt against
almighty God, and yet have had them so open to harken after lies, and vanities
of the world? Wherefore (o my omnipotent God) with what face shall I now
appear before thee, and desire thee to give ear unto me, saying thou have so
often times called me, and I would give no ear unto thee? How can I request
thee to receive me into thy house, saying thou have so often times called at my
house, and I have shutt my gates against thee? How shall I find thee now at
the time of my need, saying thou have had so oftentimes need of me in thy
poor and impotent members, and have not found me? By what title or right may
I request thee now at the end of my journey to grant me heaven, saying I have
spente all my life time in the service of the devil thine enemy? O how justly
may thou then (o Lord) say unto me: Thou have served the world and the
devil, get thee therefore unto them, and let them give thee thy hyre. The like
answer made the Prophet Heliseus to king Ioram the son of Achab. Who when
he had spente and employed all his life in the service and worshippinge of
Idols, and came in the time of his necessity to the Prophet of God,
requestinge him of help and remedy, 4. Reg. 3.13.
the holy Prophet answered and said: O king Ioram, what have thou to do
with me? Get thee hence to the Prophettes of thy father, whensoever a sinner
earnestly repents, and co^uerteth trewlie unto God he will forgive and
receive him: but few sick persons (that have lived dissolutelie) do so: but
if they recover there health, do retorn ordinarielie again to their former
wicked life. Esa 57.13. At the hour of our death we wish that we had more
time to do penance for our sins.
and mother, and desire them to help thee at this time. O how many of us do
follow this wicked king both in our life, and death? In our life we serve the
world, and at the point of death we call upon almighty God. What answer
may we look to have at that dreadful hour, but even the same that he has
already given in the like case? Which is: what have thou to do with me, since
thou did never service unto me? Get thee hence to thy counselors whom thou
have followed, and to thy idols whom thou have loved, served and adored, and
speak unto them to give thee thy wages for thy service.

When ye shall cry (says almighty God by his Prophet Esaie) let them that
ye have gathered together deliver you, but the wind shall take them all away.

At this time the sick man begins to wish, that he might have some space
to do penance for his former wicked life. And he thinks then with himself
that if he might obtain it, o how he would fast, and pray, and do great
worckes of mercy: Yea he would not content him self with every common
kind of penance, but would live the most strait, and austere kind of life
of all men in the world. But alas, when he perceives by the encreasinge of
his sickness, that his request will not be granted: and calls to mind what
time opportunity and means he has had to prepare himself for this dreadful
hour, and how fondly he has suffered the same to pass in vain, then is he
wonderfully greiued and vexed for this loss, and acknowledges him self to
be well worthy of such punnishement, for that he would not be mindful
beforehande of his dreadful account, but omitted to do penance for his sins
when he had time and space to do it. O unto how many of us does it happen to
be beguiled after this sort, spe^dinge and consuminge the time (which
almighty God has given us to do penance for our sins) in vanities, and
pleasures, and afterward when we stand in most need of it we want it. A
very apt similitude.
And so it happens unto us, as it does commonly to the pages, and seruitours
in the Cowert, who being allowed a candle to light them selves to bed, do
spend their candle in play all the night, and afterward are constrained to
go to bed darkelinge.

OF THE SACRAMENT OF EXTREME Unction: And of the agony of death. depiction of
Christ Infirmatur quis in vobis inducut pr^sbitoros ecclesiae, et orent sup^r
(...). v^gentes cum oleo in domini Jac. cap. 5. verse. 14.

VI.
The Catholic Church helpethe her children at the hour of their death with
prayers, and Sacraments.
NOw approaches the sick person to his last end: and the Catholic Church as
a very louinge and pittiefull mother, begins then to help her Children
with prayers, and Sacraments, and with all the means she may possibly do.
And because his necessity is so great (for at that instant it shall be
determined what shall become of him for ever and ever,) great have is made to
call upon all the Saints in heaven, that they all will help the sick man
in this his great peril and danger. For what other thing is the Letanye
which then by commandment of the Church is to be said over him that is at the
point of death, but that the Catholic Church as a pitiful mother, being
very careful for the danger of her sick child, knocks at all the gates
of heaven, and cries unto all the Saints, desiringe them to be intercessors
before the divine majesty for the salvation of him, that stands now in so
great need of their help, at the time of his passinge out of this world.

The Preiste then annoyntethe all the senses, and members of the sick person.
Then the Priest out of hand annointeth all the senses and members of the
sick person with the holy Oil, according as the holy Scripture commands
in the Epistle of S. James. cap. 5. verse. 14. And desires almighty God to
pardon the sick person all that he has offended by any of his senses. And
then annointinge his eyes he says: Almighty God by this Unction and of his
divine mercy pardon thee all the sins that thou have committed by means of
thine eyes. And in this wise he annointeth all the other parts of the sick
person. Now if the miserable sinner have been dissolute in his eyes, or in his
tongue, or in any other of his bodelie senses: If all his former dissolute
disorders and wanton pleasures be represented unto him at that time, in such
sort that he sees well what little fuite he is like to find then by all his
former delights and pleasures: If he perceive withal into what a narrow
strait he is brought by means of his wicked and licentious life, how can he
chose but feel an extreme angwish and grief therewith? What would he give at
that time (trow ye) that he had never lifted up his eyes from the grownde to
behold any woman with any wanton look, and that he had never opened his
mowth to speak any words of lyenge, slander, detraction, or any other
wicked word?

Of the agony of deythe.
After this follow the panges and agony of death, which is suerlie the
greatest of all the conflictes we have in this life. Then is the holy Candle
lighted, and his friends and executors begin to provide his wyndinge sheet,
and other things for his funerals: Then they begin to faie to the sick man,
that the hour of his departure out of this world is now come: and therefore
they counsel him to recommende himself unto almighty God, and call upon the
holy virgin Marie his blessed Mother, who is wont at that hour to help all
them that call upon her. Then the sick man begins to hear the woeful
cries and pittiefull lamentations of his poor wife, who now presently
begins to feel the discommodities of her new widowhode, and solitary
life. Then the soul of the sick man is ready to depart from the body: and
at the time of her goinge every one of his members is sore grieved and vexed
therewith. Then are the cares of the soul renewed a fresh. Then is the soul
in a merueilous great conflict, and agony, not so much for her departure, as
for fear of the howere of her dreadful account, approchinge so near unto
her. Then is the time of tremblinge, and quakinge, yea even of such as be most
stowte, and courageous. The blessed holy father Hilarion, S. Hilario^.
as he was passinge out of this world, began to tremble, and fear, and was
loathe to die, howbeit the holy man encouraged himself, sayienge: Go forth my
soul: go forth out of this body: whereof should thou be afraid? It is
threescore and ten years that thou have served Christ, and art thou yet
afraid of death? Now if this holy man were afraid of his passing out of this
world, who served Christ so many years, what shall he do, who peradventure
has offended him so many years? Whither shall he go? Whom shall he call
upon? What counsel shall he take? O that men understood how great this
perplexity and anguishe is at this dreadful hour? Imagine now (I beseach
thee) in what a doleful case the heart of the Patriarch Isacke was, Genes. 22.
when his father held him bound hands and feet, and had laid him upon the
wood to sacrifice him, when he saw his fathers glisteringe sword over his
head, and underneath him the flames of fiere burninge, and the servants that
might have succored him stayinge at the foot of the hill, and he himself
bownde hands and feet in such sort that he cowlde neither fly, nor defend
himself, in what plight trow ye was the heart of this blessed young man,
when he saw himself in so narrow a strayte? In what great perplexity the
soul of the wicked man is at the hour of death.
And surely in far greater perplexity is the soul of the wicked man at
this dreadful hour: because he can turn his eyes on no side, where he shall
not see occasions of great terror, and fear. If he look upward, he sees
the terrible sword of the justice of almighty God threateninge him: If he
look downwarde, he sees the grave open ever gapinge, and tarienge for him: If
he look within himself, he sees his own conscience gnawinge, and bytinge
him: If he look about him, there be Angels, and devils, on both sides of him,
watchinge and expectinge the end of the sentence, whether of them shall have
the pray: If he look backwarde, he sees his doleful wife, his littell
young children, his poor servants, his kinsfolk, his freindes, his
companions, his acquaintance, his house, his lands, and the goods of this
life to remain all behind, and are not able to succoure him in this his great
distress: for so much as he must depart all alone out of this life, and they all
must remain still here. To conclude; if after all this he take a vewe of him
self, and consider what he is inwardelie, he shall be wonderfully amassed, and
afraid to see himself in such a dangerous and terrible state: insomuch as if
it were possible, he would fly away even from himself. Now alas, to depart
from the body is a thing intolerable: To continewe still therein is a thing
impossible: And to differ his departure any longer will not be granted. All
the time past seems unto him but as a blast of wind: and that which is to
come appears (as it is in deed) infinite. Now what shall the miserable soul
do being thus compassed and environed about with so many straites? O how
fond and blind are the sons of Adam, that will not provide in time for this
terrible passage?

HOW FILTHY, AND LOTH-some the body is after it is dead: And of the bur^inge
of it in the grave. depiction of Christ ^ Eccle. 3^.23.

^ Eccle. ^^:^^.

VII.
LAST of all, when this great conflict is ended, the soul is violently taken
away from the body, and departs from her ancient habitation, the body
remayninge utterly spoiled of all the beawtie, and qualities it had.

Now let us consider what lotte each one of these two parts must have. First
consider, in what case the body is, In what case the body is, after the soul
is departed out of it.
after the soul is departed out of it. What thing is more esteimed than the
body of a prince whiles he is a live? And what thing is more contemptible,
and more vile, than the very same body when it is dead? Where is then that
former pryncely majesty become? Where is that royal behavior, and glorious
magnificence? Where is that high authority, and soueraintie? Where is that
terror, and fear, at the beholdinge of his presence? Where is that cappinge,
and kneelinge, and speakinge unto him with such reverence, and subjection? How
quickly is all this gaye pomp utterly overthrown, and come to nothing, as
if it had been but a mere dream, or a play on a stage, that is dispatched in
an hour?

Then out of hand the wyndinge sheet ^s provided, and brought forth, The
richest man in this world shall have no more with him, of all his gooddes at
the hour of his death, but only a wyndinge sheet. Psalm. 48.17.18.
which is the ^ichest jewel he may take with him out of this life. And this
is the greatest recompense that the richest man in this world shall have of
all his goods at that hour. I w^she this point were well considered by
e^erie covetous man, and by those that make their money their God, whose
blindness and folly the Prophet reprehendeth in these words: Be not afraid
when a man waxes rich, and when thou see the glory of his house very much
multiplied, and increased: for when he dies he shall not carry his goods
away with him, neither shall his glory go down with him.

Of the burial of the body.
Then do they make a hole in the earth of seven or eight foot long, (and no
longer though it be for Alexander the great, whom the whole world could not
hold) and with that small rowme only must his body be contence. There they
appoint him his house for ever: There he takes up his perpetual lodginge
until the last day of general Judgment, in company with other dead bodies:
There the worms crawle out to give him his interteinment: To be short, there
they let him down in a poor white sheet, his face being covered with a
napkin, and his hands and feet fast bownde: which trewlie needs not, for he
is then suer enough for breakinge out of prison, neither shall he be able to
defend himself against any man. There the earth re^eyueth him into her
lap: There the bones of dead men kiss, and welcome him: There the dust of
his auncesters embraces him, and inui^e him to that table, and house, which is
appointed for all men living. And the last honor that the world can do unto
him at that time is to cast a little earth upon him, and to cover him well
therewith, that the people may not feel his stinckinge savor, and behold
his dishonor. And the greatest pleasure that his very dear and spetiall
friends can do then unto him (besides prayinge for his soul,) is to honor
him with castinge a handful of earth upon him. And therefore the faithful
people are wont to use this ceremony toward the dead, that almighty. God
may dispose others to do the same unto them, when they shall be in the like
case. Now what greater confession and acknowledginge of our misery can we
divise, than to see how men do prevent before hand that they may not want
after their death so small a benefit as this is? O greidie couetousenes of
the lyuinge, and great poverty of the dead. Why should a man desire and gape
after so many things for this present life, being so short as it is,
saying so little will content him at the hour of his death?

Then the grave maker takes the spade, and pykeaxe into his hand, and
begins to tumble down bones upon bones, and to tread down the earth very
hard upon him. Insomuch that the fairest face in all the world, the best
trimmed, and most charily kept from wind, and son, shall lie there, and be
stamped upon by the rude grave maker, who will not stick to lay him on the
face, and rappe him on the sculle, yea and to batter down his eyes and nose
flat to his face, that they may lie well and even with the earth. And the
fine dapperde gentleman who whiles he lived might in no wise abide the wind to
blow upon him, no nor so much as a little hear or moore to fall upon his
garments, but in all have it must be brusshed of with great curiosity, here
they lay and hurl upon him a donghill of filthiness, and dirte. And that
sweet mynion gentleman also that was wont forsooth to go perfumed with Amber,
and other odoriferous smelles, must be contented here to lie covered all over
with earth, and foul crawlinge worms, and maggottes. This is the end of all
the gaie braueries, and of all the pomp, and glory of the world.

In this plight do all his freindes now leave him, lyenge in that strait
lodginge, in that earth of oblivion, and in that darcke prison, where he shall
remain accompanied with perpetual solitarines until the general day of
Judgment. O world what is become of thy glory? O ye my howses, lands, and
riches, where is your power? O my wife, my children, my freindes, and
kinsfolk, where have ye now left me? How happens it, that ye my old
freindes and companions do so quickly forsake me, and leave me here in the
earth thus solitary alone? How chances it, that the wheel of my so great
prosperity and felicity is so quickly ouerturned, and defaced? They that saw
Queen Iezabell when she was (by the just judgment of God) eaten with dogs,
4. Reg. 9.
when they saw that there remained nothing else of her beauty, but only her
sculle, and the extreme parts of her feet, and hands, those (I say) that
had known her before in so great flourishinge and royal estate, and saw her
at that time in such a miserable plight, wonderinge at that so great
alteration, and change, demanded, and said: Haeccine est illa Iezabel? Is
this that Iezabell? 4. Reg. 9.37.
And as many as passed by that way, and beheld her thus eaten with dogs,
repeted the same exclamation, merueylinge at so great a change, and said: Is
this that Iezabell? Is this that great Queen, and Lady of Israel? Is this she
that was so mighty, that she usurped and seized the lands and goods of her
subjects, by sheedinge of their blood? Is death able to bring the mighty
and puissaunte Princes to such a base, and miserable calamity?

Now therefore my dear brother go down I pray thee with thy spirit into the
graves and Sepulchers of such Princes, and great noble personages, as thou have
either hard of, or known in this world: and consider what a horrible and
deformed form of their bodies is there to be seen. And thou shall see, that
thou have good cause to make the like exclamation, and to use the same words,
and say: Is this that Iezabell? Is this that amiable face, which I knew so
fair, and lively? Are these those eyes, that were so clear, and brighte to
behold? Is this that pleasant rowlinge tongue, that talked so eloquently, and
made such goodly discourses? Is this that fine and neyte body, that was so
trimly pollished, and adorned? Is this the end of the majesty of Princes
scepters, and royal crowns? Is this the end of the glory of the world? O
how often times (says a Wise man) has it been my chance to enter into the
sepulchers of some dead bodies, where wonderinge or rather being greatly
astonished at the sight that I saw, I fixed mine eyes advisedly upon the shape
of the dead corpse: I set the bones in order, I joined the hands together,
and set the lips in their proper places, and spoke thus secretly to my
self. Behold these feet, that have trauayled such crooked paths, and ways:
These hands also, that have committed so many wicked acts: These eyes, that
have beheld so many vanities: This mouth, that has eaten and devoured so
many delicate, and superfluous meats. Behold this sculle of his head that
has built so many vain castles, and towers in the aier: This dust, and
filthy skin for whose pleasure and delight he has committed so many sins,
and wickedness: and for which cause the soul of this body does and shall
perhaps suffer everlasting horrible torments in hell fire. This done, I
departed out of that place wholly astonished, and amassed: and meitinge with
certain persons both men, and women, young and old, I beheld them likewise,
and considered, that both they and I should shortelie appear in the like
ugly form, and sieme as vile, and loathsome to behold, as those dead bodies
are now presentelie. Wherefore what a fond wicked wretch am I, to live in
such wise as I do? To what end is my purchasinge, and heapinge together of
lands, and riches, and my buildinge of such sumptuous howses, saying I shall
shortly be here so poor and naked? To what end are my gaie braueries, and
gorgious ornaments in my apparel, and furniture of howsholde stuff: saying I
shall shortly be here so filthy, and loathsome to behold? To what end are my
delicate disshes, my sugered sawces, and deyntie fare, saying I shall shortly
be here meat for the worms and maggottes of the earth?

Of the way, that the soul takes after it is departed out of the body: And
of the dreadful judgment, and sentence, that shall be given upon it at that
time. VIII.
Note, that there be two judgments: one is at the hour of every ma^s
death, which is called the particular judgment: And the other is at
doomesdaye, which shall be the universal iudgmente of all mankind together. S.
Bernarde.
LET us now leave the body lyinge thus buried in the grave, and let us see
what way the soul takes through that new world, which is as it were an
other hemespherie, where it finds a new heaven, a new earth, an other kind
of life, and an other manner of understanding, and knowledge. The soul then
after it is departed out of the body enters into this new region, where
those that by living never entered: a place full of fear, and terror, and of
shadows of death. But now what shall this new stranger do in this so
strange a country, unless it be so, that he has deserved in this life to
have the guard and defense of Angels for this time. O my soul (says S.
Bernarde) what a terrible day shall that be, when thou shall enter all alone
into that unknown region, where those hellishe monsters that are so horrible
and ugly to behold, shall encounter and assault thee in the way? Who will
then take thy part? Who will then defend thee? Who will then deliver thee from
those rampinge lions, which being raginge mad for honger, do lie there in
wait to devour thee?

At the hour of death the soul must render a particular account unto
almighty God of all things: and then it shall be judged what shall become of
her for evermore: and this is termed her particular judgment. Math. 12.36. 1.
Peter. 4.18.
Undoubtedly this is a very fearful way, but the judgment that shall then
so solemnlie be given, is far more terrible. Who is able to declare, how
strait the decision of this particular judgment shall be? How righteous the
judge? How busy, and solicitous the devils our accusers? How few
intercessors on our side? What a particular examination shall be made of every
point of our account? And what a long process shall be drawn of all our whole
life? And as our Savior affirms: we must then render an account of every
idell word. Wherefore, if the just man (as S. Peter says) shall hardly be
saved, where shall the sinner and wicked man show them selves? It is a thing
truly very worthy to be noted, that whereas a man would think that those
things that we have most loved, and for which we have taken most pains,
should most help us in this great distres, it falls out quite contrary.
For they shall not only not help us, but also be an occasion at that time of
more pain and grief unto us. 2. Reg. 14. 2. Reg. 18.
The thing that Absolo^ loved, and esteemed above all things, was his goodly
hear of his head. And that very hear almighty God ordained by his just
judgment to be the cause of his death. The things that we love most in this
life, shall make our account more dowtefull, and be greater grief unto us at
the hour of our death.
Now the very same judgment is prepared for all wicked persons at that hour:
that those things that every man most loved in this life, and for which he
committed most heinous offenses against almighty God, the very same things
shall make his account more doutfull, and be occasion of greater torment unto
him. There shall our children whom we sought to enriche, not passinge whether
it were by right or wrong accuse us. There shall the nawghtie harlotte (for
whose wanton love we have broken the laws and commandments of almighty
God,) plead against us. There shall our lands, our goods, our offices, our
dignities, our pleasures, and delights, (which were our idolles) be our
hangmen, and tormente us most cruelly. There shall almighty God give
judgment upon all the gods of Egypt, ordeyninge the matter in such sort, that
those very things wherein we have put all our glory, shall at that time be
the cause of our ruin.

Now if the severity of the dreadful sentence of almighty God be answerable
to our sins, who shall be able to abide it? One of those ancient holy fathers
that lived in the wilderness was wont to say, that of three things he Ierem.
Lam. 2. verse. 16.
All thine enemies shall open their mouths upon thee, they shall laughe thee
to scorn, and gnashe their teath at thee, and say: we will devour him: this
is the day we have so long looked for, we have found him, we have espied him.

But thou o sweite Jesus, Psalm. 12.
Illuminat the eyes of my soul (I beseech thee) that I steipe not in death,
that mine enemy may never say: I have prevailed against him. Amen.

THVRSDAIE NIGHT. OF THE GENERAL DAY OF IVDGEMENT. depiction of Christ O^^^^
nor ^^^festari Oport^t a^^e Tribunal Christi est Ref^^^^ Vnusqu^^^ (...)
Co^^^^^ (...) g^ff^t, fini^^^ sin^ in^^^ sci^utes ingo timote^^ domini
hominib^s sund^^^ 2. Corinthians. 5.10.

Si Justi^ vix saluabitur, impius et pecc^^^ V^^ p^rr^^^? 1. petr. 4.^^.


THIS DAY (WHEN THOU HAVE MADE THE SIGN OF the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the day of the general judgment, that
by means of this consideration those two principal effects may be stirred
up in thy soul, which every faithful Christian ought to have, to wit: the
fear of God, and the abhorringe of sin.

CONSIDER first what a terrible day that shall be, Of the dreadfulnes and
terror of the general judgment.
in which the causes of all the children of Adam shall be througlie examyned, the
process of all our lives diligently perused, and a general definitive sentence
given what shall become of us all for evermore.

That day shall comprise in it all the days of all the ages, and times, both
present, past, and to come. For upon that day the world shall re^dre an
account of all these times. And then shall almighty God power out the anger,
and indignation, which he has gathered together in all ages. How violently
shall the maine floude of gods wrath, and indignation break out at that day,
which contains in it so many floudes of anger, and wrath, as there have
been sins committed since the beginning of the world until that day. And
therefore the Prophet had good cause to say: That day shall be a day of anger:
Soph. 1.15.
a day of calamity, and misery: a day of obscurity, and darckenes: a day
of clouds, and tempestious storms: a day of the trompette, and alarom
against the strong cities, and against the high towers.

Of the dreadful signs that shall go before the general day of judgment.
Secondly, consider what fearful and terrible signs shall go before this
day. For (as our Savior says,) Before the coming of this day, there
shall be signs in the Son, in the Moon, and in the Sterres, and in all
creatures both of heaven, and earth. For they shall all have as it were a
certain feelinge and understanding of their end, Luc. 21.25.
before they come to their end in deed. And shall tremble, and quake, and
begin to fall before they fall in deed. But as for men they shall (says
he) go up and down dry, and withered, Luc. 21.26.
in great anguishe, and fear of death, hearing the terrible roringes of the
Sea, and saying the great outrageous storms, and tempests, that shall then be
stirringe. And by those dreadful signs they shall conjecture what great
calamities and miseries are threatened to the world. And in this wise shall
they go wholly amassed, and astonished: their faces pale, and wa^ne: their hearts
dead before death come: and as persons condemned before the sentence be given.
For they shall measure the perilles and dangers to come, by the great fear
and terror they be presentelie in. And every one shall be so thoroughly
occupied with his own affairs, that none shall think of others: no not so
much as the father of the son, or the son of the father. No man shall have
to do for any other man: because no man shall be sufficient for himself alone.
The Sibilles do affirm, that at that time the beasts shall go bellowinge
and roringe through the feildes, and cities: and that the trees shall sweat
blood: and that the Sea shall cast up the fisshes on the dry ground. But if
this seem incredible to any man, let him consider that there is much more
spoken in the gospel. For it is a greater matter for men to be dried up, Luc.
21.
than for the sea to be dried up. And it is a greater matter that the virtues
of the heavens should be moved, than that all creatures in the earth should
be altered.

Of the coming of the floude of fire before the Judge, and of the dreadful
sownde of the trompette at the general Judgment. Nahum. 1.
that shall come before the judge, and that dreadful sownde of the trompett,
which the Archangell shall blow, to sommon and call all the generatio^s of
the world to assemble together in one place, and to be present at their
general and universal judgment. And above all this, consider with what a
dreadful majesty the Judge shall come. Whose coming is described by the
Prophet Nahum in these words: Our Lord shall come like a tempest, and furious
whyrlewinde, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. He shall take
indignation against the Sea, and it shall wax dry, and all the rivers of the
earth shall be dried up. The hill Basan, and Carmelus, shall be withered, and the
flower of the mount Libanus shall fade and fall away. The mountains shall
qwake before him, and the hills shall melte: The earth shall tremble at his
presence, and the world and all the inhabitants thereof. Who shall stand
before the face of his indignation? And who shall abide the fearcenes of his
fury? His wrath shall be poured out like a fire, and the very rocks shall

Of the strait account that shall then be required of every man. Job. 4.
Job. 31.
After this, consider what a strait account shall be there required of every
man. Verelie (says Job) no man can be justified, if he be compared with
almighty God, and if he contend with him in judgment, of a thousand things
that he shall charge him withal, he shall not be able to answer unto one. Now
then what shall every wicked person think at that time when almighty God
shall enter with him in this examination, How almighty God shall then accuse
the wicked within their own consciences.
and shall there within his own conscience say thus unto him: Come hither thou
wicked and naughty man. What have thou seen in me, that thou should thus
despise me, and go to mine enemies side? I have raised thee from the dust of
the earth, and created thee after mine own image, and likeness. I have given
thee virtue, and strength, wherewith thou might have obtained my glory.
But thou despisinge the benefits and commandments of life, which I have
given thee, would rather follow the lies of the deceiuer, than the wholesome
counsel of thy Lord and creator. To deliver thee from this foul fall I went
down from heaven into earth, where I suffered the greast pains, torments,
and reproaches, that ever were suffered in the world. For thee have I fasted:
for thee have I traueyled from place to place: for thee have I watched,
labored, and sweat drops of blood: for thee have I suffered persecutions,
scourginges, blasphemies, reproaches, buffettinges, dishonours, torments, and
even death it self upon the cross. To be short, for thee I was borne in
much poverty: for thee I lived in great pain: for thee I died with
intolerable torments, and greifes. Witness hereof are this cross, and nails,
which thou here now see: Witness hereof are these wounds both of my hands,
and feet, which are here to be seen in my body: Witness hereof are heaven and
earth, before whom I suffered: Witness hereof are the son, and moon, which
were eclipsed at the same hour. Now what have thou done with this thy soul,
which I with the sheedinge of mine own blood purchased to be mine? In whose
service have thou employed that which I bought so dearly? O foolish wicked and
adulterous generation, why would thou rather serve thy enemy with pain,
than me thy creator, and redeemer, with joy? Be ye astonished (o ye heavens) at
this strange case, and let your gates fall down at the straungnes hereof.
Ierem. 2.
For two abominations has my people committed: They have forsaken me, that am
the fountain of lively water, and refused me for an other Barrabas. I called
you very oftentimes, and ye would not answer me. I knocked at your gates,
and ye would not awake. I stretched out my hands on the cross, and ye would
not behold them. Ye have despised my counsels, with all my promises, and
threatninges. Wherefore speak ye now o ye Angels: be you judges between me,
and my viniarde: what could I have done more for it, than I have done?

Now what answer can the wicked make hereunto? Let the wicked provide what
answer to make here unto, now whiles they have time in this world.
Such as be scoffers at holy and divine things? Such as be mockers of virtue?
Such as be despisers of simplicity? Such as make more account of the laws
and statutes of the world, than of the laws of almighty God? Such as have
been deaffe to hear the callinges of God: insensible to understand his
inspirations: rebellious against his commandments: obdurate and unthankful
for all his chastisementes, and benefits? What can they say? What answer
will those persons make, that have lived in such sort, as if they had believed
that there were no God? And such as have made none account of any other law
but only how to procure their own worldly interest and commodity? What will
ye do (says the Prophet Esaie) in the day of the visitation, and calamity,
Esa. 10.
that shall come upon you from afar? Unto whom will ye fly for succor and
help? What shall the glory and abundance of your lands and riches at that
time avail you, but that ye may be carried away prisoners into hell, and
there fall emonge the dead?

After all this, consider the terrible sentence, Of the terrible sentence that
the judge shall then give against all the wicked.
which shall make the ears of all that shall hear it to glowe and tingle. His
lips (says the Prophet Esaie) are full of indignation, and his tongue is
like a consuminge fire. What fire shall burn so hot, as those words: Esa. 30.
Depart from me ye cursed into the everlasting fire. Math. 25.
This is the most terrible sayeinge that can be said to a creature. For by
this departure and separation is understood the pain which the divines call
Penam damni: that is the loss of all losses. Which is a universal spoil of
all things, and a deprivation of that cheiffest goodness (to wit of almighty
God) in whom all good things do consist. Now whither shall those cursed
wicked persons go o Lord, that shall depart from thee? In what haven shall
they arrive? What master shall they serve? Ierem. 17.
Whosoever they be that shall depart from thee, shall be written in earth,
because they have forsaken the vain and spring of the water of life, which is
almighty God. The greatest punnishement that the Romans used to put a
Citizen unto for certain greiuous offenses, was to bannishe him out of the
noble city of Rome, and to co^fine him into some Island aparte emonge some
Barbarous nation. Now if it were thought so great a punnishement to be
bannished out of the city of Rome, what a punnishement shall this be, to be
bannished out of the company of almighty God, and of all his elect? Yea, and
to be bannished for ever and ever into the company of Satan, and of those
Barbarous helhowndes.

Depart from me (says Christ) ye cursed: Math. 25.
As if he should say: I have invited you with my blessinge, and ye would not
come, now therefore take ye my curse to your despite. The wicked man, (says
the Prophet) loved maledictio^, Psalm. 108.18.
and it came upon him, and he refused the blessinge, (that almighty God
offered unto him,) and therefore it shall be kept far enoughe from him. Math.
21.19.
Our Savior Christ cursed the figtree, Marc. 11.14.
and immediatle not only the leaves, but even also the body, and routes of
the tree withered away, so as it never brought fruit any more. In like manner
shall those miserable damned persons be accursed and utterly deprived of all
hope of salvation, and of all fruit, and merit for evermore.

But whither do thou send them o Lord? Unto everlasting fire. O what a
bed is this for delicate, and tender persons? Esa. 33.14.
Which of you (says the Prophet) is able to dwell in the burninge fire? Which
of you is able to continewe in the everlasting flames? What greater curse and
malediction can there be than this? What calamity, what sentence, what
adversity, may be compared with the only shadow of this? Esa. 34.
This is that terrible and fearful fire, which the Prophet Esaie settethe
forth in these words: The streams thereof shall be turned into meltinge
pitche, and the dust of the earth into sulphur, and brimstone, and the very
earth of it shall be wholly burninge pitche. It shall not be quenched night,
nor day: The smooke of it shall go up evermore. It shall be desolat from
generation to generation. No man shall ever pass through it.

THE FOVRTHE TREATISE. OF THE CONSIDERATION OF the general day of judgment:
wherein the former meditation is declared more at lardge.
GREAT are the effects undoubtedly which the fear of God works in the
soul. Who so fears God (says Ecclesiasticus) it shall go well with him at
his last end, Eccles. 1.13.
and on the day of his death he shall be blessed. Eccles. 25.13.
And in an other place he says: How great is that man, that has atteined
unto wisdom, and knowledge, but be he never so great, he is no greater than
he that fears God. For the fear of God has placed his seat above all
things. Blessed is that man, to whom it is given to fear our Lord. He that
has this fear, with whom shall we compare him? For the fear of God is the
beginning of his love. All these be the words of Ecclesiasticus. Whereby it
appears plainly, The fear of God is the beginnynge of the love of God.
that the fear of God is the beginning of all goodness, (sithence it is the
beginning of his love.) And it is not only the beginning, but also the keie,
and preservation of all good things. As S. Bernarde witnesses, sayeinge: I
know this for a most certain truth, S. Bernarde.
that there is no thing of so great force and efficacy to keep us in the
grace of God, as to live at all times in the fear of him, and to eschew
always all manner of proud and presumptuouse thoughts.

Now to obtain this so precious a Jewel, it avails very much to occupy
our mind in the consideration and continual remembrance of the iudgeme^te of
almighty God, The consideration and continual remembrance of the judgments
of almighty God, will help us to obtain the fear of God.
and above all other things, in the consideration of that supreme and final
general judgment, that shall be given in the end of the world. This judgment
is the most dreadful thing, of all that the holy scriptures declare unto us.
For the things that are there signified unto us of this day are so terrible,
that were it not that almighty God himself reported them, they would seime
altogether incredible. And therefore our Savior after he had preached, and set
out certain of the^ to his disciples, the greatness of the^ was such, that they
seemed to exceide the common credulity, and faith of men, in regard whereof
he ended the matter with this affirmatio^, Marc. 13.
sayeinge: Verily, verily, I say unto you, that the world shall not end
before all these things be fulfilled. For heaven and earth shall fail, but
my word shall never fail.

It is written in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 24.
that when S. Paul preached before the president of Judea of the terrible
things of this day, the same president began to tremble, and quake, at the
words which the Apostle spoke, notwithstanding that he was an infidel, and
had no belief at all in this mystery. Whereby it may appear, what terrible
things those were, that the Apostle then spoke of, since the only sownde of
them was able to cause such a great fear and tremblinge in a man that did not
believe them. Now the Christian that belieueth them, and holds them for a
matter of faith, what a lively sense and feelinge should he have in these
things, when he hears, reads, or considers them?

And let no man think to excuse him self, pretendinge innocence, and
sayeinge, that these threatninges are not spoken unto him, but to unjust and
wicked persons. S. Jerome.
For S. Jerome was a just man, and yet for all that he saiede: That so often as
he remembered the day of judgment, both his heart and body trembled for very
fear. The Prophet David also was a just man, yea, he was a man according to
Gods own heart, and yet for all this he had so great a fear of the account of
this day, that he saiede in a certain Psalm: Psalm. 142.
O Lord enter not into iudgmente with thy servant, for in thy sight no man
lyuinge shall be justified. The holy man Job likewise was a most innocent, and
just man, and yet for all that he lived in such exceedinge fear all the days
of his life, that he reports thus of himself, Job. 31.23.
and says: Like as he that saileth in the mids of a stormye tempest is in
great fear when he sees the furious raginge waves coming upon him: even so
have I trembled always before the majesty of almighty God, and my fear has
been so passinge great, that I was not able to abide the heavy burden
thereof. But above all these, the Apostle S. Paul was a very just man, and
yet for all that he said thus of himself: 1. Cor. 4.4.
I feel no remorse of conscience of any thing that I have done amiss, and
yet I account not my self safe, and secure, forsomuche as our Lord is he
that shall be my judge.

As if he had said in express words: Many times it may happen, that in our
own sight we find our selves to be without blemishe in our works, and yet in
the sight of almighty God we be far otherwise. For that which lies hidden
from the eyes of men, is not hid from the eyes of almighty God. Unto a rude
and unskillful painter the work that he has drawn seems to be very
perfect: but a conninge and skillful painter will find many defectes worthy
to be noted in it. Now how far greater defectes and imperfections shall the
most high goodness and wisdom of almighty God find in a creature so evil
inclined as man is: Job. 15.16.
Who (as Job says) drincketh sin, and iniquity, as it were water. Again,
if the swoorde of almighty God did find so much to be pared of in heaven, how
much more shall it find in earth, which brings forth nothing else but
brambles, and briars? And who is he that has all the corners of his soul so
pure, and clean, but that he shall have neide to say with the Prophet: Psalm.
18.13.
Ab occultis meis munda me Domine: Cleanse me o Lord from my secret sins.

Wherefore it behooves all men to live in great fear and dread of this day
of iudgmente, be their life never so just: saying the day is so dreadful, our
life so faulty, and the Judge so just: and above all, saying his judgments
be so secret, and profounde, that no man knowethe what lotte shall fall unto
him. But (as our savior says: Math. 24.40.
) Two shall be in the feilde, the one shall be taken, and the other forsaken: Two
in one bed, the one shall be taken, and the other forsaken: Note here against
the presumptuous security and assurance of salvation tawght by the Heretics.
Two grindinge in one mill, the one shall be taken, and the other forsaken. In
which words we be given to understand, that of such persons as are all of one
same state, and manner of life, some shall be carried up to heaven, and some
thrown down into the bottomless pit of hell; insomuch as by this and many
other places of the holy scriptures it playnlie appears, that no man can
account him self secure, and assured to be saved, Psalm. 18. verse. 13.14.
Eccles. 9.1. Eccles. 12.14. Eccles. 5.5. Job. 31.14.23. Daniell. 4.24. Math.
12.36. Math. 19.17. Joan. 8.31. Joan. 15.7.14. Romans 2.13. Romans 8.17. 1. Cor.
4.4. 1. Cor. 9.27. 1. Cor. 10.12. 1. Cor. 13.2.13. 2. Cor. 5.10.11. Galat.
5.24. Philip. 2.12. Iac. 2 14.17.24. 1. Pet. 1.16. 1. Pet. 2.21. 2. Pet. 1.10.
1. Joan. 2.3.5.6. 1. Joan. 3.7.24. 1. Joan. 4.12. 1. Joan. 5.3. Apoc. 3.11.
Apoc. 14.7.
so long as he lives in this frail and transitory life.

How rigorous the day of Judgment shall be. I.
TO consider well of the greatness of this judgment, thou must first presuppose,
that there is no tongue in the world able to express the least part of the
troubles, that shall be upon this day.

And therefore the Prophet Ioell being desirous to speak of the greatness
thereof, fownde his wits and senses so weak, and confounded, that he began
to stutte and stammer like a child, and to say, Ioell. 1.15.
A! a! a! what a day shall that be? The like manner of speech used the Prophet
Jeremy, Ierem. 1.6.
when almighty God would send him to preach: to signify that he was an
infant, and altogether unable to discharge so great an embassy, as he was
appointed by almighty God to do. And the same manner does the Prophet Joel use
even at this time, to give us to understand, that there is no tongue in the
world, that will not stutte and stammer like a child, when it shall go about
to signify what things shall happen upon this dreadful day.

Upon this day almighty God will reduce all such filthiness as the wicked have
caused in the world through their wicked works, to his first dew form, and
comelines. And as their filthy and wicked acts have been many, and great,
even so must the purifyenge of them be proportionable to the acts committed.
And so shall the world be so much bewtified by the punishment of the wicked,
as it has been defiled and disfigured through their offenses. When a man has
by reason of some great fall put his arm out of ioynte, the more it is out of
iointe, the more grief and pain must he afterward abide, before it can be
set in iointe again, and brought to his dew proper place. Now whereas the
wicked have disordered all things in this world, and set them out of iointe,
and wrenched them out of their natural places, when that heavenly reformer
shall come to restore the world by punnisheme^t of so many disorders, how
great shall the punnishement be, where so many and so great disorders have
been?

This dreadful day is called not only the day of Anger, but also the day
of our Lord, as the Prophet Joel terms it. Joel. 1.15. why the day of
judgment is called the day of our Lord.
Geauinge us thereby to understand, that all other days have been the days
of men, in which they have fulfilled their own wills against the will of god,
but this day is called the day of our Lord, because upon this day our Lord
will do his will against the will of men. Thou do now swear, and
forswear, and blaspheme, and almighty God in this mean while holds his
peace, and says nothing unto it: but be thou well assured the day shall
come when almighty God will break of his long silence of so many days, and
of so many injuries, and will answer for his own honor. There be but two
days, the one is the day of our Lord: and the other is the day of men. 2.
Paral. 18.
So that there be no more but two days in the world: the one is the day of
our Lord, and the other the day of men. Man whiles his day endures may do
whatsoever he lists, and almighty God will hold his peace, and as it were
wincke at all his doings. Upon this day the King Sedechias may command
the Prophet of God to be cast into a well, and bread to be given unto him by
ounces. He may use and abuse the Prophet at his pleasure, and at all those
injuries almighty God will hold his peace. But after this day there will
come an other day, and almighty God will take king Sedechias, and deprive
him of his kingedome: he will destroy Jerusalem, and bring king Sedechias in
fetters before the king of Babylon, and there shall all his sons and
friends be murdered before his face. There shall he command his eyes (which
were preserved to see so many miseries) to be plucked out of his head: which
done, he shall cause him to be carried in fetters to Babylon, and confyne him
into a prison, there to remain all the days of his life. So that as man has
liberty to do upon his day whatsoever he lists, without any restraint, or
impediment at all: even so will almighty God have free liberty to do upon
his day whatsoever his will and pleasure shall be, and no man shall be able to let
or disturb him.

Of the signs that shall go before the day of the general Judgment. II.
FINALLY, if thou desire to understand what manner of day this shall be,
consider what signs shall go before it. For by the signs thou shall perceive
what the thing shall be that is signified: as by the eueninge, and Vigile, thou
may understand what the feast of the day shall be.

First of all, when that day shall be, no man knows: Marc. 13.
no, not the Angels in heaven, nor yet the son himself (to reueile it to
any other) but the father only. Howbeit certain signs shall go before it,
whereby men may prognosticate not only of the nearnes of the day, but also
of the greatness and dreadfulnes thereof. Math. 24.7.
For as our Savior says: Before the coming of this day there shall be great
wars and troubles in the world. Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kindome: And there shall be great earthquakes in many places,
and pestilence, and famine, and terrible things appearinge in the aier, and
other great signs and wonders.

And (which is more dreadful than all this) there shall come that great
horrible persecution so oftentimes mentioned in the holy Scriptures, The
horrible persecution of Antichrist. The Jews shall receive and worship
Antichrist for their Messiah: as appears in John. 5. verse. 43. and 1. John.
2. verse. 22.
which shall be executed by the most crewell persecutor that ever the Catholic
Church has had, to wit, by Antichrist, who shall impugn the Catholic
Church most malitiouslie, not only with most crewell wars, and horrible
torments, but also with apparent and feyned miracles. Consider now therefore
with thy self (as the blessed holy Pope S. Gregory says) what a terrible
time that of Antichrist shall be, when the godly martyr shall offer his body to
the tormentor: and the tormentor shall work miracles before his face. Math.
24. verse. 21.22. Marc. 13. verse. 19.20.
To conclude, the tribulation of these days (as our Savior says) shall be so
great, as the like was never since the beginning of the world, Antichrists
reign and persecution shall not continewe but three years and a half. as
appears in Daniell. 7. verse. 25. Daniell. 12. verse. 7. and 11. Apoc. 11.
verse. 2. and. 3. Apoc. 13. verse. 5. Ezech. 32.
nor never shall be: insomuche that if almighty God of his great mercy did not
provide to shorten these days, all fleashe should not be saved: But for the
electes sake, the days (of Antichrist) shall be shortened.

After these signs (as this day of the general judgment draws nearer, and
nearer) there shall appear other signs more dreadful than these, in the
Son, in the Moon, and in the Sterres. Of which dreadful signs our Lord
spoke by his Prophet Ezechiel, sayeinge: I will cause the sterres of heaven to
be darckened over thee, and I will cover the Son with a cloud, and the Moon
shall not show fourth her light. And I will cause all the lights of heaven
to mourn, and lamente over thee. And I will send darcknes over all the land.
Now when these great signs and alterations shall appear in the heavens, what
may we look for upon the earth, which is wholly governed by the heavens? We
see in a common weal, that when the heads that govern it are in any
tumulte, all the other members and parts thereof are also in a like tumulte,
and uproar, and the whole commonweal is tossed and tormoyled with arms, and
dissension.

Now if all this body of the world be governed by the virtues and influences
of the heavens, in case both the heavens and this body be altered, and out of
their natural order, in what ruthful case the^ shall all the members and
parts be, that depend of them? The aier shall be full of lighteninges,
whyrlewindes, and blasinge sterres: The earth shall be full of wide yawninge
cleiftes, fearful tremblinges, and quakinges. And these earthquakes (as it is
thought) shall be so great, and violent, that they shall be able to overthrow not
only the sumptuous palaces, high towers, and strong Castles, but even the
very mountains and rocks them selves shall be also shaken and overwhelmed by
them, and quite removed out of their places. But most of all other elements
the Sea shall at that time show greatest rage, and fury, and the waves
thereof shall be so high, and so furious, that it shall seem that they will
utterly ouerwhelme all the whole earth. Such as dwell by the Sea side shall be
in great dread and terror by reason of the great rysinge of waters: and such as
dwell further of shall be wounderfullie afraid of the horrible roringes, and
noyces of it, which shall be so extremely outrageous, that they shall be heard
many miles of.

In what a pittiefull case then I pray you shall men be in these days? How
shall they be astonished, confounded, yea utterly bereued of their senses, of
their speech, and of their taste of all things? Luc. 21.
Our Savior says that at this time the people shall be in great anguishe, and
distres, and that men shall go as though they were withered, and dried up,
and had no life in them, by reason of the great fear of those things that
shall happen to the world. Then shall they say one to an other: What means
this? What do these terrible prognostications signify? What will the world
at the length bring forth, that it now swells and rages in such furious
wise? What shall the end be of all these so great tossinges and alterations of
all things? Now after this sort shall men go up and down sore afraid, and
dismaide, their hearts failinge them, and carienge their arms a cross, and
one of them lokinge pittiefullie upon an other. And they shall be in so great
dread, and fear, beholdinge one an other to be so far changed, and
disfigured, that even that alone were enoughe to dismaie the^, although there
were nothing else to be feared. All occupations and trades of the world shall
then cease every where: and so shall in like manner all study, and desire of
purchasinge, and gayninge. For the greatness of the fear shall hold men's hearts
so thoroughly occupied, that they shall not only forget these things, but they
shall also forget even to eat, and drink, and to do such things as are
necessary for the maintenance and sustentation of their lives. Their chiefest
care shall be where to seike out sure and safe places to defend them selves from
earthquakes, and from the tempesteous storms of the aier, and from the
inundations of the Sea. And so men shall go to hyde themselves in the caves
and dens of wild beasts: And the wild beasts shall seike likewise to save
them selves in the lodgings and howses of men. And so all things shall be
tossed and turmoiled vpside down, and be full of terror, and confusion. The
present calamities shall afflicte them very sore: but the great dread and
fear of those that are to come shall vex them worse, because they know not
what the end shall be, of such doleful and lamentable beginninges. I wa^te
words to declare this matter, as it were requisite to be declared. And all
that is said, is much less then that, which shall be in deed. We see even now
by experience when any outrageous tempest rises in the Sea, or when any
stormy whirlwinde or earthquake happens upon the land, how wonderfully men
are dismaide, how they tremble, and be astonished, and how both their strength
and wits do fail them. Now then when the heaven, the earth, the Sea, and
the aier shall be wholly distempered, and disordered, when in all regions and
elements in the world there shall be peculiare storms, and tempests, when the
Son shall threaten with mourninge, the Moon with blood, and the Sterres with
their fallinges, who shall be able to eat? Who shall be able to sleep? Who shall be
able to take so much as one minute of rest, being compassed on each side with
so many outrageous storms, and tempests? O how miserable and unhappy is the
state and condition of the wicked, who are threatened with all these fearful
prognostications? And contrariewise how blessed is the state of the good, and
Godly, unto whom all these things are favors, comfortes, and good tidinges
of the happy prosperity so near at hand approchinge then unto them? How
ioyefully shall they then singe with the Prophet: God is our refuge, Psalm. 45.
and our strength, and therefore we will not fear though the whole earth be
tossed, and tormoyled, and the mountains be removed, and fall into the
bothome of the Sea. Luc. 21.30.31.
Like as you understand (says our Savior) when the fig tree, and all
other trees, begin to blossom, and to bring fourth their fruit, that then
the spring time draws near at hand, even so when ye shall see these
things come to pass, then may ye perceive, that the kingedome of God is at
hand.

Then may ye open your eyes, and lift up your head, because the day of your
redemtion approaches. How ioyefull shall the good and virtuous then be? How
well shall they think all their travels, and labors employed? And
contrariewise, how woeful and sorrowful shall the wicked be, and how sore
shall they then condemn all the steps, and ways, of their sinful lives?

Of the end of the world: and of the resurrection of the dead. III.
AFTER all these signs shall the coming of the Judge approach near at
hand, before whom there shall go an universal floude of fire, There shall be
an universal floude of fire before the coming of the Judge.
which shall burn and consume to ashes all the glory of the world.

This fire shall be to the wicked a beginning of their pain: to the good a
beginning of their glory: and unto them that have not made full satisfaction,
it shall be a purgatory for their offenses. Then shall all the glory of the
world have an end. Then shall the mouinges of the heavens, the course of the
planettes, and the generation of things cease. Then shall the variety of
times, with all other things that depend of the heavens, have an end. And so
S. John writes in the Apocalippes, Apoc. 10.
That he saw a mighty Angel clothed with a bright cloud. His face was like
the son: he had a rainbow for a crown on his head: his feet were like
pillars of fire, of the which, one he set on the Sea, and the other upon the
land. And he says, that this Angel lifted up his arm toward heaven, and
swear by him that lives everlastingly world without end, that from
thenceforthe there should be no more time. That is to say: that there should
be no mouinge of the heavens, nor of any other thing that is governed by
them. And (which is more than all this) no place of penance, nor any time to
merit or demerite for the life to come.

After this fire there shall come (as the Apostle says) an Archangell with
great power, 2. These. 4.
and majesty, and he shall sownde a trompette, (to wit: At doomes day an
Archangell with the sound of a trompette shall sommon all nations to come to
the general iudgmente.
a great and terrible voice) whose sound shall be heard over all the parts of
the world, and with this trompette he shall summon all nations to come to the
general judgment. This is that fearful voice, whereof S. Jerome speaks:
sayeinge, Whether I eat, or drink, or whatsoever I do, me seems always
that I hear that voice soundinge in mine ears, which shall say, rise up all
ye that are dead, and come to judgment. Who shall appeal from this sommons?
Who shall be able to avoid this judgment? Whose heart shall not tremble and quake
for fear, at the terrible sownde of this voice? This voice shall take from
death all her spoils, and cause her to restore again all that she has taken
away from the world. And so S. John says, that then The Sea shall restore
the dead bodies, which it has had. Apoc. 20.
And likewise both death, and hell, shall restore all those bodies that they
have. Now what a wounderfull sight shall that be, to see the Sea, and the
earth, to bring forth in all parts such variety of bodies, and to see so
many huge armies, and so many sorts and diversities of nations and people
assemble together? There shall the Alexanders appear: There the Zerxes, and
Artaxerxes: There the Dariies, and the Emperors of Rome, and the most mighty
Kings and puyssante Princes of the world, with an other manner of habit, and
behavior, and with other kind of thoughts, much differinge from those, that
they had in this life. To be short, there shall all the children of Adam meet
together, every one to give up an account of his own life, and to be judged
according to his works.

There shall be a great difference at the day of resurrection between the
bodies of the just, and the bodies of the wicked.
Howbeit although all persons shall rise again at that day never to die any
more, yet shall there be a great difference between bodies and bodies. For the
bodies of the just shall rise very bewtifull and bright like the Son. But the
bodies of the wicked shall rise very dark, and filthy, even like unto death
it self. Now what a great joy shall it be then unto the sowles of the just,
to see their desire now fully accomplished? What a joy shall it be, to see
the^ selves after so long a banishement to be united and joined everlastingly
in ce^panie with their most dear and louinge brethern? With what joy may the
soul say then unto the body? O my body, Of the ioyefull meeting of the
sowles and bodies of the just at the day of general iudgeme^te.
and faithful companion, that have helped me to gain this crown, that have
so oftentimes fasted, watched, and suffered with me the painful strookes and
lashes of discipline, the travel of poverty, the cross of penance, and the
contradictions and reproaches of the world? How often times have thou spared
the meat from thine own belly, to give it to the poor? How often have thou
lacked clothes thy self to clothe the naked? How often have thou renounced and
lost thine own right, and title, for that thou would not break peace, and
be at discention with thy neighbor? Wherefore it is meet that thou should
now be partaker of this heavenly treasure, saying thou have holpe^me to gain
the same: And it is meet that thou should be my companion in this my
glory, saying thou have been my companion in all my pains, and labors. The^
shall these two faithful friends be joined together in one subject, not (as
they were in this life) with contrary appetites, and desires, but with a leage
of perpetual peace, and conformity. So as they may singe, and say for ever.
Behold what a good and ioyefull thing it is, Psalm. 132. Of the sorrowful and
grievous meetinge that shall be of the sowles and bodies of the damned persons,
at the day of general judgment.
for brethern to dwell together in one. But contrariewise, what a heaviness, and
grief shall it then be to the soul of the damned person, when he shall see
his body in an ugly form, as there it shall be given unto him, to wit: black,
filthy, stinckinge, and horrible. Then shall he say: O cursed body! O
beginning, and end of my pains, and sorrows! O cause of my damnation! Now
art thou no more my companion, but mine enemy: Now art thou no more my helper,
but my persecutor: Now art thou no more my habitation, but the chain, and
snare of my destruction. O cursed taste! How dearly do I pay now for thy
delicacies, and delights? O stinckinge fleashe, that have thus brought me to
these painful horrible torments, by yeeldinge to thy lusts, and pleasures!
What? Alas! is this the body for whose sake I committed so many sins? Were
these the delights of this body, that caused me utterly to cast away my
self? Was it for this stinckinge muckhill, that I have lost for ever the
kingdom of heaven? Was it for this vile and filthy carkas, that I have lost
for ever the glory of life everlasting? O ye infernal furies rise up now
against me, and tear and rent me in pieces, for I have well deserved these
horrible torments! Cursed be the day of my unfortunate birthe, saying my hap
must be so miserable, as to suffer everlasting torments in the most horrible
pit of hell, for so short pleasures, and delights.

These and other more desperate words shall the damned soul speak unto that
body which she loved so exceedingly in this tra^sitorie world. But tell me o
miserable, soul, why do thou now so much abhor that thing, which
heretofore thou louedst so well? Is not this fleashe thy dearly beloved? Is
not this the belly, which thou made thy God? Is not this the face, which
thou did keep so warily from the son, and wind? Is not this the visage,
which thou did paint with so many artificial colors? Are not these the
arms, and fingers, which glistered with ringes of gold, and dyamondes? Is not
this the body, for whose sake search was made both by land, and Sea, to
furnishe a table for it with all delicate and deintie disshes, to have a fine
and soft bed, to procure curious and costly garments? Who has now so
altered thy affection? Who has made thy body to look now so horrible, and
ugly, which before seemed so fair, and amiable? Thou see here now Christian
brother, what end the glory of the world has, with all the vain pleasures
and delights of the body.

Of the coming of the Judge: Of the matter of the judgment: And of the
witnesses, and accusors, that shall be there against the wicked. IIII.
NOW when all mankind shall be raised again, and assembled together in one
place, expectinge the coming of the Judge, Act. 10.
then shall he whom almighty God has appointed to be judge over the quick
and the dead come down. Note here the two co^minges of Christ: the first was
with great humility: and the second shall be with great majesty and glory.
And like as at his first coming he came with very great humility, and
meikenes, inuitinge men unto peace, and calling them unto penance: even so at
his second coming he shall come with very great majesty, and glory,
accompanied with all the powers and principalities of heaven, threateninge all
those with the fury of his anger, that refused to use the meeknes of his
mercy. At this time the fear and terror of the wicked shall be so great, that
as the Prophet Esaie says, Esa. 2.19.
they shall seike the cliftes of stones, and the hollow places of the rocks,
to hide them selves therein, for the great fear they shall have of our Lord,
and of the glory of his majesty, when he comes to judge the world, To
conclude, this fear shall be so great, Apoc. 20.
that as S. John says, both the heavens and the earth shall fly from the
presence of the judge, and shall find no place where to hide them selves. Now
o ye heavens, why do ye fly away? What have ye done? Why are ye afraid? And
if by the heavens be understood the blessed spirits that are in heaven: O ye
blessed spirits that were created and confirmed in grace, At the day of
general Iudgmente even the blessed spirits shall be afraid to see so great
majesty and indignation in Christ the judge.
why do ye fly away? What have ye done? Why are ye afraid? Vndowbtedly they
are not afraid for any danger that is toward themselves, but they be
afraid to behold in the judge such a great majesty, and indignation: the
greatness whereof shall be able to stryke all the heavens with terror, and
admiration. When the Sea is outrageous, and tempestious, even he that stands
safe upon the shore is in a kind of fear and admiration. When the father
goes like a lion about his house in punishinge his bond slave, his innocent
son is also afraid, although he know right well that his fathers rage is
not bent against him, but against the slave. Now what shall the wicked do at
this time, when even the just shall be so greatly afraid? If the heavens fly for
fear, what shall the earth do? And if those that be wholly spirit do
tremble, and quake, what shall they do that have been wholly fleashe? Esa. 64.
And if (as the Prophet says) the mountains shall melt in this day before
the face of almighty God: What stony hard hearts then have we, that for all
this be nothing at all moved?

The holy cross shall come before Christ the Judge at the day of general
judgment, and be a witness against the wicked. Math. 24.30.
Before the Judge there shall come that royal standarde of the cross, to be a
witness of the redemption and remedy which almighty God sent to the world:
and that the world would not receive it. And so the holy cross shall there
justify the cause of almighty God, and leave the wicked void of al manner of
comfort, and excuse. Then shall all nations of the earth (says our Savior)
weep and lament: and they all shall stryke and bear upon their breasts. O how
great cause shall they then have to weep, and wail! They shall weep, because
at that time they can neither do penance^, nor fly from the justice of
almighty God, nor appeal from his sentence. They shall bewail their sins
past, their shame present, and the torments that are to come. They shall
bewail their miserable hap, their unfortunate birthe, and their cursed end.
For these and many other causes they shall weep, and wail very bitterly:
and as persons wholly dismayed and fettered in all parts, and without all
manner of comfort, and remedy, they shall wringe their hands, and stryke the^
selves upon their breasts.

Our savior Christ the Judge shall make a seperatio^ between the good and the
wicked. Math. 25.
Then shall the Judge make a division between the evil, and the good: and
place the goats at his left hand, and the sheep at his right hand. O how
happy and blessed shall those persons be, that shall be though worthy to have a
place emonge those elected sheep! O Lord I most humbly beseech thee let me
have tribulation here in this world: Punish me here: cut me in pieces here:
burn me here, so that I may there be placed at thy right hand. Then shall
the general judgment begin to be solemnised: and the causes of each one
shall be thoroughly scanned, and examined: According as the Prophet Daniell
writes in these words. Daniel. 7.9.
I stood (says he) attentively, and I saw certain seats set in their
places, and the ancient of years sat down, whose garmente was white as
snow, and the hear of his head like the pure wolle. The throne wherein he sat
was like flames of fire, and the wheels thereof like burninge fire. And a
river of raginge fire issued and came forth from before him. Thowsande
thousands were attendant to serve him, and ten hundred thousand thowsandes
stood waitinge before him. etc. I beheld all this in the vision of the night,
and I saw one coming in the clouds, who seemed to be the son of man.
Hitherto are the words of the Prophet Daniell. Whereunto S. John adds, and
says. Apoc. 20.12.
I saw all the dead both great and small standinge before this throne, and
there the books were opened: and an other book opened which is the book of
life, and the dead were judged according to the contents in those books,
according to their works.

Behold here dear Christian brother the measure, whereby thou shall be
judged. Behold here the tax, and prices, whereby all things that thou do
shall be valued, and esteemed, and not by the fond judgment of the world,
which has the false and counterfeit weightes of Canaan in their hands, Os^^.
12.
in whose balance virtue and vice are judged to be of small weight, and
account. In these books are written all our whole life, and that with such
care, and diligence, that a word has no sooner passed thy mowth, but it is
forthwith noted, and set in his proper register.

But of what things (trow ye) will the Judge require an account of us? Of
what things we must give an account. Job. 31.4.
O Lord (says Job) thou have nombered all the steps of my life. Certainly,
there shall not be so much as one idle word, nor one only thowghte whereof an
account will not be required in that judgment. Yea, Math. 12.36.
and not only of those things that we either think, or do, but also of
those that we leave undone: of such things I mean, as we are bownde to do.
If thou say at the day of Judgment: o Lord, I have not sworn: the Judge
will answer, that thy son, or thy servant has sworn, whom thy duty was to
have chastised and corrected. And we shall give an account not only of our
evil works, but also even of our good works, with what intention and after
what manner we did them. Finally, as S. Gregory says: S. Gregory Math. 12.36.
An account shall there be required of us of every point and moment of our
life, how and after what sort we have spente them. Consideringe therefore that
such a strait acco^pte shall be required of us, how happens it, that we that
believe this as a most certain truth, do nevertheless live with such
security, and negligence as we do? Wherein do we put our affiance?
Wherewithal do we persuade and flatter our selves in the midst of so many
dreadful perilles and dangers? How comes this to pass, that those persons
that have most cause to fear this dreadful day, do least fear it, and
those that have least cause to fear it, do live in greatest fear thereof?
Job. 2. verse. 3.
Holy Job was a just man (for so almighty God witnessed of him with his own
mouth) and yet for all this he lived in so great fear and dread of his
account at the day of Judgment, that he saiede: What shall I do, Job. 31.14.
when almighty God comes to judge, and when he begins to question with
me, what answer shall I make unto him? Suerlie these be words that proceed
from a very sore afflicted, and troubled heart. What shall I do says he: As
if he had saiede: One care I have that troubles me continually: One nail I
carry always fixed in my heart, that will not suffer me to take any rest. What
shall I do? Whither shall I go? What answer shall I make, when almighty God
shall enter into judgment with me? But o holy and blessed man Job, why art
thou thus afraid? Why art thou thus troubled and vexed? Job. 29.15.16.
Art not thou he that saiede: I have been a father unto the poor, an eye unto
the blind, and feet unto the lame. Art not thou he that said, Job. 27.6.
that In all thy life time thy heart never reproved thee of any wicked deed.
Now being a man of so great innocence, why o holy Job art thou thus
afraid? Truly the cause is, for that this holy man knew right well that
almighty God looked not with fleashlie eyes, and that he judged not according
to the iudgeme^te of men, in whose eyes often times that thing shyneth very
gaye and bright, which in the sight of almighty God is very abominable. Thou
art o holy Job very just indede, yea even for this cause thou art very
just, becauthou live in so great fear. This fear of this holy man Job (my
dear brethern) condemns our false security. These words of his, overthrow
our vain confidence. For which of us has at any time in respect of this
care of our dreadful account at the day of Judgment once refrained from his
dynner, or supper, or broken his sleep? Whereas those devout godly persons
that think hereupon as they ought to think, do oftentimes loose their
sleep, and their appetite to their meat, yea, and sometimes more than that
also. We read in the lives of the ancient holy fathers, that wha^ one of
those holy me^ saw one of his scholars laughinge he reprehended him for it,
and saiede: What? knowinge as thou do, that thou must yield an account to
almighty God before heaven and earth, art thou (that notwithsta^dinge), so
bold as to laughe? This holy father thought that that man which looked
earnestly for this dreadful account could hardly laughe.

Now as touching accusors, and witnesses, there shall not want in this
behalf. For our own very consciences shall be witnesses and cry out against
us: All creatures which we have abused shall be witnesses against us: And above
all, our Lord him self whom we have offended shall be also a witness against us:
As he himself has signified by one of his Prophets, sayeinge: Malach 3.5.
I will be a swifte witness against inchaunters, adulterers, perjured persons, and
against those that seek cauels to defeit the labourer of his day wages, and
against them that do evil entreat the widow, and Orphan, and oppress
pilgrims, and strangers. For they do not fear me, says our Lord.

The devil shall accuse the wicked at the day of iudgme^te.
Neither shall there want accusors against the wicked. For the devil himself
shall be a sufficient accusor: who (as S. Augustine writes) shall allege very
exactly before the judge his right, and title, and shall say unto him. O most
just and righteous judge, thou can not of justice but give sentence and
adiudge these wicked traitors to be mine: for so much as they have been always
mine, and have in all things fulfilled my will. Thine they were, (I grant,)
because thou did create them, and make them after thy Image, and likeness,
and redeime them with thy blood. But they have defaced thy Image, and put on
mine. They have refused thine obedience, and embraced mine. They have despised
thy commandments, and observed mine. They have lived with my spirit. They
have imitated my works. They have walked in my steps. And in each thing
have followed my counsels. Consider how much more they have been mine than
thine, as appears herein, that notwithstanding I gave them nothing, I
promised them nothing, nor laid my shoulders on the Cross for them, yet have
they always obeyed my commandments, and not thine. If I commanded them to
swear, and forswear, to rob, and to kill, to commit adultery, fornication,
simonie, and usury, and to deny thy holy name, all this they did willingly,
and with great facility. If I commanded them to bestow their lands, their
goods, their life, and their soul, for a point of honor, and estimation,
which I persuaded them in any wise to maintain, or for a false delighte
whereunto I invited them, they did forthwith very willingly hazard all this
for my sake. But for thee, that art their God, their creator, and their
redeemer, that gave the^ their lands, their goods, their health, and life,
that have offered unto the^ thy grace, and promised them thy glory, and above
all this, have suffered most cruel death upon the cross for them, they never
took the least pain and labor in the world. How oftentimes have thou come to
their doors in great poverty, nakedness, and full of sores? And what alms
had thou of them, but a waiewarde answer, and shuttinge their doors in a
great fury and anger upon thee, they being then more careful to feed their
hawks, their dogs, and their horses, and to clothe their walls with
hanginges of tapessarie, silk, and gold, than to relieve, clothe, and help
thee. Wherefore saying thou art a most Just Judge, and know that this is
most certainly true, the very order of justice requires, that they should
be now punnished for their injuries, and contemptes, done to so great a
majesty.

Now this accusation being found most true, Christ the judge will pronounce
that terrible sentence against the wicked, Math. 25.
sayeinge: Depart ye cursed into the everlasting fire, which is prepared for
Satan, and his angels. for I was hongrie, and ye gave me not to eat, I was
thirsty, and ye gave me not to drink, etc. And then shall the good go to
life everlasting, and the wicked to fire everlasting. Now who is able to
express what an intolerable anguishe, and grief, it will be to the damned
persons, when they shall hear those most terrible words pronounced against
them? There shall they cry out to the mountains, to come and fall upon them,
and to the hills to cover them. There shall they blaspheme, and renye, and
open their sacrilegious mouths even against almighty God. There shall they
continually curse the day of their birthe, and their unhappy state. There
shall their day wholly end. There shall their glory be finished. There
shall their prosperity be utterly extinguished, and overthrown. There shall
the day of their horrible pains and greifes begin in their bodies to
continewe for ever, and ever. As S. John signifies in his Apocalippes under
the name of Babylon, in these words: Apoc. 18.
The kings of the earth shall weep and wayle over themselves, that have
enjoyed the pleasures and delights of Babylon, and have committed fornication
with her, when they shall see the smooke that rises up from their torments,
and they shall endeavor to keep them selves a far of for fear of them, and
say: Woe, woe, be unto that great City of Babylon, for in one hour is her
judgment come. And the merchauntes of the earth shall lament, because now
there be none to bye their merchaundices of gold, and silver, and precious
stones. And they shall lament over her, and say: woe, woe, be unto that great
City, that was clothed with garments of purple, scarlett, silks, and
veluettes, and was covered over with gold, and precious stones. For in one
hour all this great riches shall perish, and come to naught.

Wherefore o my dear Christian brethern, if this must pass in this wise, let
us provide for our selves (I beseach you) whilst we have time here in this
life, and let us follow the counsel which he gives us, Christ is our
advocate duringe the time we live here: but after our departure out of this
life, he is no longer our advocate, but our Judge. For then the time is past of
deylinge any more by an advocate with almighty God: because the whole
process of all our life is already then come to an end: and the^ we be to
have forthwith a definitive sentence thereof according to our works. 1. Cor.
11.31.
who would lever be our advocate, than our judge: and there is none that
knows better what is requisite for that day, than he who must be the judge
of our cause. Christ then our judge teaches us breefelie what we ought to do,
in these words: Take heed (says he in the gospel of S. Luke cap. 21. verse.
34.) that your hearts be not burdened with over much eatinge, and drinkinge,
and with the cares of this life: and beware that that sudden day come not
upon you at unawares. For it shall come like a snare upon all that dwell upon
the face of all the earth. And therefore watch and pray at all times, that
ye may be worthy to be delivered from all these evils that are to come, and
that ye may appear before the son of man Now consideringe this my dear
brethern, come I most hartelie pray you, and let us arise whiles we have time
out of this so heavy sleep, before that darcke night of death fall upon us,
and before this dreadful day come, whereof the Prophet Malachie cap. 3.
says: Now he comes, and who dare abide his coming? And who shall be able to
behold the day thereof? Vndowbtedlie that man shall be able to abide this
dreadful day of judgment, that shall prevent the judge, and judge him self
before hand, according as S. Pawle forewarneth and counsels us.

FRYDAIE NIGHT. OF THE PAINS OF HELL. depiction of Christ Juntisem seruum
eijcite in (...) exterio^^ issi^ erit fl^^^, et stridor (...). Math. 15.30.

Quantum glorifi^auit se et in (...) suit: (...) date illi tormentum et lu^^^^
Apoc. ^8.^.15 (...)


THIS DAY (WHEN THOU HAVE MADE THE SIGN OF the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the pains of hell: to the intent that
as well by means of this meditation, as by the former, thy soul may be the
more confirmed in the fear of God, and abhorringe of sin, as we have there
declared.

THESE pains, (as S. Bonauenture How we must imagine the place of hell to be.
and similitudes, as the saints have taught us. Wherefore it shall do well
to imagine the place of hell (as he him self says) to be as it were an
obscure and darcke lake under the earth, or a passinge deep pit full of
fire, or as a horrible and darcke City wholly bourninge with terrible flames
of fire, in which none Of two principal kinds of pains in hell.
but only the furious raginge of hellysh tormentors, and ruethfull
lame^tations of damned persons tormented with continual weapinge, and
wailinge, and gnashinge of teeth.

Now in this cursed place there be two principal kinds of pains, the one,
which the divines call, Poenam sensus: a sensible pain: And the other, Poenam
damni: the pain of the loss of all losses. As towchinge the first pain, to
wit, Paena sensus.
the pain of sense: consider that there shall be no sense, neither within nor
without a man, but that it shall suffer his proper tormente. Eeach part of the
body of damned persons shall be tormented with his peculiar tormente. Eyes.
Ears.
For like as the wicked have offended almighty God with all their members, and
senses, and have made armor of them all to serve sin: even so will he
ordain, that they all shall there be tormented, each one of them with his
peculiar torment, and pay according to his desert. There shall the wanton and
lecherous eyes be tormented with the terrible ugly sight of devils. The
ears, with the confusion of such horrible cries, and lamentatio^s as shall
there be hard. The nose, Nose.
with the intolerable stenche of that filthy and lothesome place. The taste,
Taste. Towchinge.
with a most ravenous honger, and thirste. The towchinge, and all the members
of the body, with extreme cold, and fire. Imagination. Memory.
Understanding.
The imagination shall be tormented with conceiuinge of the greifes present. The
memory, by calling to mind the pleasures past. And the understanding, by
consideringe what benefits are lost, and what miseries are to come.

Finally, there shall all the miseries and torments that possibly may be
imagined be heaped together upon the damned person. For as S. Gregory says.
There shall be cold intolerable, fire unquenchable, the worm of conscience
that can not die, and a most horrible stenche that cannot be abidden. There
shall be palpable darckenes: whippes of tormentors: vision of foul fiendes, and
ugly devils: confusion of sins: and desperation of all goodness. Now tell me,
I pray you, if the least of all these pains that are suffered here in this
world though it were but for a very small time, do seem notwithstanding
so intolerable a thing, what shall it be, to suffer there at one time all
these multitude of horrible torments, in all the members, and senses, both
inward, and outward, and that not for the space of one night alone, nor of a
thousand nights, but for ever, and ever, duringe infinite worlds. What
sense, what words, what judgment is there in the world, that is able to
conceive and express this matter as it is indede?

And yet this is not the greatest pain that is there suffered. Paena da^ni, to
wit, the pain to be deprived for ever of the sight of almighty God.
For there is an other pain far greater without any comparison than all
these: to wit, that pain which the divines term Poenam damni: the pain of
loss, or deprivation. Which is to be deprived of the sight of almighty God,
and of his glorious company, for ever, and ever. And albeit this pain be
common to all the damned persons, yet shall it be much more grievous unto them,
that have had better means and opportunity than others, whereby to enjoy this
felicity: As namely all Christians, to whom the Gospel has been preached,
and espetially all naughty religious persons, and preistes, who as they have
had greater means and prouocations to obtain this everlasting felicity:
even so shall they be more vexed and greiued for the loss thereof.

These are the pains that do generally appertain to all the damned. In hell
besides the general pains, there be also particular pains, proportionable to
the quality of every sins, not forgiven in this life.
But besides these general pains, there be other particular pains, which
every one of them shall also suffer according to the quality of his sin.
For there shallbe one kind of pain for the proud man, an other for the
envious: one for the covetous, and an other for the lecherous: and so in like
manner for all other sins. In which punnishemente the wisdom and justice of
almighty God shall wonderfully appear, in that emonge such an infinite number
of sins, and sinners, he shall be able to judge very perfectly all the
excess of each one, and shall measure unto them as it were in a balance the
pains proportionable to their sins. As the Wiseman says: Prou. 16.11.
The judgments of our Lord are by weight and measure. O what a doleful
thing shall it be to the wicked, when they shall see how almighty God will
then pay them home in the very joints.

And what a delighte shall it then be to the just, when they shall see such a
wonderful just proportion observed, in allottinge pains, and torments,
emonge such a great multitude of sins. The pain in hell shall be taxed
according to the pleasure and delight received in this world.
There shall the pain be taxed according to the pleasure and delight
received. And the confusion according to the presomption, and pride: The
nakedness according to the superfluity and abundance. The honger and thirst
according to the gluttony and delicate deyntie fare in their life past. And
in this wise did almighty God command that naughty woman to be punished,
which is mentioned in the Apocalips, who sat upon the waters of the Sea,
holdinge a Cup in her hand full of poisoned pleasures, and delights.
Against whom was thondered out from heaven that terrible sentence, Apoc. 18.7.
which sayede: Look how much she has extolled her self, and enjoyed her
pleasures, and delights. even so proportionably give her torments, and
wailinge, and lamentation.

The eternity of the pains in hell.
And this is as it were the seal and keye of them all. For all the rest were
yet somewhat tolerable, if they might have some end. For So Much as nothing is
great that has an end. But to be tormented with most horrible pains that
have neither end, nor ease, nor mitigation, nor declination, nor change, nor
hope that ever they will finish, and have an end, neither the pains, nor he
that gives them, nor he that suffers them, but to be as it were a perpetual
bannishement never to be remitted, this is a matter able to make a man besides
him self, that should consider it deeply, and with good attention.

Of this eternity and everlasting sufferinge of these pains and torments in
hell, comes that horrible hatred, which the damned have against almighty
God, and those blasphemies which they shall utter with great despitefull rage
against him. For when they shall be in utter despair of his amity, and
friendship, they shall know that they shall never be received again into
his grace, and favor, and that none of all their most grievous and horrible
torments shall ever be deminished, or assuaged, again, when they shall
consider that almighty God is he, that does thus tormente, and punish them,
and that it is he that fettereth them from above, and keeps them prisoners in
that fiery torme^tinge chain, they will be in such an exceedinge anger, and
rage, against him, that they will never cease day, nor night, blaspheminge
his holy name.

THE FIFTE TREATISE. OF THE CONSIDERATION OF the pains of hell: Wherein the
former meditation is declared more at lardge.
THE consideration of the pains of hell is greatly profitable for diverse and
sundry respects. First, The consideration of the pains of hell moves us to
sustain the labors and austeritie of penance.
it

The consideration of the pains of hell, helpethe us to overcome the
temptation of the devil.
when at the first entry of any evil thought, we do forthwith call to
mind the horror of these pains. For by this mean we do quench the flame of
the delighte (before it burn) with the remembrance of the horrible flames of
hell fire, which shall burn everlastingly. According hereunto, it is written
of one of those ancient fathers, that lived in the desert, that being upon a
time tempted by the enemy of mankind with an evil thought, he laid his hand
upon certain burninge coals, to try whether he could abide that little heat,
and perceiuinge that he was not able to abide it, he said unto him self:
What? If I can not abide this little heat for so short a time, how shall I be
able to abide the horrible fire of hell, which shall endure for ever, and ever,
world without end?

The consideration of the pains of hell, helps us, to stir up in our
hearts the fear of God.
which is the beginning of wisdom, and the original of charity: and next
after charity it self it is the greatest bridle we can have to keep us from
all sin, and wickedness. Above all this, this consideration helps very much
to make us to be afraid of sin, consideringe what a miserable reward is
ordained for it, to The consideration of the pains of bell, helpethe very much
to make us afraid of sin.
death everlasting. Wherefore it is much to be meruailed how the Christians
that do both believe and openly confess this to be true, dare commit any one
deadly sin against almighty God. Two great wonders have happened in the
world in these kind of things. The one is, that whereas our Savior has
wrought so many miracles as he did here emonge men, there be yet a number of
men that do not believe in him. The other is, that of such as be Christians,
and do believe in him, there be yet nevertheless so many of them that dare
offend him. Certainly it was a wonderful matter, that when our Savior emonge
other wonders had wrought that great miracle in raisinge up Lazarus from death,
when he had been dead for the space of four days, Joan. 11.45.46.
yet there were many of them that were there present at the doing thereof,
that would not believe in him. And it is also wonderful, that whereas men do
now believe by reason of his preachinge, that there is pain and glory
everlasting, (all this belief, and preachinge notwithsta^dinge) there be yet
so many Christians that dare offend him. It is a wonderful matter to see
after so great miracles so great infidelity. And it is no less wonderful
also, to see after so great faith such corrupt and wicked life.

But because this proceeds rather of the want of consideration, than of the
want of faith, it is therefore a very profitable exercise, to consider and
weigh diligently those things that our faith tells us: to the end that by
understanding the greiuousnes of the pains of hell, we may live more warily,
and be the more afraid to commit any deadly sin, whereby to deserve such
great and everlasting pains.

Of two kinds of pains that are in hell. I.
AND although the pains in hell be innumerable, yet they all in conclusion (as
we have saiede) are reduced to two. Which are, Poena sensus: and poena damni:
The pain of sense, and the pain of loss.
the pain of sense, and the pain of loss. The pain of sense, is that which
tormenteth the senses and bodies of the damned. And the pain of loss, is to
be deprived for ever of the sight and company of almighty God. These two
kinds of pains are answerable to two enormities, and disorders, that are in
sin: whereof one is the inordinate love of the creature: and the other is the
contempt of the creator. Now unto these two enormities do answer these two
kinds of pains in hell. To the love and sensual delight which is taken in
the creature, does answer the pain of sense: that like as the sense has
taken delighte against the commandment of almighty God, even so with the
grief of the pain it may make recompense for the enormitie of his offense.
And to the contempt of God does answer the leesinge of God for evermore. For
saying that man does first forsake God, reason it is, that he should likewise
be forsaken for ever of God. And because emonge these two evils, the last
(which is the co^tempte of God) is without all comparison greater than the
first, therefore the pain of loss, which is answerable to this iniquity, is
without all comparison far greater than the pain of sense.

And to begin now with the pains of the outward senses. Of the horrible
fire in hell.
The first pain is the horrible fire in hell, which is of such a great
vehemente heat, and strength that (as S. Augustine says: S. Augustine.
) This fire here in this world in comparison of it is as it were but a painted
fire.

This fire shall tormente not only the bodies of the damned, but even the
sowles also. And it shall tormente them in such sort, that it shall not consume
them. Which is so provided, to the intent that the pain may be everlasting,
and continewe for ever and ever. The which everlasting co^tinua^ce (as S. The
fire of hell shall burn and tormente, and never consume.
Augustine says) is wrought by a spetial miracle. For almighty God (who has
given to all things their natural properties) has given this spetiall
property unto the fire of hell, that it shall in such wise burn, and torment,
that it shall not consume.

Consider then what an intolerable pain it shall be to the damned, to be
always lyinge in such an horrible everlasting tormentinge bed, as this is?
And that thou may the better conceive the same, imagine with thy self what a
greiuous pain it would be unto thee, if thou should be cast into a great
scaldinge caldron, when it boyleth most feruentelie, and is in greatest heat,
or into some hot glowinge oven, such a one as that was, which Nabuchodonosor
caused to be set a fire in Babylon, Daniel. 3.
the flames whereof ascended forty and nine Cubits in height. And hereby
shall thou have some kind of conjecture and guess of that raginge hoate fire
which is in hell. For if the fire here in this world which (as we have saiede)
is in comparison of that fire, but as it were a painted fire,) do so sore
burn, and torment, what shall that fire in hell do, which is a very lively
tormentinge fire indede? Me thinks it were not neidfull to pass any further
in the consideration of the pains of hell, but even to leave here, if a man
would stay him self a little while in consideration of this point, and make a
station here, until such time as he has considered this matter, as the thing
it self requires.

Of the extreme cold in hell.
Unto this pain is joined an other directelie contrary unto it, although no
less intolerable, that is, an horrible extreme cold, far exceedinge
without comparison all the cold in this world, which shall be given as a
miserable refresshinge unto those that burn in that raginge fire. And they
shall pass (as it is written in Job) from the snowie waters, Job. 24.
unto the fiery heates: that there might be no kind of torments whereof they
should not taste, that would be tastinge of every kind of wanton pleasure
and delighte.

And they shall not only be tormented with extreme fire, The diuelles shall
tormente the damned persons with appearinge unto them in most horrible and
ugly shapes of wild beasts and monsters.
and cold, but also by the very devils them selves, which shall torment them
with most horrible shapes of wild beasts, and terrible monsters, wherein they
shall appear unto them. And they shall with their most horrible and ugly
looks torment the adulterous and leacherous eyes, and such as have painted
them selves with artificial colors, to become the bewtifull snares, and
nets of Satan.

This pain of the horrible and ugly sight of devils, is far greater than
any man can imagine. For if it be euidentelie known unto us that some persons
have lost their wits, and that some have been also stricken starcke dead by
means of the dreadful sight or imagination of fearful things, yea, and that
some times the very suspicion thereof alone has caused many men to tremble
and quake in such sort, that the very hear of their heads did stare, and
stand up an end: what shall the terror and fear of that darcke lake be,
which is full of so many horrible fiendes, and dreadful hellishe monsters, as
there the damned persons shall behold with their eyes. And we may the better
consider, how ugly and horrible the form of the devil is, in that almighty
God him self describethe him unto us by such terrible shapes in the holy
scriptures. As in the book of Job he says thus: Job. 41.
Who shall discover the face of his garme^te? And who shall be so hardy as to
look into his mouth? And who shall open the gates wherewith his face is
covered? His teethe are terrible round about. His body is as it were a
shield of steile covered all over with scales, and that so close riueted and
joined together, that not so much as a little aier can pearce through them. His
neisinge is like a lighteninge of fire, and his eyes are glowinge read, like
the eyelyddes of the morninge. He casts out of his mouth flakes of fire, like
burninge torches: and out of his noistrels reaketh smoke, as it were from a
boylinge pot. With his breath he is able to set coals a fire, and raginge
flames do issue out of his mouth. Now what a terrible sight will this be to
the damned persons in hell, to behold such an horrible and ugly monster, as
is here figured unto us by these similitudes.

The nose shall be tormented with an intolerable stenche.
Unto the torment of the eyes is added and other very terrible pain for
torment of the nose, to wit: an intolerable stenche, which shall be there
ordained to punish carnal and worldly persons, that used sweet savors and
perfumes superfluouslie here in this life. And so does almighty God threaten
by his Prophet Esaie, Esa. 3.
sayeinge: Because the daughters of Sion are hautie, and walk with stretched
out necks, and with wanderinge eyes, walkinge and minsinge as they go, and
making a tincklinge with their feet, because they make ostentatio^ of their
pompes and riches emonge the poor, and naked, therefore our Lord will pluck
of their heir from their heads, with all their other profane attyres, and
give them instead of their sweit odours, horrible stenche: and instead of
their gorgious girdle, a rope: and instead of their curled heir, a balde
scull: and instead of their stomacher, a rough heyreclothe. This is the pain
that is due unto the odoriferous savors, and gaye ornaments of worldly men,
and women.

That we may the better conceive somewhat of this kind of pain, consider
that terrible kind of torment which a certain cruel Tyrant inverted, to put
men to death withal, who took a dead body, and caused it to be laid a long
upon him that was living, and bindinge the dead body and the living body
very fast together, he let them continewe both joined thus together, until
such time as the dead body had killed the living body with the filthy
ste^che, and vermin, that issued from it. Now if this seem to thee so horrible
a torment, what torment shall that be (trowest thou) that shall proceed from
the stenche of all the bodies of the damned, and from that abominable place,
where the wicked shall remain in a most horrible continual stenche for
evermore. Esa. 14.11.
There shall those words of Esaie be verified in every one of the damned: Thy
pride sincketh down into hell, and there fell thy dead body: the worm is
spread under thee, and the crawlinge worms do cover thee.

The ears shall be tormented, with hearing perpetual horrible cries,
lame^tations, and blasphemies.
And if this pain be appointed for the nose with what pains shall the ears
be tormented wherewith greater sins are committed? The ears shall be tormented
with hearing of perpetual horrible cries, clamours, lamentations, and
blasphemies, which shall sound in that place. For like as in heaven there
shall be none other sound hard, but only a continual Alleluia, and praises of
almighty God: even so shall there none other sound be hard in this infernal
house of tormentors, but only blasphemies, cursinges, and banninges of
almighty God, and a disordered horrible melody of infinite iarringe noises,
roringe, cryinge, squeakynge, and howlynge, at the terrible sound of the
hammers, and strookes of the hellishe tormentors, wherein shall be such
confusion, and variety of noyses, such great howlinges, and lamentations,
emonge all that miserable prison, that all the noise that was made at the
destruction of Troy, or burninge of Rome, was nothing in comparison of that,
which shall be hard emonge the damned in hell.

And that thou may conceive somewhat of this horrible pain, imagine with thy
self that thou did pass by a very great deep valley, that were full of
an infinite number of prisoners, some hurt, some wounded, and some sick, and
that they were all cryenge, roringe, and howlinge, each one in horrible wise
after his manner, both men, and women, young, and old: tell me I pray thee,
what would thou think, of this so great roringe, and confusion? Now what
may we think of that most horrible cryenge and roringe in hell, of such an
infinite number of damned persons, which shall do nothing else but cry, and
rore, blaspheme, and renye almighty God and his Saints everlastingly? What
Galley is there in the world so full frayghte with renegates, and bond
slaves, as that horrible place of hell is? These are the mattins which there
are song. This is the miserable chapel of the prince of darcknes. These be
his musitions, and singinge men. Of whose brotherhoode and fraternity shall
all sclanderers, and backebiters be, with all such as have given ear to the
lies of the enemy.

The tongue and delicate taste, shall be likewise tormented in hell. Luc. 16.
Neither shall the tongue and delicate taste fail of their torments in hell.
For what a great thirste was that, which the rich glutton mentioned in the
Gospel suffered emonge the flames of his torments? What doleful cries and
clamours did he make to the holy patriarch Abraham, requestinge of him but one
only drop of water, to cool his tongue, that burned so terriblie?

Of the torments of the inward senses, and powers of the soul. II.
ALL these pains of the outward senses of the body are certainly very
greiuous. But the pains of the inward senses of the soul shall be much more
greiuous. For those inward senses shall be more or less tormented, according
as the sinners have been more or less negligent in this life in eschewinge the
occasions of sins. The Imagination.
First of all therefore the imagination shall there be tormented with such a
vehement apprehension of those pains, that it shall not be able to think upon
any thing else, but only upon the pains that they suffer. For if we see by
experience, that when a grief is very intensiue, and sharp, we be not able
(though we would) to separate our cogitation from the same, because the very
grief it felfe occupies the imagination so vehemently, that it can not think
upon any other thing, but only upon that which is the cause of our grief.
How much more may we assure our selves this to be true in hell, where the
grief and pain is without all comparison much more intolerable, tha^ all the
greifes and pains of this world? By this mean therefore shall the
imagination co^tinuallie quicken and renew the grief: and likewise the grief
the imagination: and so the tormente of the damned person shall be renewed and
increased on every side. These shall be the continual meditations of them, that
would not (whiles they lived) call to mind these pains. So as they that
would not think upon these pains here, and so by thinkinge upon them bridle
their affections in this life, shall suffer them there as a punnishement for
their offense. The memory.


The memory shall likewise tormente the damned persons, when they shall there
call to remembrance their old felicity, and prosperous state, and withal
the pleasures and delights of the life past, for which they do then abide
such horrible torments. There shall they playnlie perceive how dearly they
pay for their miserable gluttony, and delicate bellye cheer, and what a
sharp sauce is ordained for their dainty sugered morsels, which seemed before
so sweite and delitefull unto them. Emonge all kinds of adversities, one of
the greatest is (as a Wise man saiethe) to have been once in prosperity, and
afterward to fall into misery. Now when the rich and mighty personages of
this transitory world do look backwarde, and call to mind their former
prosperity, and abundance of their lives past: when they see how after that
abundance there succeeds such a great barrennes, and dearthe, that they shall
not have so much as one only drop of cold water given unto them: when they
see all their pleasures turned into pains, all their delicacies into miseries,
all their sweite perfumes into loathsome stenches, all their music into
lame^tation, what torment can be so great as the very remembrance of these
things shall be, at that time unto them.

The pleasures of this life continewe but a small time: but the pains of hell
contynewe euerlastingelie.
Howbeit they shall yet have a far greater tormente, when they shall compare
the continuance of their former pleasures past, with the continuance of their
pains present: when they shall see how their pleasures have endured but a
moment, where as their pains shall endure everlastingly world without end.
Now what a terrible grief, and angwishe of mind shall that be unto them, when
by castinge their account they shall perceive that all the whole time of their
life was but a mere shadow of a dream, and that for their wanton delights,
and pleasures, that were so quickly at an end, they shall suffer most
horrible pains, and torments, that shall never have an end.

These are the pains that the damned persons shall suffer in the memory by
calling to mind their former prosperity. The understanding.
But the pains which they shall suffer in their understanding when they shall
consider the everlasting glory that they have lost shall be far greater.
Hereof commethe that worm that is always gnawinge at their conscience: which
(as the holy scripture does so oftentimes threaten) shall lie day and night
bytinge, The worm of conscience.
and gnawinge, and feedinge continually upon the bowels of the damned persons.
And as the worm breeds in the woodde, and is always eatinge the woodde,
wherein it was bredde: even so this worm of conscience proceeds of sin,
and is evermore striuinge and settinge it self against the same sin, whereof
it was ingendered,

This worm of conscience is a certain despite, and raginge repentance, which
the damned shall have for ever, and ever, when they consider what they have
lost, and what good opportunity and means they have had in this life not to
lose it. This opportunity shall continuallye be before their eyes.

This worm is always gnawinge their bowels (howbeit in vain,) and it causes
them to say evermore: O what an infortunat wretch am I, that had time and
opportunity to gain that so blessed state which the virtuous do enjoy in
the kingdom of heaven, and would not use the benefit thereof. Alas! a time
there was when this felicity was offered unto me, and I was exhorted and
desired to receive it, yea it was franckly given me, and I would not accept
it. For the only confessinge and pronouncinge of my sins with sorrow, and
contrition, they had been all forgeuen me. For the only askinge of forgeuenes
of almighty God, it had been granted me. For the only geuinge of a cup of
cold water to the poor, I had had life everlasting granted unto me. And now
alas!, cursed caytiffe that I am, I shall fast for ever: now shall I weipe and
wail for ever: and repent me of that, which I have done for ever: and all
shall be utterly without any fruit. O how idlye and wickedlie has my time
passed away, which shall never return again? What great benefits received
I of the world that might allure me to hazard and lose the everlasting
felicity and bliss of heaven? Although the world should have given me all
the rich offices, manors, lordshippes, kingdoms, pleasures and delights
that it had, although I might have enjoyed them so many years as there be
sands in the Sea, all this were nothing in comparison of the least pain and
tormente which I now here alas do suffer. And whereas I have not had the true
fruition of any of these things, but only a little shadow of a fugitive
vain pleasure, for this must I now suffer everlasting horrible torments
here in hell. O unhappy pleasure! O cursed change! O infortunat hour, and
moment, wherein I thus blinded my felfe! O what a blind bussarde have I been!
O what a miserable wretch and villaynous caytife am I! O a thowsande, yea a
hundredth thowsande times unhappy, that have so fondly deceived my self!
Cursed be he that deceived me. Cursed be he that should have corrected me, and
did not. Cursed be my father, and mother, that so wantonlye brought me up.
Cursed be the milk that I sucked. Cursed be the bread that I did eat, and the
life that I have lived. Cursed by my birthe, and my nativity. And cursed be
all creatures, that were any helps or means to bring me to any being. O
how happy and fortunate are they that had never any being, and they that
were never borne! Happy are the wombes that never conceived: and happy are
the breasts that never gave suck.

After this sort shall the miserable damned wretches curse and banne all
creatures, and cheiflie them that were the cause of their damnation. And so we
read in the lives of the holy fathers, of a blessed holy man that saw by
revelation a very deep well, full of great and horrible flames of fire, and
in the midst of them were the father, and the son, both of them manicled
together, and cursinge one an other, with great furious rage, and despite. The
father said unto his son. Cursed be thou my son. For I to leave thee
wealthy, and rich became an usurer, and for usury am I now here in hell
damned. And the son said likewise unto his father: Cursed be thou my father,
for that imagininge to enriche me have been the cause of my damnation: in that
thou did leave me evil gotten lands and goods, and I for the wrongefull
keepinge of them and not making dew restitution to the right owners am here
now alas damned everlastingly.

The evil disposition of the will of the damned against the glory of God and
of his Saints.
Above all this, how great shall the pains and torments of the malicious and
evil disposed will of the damned be? There shall be in the will a continual and
outrageous malicious envy against the glory of almighty God, and his elect,
which shall be evermore bytinge and gnawinge at their entrails, no less than
the worm of conscience, whereof we spoke before. Psalm. 111.10.
Of this pain says the Psalm: The sinner shall see and be angry: he shall
gnashe with his teeth, and consume. And the desire of the wicked shall perish.
The malice and hatred of the damned against almighty God.
They shall have also such a great abhorringe and hatred against almighty God,
because he deteyneth and punishes the^ in that place, that like as a mad
dog stricken with a spear, tourneth again in great fury to byte and gnawe
it: even so would the damned persons (if they might possibly) tear and rent
almighty God in pieces, because they know that it is he, that pricketh them
with his terrible spear, and that it is he, that strikes and tormenteth them
from above with the dreadful sword of his justice. The great obstinacy of
the damned in their wickedness.
They have also a very great obstinacy in wickedness, for they are not sorry
either because they are wicked, or because they have been wicked, but rather
they wish that they had been worse. And if they be sorry for their wicked
life, it is not for any love they bear unto almighty God, but for the love
of them selves, that so they might have escaped these horrible torments, if
they had lived otherwise. The perpetual desperation of the damned.
Besides this, they have also a perpetual desperation. For they think so
evil of almighty God, and of his mercy, that they have no manner of hope
therein, that ever he can perdo^ them, and also for that they know for
certain that their most grievous pains and torments shall never have any
mitigation, or end. This is the cause of their so horrible blasphemies, and of
their dispitefull raylinges against almighty God. For as they have no hope in
him, so do they seike to be revenged of him as much as they can with their
outrageous and malicious raylinge tongues.

Of the pain, which is termed by the diuins, Poena damni: that is the pain of
loss of almighty God. III.
VHO would think that after all these pains here before rehearsed there were
yet more to be suffered.? And yet nevertheless it is certain that all these
pains in comparison of that which we have now to speak of, are as it were
nothing. Consider then what a wounderfull pain this is like to be, saying
that such horrible torments as we have before mentioned may be termed
nothing if they be compared with this tormente. For all the pains that we
have hitherto spoken of, appertain for the most part to the pain of the
sense. But besides all these, there is yet an other pain called the pain of
loss, (which we touched before) the which without all comparison is far
greater than all the other, as it may well appear by this reason. For pain is
nothing else, but only a privation of some good thing that was either had, or
in hope to be had. Now the greater this good thing is, the greater pain and
grief we have when it is lost. To loose almighty God is the greatest loss:
for that he is an infinite good thing.
As it appears plainly in the loss of temporal things, the which the
greater they are in vallewe, the greater is the grief that they cause. Now
then, consideringe that almighty God is an infinite good thing, and the
greatest of all good things, it follows necessarily that the wantinge of him
shall be an infinite misery, and the greatest of all miseries.

Almighty God is the center of the reasonable soul. S. Chrysostom.
Besides this, almighty God is the center of the reasonable soul, and the
place where it has his perfect rest. And thereof it comes that the
separation of the soul from almighty God is the most grievous and painful
separation of all that may possibly be devised. And therefore S. Chrysostom
says: That if a thousand fires of hell were joined together in one, they
should never be so great a pain to the soul, as it is to the soul to be
separated in this wise for ever from almighty God.

It is not possible for any man to express by words the exceydinge greatness
of this grief. That separation that is wont to happen in time of war, when
the suckinge babes are taken from their mothers breasts, is nothing in
comparison of the perpetual division, and separation, which shall be from the
fruition and separation, which shall be from the fruition of almighty God. And
that thou may understand somewhat hereof, consider what a horrible kind of
death that was, which certain tyrants caused some of the martirs to be put
unto. They caused two tops or great boughs of two great trees to be bowed
down violently to the grownde, and at the two ends of them they commanded
the feet of the holy Martyr that should suffer death to be bound, this
done, they commanded that the two bowghes should suddenly be losed with all
violence, that when they should recoyle and mount up again to their natural
places, they should hoyse up the body on high, and so rent and tear it a
sonder in the aier, each one of the bowghes carienge with it that part of the
body, that was bound unto it.

Now if this crewell separation of the parts of a man's body one from an other
seem so great a tormente, what a torment think ye shall that be, when the
soul shall be separated from almighty God, which is not a part but the whole
of our soul, espetially saying the separation and tormente must endure, not
only for so small a time, as whilst the bowghe of a tree may asce^de from
the grownde upon high, but so long as God shall be God, which is for ever, and
ever, world without end.

Of the particular pains of the damned in hell. IIII.
BESIDES all these pains before rehearsed, there be yet diverse and sundry
others. For these pains are general and common unto all the damned in hell,
Certain peculiar pains are also particularly appointed unto every damned
person, according to the quality of his sin. Esa. 27.8.
but over and besides these, there are certain other pains that be
particularly and espetially appointed and proportioned to every damned person,
according to the quality of his sin, As the Prophet Esaie signified when he
said. Measure shall be given against measure, for so has our Lord determined
in his hard heart, in the day of his heat. This heat signifies the
enkendelinge and fury of the wrath of almighty God. The hard heart
signifies the terriblenes of his sentence, that shall punnishe temporal
offenses with everlasting pains. The measure against measure shall be the
quantity and proportion of the pain, answerable to the quality of the
offense. For therein shall the beauty, and order of gods justice wounderfullye
show it self, when he shall give to every one of the damned his deserte,
according to the quality of his sin.

After this sort (as a holy father saiethe) The covetous shall there be
punished with miserable necessity. The covetous. The slouthefull. The glutton.
The leacherous. The envious.
The slouthefull and negligente shall be pricked with bourninge hot bodkins, and
needels. The gluttons shall be tormented with passinge great honger, and thirste.
The lecherous, and licentious livers shall be wrapped in flames of stinckinge
brimstone. The envious shall houle and cry like mad dogs, with most
inward pains, and greifes. The proud.
The proud and presumptuous shall be full of perpetual shame, and confusion:
and so in like manner of all the rest.

Wherefore o ye Idolators of the world! O ye lovers of honor, and promotion! O
ye greedy purchasers and scrapers together of lands, and riches! O ye
deuisers of new fashoned garments, and of strange meats, pastimes, and
delights! O thou wicked and miserable City of Babylon, who will now weep,
and bewail thy case, who will lamente again thy miserable state with such
pittiefull tears, as our Savior did, sayeinge: Luc. 19.
Si cognouisses and tu: etc. If thou knew now, etc. O that thou knew how
dearly these dainty delicate morsells will cost thee, and what fierce
tormentors these same Idols that thou now adorest, will be there unto thee! If a
man do eat fruit before it be ripe, it must needs set his teethe on edge.
And in like manner forsomuche as worldie men will now enjoy ease and rest
before their time, we must not seek to enjoy ease and rest in this life, but
expecte the same in the life to come. Ierem. 31.30.
and have their paradise here in this place of bannishement, certaynlye the
day will come, when their deintie morsells will set their teethe sore on edge:
According as almighty God has threatened by his Prophet: sayeinge: Whosoever
will eat sower grapes before they be ripe, let him be well assured, that they
shall be bitter unto him. Now that man eats grapes before they be ripe, that
will preuente and taste before hand here in this life the delights that are to
be enjoyed in the life to come, who afterward shall feel the bitterness of
that morsel, when by the just judgment of almighty God he shall be punnished,
because he would be so hasty to enjoy rest and delights before his time.

Of the eternity of all these pains before reheresed. V.
NOw if all these pains be of them selves so grievous, and so passinge great,
how much greater and more greiuous shall they appear, if unto the greatness and
greiuousnes of all these pains we join also the eternity, and everlasting
continuance of them, and that they shall never have an end. When ten
thowsande years be gone, and past, there shall be added unto them a hundred
thowsande years, and after those hundred thowsande, there shall succeide so
many thowsande millions of years as there be stars in the Sky, and sands
in the Sea, and after all these nombers of years are past, and gone, then
shall the damned begin to suffer a fresh, and so shall the everlasting
wheile of their most horrible torments go continually turninge about for
ever, and ever, world without end. Esa. 30.33.
The valley of Tophet (says Esaie) is prepared long since as yesterdaye, it
is prepared at the kings commandment, and it is very diepe and large. The
nutrimente thereof is fire, and much wood: and the blast of our Lord being
as it were a ronninge floude of brimstone does enkendle it. This valley is the
bottomless pit of hell, prepared as yesterdaye (to wit, from the beginning of
the world,) for the punnishement of the wicked. The nutrimente thereof is
fire, which burns, and never consumes. And the matter that preserves this
fire can never possibly end, nor consume, nor be diminished with any
continuance of time. And that the damned may be assured that this horrible
fire shall never be quenched, the diuelles have always in charge to blow it,
and to keep it continuallye burninge, who as they be immortal, so shall they
never cease or be weary of blowinge therein. And though they should be
weary, yet is there the blast of the almighty and eternal living God, which
shall never be weary. Suerlie it should be to great purpose and very much
it were to be wished that men had some understanding of the co^tinua^ce and
eternity of these most horrible grievous torments, in such sort as they be
indeed. For vndoutedlie this would be a great bridle for our life. And
therefore it shall not be from our purpose, if we bring here some examples of
like things, to the intent that thereby we may have some understanding
thereof.

Consider then with thy self that so horrible kind of tormente, that is used
in some countries, where malefactors be burned alive, and the greater their
offenses are, the less is the fire wherewithal they are burned, which is done
in this wise, that their torment may be the longer prolonged. But what is the
longest time ordinarily that the tormente of a man may continewe, that is thus
executed by this artificial cruelty? Truly it can scarcely continewe one
whole natural day. Well then, tell me I pray thee, if this be so terrible
and so horrible a kind of tormente that endures not one whole day, the fire
being also but small, what an exceidinge horrible tormente shall that be in
hell, that shall endure everlastingly, for ever, and ever, with such an
extreme great and feruente fire as that is? Is there any man in the world so
well skilled in the Mathematical sciences, that he can declare by any
demonstration how far the one exceeds the other? Now if a man to escape
that tormente would not stick to put him self to all dangers, labors, and
pains, be they never so great, what then ought all we to do, to escape this
most horrible extreme tormente of hell fire?

Consider also what a terrible kind of tormente that was, which Phalaris that
cruel Tyrante invented, of whom it is written, that he used when he would put
men to death, to cause them to be enclosed within the belly of a bull made of
metal, and then caused a fire to be made underneath it, and this cruel manner
of punnishemente he devised, that the miserable man by the heat of the iron
should burn within the same by little and little, and not be able to escape,
nor defend him self, nor have any other remedy, but only to burn, and
rore, and tumble, and toss him self within that strait place, until he were
dead. What heart can hear of this cruelty, but that his fleashe will tremble
and quake, only in thinkinge of it? Wherefore tell me now (o thou Christian)
what is all this in comparison of that most greiuous and horrible tormente
which we here treat of, but only a mere dream, or shadow? Now if the very
imagination and thinkinge of these horrible pains of hell do make us afraid,
what shall it be, not to think of them only, but even to suffer them in very
deed? Certainly it is so horrible a matter to suffer pains and torments
euerlastinglye, that although there were but one alone emonge all the children
of Adam, that should suffer in hell in this wise, it were enoughe to make us
all to tremble, and quake. There was but one emonge Christ's disciples, that
should sell his master, and yet when Christ said: One of you shall betraie
me: Math. 26.21.
all began to be afraid, and wax sad, for that the matter was of so great
importance. Now then why do not we much more tremble, and quake, knowinge
certainly: Eccles. 1.15. Math. 7.14. Esa. 5.14.
That the number of fools is infinite: and that the way unto life
everlasting is very narrow, and strait: and that hell has enlardged her
mouth without any limitte, to receive the multitudes that go into it? If we
believe not this, If a Christian did consider the everlasting continuance of
the horrible pains of hell, it would make him look better to the dew
framinge of his life.
where is our faith? If we do believe and confess it, where is our
iudgeme^mente, and reason? And if we have both judgment and reason, why do we
not publishe and preach this matter in the open streates and market places?
Why go we not into the deserts, (as many of the Saints have done) there to
do penance for our sins, and to live an austere life emonge beasts, that we
may escape these most horrible and everlasting torments? How is it that we
can sleep in the night? Yea how happens it, that we be not quite out of our
wits, when we do think attentively and consider of so strange a peril as
this is, saying less dangers than these have been able, not only to frighte
and bestraught men out of their wits, but also to bereue them of their lives.

This is the greatest pain that the miserable damned persons have in hell, to
understand that almighty God and their most greiuous torments shall be of one
like continuance: and therefore their misery can have no comfort, because
their pain has no end. If the damned persons could be persuaded that after
a hundred thowsande millions of years their pains should have an end, eue^
that persuasion alone would be a great comfort unto them. For then all their
torments (albeit it were very long) would yet at the length come to an
end. S. Gregory.
But assured they are that their pains shall have no end at all. For as S.
Gregory says. There the wicked have death without any death, an end
without any end, and a defecte without any defecte. For their death always
lives, their end always begins, and their defecte never fails. And for
this cause the Prophet says: Psalm. 48.15.
They are in hell as it were sheep, and death feideth upon them. The herb
that is there fed upon is not wholly plucked up, because the root is alive,
which is the beginning of life: and this causes the herb to spring again,
that it may still be fed upon. And therefore the pasture of those feildes is
immortal, for so much as it is always eaten, and always reuyueth again. Now
after this sort shall death feed upon the damned persons: and as death cannot
dye, so shall it never be filled with this kind of food, nor ever be weary
in doing this office, neither shall it ever make an end of deuowringe this
morsel. For that death shall evermore have somewhat in them to devour, and
they shall evermore minister somewhat unto death to be devoured: so as the
damned in hell shall suffer their most horrible pains and torments for ever,
and ever, without any end.

SATTVRDAIE NIGHT. OF THE EVERLASTINGE GLORY AND FELICITY OF THE KINGDOM OF
HEAVEN. depiction of Christ ^ Corinth. 2.9.


THIS DAY (WHEN THOU HAVE MADE THE SIGN OF the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the felicity of eternal glory in the
kingedome of heaven.

THIS consideration is so profitable, that if it were helped with the light of
a lively faith, it were able to make all the bitter pains and labors which
we should take for the attaininge thereof to become sweite, and pleasant. For
if the love of lands and riches do cause the pains, and labors, that be
taken for them to seime sweite, and pleasant, If the love of children also do
cause women to wish for the pains of childebearinge, what would the love of
this most excellent and passinge great felicity do, in comparison whereof all
other felicities are of non account. If it be said of the patriarch Jacob,
Genes. 29.20.
that his seven years service feemed but short unto him, in respect of the
great love he bare to Rachel, what would the love of that infinite beauty
work in our hearts, what would that everlasting marriage cause us to do, if
it were considered with the eyes of a lively faieth.

Five points to be considered in this meditation.
Wherefore that thou may understand somewhat of this felicity, thou have to
consider (emonge other things) these five points that are in it: to wit: The
excellency and greatenes of the place: The fruition of the company of those
blessed inhabitants: The vision of almighty God: The glory of the Saints
bodies: And finally, the perfect fruition of all good things that are there.

The excellency and greatness of the heavens.
and especially the greatness thereof, which is surely very wonderful. For
when a man reads in certain grave awthors, that every one of the stars of
heaven is greater than all the whole earth, yea and which is more marvelous
that there be some stars emonge them of such notable greatness, that they be
nyntie times greater then all the whole earth: when a man hearethe these
things, and lifts up his eyes to heaven, and sees in the same such a
multitude of stars, and so many void spaces where many more stars might
be set, how can he but wonder? How can he but be astonished, and in a manner
besides himself consideringe the passinge greatness of that place, and much
more of that mighty Sovereign Lord, that created it of nothing?

The goodly beauty of the heavens.
Then as towchinge the goodly beauty of that place it is a thing that can not
be expressed with words. For if almighty God has created things so
wonderful and so bewtifull in this vale of tears, and place of bannishement:
what wonderful bewtifull things has he created (trow ye) in that place,
which is the seat of his glory, the throne of his mighty power, the palace
of his majesty, the house of his elect, and the paradise of all delights?

After thou have considered the excellency of the place, The fruition of the
company of the blessed inhabitants in heaven. Apoc. 7.9. The number of the
elect. The number of the Angels in heaven.
consider also the great worthiness of those blessed inhahitantes that dwell in
it: whose number, holiness, riches, and beauty, are greater than any man can
imagine. S. John says, that the number of the elect is so great, that no man
is able to count them. S. Dionysius says, that the number of the Angels is
so great, that they exceed without comparison all corporal and material
things in the earth. S. Thomas agreinge with this opinion says, that like
as the greatness of the heavens exceedethe the greatness of the earth without
any proportion: even so does the multitude of those glorious spirits exceed
the multitude of all corporal and material things that are in this world
with the like advantage and proportion. Now what thing can be imagined more
wonderful than this? Certainly this is such a matter, that if it were well
considered, it were able to astonishe all men. Again, if every one of the
Angels (yea though it be the very least Angel emonge them all) be more
goodly and bewtifull to behold than all this visible world, what a glorious
sight shall it then be to behold such a number of bewtifull Angels, and to
see the perfections, and offices, that every one of them has in that high
and supreme city? There the Angels go as it were in ambassages: Angels.
The Archangels are occupied in their ministry: Archa^gels. Principalities.
Powers. Dominations. Virtues. Thrones. Cherubins Seraphins.
The Principalities triumph: The Powers rejoice: The dominations govern: The
Virtues shine: The Thrones glister: The Cherubins give light: The Seraphins
burn with love: And all of that heavenly cowert do singe lawdes and praises
unto almighty God. Now if the company and conversation of good and virtuous
persons be so sweite, and amiable a thing, what a blessed thing shall it be,
to converse, and keep company with so so many good and blessed Saints as be
there? to speak with the Apostles, to be conversant with the Prophets, to
communicate with the Martirs, and to dwell and have a perpetual familiarity
with all the elect?

The vision of almighty God.
what shall it be to enjoy the company and presence of him, whom the morninge
stars do praise, at whose excellent beauty the Son and moon do wonder,
before whose majesty the Angels bow down, and at whose presence men do
meruailouslie rejoice? What a glory shall it be, to behold that universal
goodness, in whom are all good things? That greater world, in whom all worlds
are contained? What a joy shall it be to see him, who being one, is all
things, and yet being one, and most simple in himself, comprehends the
perfections of all things? If to hear and see king Salomo^, were thought so
great a matter that the Queen of Saba said of him: 3. Reg. 10.
Blessed are they that stand before thy presence, and enjoy thy wisdom: what
a thing shall it be to behold that most high Solomon? that everlasting
wisdom? that infinite greatness? that inestimable beauty? that exceedinge
goodness? and to enjoy the same for evermore? This is the essential glory of
the Saints. This is the last end and center of all our desires.

The glory of the Saints bodies in heaven.
After this, consider the glory of the bodies, in which there shall be no part
but shall be glorified. For there every one of the members and senses shall have
his particular glory, and object, wherein to take delighte. There the bodies
of the Saints shall be endued with those four singular qualities, and dowries,
The four dowries of glorified bodies.
to wit, with subtilitie, swiftnes, impassibilitie, and clearenes. And this
clearenes shall be so great, that every one of the Saints bodies shall shine
like the son in the kingdom of their father. Now if this son that stands
in the midst of the firmamente being but one be sufficient to give light
and comfort to all this world, what a light shall so many sons and lamps
make, as shall shine so brightlie in that place altogether?

The perfect fruitio^ of all good things in heaven.
To conclude, in this glory all good things shall be fownde wholye together,
and all evil things shall be bannished from thence. There shall be health
without infirmity, liberty without bondage, beauty without deformity,
immortality without corruption, abundance without necessity, quietness
without vexation, security without fear, knowledge without error, fulness
without lothsomenes, joy without heaviness, and honor without contradiction.
There (as S. Augustine says) shall be true glory. S. Augustine.
For there shall non be praised, either by error, or flattery. There shall be
true honor. For there it shall neither be denied to such as deserve it, nor
given to such as deserve it not. There shall be true peace. For there shall no
man be molested neither by him self, nor by others. The reward of virtue
shall be even he that gave the virtue, and has promised himself for a reward
of the same, who is the greatest and best of all things, (to wit, almighty
God.) He shall be the end of our desires. He shall there be seen without
ceassinge, loved without lothsomenes, and praised without wearines. There the
place is large, bewtifull, bright, and secure. The company very good, and
delightful. The time always after one sort, not distincted into eueninge,
and morninge, but continued with a simple eternity. There shall be a perpetual
spring, which through the freshnes and sweite breathinge of the holy Ghost
shall florishe for evermore. There shall all rejoice, all shall singe, and give
continual praise to the chief geuer of all things, through whose bountiful
goodness they live, and reign in glory. O heavenly city! O secure dwellinge
place! O blissful country, where all delightful things are to be fownde! O
happy people, without any grudginge! O quiet neighbors, where no one is
subject to any want, or necessity! O that the striffe, and contention of
this present state were at an end! O that the days of my bannishement might
be finished! O how long is the time of my peregrination prolonged! When shall
this day come? When shall I come and appear before the face of my sweite
Lord and Savior?

THE SIXTE TREATISE. OF THE CONSIDERATION OF the glory of Paradise: Wherein
the former meditation is declared more at large.
ONE of the things whereupon it behooves us most to have our eyes always
fixed in this vale of tears is the blessed state of glory in the kingdom of
heaven. For this consideration alone were able to encourage us to sustain
willingelye all labors and pains that are to be suffered for the atteyninge
of it. When almighty God promised to give to the Patriarch Abraham the land
of promise he commanded him to walk and vewe it all round abowte: sayeinge,
Arise, Genes. 13.17.
and walk all over this land both in length, and breadthe, and consider it
one every side. For I will give it unto thee. Arise up therefore (o my soul,)
advance thy self on high, leave all earthlye cares and affairs here
benethe, and flee up with the wings of thy spirit unto that most excelle^te
noble land of promise, and consider with good attention the length of the
eternity, the lardgenes of the felicity, and the greatness of the riches, with
all the rest that is therein.

It is written of the Queen of Saba, 3. Reg. 10.
that when she heard of the great fame of Solomon, she went to Ieruzalem to
see the great and wonderful things that were reported of him. Consideringe
therefore that the fame of that heavenly Ieruzalem, and of that supreme king
that governs it, is no less than the renown of Solomon was, ascend thou
now up on high with thy spirit unto this noble city, to contemplate the
wisdom of this supreme king, the beauty of this temple, the service of this
table, the orders of them that attend upon it, the liueries that the whole
family wear, and withal the policy and glory of this noble city. For if
thou be able to consider every one of these things, it may be that thy
spiritie shall be lifted up above it self, and thou shall perceive that there
has not been declared unto thee so much as the very least part of this
glory. But for this purpose it shall be requisite to have a spetiall light of
almighty God, as the Apostle signifies, sayeinge: I beseache the God of
glory and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ to give you the spirit of
wisdom, Ephesians. 1.17.18.
and to lighten the eyes of your hearts, that you may understand how great
the hope of your vocation is, and the riches of that enheritance, and glory,
which he has prepared for the Saints. And although in this glory there be
many things to contemplate upon, yet may thou now espetiallie consider
these five principal things, that we towched before: to wit: Five principal
things to be considered in this meditation.
The excellency and greatness of the place: The fruition of the company of
those blessed inhabitants: The vision of almighty God: The glory of the
Saints bodies: And the everlasting continuance and eternity of all these so
great and wonderful benefits.

Of the goodlines and excellency of the place. I.
FIRST of all consider the goodly beauty of the place, which S. John
describes unto us in a figure in his Apocalips in these words: Apoc. 12.
One of the seven Angels spoke unto me, sayeing: Come, and I will show thee
the spouse of the lamb: and he carried me away in spirit to a high and great
mountain, and showed me the holy city of Ieruzalem, which descended from
heaven, and shyned with the clearenes of almighty God, and the light thereof
was like to the glisteringe brightness of precious stones. This city had one
great and high wall, in which were twelve gates, and in the gates twelve
Angels, according to the number of the gates. The foundatio^s of the walls of
this city were wholye wroughte with precious stones, and the twelve gates
thereof were twelve pearls, every gate made of one pearl, and the streat of
this city was of pure gold like unto a very clear glass: and I saw no
temple therein, because our Lord God almighty and the lamb were the temple:
and the city had no need of Son or Moon to give light unto it, forsomuche
as the clearnes of almighty God does lighten it, and the lamp that burns
there is the lamb. Moreover the Angel showed me a flood of the water of life,
as clear as the crystal, which issued out of the seat of almighty God, and of
the lamb. Apoc. 22.
In the midst of the streat and both on the one side of the floude and on the
other was planted the tree of life, which brought forth twelve fruits in the
year, every monethe his fruit, and the leaves of this tree served for the
health of nations. No manner of malediction shall ever be seen there, but
there shall be the seat of almighty God, and of the a^be. And his servants
shall serve him, and they shall see his face, and have the name of him written
in their foreheaddes, and they shall reign for ever, and ever, world without
end.

Behold here (dear brother) the beauty of this city described unto thee: not
that thou may think that these things are there in such a material sort as
the words do sound, but that by means of these thou may conceive other
more spiritual and more excellent things, which are figured unto us by these
material things.

The situation and greatness of the heavenly city.
The situation of this city is above all the heavens, and the greatness and
largenes thereof exceideth all measure. For if every one of the stars of
heaven be so great as we have before declared, how great then must that heaven
be, that contains in it all the stars, and all the heavens? Suerlie there
is no greatness in the world that may be compared unto this. For (as a holy
father saiethe) from the west part of Spain unto the uttermost borders of the
Indiens a ship may sail (if it have a prosperous wind) in few days: but
that region of heaven is so great, that the stars (which are more swifte than
the son beams) can not finishe their course in it in many years.

The goodly workemanshippe of the buildinge.
Now if thou demand of the workmanshippe of that buildinge, there is no tongue
able to express it. For if that work that appears outwardly to our mortal
eyes be so goodly, and bewtifull, what is to be supposed of all the rest that
is there reserved for the sight only of immortal eyes? And if we see that
by the handieworke of men certain works are made here so sightly, and so
bewtifull, that they astonishe the eyes of them that do behold them, what a
work must that be, which is wrought by the hand of almighty God himself in
that royal house, in that sacred palace, in that house of joy, and solace,
which he has built for the glory of his elect? Psalm. 83.1.
O how amiable are thy tabernacles (saiethe the Prophet) o Lord God of
virtues? My soul desires and feinteth in beholdinge the palaces of our Lord.

The state and condition of the citizens of heaven.
The thing that most principally commends a city is the state and
condition of the citizens, to wit, if they be noble, if they be many, if
they live in peace, and concord emonge them selves. Now who is able to declare
the excellency of this city in this behalf? All the inhabitants therein be
noble personages, there is no one emonge them of base lineage, for so much as they
be all the sons and children of God. They be so friendly and louinge one
toward an other, that they be all (as it were) one soul, and one heart. And
they live in so great peace, and concord, that the very city it self is
called Ieruzalem that is to say, the vision of peace. If thou desire to
understand the number of the inhabitants in this city, unto this desire S.
John makes answer in his revelations, Apoc. 7.9. The number of the blessed
inhabitants in heaven.
where he says: that he saw in spirit such a great company of blessed
Saints, that no man was able to reckon them, gathered together of all kinds
of nations, people, and tongues, which stood before the throne of almighty God,
and of his lamb, appareiled in white garments, and with triumphante palms in
their hands, singinge unto almighty God songs of praise. And unto this
sayeinge of S. John, does that agrie very well, which is signified by the
Prophet Daniell concerning this holy number: where he says: Dan. 7.10.
Thowsande thowsandes serve the Lord of majesty, and ten hundred thowsande
thowsandes stand before him.

And think not because the number is so great that they be therefore
disordered. For there the multitude is no cause of confusion, but of greater
order, and harmony. For almighty God that has with such a wonderful
consonance and agreement disposed the mouinges of the heavens, and the courses
of the stars, Every one of the Saints has his place and glory in heaven
according to the degrie of every one of their merits in this life.
calling them every one by his proper name, has also ordained all that
innumerable army of blessed Saints with a most wonderful goodly order, and
disposition, appointinge to every one his place, and glory, according to his
merit. And so there is one place for the virgins, an other for the Confessors,
an other for the holy Martirs, an other for the Partiarkes, and Prophets, an
other for the Apostles and Evangelists, and so forth in all the rest. And in
like sort as men are there divided, There be nine orders of Angels in heaven.
and placed, even so after their manner are the Angels also, which be divided
into three Hierarchies, and those three Hierarchies into nine orders. And above
all the Saints and Angels is placed the throne of that most excellent Queen
of Angels, The blessed virgin Marie is placed in heaven above all the Angels
and Saints.
the mother of almighty God, who alone is an order by her self: for so much as
she has no peer, nor any one that is like unto her. And above the^ all the
holy humanity of our Savior Christ has the chief place and preemine^ce,
who sits at the right hand of the majesty of almighty God in the highest.

Now (thou Christian soul) take a vewe of all these orders: walk through
these streates, and ways: consider the order of these citizens, the beauty of
this city, and the noblenes and worthiness of these inhabitants. Salute them
every one by their names, and desire them to help and succor thee with their
prayers. Salute also this sweite and pleasant country, and as a pilgrim
beholdinge it as yet a far of, direct thine eyes, and withal thy heart unto
it, and say. Alhaile sweite country! the land of promise! the haven of
security! the place of refuge! the house of blessinge! the kingdom of all
worlds! the paradise of delights! the garden of eternal flowers! the market
place of all treasure! the crown of all just persons! and the end of all our
desires! Alhaile our mother, and our hope! After thee have we sighed a long
time! For thee have we mourned, and do mourn even at this present! For the
love of thee have we fought and do still fight a long battle in this our
transitory life! For we know assuredly, 2. Tim. 2.5.
that none shall be rewarded and crowned in thee, but only such as have here
fowghten faithfully.

Of the second Joy that the soul shall have in the kingedome of heaven:
which is the enioyinge of the company of the Saints. II.
VHO is able after this great joy to declare what a further joy the soul
shall have by being in this most happy and blessed company? For there the
virtue of charity is in her full perfection, the property of which virtue is
to cause all things to be common. There shall that petition be perfectly
fulfilled which our savior made, sayeinge: I beseech thee o father, Joan.
17.11. All the elect in heaven shall be more streitlie united together in one,
than the members of one body, because all shall participate of the spirit of
God.
that they may be one (by love,) as we are one (by nature.) For there shall
the elect be more streitlie united together in one than the members of one
same body, because all shall participate of one same spirit, which gives
unto all one same being, and withal one blessed life. If thou imagine it to be
otherwise, tell me, what is the cause why the members of one body have so
great a unity and love one toward an other? The reason is, because they all
are partakers of one same form, that is, of one soul, which gives one same
being and one life to them all. Now if the spirit of a man liaue power to
cause so great a unity between members that are so different in offices, and
natures, is it any wonder if the spirit of almighty God by whom all the
elect do live (which spirit is as it were the common soul to them all)
should cause a far greater and more perfect unity emonge them: espetially
consideringe that the spirit of God is a more noble cause, and of a more
excellent virtue, and power, yea, and gives also a more noble being?

Well now, if this manner of unity and love do cause all things to be common,
as well good, as evil, (as we see in the members of one body, and in the love
of mothers toward their children, who rejoice as much at their felicity, as
at their own,) what a wonderful joy shall one of the elect there have of the
glory of all the rest, consideringe that he shall love every one of them as
well as him self? For as S. Gregory saiethe. S. Gregory.
That heavenly inheritance unto all is one, and unto every one is all:
for so much as every one of the blessed Saints rejoices as much at the joys
and felicities of all others, as if he were him self in possession of the
same. But what can we infer of all this? Marie thus much, that as the number
of the blessed Saints is after a sort infinite, even so the joys of each
one of them shall also after a sort be infinite, and that every one of the
Saints shall have the excellencies of all, for so much as whatsoever any one
of them shall not have in himself, he shall have it in others. These be
spiritually those seven sons of Job, Job. 1.4.
emonge whom there was such a great love and co^municatinge one to an other,
that every one of them in his order made a feast one day of the weke unto all
the rest, whereby it came to pass that every one of the^ was no less
partaker of the goods of others, than of his own proper goods. And so that
which was proper to one was common to all: and that which was common to all was
proper to every one. This effect wroughte love and brotherly affection in
those holy brethern. Now how much greater shall the brotherly love of the
elect be in the kingdom of heaven? How much greater shall the number of
brothers be there? How much more treasure and riches shall they have to enjoy?
Luc. 19. Seraphins.
Now by this account, what a feast shall that be, which the Seraphins shall
there make unto us, who are in the highest degree of all blessed Spirits, and
most near unto almighty God, when they shall discover unto our eyes the
noblenes of their state, and condition, the cleerenes of their contemplation,
and the most feruente burninge heat of their love? What a feast also shall the
Cherubins make, Cherubins.
in whom the treasures of the wisdom of almighty God are enclosed? What a
feast likewise shall that be of the Thrones, Thrones. Dominations. Ierem. 31.
Martirs.
and Dominations, and of all the other blessed spirits? What a joy shall it
be to see and have the fruition of that glorious army of Martirs, clothed with
white garments, with their palms in their hands, and with the glorious
ensigns of their triumphs? What a joy shall it be to behold there those
eleven thowsande virgins altogether, Virgins.
and those ten thowsande Martirs, which were the true followers of the
glory, and Cross of Christ, with other innumerable multitudes of them? What a
joy shall it be to see there that glorious Deacon (S. Laurence) with his
greedyron in his hand, S. Laurence.
shyninge now much brighter than the flames wherewith he was burned, having
defied the cruel tirantes, and wearied the torme^tors with an invincible
patience? What a joy shall it be to behold there the bewtifull and glorious
virgin S. Catherine crowned with roses, S. Catherine.
and lilies, who overcame the wheel of their rasers with the weapons of faith,
The holy Machabees.
and hope? What a joy shall it be to see those seven noble Machabees with
their godly and valiant mother, having contemned all kind of deaths and
torments for kepinge the law of almighty God? What chain of gold and
precious stones are so goodly to behold as the neck of the glorious
forerunner of Christ. S. John Baptist, S. Ihon Baptiste.
who chose rather to lose his head, than to dissemble the filthiness of the
adulterous king? What purple shall shine so brighte as the body of blessed S.
Bartholomewe, S. Battholomewe.
who had his skin fleyd from his fleashe for our Savior Christ his sake?
What other thing shall it be to see the body of S. Stephen that was bruised
with the strokes of the stones, S. Stephen.
than to behold a rich long robe trimly garnished and set all over with
goodly precious rubies, and diamondes? What a joyful sight shall it be to see
those two glorious princes of Christ's Church, S. Peter, S. Peter. S. Paul.
and S. Paul, shyninge there very brightly, the one with his sword, and the
other with the glorious standarte of Christ (to wit, the Cross) wherewith
they were crowned? Now what a joy shall it be, to enjoy the glories of each
one of all these blessed saints, as if they were properly our own? O
glorious feast! o royal bancket! o table meet for almighty God, and his
elect! Wherefore let these worldlinges get them to their filthy and carnal
banckettes: let them burste their bellies with their gluttonous excess, and
superfluities: Such a feast as this is where such excellent meats are served
is convenient for almighty God, and his elect.

Ascend yet up higher above all the orders of Angels, and there shalt thou
find an other singular glory that does wonderfully rejoice all that supreme
Court, and makes the city of God as it were drunk with marvelous
delighte. Lift up thine eyes, The blessed virgin Marie, mother of God.
and behold (the most blessed virgin Marie) that Queen of mercy full of
clearenes, and beauty, at whose glory the Angels do wonder, and in whose
excellency men do glory. This is the Queen of heaven crowned with stars,
clothed with the son, shodde with the moon, and blessed above all women.

Consider now what a great joy it shall be to behold this our blessed Lady,
and mother, not kneelinge now upon her knees before the maunger, not troubled
and molested now with the fryghtes and fears of such things as holy Simeon
prophesied unto her, Luc. 2.
not lamentinge and seekinge now her lost child in all parts, but with
inestimable peace and security placed at the right hand of her dear son,
without all fear of ever leesinge that her most precious treasure. Now has
she no need to seek the dead time of the secret night, to deliver the
child from the co^spiracies of Herod by flyenge into Egipte. Math. 2.
Now does she no more stand at the foot of the cross, receyuinge upon her
head the drops of blood that fell from above, and caryenge in her upper
garmente a perpetual remenbrance of that her great grief. Joan. 19.
Now she feelethe no more the grief of that doleful exchange, when she had
assigned unto her the disciple in steed of the master, and the seruante in
steed of the lord. Now are those sorrowful words to be heard no more which
she uttered with great weepinge and lamentation under that blouddie tree:
sayeinge: O that I might die for thee Absolon: 4. Reg. 18.33.
my son: my son Absolon. Now is all this sorrow at an end, and she that
was more afflicted in this world tha^ any other mere creature, is now seen
there exalted above al creatures, enioyinge for ever that cheifeste goodness,
and sayeinge: Cant. 3.4.
I have found him whom my soul loves: I will hold him, and will not let him
go.

And if this be so great a joy, The sacred humanity of Christ.
what a joy shall that be to behold the most sacred humanity of our savior
Christ, and the glory and beauty of that body, which was so fowlie disfigured
for our sakes upon the cross? S. Bernarde.
It shall be vndowtedlie (as S. Bernarde says) a thing full of all sweitnes,
and delighte, when men shall there see and behold a man, the creator of men,
and Lord of all things created. We are wont to esteime it for a singular
honor to our whole family, to see some one of our kindred to be made a
Cardinal, or a Pope. Now how far greater honor shall this be unto us, to
see that Lord who is of our fleashe, and blood, sittinge at the right hand
of the father, and made king both of heaven, and earth? With what a passinge
great joy shall men stand emonge the Angels, It shall be a great joy to men
in heaven, to see the Lord and creator of all things to be (not an Angel,
but) a man.
when they shall see that the Lord of the whole house, and the universal
creator of all things is not an Angel, but a man? For if the members do
account that to be an honor unto them, that is done to their head, (by reason
of the great union, that is between them and it,) what shall it be there, where
there is such a strayte union between the members, and the head? What shall it
be else, but that every one of the saints shall account the glory of their
Lord as their own peculiar glory? This joy shall be so passinge great, that
no words are able to express it according to the worthiness thereof. Now who
shall be so happy, as to be thowghte worthy to enjoy so great a bliss and
felicity? Cant. 8.
O that thou were as my brother suckinge the breasts of my mother, that I
might find thee without, and kiss thee with the lips of devotion, and
embrace thee with the arms of love! O most sweet louinge Lord! When shall
this ioyefull day come? When shall I appear before thy face? When shall I be
filled with thy excellent beauty? When shall I see that countenance of thine,
whereupon the Angels are desirous to behold?

Of the third joy that the soul shall have in the kingdom of heaven: which
is, the enioyinge of the clear vision of almighty God. III.
In the clear vision of almighty God consistethe the essential glory of the
Sianctes.
NOW what a joy shall it be above all this to have a clear sight of that
divine face, in the sight of who^ consists the essential glory of the
Saints? All the things we have hitherto spoken of, are certainly great
motives toward the accomplishemente of glory: but they all are little in
comparison of the clear vision of almighty God. Of Issachar it is written,
That he saw that rest was good, Genesis 49.15.
and that the land was best: and therefore he put his shoulders to labor, and
made him self subject to tribute. The rest and glory of the Saints is
good: but the land that brings forth this rest is best in the superlatiue
degrie. For this land is the face and beauty of almighty God, of the vision
and beholdinge of whom proceeds the rest and glory of the Saints. This
clear vision of almighty God is the thing that of it self alone is able to
give perfect rest unto our sowles. The heart of man can never be fully
satisfied and filled but only with the vision of almighty God.
For all the sweetness and pleasantnes of creatures well may it give delighte
to the heart of man, but it can never wholye satisfy and fill it. Now if all
these good things before reheresed shall so much delighte us, how much then
shall that good thing delighte us that contains in it self the perfection
and sum of all good things? And if the only sight and beholdinge of
creatures be so glorious, what a glory shall it be to behold that divine
face, that most brighte light, and that most excellent beauty of almighty
God, in whom all bewties do shine? What a glorious sight shall it be to
behold that essence, so wonderful, so simple, and so communicable, and with
one sight to behold in the same the mystery of the most blessed Trinity?
The glory of the father, the wisdom of the son, and the goodness and love
of the holy Ghost?

There shall we see God, and in God both our selves, S. Fulgentius.
and all things. S. Fulgentius says, that like as he that has a glass
before him, sees the glass, and him self in the glass, and all other
things that are before the glass, even so when we shall have that unspotted
glass of the majesty of almighty God present before us, we shall see him,
and our selves in him, and withal whatsoever is without him, according to the
knowledge (greater, or less) that we shall have of him. The understanding.
There shall the appetite of our understanding rest, and shall not desire to
know any thing else, because it shall have before it all that can be known.
There shall the appetite of our will rest, in louinge that universal good
thing in whom are all good things, The will.
and out of whom there be no more good things to be enjoyed. There shall our
desire rest, The desire.
and be fully satisfied with the morsel of that supreme joy, which shall in
such wise fill the mouth of our heart, that there shall be nothing else for it
to desire. There shall those three Theological virtues, How faith, hope, and
charity shall be rewarded in heaven.
to wit, Faith, Hope, and Charity, wherewith almighty God is here honored
be perfectly rewarded: when unto faith shall be there given for a reward the
clear vision of almighty God: unto hope the possession of him: and unto
charity imperfect, charity in all her perfection. There shall the elect see,
love, enjoy, and praise almighty God. There shall they be filled without
gluttinge, and be ho^grie without necessity.

There is the place where that song is always song, that S. John heard in
his revelations, which song he terms, Apoc. 14.3.
Quasi canticum nouum: As it were a new song. For that althowghe the song be
always after one manner (forsomuche as it is one common praise, answerable to
one common glory, which all that blessed company enjoys,) yet is it always
new, as concerning the taste and delighte it has. For look what taste it had
at the beginning, the same very taste also shall it have for ever, and ever,
without end. The joy of the Saints in heaven shall never diminishe, nor
decay, neither shall their bodies ever decay, or wax old. For he that
causes the heavens to be always fresh and new after so many thowsande
years as have passed since they were created, shall also cause the flower of
the glory of the Saints always to be lively, and florishinge, and never to
wither or decay in any one point.

Of the fourth joy that the soul shall have in the kingdom of heaven: which
is the enioyinge of the glory of the body. IIII.
The bodies of the Saints shall also be glorified in heaven.
THE clear vision of the divine majesty is (as has been declared) the
essential glory of the blessed sowles in heaven. Howbeit our most just judge
and bountiful father thinkethe it not enoughe to glorify the sowles only,
but for the honor of them extendethe his magnificence and liberality yet
further, even to glorify their bodies also: geuinge thus a rowme and place
unto beasts in his royal and everlasting heaue^lie palace. O lover of men!
O honorer of the good and virtuous! What has this rotten and stinckinge
fleashe of ours (which like a beast follows always his appetites) to do
with the sanctuary of heaven? What? shall this fleashe (which should rather
be tied up in a stable emonge beasts) be placed emonge the Angels in heaven?
Let dust (o Lord) continewe with dust: for it is not seemly that earth
should be placed above the heavens.

But he that saiede unto Abraham, I will honor and multiply Ismael, Genesis
17.20.
notwithstanding he is the son of a bondslaue, because he appertains unto
thee, will also show this favor to the bodies of the Saints, for the nighe
kindred that is between the sowles, and the^. It is our Lords pleasure also
that he that has helped to bear the burden, Note here the reason why the
Saints bodies shall as well be glorified in heaven as their sowles.
shall likewise be partaker in the division of the glory: and that like as the
soul by conformynge it self in this life unto the will of God, comes
afterward to be made partaker of the glory of God: even so the body which
(contrary to his nature) was conformable and obedient unto the will of the
soul, shall also be made partaker of the glory of the same soul. And thus
shall the just be glorious both in body, and soul. And (as the Prophet
says: Esa. 61.7.
They shall possess in their country dowble riches: Whereby is understood
the glory of the sowles, and the glory of the bodies.

The glory of the senses. The eyes.
Now what shall I say of the glory of the senses? Each one of them shall
there have his own proper delighte and glory. The eyes shall be renewed and
made more clear than the light of the son: They shall see those royal
palaces, those glorious bodies, and those bewtifull feildes, with other
infinite goodly things that are there to be seen. The ears.
The ears shall always hear that wounderfull music, which is so exceedinge
sweite, and pleasant, that one only fownde of it were able to bring all the
hearts of this world a-sleepe. The sense of smellinge shall also be recreated
with most sweite and pleasant savors, The smellinge.
not of such vaporous things as we have here, but of such as be proportionable
to the glory that is there. The taste.
In like manner the taste shall be satisfied with incredible sweitenes, and
delights, not for sustentation of life, but for accomplishemente of all
glory. Now what an exceedinge joy shall the blessed soul conceive at that
time, when for the mortification and diligente lookinge unto the senses (which
continued so short a time) she sees her self so wholly drowned in that most
deep fountain of glory, without findinge any bothom or end of so many and
of such passinge great joys? O labors and pains well employed! O services
well rewarded! O treasure not so much to be spoken of, as to be wisshed, and
desired, and to be purchased with a thowsande lives, if we had so many to give
for the same!

Of the fyfte joy in the kingdom of heaven: which is the everlasting
continuance of the glory and felicity of the the Saints. V.
BUT now let us see for how long time this great glory and felicity is to be
enjoyed. This is a point that were able alone to cause us even to cry out,
and desire, that all manner of tribulations, afflictions, pains, and labors,
might rain and power down upon us, as thick as hayle, so that we might serve
and please almighty God in this transitory life, who is to bestow so great
and inestimable benefits upon us in the everlasting life to come.

This reward of so great glory and felicity in the kingdom of heaven shall
endure so many thowsande years, as be stars in the firmament, yea and a
great deal longer: It shall endure so many hundred thowsande millio^s of
years, as have fallen drops of water upon the earth, yea and a great deal
longer: yea to conclude, it shall endure so long as almighty God him self
shall endure, which shall be euerlastingelie world without end. Psalm. 145.
For it is written thus: Our Lord shall reign for ever, and ever. And in an
other place: Psalm. 144.
Thy reign is the reign of all worlds, and thy dominion endurethe from
generation, to generation.

Wherefore (o father of mercies, and God of all consolation) I humbly beseech
thee by the bowels of thy mercy, that I may not be deprived of this supreme
glory, and felicity. O Lord my God, that have vowchsaffed to create me after
thine own image, and likeness, and to make me capable of thy self, fill this
heart of mine (which thou have created,) with thy self, since thou have created
it for thy self. Psalm. 141.
Let my portion (o my almighty God) be in the land of the living. O Lord I
beseech thee give me not in this transitory life either rest, or riches: but
reserve all in store for me for the everlasting life to come. Number. 32.6.
I desire not to enherite with the children of Ruben in the land of Galaad,
and to lose my right and title of the land of promise. Psalm. 26.
One thing only (o Lord) have I demanded of thee, and this will I always
require, that I may dwell in the house of our Lord all the days of my life.

SONDAIE NIGHT. OF THE BENEFITS OF ALMIGHTY GOD. depiction of Christ (...)


THIS DAY (WHEN THOU HAVE MADE THE SIGN OF the Cross, and prepared thy self
hereunto,) thou have to meditate upon the benefits of almighty God: that in
so doing thou may give him thanks for them, and enkendle in thy self a
more feruente love of him, who has showed himself so bountiefull toward
thee, and withal procure thereby more grief and sorrow for the sins and
offenses that thou have committed against such a louinge benefactor.

AND albeit the benefits of almighty God toward us be innumerable, yet they
all may be reduced to five kinds: to wit, to the benefits of creation,
conservation, redemption, vocation, and to the secret benefits, that every
one has received particulerly in him self.

As concerning the first benefit, which is The benefit of creation.
Consider first with great attention what thou wast before thou were created,
and what almighty God has done for thee, and bestowed upon thee, before thou
did merit or deserve any thing at all: to wit, he gave thee thy body
with all thy members and senses, and thy soul which is of so great
excellency, created after his own image and likeness for so high and
excellent an end, as to have the fruition of almighty God. And withal he
gave thee those three noble powers also of thy soul, which be, Understanding,
Memory, and Will. And consider well with thy self, that to give thee this
soul was to give thee all things. For it is clear that there is no
perfection nor ability in any of all the inferior creatures, but that man
has the same in him in a far more high and greater perfection, and by
means of the virtue and ability of his soul he is able to attain unto it.
Whereby it appears, that by geuinge unto us this thing alone, (to wit, our
soul) he gave us therewith at once all things together.

The benefit of conservation.
consider how all thy whole being dependethe of the providence of almighty
God: How thou art not able to live one momente, nor to step so much as one
step, were it not by means of him. Consider also, how he has created all
things in this world for thy use, and service: insomuche as he has appointed
even the very Angels of heaven for thy guard, and defense. Consider moreover,
how he has given thee health, strength, life, sustenaunce, with all other
temporal helps, and succors. And above all this, consider well the manifold
great miseries, and calamities, into which thou see other men fall every
day, and how thou thy self might also have fallen into the same, had it
not been that almighty God of his great mercy preserved thee.

As concerning the benefit of redemption, The benefit of redemption.
First, how many and how great benefits almighty God has given us by means
of the benefit of redemption. And secondly, how many and how great miseries
he has suffered in his most holy body and soul to purchase these benefits
unto us.

consider first of all, The benefit of vocation.
what a great benefit it was of almighty God to make thee a Christian, to
call thee to the Catholic faith by means of the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, and to make thee also partaker of the other sacraments. And then if
after this calling of thee thou have fallen into deadly sin, and thereby
lost thine innocence, in case now our Lord have raised thee up from sin,
and received thee again into his grace, and favor, and set thee in the state
of salvation, how canste thou be able to give him sufficient praises and
tha^ckes for this so inestimable a benefit? What a great mercy was it, to
expecte thee so long time? to suffer thee to commit so many sins? and in
the mean time to send thee so many divine inspirations? and not to shorten
the days of thy life, as he has done to diverse and sundry others, that were
in the very same state? and last of all, to call thee with so mighty a
grace, that thou might rise up again from death to life, and open thine
eyes to behold the eternal light? What a great mercy was it also (after
that thou wast converted, to give thee grace not to return unto deadly sin
again, but to stand and vanquishe thine enemy, and to persevere in good
life? This is that morninge and eueninge dew that almighty God promised by
the Prophet Joel, sayeinge: And ye sons of Sion rejoice, Ioell. 2.23.
and be glad in our Lord God: for he has given you a teacher of justice, and
he shall cause the morninge and eueninge dew to rain and pour down upon
you. Meaning hereby that almighty God gives us first his preuentinge grace,
1. Grace preuentinge.
wherewith we begin to sow the seed of virtues: and afterward he gives
us his grace subsequent, 2. Grace subsequente and final.
and final, which brings this seed to his full rypenes, and happy end.

Of secret benefits.
But besides these there be other secret benefits, which no man knows but
he only that has received them. Again, there be other benefits also so
secret that even he himself that has received them knows not of them: and
he only knows them that is the geuer of them. How many times have thou
deserved in this world either through thy pride, negligence, or
unthankfulness, that almighty God should have withdrawn his grace from thee,
we fall from God either through our pride, negligence, or unthankfulness.
and utterly forsaken thee, as he has done to many others for some one of
these causes, (for whosoever they be that do fall from God, they fall by
some of these means,) and yet has not almighty God dealte thus with thee?
How many euilles and occasions of euilles has our Lord prevented and turned
away by his providence, in ouerthrowinge the snares of the devil thine
enemy, and stoppinge him of his passage, and not permittinge him to execute
his wily practices and deceites upon thee? How oftentimes has he done for
every one of us, as he saiede he did for S. Peter? Luc. 22.
Behold, (saiede our Savior) how Satan goes busily about to sift you as
corn in the barn, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Now
who knows these secrets, Benefits positive.
but only almighty God. The positive benefits be such as a man may
sometimes understand and know them: but those benefits that are called
privative, Benefits privative.
which consiste not in doing benefits unto us, but in deliueringe us from
hidden and secret euilles that were coming toward us, who is able to
understand? Wherefore as well for these benefits, as for the others, it is
reason we should always show our selves thankful to our Lord, and
understand how far in arrerages we be in our reckeninge with him, and how
much more we be indetted unto him, than we are able to pay, consideringe we
are not able so much as to understand what they are.

THE SEVENTHE TREATISE. OF THE CONSIDERATION OF the benefits of almighty God:
Wherein the former meditation is declared more at large.
ONE of the greatest complaints that almighty God makes against men, and
wherewith he will most charge them at the day of their account, Almighty God
will charge us at the day of our account with our unthankfulness and
ingratitude, for his manifold benefits. Esa. 1.
is their unthankfulness and ingratitude for his manifold benefits. With this
kind of complaynte the Prophet Esaie begins the first words of his
prophecy, calling heaven and earth to witness against the ingratitude and
unthankfulness of the wicked. Hearken (says he) o heaven, and thou earth give
ear unto my words, for our Lord has spoken it: I have nourished children,
and exalted them, and they have despised me: The ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his masters maunger: but Israel has not known me, neither would my
people understand me. Now what thing is more strange, than that men should
not acknowledge that thing, which the very brute beasts do acknowledge.
And (as S. Jerome says upon this place: S. Jerome.
The Prophet would not compare men with other lyuinge beasts that are more
quick of sense, Ungrateful and unthankful persons are more brutishe than the
most brutishe beasts that are.
as with the dog, that for a little piece of bread defends his masters
house, but even with the Ox, and Ass, which are more heavy, and rude:
geauinge us hereby to understand, that ungrateful and unthankful persons
are not to be likened to every kind of beasts, but that they be much more
brutishe tha^ the most brutishe beasts that are.

Now what punishment (trow ye) does so great beastlines deserve? Almighty
God has prepared many punishements for ungrateful persons: The ordinary
punishemente of ingraful persons.
but the most just and ordinary punishment is to spoil them of all those
benefits they have received, because they would not give thanks to the geuer
of them, as of duty they ought to have done. S. Bernarde.
For as S. Bernarde saiethe: Ingratitude is as it were a burninge wind, that
dries up the river of Gods mercy, the fountain of his clemency, and the
flowinge stream of his grace.

Now as unthankfulness is the cause of so The consideration of Gods benefits
moves us to love God.
even so contrariewise thankefulnes is the beginning of very great graces,
and especially of three. The first is the love God. For (as Aristotle says)
goodness is amiable of it self, and every man is naturally most inclined to
love his own proper weal. Saying therefore that men be naturally such lovers
of them selves, and of their own proper commodity, when they see plainly
that all that they have, comes of the gracious goodness of that chiefest
benefactor, forthewith they be moved to love, and wish well unto him, whom
they perceive and acknowledge to have bestowed so great benefits upon them.
And hereof it comes, that emonge the considerations that do most help us to
attain unto the love of God, one of the most principal is the consideration
of the benefits of almighty God. For every one of these benefits is as it
were a fyerbrande, that quickens and enkendeleth more and more the flame of
this love: and so consequently, to consider many of these benefits, is to
join many fyerbrandes together, whereby the flame of this fire is enkendeled
more and more in us.

This consideration helps also to stir up a The consideration of Gods
benefits stirs up a desire in a man to serve God.
that he owes unto him, unto who^ he is so much indetted. For if the very
birds and brute beasts be moved herewith to answer unto the voice of him
that calls them, and do obey (as though they were reasonable creatures)
unto all such things as are commanded them: how much greater prouocations
have we to do the like unto almighty God, that have received far more than
they, and be able to understand far better then they, what great and
inestimable benefits we have received of God.

This consideration is also profitable to stir The consideration of Gods
benefits stirs up a sorrow and repentance in us for our sins.
For when a man considers and weighs deeply on the one side the multitude
of benefits he has received of almighty God, and on the other side the great
number of offenses he has committed against him, how can he choose but be
ashamed of him self? How can it be but that he must needs be confounded, and
discern much better the black by comparinge it with the white? I mean
hereby, he shall much better discern the greatness of his own wickedness, by
co^paringe the same with the greatness of Gods passinge great goodness, who has
continued so long time in doing good unto him, that contrariewise has
continued evermore for his part in heapinge sin upon sin against almighty
God.

For these three ends therefore owght a man to consider the benefits of
almighty God: and withal in the consideration of them to give him most humble
thanks for the same. So that when he sets him self to meditate upon the
benefits of almighty God, he must then be careful to have his recourses unto
these three points in their due places, applyenge his heart sometimes to love
him, who has been so greatly beneficial unto him: some times to desire to
serve him: sometimes again to be sorrowful and repentant for his sins: yea
and sometimes also to offer unto him sacrifice of praise, and thanks geuinge
for his so manifold benefittes. These sacrifices are signified by those calves
of our lips, Osea. 14.3.
which the Prophet would have us to offer unto almighty God for the benefits
that we have received of him.

True it is, that the benefits of almighty God be innumerable, but we will
treat here only of five kinds of benefittes, which are of all others the
most chief, and principal, and whereunto all the other may be reduced. These
five are the benefits of creation, conservation, redemption, vocation, and
finally the particular and secret benefits that every particular person may
recognize and acknowledge in him self.

And it is not required of a man to think upon all these benefits at one
time, but it shall suffice to think upon one, or twoe, or three of them, and
to consider and pondre them well and diligently in his mind. The exercises of
meditation are not to be used as a task, but to be taken moderatlie as a
daily food for the soul.
For the exercises of meditation are not to be taken in lumpes, as a task,
that must be fully wrought and finished within a certain time, but as a daily
food, and sustenance, which the more moderatly and temperatlie it is taken,
and the better it is digested, the more profitable and wholesome it is to a man.

Of the benefit of creation. I.
TO begin now with the benefit of creation: that thou may the better
understand somewhat of the greatness of this benefit, thou shall do well to
consider first very deeply with thy self, what thou wast before thou were
created. This is one of the principal aduises, that the masters of the
spiritual life do use to give in this behalf, as well for the understanding
of the greatness of this benefit, as also for the annihilation (as they term
it,) which is, that a man may hereby clearlie and palpably perceive how of him
self he is no more than very nothing. Consider then how it is not many
years sithence, not a thowsande, nor an hundred years, but even as it were
yesterdaie, that is within a very small time, that thou wast nothing, (at
least wise as concerning thy soul) and from the beginning thou wast
nothing, and might for ever have been nothing, that is, less than a
clodde of earth, less than a puff of wind, yea less than a straw, and to
be short even nothing.

Consider then how the same nothing could not make it self any thing, and as
little could it deserve that an other should make it any thing, for that
pardy that is not, can neither work, nor deserve. Now when thou wast in this
darckenes, and in this deep bothomles pit of the same nothing, it pleased
the infinite goodness and mercy of almighty God, before any deserte of thine,
only of his mere grace, to show upon thee his power, and omnipotency, and
with his mighty hand to pluck thee out of this darcknes, and out of this
deipe bothomles pit of no being, and to bring thee to a being, and to make
thee somewhat: and (as S. Augustine saiethe) not every somewhat, S. Augustine.
not a stone, not a bird, not a toode, not a serpente, but even a man, which
is one of the most noble creatures in the world. He gave thee this being that
thou now have. He compacted and framed this thy body, and bewtified it in all
parts, both with members and senses, and that with such a wonderful
providence, and art, that every one of them (if they be well considered) is
of it self a great wonder, and a very great benefit. This is that benefit,
which the holy man Job did most humbly acknowledge, when he saiede: Job. 10.
Thy hands (o Lord) have made me, they have given me a due proportion in
every part. Remember o Lord that thou have made me, as it were of a lump of
claye, and that thou shall reduce me again into dust. Thou have clothed me
with skin, and fleashe: Thou have compacted me with bones, and sinowes: Thou
have given me life, and mercy, and have preserved my spirit with thy
visitation,

Now what shall I say of the noblenes of thy soul, The noblenes and
excellency of our soul.
and of the excellency of the end for which it was created, and of the image
and capacity that it has. The image thereof is the image of almighty God him
self. For in very deed there is nothing in all the earth that more
resembles almighty God, there is nothing whereby we may come to a more
evident knowledge of him, than by the soul. And therefore the aunciente
Philosophers (and namely Anaxagoras) knew no meeter name to be given unto God,
than Men's (the Mind), which is as much to say, as a reasonable soul, by
reason of the great similitude and likeness that they perceived to be between
God, and it. And this is the cause why the substance of our soul can not be
perfectly understood. For being as it is very like unto the substance of God,
(which can not be known in this life) it follows that the substance of the
soul is also a thing not able to be known here by us.

For what end the soul of man was created.
Now the end for which this noble creature was created, is answerable to this
dignity. For it is manifest that the soul was created to be partaker of that
blessed glory and felicity of almighty God, to dwell in his house, to eat
at his table, to enjoy those things that almighty God him self enjoys, to
be clothed with the same garmente of immortality that he him self is clothed
withal, and to reign everlastingly with him.

And hereof it comes, that the soul has such a wonderful capacity: which
is so great, The wonderful capacity of the soul of man.
that all the creatures and riches of the world put together, are no more able
to fille her capacity, than a barlie corn is able to fille all the whole
world.

Now therefore, what recompense shall we make unto our most gracious and
bountiefull Lord for this so passinge great benefit? If we think our selves
to be so much bound to our carnal parents, for that they have been some
part in the buildinge of this our body, how much more are we indetted unto
our heavenly father, who by means of our parents has formed our bodies, and
without the^ has created our sowles, which be without comparison more
excellent than the body, and without which our body were no better than a
stinckinge donghill? What are our parents, but only an instrument whereby
almighty God has made a small portion of this work? Now if thou be so much
bound to the instrument of the work, how much more art thou bound to the
principalle agent, that made the work? And if thou be so much bound unto him,
who was only a mean in framinge one part, how much more art thou bound unto
almighty God that made the whole? If thou esteem a sword so much wherewith a
city was conquered, how much more owghtest thou to esteime the king him
self that conquered it.

Of the benefit of our Conservation. II.
AND our Lord has not only created thee in such great dignity, and glory,
but it is he also, that mainteneth and conserueth thee after thy creation in
the same? As he him self witnesses by the Prophet Esaie, Esa. 48.17.
sayeinge: I am thy Lord thy God, that do teach thee whatsoever is meite for
thee to know, and do govern thee in the way that thou walk. Many
mothers there be, that think it sufficient to sustain only the travail of
child bearinge: they will not burden them selves with noursinge their
children, but will seike out some other nourse that may discharge them of that
trouble. But almighty God deals not so with us: for he vouchsafes to take
upon him self the whole charge, and burden: insomuch as he is both the mother
that bare us, and the nourse that nourishethe us with the milk and
cherishinges of his providence: according as he him self witnesses by one of
his Prophets: saying: I was as it were the nourse of Ephraem, and carried them
in mine arms, Osea. 11.3.
and they understood not that I had care of them. So that our Lord himself is
both the creator and conseruer of all things that be created. And like as
without him nothing is made, even so were it not for him, all things would
go to utter ruin, and decaie. The Prophet David confesses plainly both the
one and the other in these words: Psalm. 144.
The eyes of all things do look upon thee o Lord, and thou geuest the^
their food in dew season. And whilst thou geuest it, they receive it, and
when thou stretchest forth the hand of thy bountiful goodness, they are
replenished and satisfied with all such things as they stand in neide of. But
if thou (o Lord) turn thy face away from them, they shall forthwith be
disapointed, and utterly fail, and return again to the same dust whereof
they were made. Whereby it appears that like as all the mouinge and order of
a clock depends of the wheels that do draw it, and make it to go,
insomuch that if they should stay, immediately all the whole frame and mouinge
of the clock would stay also: even so all the worckmanshippe of this great
frame of the world depends wholly of the providence of almighty God, in
such sort that if his divine providence should fail, all the rest would
fail out of hand withal.

But how many benetfites (trowest thou) are contained in this one benefit.
Every minute and momente of our life depends of the providence of almighty
God.
Trewlie every minute and momente of an hour that thou live, are parts of
this benefit. For thou could not live, nor have any being so much as one
minute if almighty God should withdraw his providence, and turn his eye
away never so little from thee. All creatures in the world are part of this
benefit. For we see that they all do serve to this end. Insomuch as the
heaven is thine, the earth is thine, yea, the Son, the Moon, the stars,
the sea, the fishes, the birds, the trees, the living beasts, and to be
short, all things in the world be thine: for so much as they all are appointed
to do thee service. This is that benefit which the Prophet wondered so much
at, when he saiede: Psalm. 8.
What is man o Lord, that thou should be mindful of him: and what is the
son of man, that thou do so visit him? Thou have made him not much
inferior to the Angels: Thou have crowned him with glory, and honor, and have
made him Lord over all the works of thy hands. Thou have put all things
under his feite, sheep, oxen, and all the beasts of the feilde, the birds of
the aier, and the fishes of the sea, that walk over the paths of the Sea. O
Lord our God, how wonderful is thy name over all the earth.

Almighty God has appointed al creatures visible and invisible to serve man.
And almighty God has vowchsaffed not only to appointe all visible creatures
for the service and behoof of man, but has also of his great mercy appointed
the invisible creatures, to wit, those most noble and excellent
vndersta^dinges, that be always in his presence, and behold his divine face.
For as S. Paul saiethe: Hebr. 1.14.
They be all officers in this great house and family of almighty God, Unto
the Angels is committed the defense and safegarde of men.
unto whom is committed the defense and safegarde of me^. Finally, he has
employed all the whole world to do thee service, to the intent that thou
should in like manner imploie thy self in his service. And his will is, that
there should be no one creature either under the heaven or above exempted from
seruinge and helpinge thee. And this has he done, that there should be
nothing within thee, that should not likewise be employed in seruinge of him.

And although peradventure thou runnest slightlie over all these things, yet
ought thou not so to pass over the benefits that almighty God has done
unto thee in deliueringe thee from infinite mishappes, and calamities, which we
see do daily happen to other men. Thou see how one is troubled with the
palsy, an other is blind, an other lame, This world is a maine sea of
infinite trowbles, calamities, and miseries.
an other broken legged, an other sore vexed with the stone, and others with
the strangurie, gowte, fistula, or with other like terrible diseases, and
miseries. For to say the very truth, this world is nothing else but a main
sea of infinite troubles, calamities, and miseries, and scarcely can thou
find any one house in all this land of Egipte free from sighinge, mourninge,
grief, and sorrow. And now tell me (I pray thee) who has granted unto thee
this bulle and pate^te of exe^ptio^, to be quitte and free from these so
greiuous calamities, and miseries? Who has given thee so great a privilege,
that emonge such a number of diseased and wounded persons, thou should be
free, and sound: and emonge such a number that do daily fall, thou
should yet stand vprighte upon thy feet? Art not thou a man as all
others? a sinner as all others? and the son of Adam as all others? If then
all these evils and miseries do come either on the behalf of nature, or else
of sin, and the very same causes are in thee, how is it, that the very same
effects are not also in thee? Who has suspended the effects from their
causes? Who has stayed the streams of the waters, that thou should not
perish with others in this common floude, but only the very grace of God?
Wherefore if thou cast this account aright, All the miseries of this world
are benefits unto us.
thou shall find that all the miseries of this world are benefits unto thee,
and that for every one of them in particular thou owe a special
thankefulnes and love unto almighty God. So that by the benefit before
alleged thou may perceive, that all the good things in the world are
benefits bestowed upon thee, (for so much as they all do serve for thy
conservation:) and now also by this may thou vnsterstande, that all the
miseries and euilles in the world are likewise benefits unto thee, in that
our Lord has delivered thee from them all.

Of the benefit of Redemption. III.
LET us come now unto the inestimable benefit of our redemption: although it
should be much better to adore this mystery with an holy silence, than to
speak of it in such gross and base wise as we must do with our mortal
tongue. Thou did lose throwghe sin that first innocence and grace wherein
thou wast created, and almighty God might with good equity and justice have
left thee in that miserable state, (as he left the devil, and non should have
been able to have reproved him therefore. And yet he would not so do, but
rather contrariewise chaunginge his anger into mercy, it pleased him of his
infinite goodness to bestow greatest benefits at that time, when he was most
provoked to wrath with greatest offenses. And whereas he might have repaired
this loss of innoce^cie by sendinge some Angel, Summa S. Thomae. 3. quaest. 1.
artic. 2. and 3. and quaest. 46. artic. 1. and. 2. Our Lord came himself in
person to redeem us, and that in great humility and poverty.
or Archangell, or by some other means, he would not so do, but vowchsaffed
to come eue^ him self in person. And whereas he might have come with great
majesty, and glory, he abased him self so far, as to come in great
humility, and poverty. And this he did, to cause thee to be the more in love
with him by reason of this benefit: and to make thee the more beholdinge unto
him by this example: and to make thy redemption the more abou^dant by reason of
the great treasure, that he bestowed upon it: and to give thee more clearlie to
understand how much good will he bears unto thee, that thou should bear
toward him the like again: and to show playnlie unto thee how much interest
thou have in him, that thou should repose thy whole trust and affyance in
him. This is that benefit, which the Prophet Esaie extolleth (and that for
great good cause) in these words: which after the translation of the
septuagintes sownde thus; In all the tribulations of men he never fainted, Esa.
43.
neither was he ever weary in sufferinge for them. Neither would he send
any Ambassador, or Angel to redeem them, but vouchsaffed of his great
mercy to come him self in person to redeem them, and to carry them upon his
shoulders all the days of this world, notwithstanding that they did evil
acknowledge this benefit, Ephesians. 4.30.
but did greiue and provoke the holy Ghost to anger.

How greatly we are bound to our Lord for the manner of our redemption.
And if thou be so much bound to our Lord for that he vouchsaffed to come him
self in person to redeem thee, how much more art thou bound unto him for the
manner of thy redemption, which was by sufferinge so great pains, and
torments? It were certainly a great benefit, if a king would pardon a
theife that had deserved to be whipped: But if the king would vouchsafe him
self to receive the lasshes upon his own shoulders for him, this were without
comparison a far greater benefit. Consider therefore how many benefits are
comprehended in this benefit of thy redemption. Lift up thine eyes unto that
holy roode, and consider all the wounds, and pains, that the Lord of
majesty suffers there for thy sake. For every one of them is a benefit of
it self, yea, and a singular great benefit. Our saviors body.
Behold that most innocent body of thy sweite savior and redeemer all of a
gore blood, with so many wounds and bruses on all parts of him, and the
blood gusshinge out on every side. His head.
Behold that most sacred head fallinge down for very faintnes, and hanginge
upon his shoulders. His face. 1. Pet. 1.12.
Behold that divine face (which the Angels are desirous to behold) how
disfigured it is, and ouerflowed with streams of blood, in some parts
fresh, and read colored, in other parts very foul, and black. His visage.
Behold that most bewtifull visage of all creatures, and that countenance that
delighted the eyes of all such as beheld it, how it has now lost all the
flower of his former beauty. Jeremy Thren. 3.
Behold that holy Nazareth, more pure than snow, more white than milk,
better colored than old Iuerie, how he is now become blacker than cooles, and
so much disfigured, and beraied, that scarcely his own fryendes are able to
know him. Behold that holy mouth, His mouth. His lips.
how wanne and deadly it looks. Behold his lips, how black and blewe they
seem: Behold how they move, desiringe pardon, and mercy, even for those that
are his very tormentours.

Finally, wheresoever thou beholdest him, thou shall find that there is no one
part of him free from pain, and grief, but that he is covered all over with
lashes, and wounds, eue^ from the top of his head to the soles of his feet.
His forehead. His eyes.
That goodly clear forhead, and those eyes more bewtifull than the Son, are
now dimmed and darkened with the blood and presence of death. His ears.
Those ears that are wont to hear the songs of heaven, do now hear the
horrible blasphemies of sinners. His arms.
Those arms so well fashioned and so large that they embrace all the power of
the world, are now disioynted, and stretched out upon the cross. Those hands
that created the heavens, His hands.
and were never injurious to any man, are now nailed and clenched fast with
hard and sharp nails. His feet.
Those blessed feet that never walked in the ways of sinners, are now deadly
wounded, and pierced through. Our saviors narrow and hard bed upon the
cross, without any pillowe, or other thing wherevpo^ to rest his head.
(...) His side.
But above all this, behold the bed where he lies, and whereupon that
heavenly bridegroom sleapeth at none day, how narrow and hard it is, and how
he has nothing whereupon to rest his head. O precious head of my sweet
savior, what means this, that I see thee thus afflicted and tormented for my
sake? O blessed body, conceived by the holy Ghost, how is it, that I see thee
thus wounded and evil entreated for my sake? O sweet and louinge side, what
means this great wound and open cleft in thee? What means this so great
abundance of blood? Alas wretch that I am, what a pittiefull sight is this,
to see thee thus furiously pierced with a spear for my sake? O rigorous
cross, be not now I beseech thee so stiff, but mollify a little thy hardness,
bow down unto me these high branches, let down to me this most precious
fruit, that I may taste thereof. O cruel nails, leave I pray you those
innocent hands and feet of my innoce^te Savior, and come and enter into my
heart, and pearce it through: for it is I that have sinned, and not he. O good
Jesus, what have thou to do with so many cruel torments? What have thou to
do with death? With sharp nails? and with the cross? Vndowbtedlie the
Prophet had good reason to say: Esa. 28.21.
That his works shall be very strange, and far unlike him self. What is
more strange and more contrary to life, than death? What is more disagreable
to glory, than pain? What is further of from the nature of most perfect
holiness, and innocence, than the image and shape of a sinner? This title and
shape o Lord, is certaynlie very strange for thee. O true Jacob, Genesis 26.
that with wearinge the garments of others, and with disguisinge thy self in
a strange habit, have purchased for us the blessinge of our heavenly father!
For by taking upon thee the image of a sinner, thou have purchased for us
victory against sin. O goodness inspekeable! O mercy undeserved! O love
exceidinge all understanding! O charity incomprehensible! Tell me (o most
merciful Lord) what saw thou in us? What service have we done unto thee?
With what works have we bound thee, to suffer such greiuous and cruel
torments for our sakes? O wonderful bountiefulnes, that without any merit
of our part, and without any necessity of thine own part, would
vouchesafe only of thy mere grace, and mercy, to purchase our redemption
after this sort! Tit. 3.4.
The benignity and clemency of our savior (says the Apostle) has
appeared, not in respect of the works of justice that we have done, but
according to his great mercy he has saved us. O how wonderful desirous was
our most gracious Lord, that we should understand his mercy, when by the
Prophet Esaie he spoke those so notable words: Esa. 43.22.
Thou have not called upon me o Jacob, and thou o Israel have not trauayled in
my service. Thou have not offered unto me thy ra^mes in a whole burnte
sacrifice, neither have thou glorified me with thy sacrifices, etc. And yet for
all this, thou have made me to serve in thy sins, and have put me to pains
with thine iniquity. It is I, It is I, that do pardon thy sins for mine
own sake, and that will never be mindful of them. Put me in mind, and let
us enter into judgment: and show if thou have any thing, where with to
justify thy self.

Wherefore o most merciful and sweite Lord, what thing is there in me,
wherewith I may recompense thee for this so great a benefit? If I should
live all the lives of the children of Adam, and all the days and years of the
world, If I were able to sustein all the travels and pains of all the men
that either be, has been, or shall be, all this were as nothing to recompense
the very least of the greifes and pains that thou have suffered for me.
Consideringe therefore that I can by no means possible discharge this
inestimable great dett, let me pay thee o my almighty God if it be thy
blessed will with the continual remembrance of the same. I beseech thee o
Lord even by the bowels of thy infinite charity, that thou will wound my
heart with thy wou^des, and make my soul droncke with thy most precious blood,
in such sort that whither so ever I shall turn my self, I may always see
thee crucified, and wheresoever I shall cast mine eyes, all things may seem
unto me to shine with thy precious blood. Let this be all my consolation, to
be always crucified with thee: and let this be all my affliction, to think
upon any other thing besides thee. Consider o my almighty God the great
price wherewith thou have bowghte me, and suffer not so precious a treasure to
be shed in vain for me. And grant me o most merciful Lord, that I be not
as a child that is borne before his time, whom his mother brings forth with
exceidinge great travel, and pain, and yet he enjoys not the commodity and
fruit of life.

Of the fourth benefit: to wit, of Vocation. IIII.
AFTER this, think upon the benefit of Vocation or calling of almighty God,
without which all the other benefits tend to the greater damnation of a man.
Two callinges of God: one unto faith, and an other unto grace.
But here it is to be noted, that there be two kinds of callinges of almighty
God: one unto faith, by means of the Sacrament of Baptism: and an other unto
grace, after that a man has lost the first innocence which he had by baptism.

Consider now, what a great benefit the first calling of thee was by means
of the Sacrament of holy Baptism, The first calling is by Baptism.
whereby thou wast cleansed from original sin, delivered from the power of
the devil, made the son of almighty God, and an inheritour of his
kingedome. There he took thy soul to be is spowse, and adorned it with such
ornaments, as were convenient for such a state, to wit, with the grace,
virtues, and gifts of the holy Ghost, and with other jewels, and gifts,
that are far more precious than those that were given to Rebecca, Genesis 24.
when she was taken to be the spowse of Isaac. Now what have thou done, whereby
to deserve so great a benefit as this is? How many thowsandes not only of
men, but also of nations and whole countries are there, that by the just
judgment of almighty God do not obtain this inestimable great benefit?
What had become of thee, if thou had been borne emonge those infidels, and
wanted this knowledge of the true living God, and worshipped stocks, and
stones for God, as the infidels do? How much art thou bound to almighty God,
that emonge such an infinite number of lost and damned sowles, it pleased him
that thou should be one of the number of them that should be saved, yea and
be borne in the lap of the Catholic Church, and be nourished there with the
milk of the Apostles, and with the precious blood of our sweet Savior Jesus
Christ.

The second calling.
Now if after the grace of this first calling thou have through thine own
default and sinful life lost the innocence which thou receiuedst in the
Sacrament of Baptism, in case it has pleased our Lord all that
notwithstanding to call thee the second time, yea and very many and often
times, how much art thou then bound unto him for this so passinge great
benefit? How many benefits are contained in this benefit? One benefit thee
down therefore into the most horrible bothomles pit of hell fire, where
perhaps many others are now there tormented even for less offenses than
thine. An other Joan. 2.
out of the darcke and obscure grave of thy wicked and synnefull life, and not
with thy hands and feet bownde, but losed and set at free liberty out of
the stinckinge prison and thraldom of the enemy of mankind. But above all
this, what a benefit was it, Luc. 15.
as were given to the penitente prodigal son, when he was received into
grace and favor again: by means of which ornaments and graces thou might
live as the child of God, and contemn and laughe at the malice of the devil,
and triumph over the world, and take a sweet taste of the things
appertaininge unto almighty God, which before seemed very unsavory unto
thee, and withal conceive a certain lothsomnes and mislikinge of the things
of the world, which before seemed very sauorie and delightful unto thee.

But now besides this, what if thou do consider unto how many others
almighty God has denied this benefit, which he has so freely granted unto
thee. And whereas thou being a sinner as well as they, and as unworthy of this
calling as they, yet it has pleased almighty God to suffer them to continewe
in their wicked state, and to call thee unto the state of salvation, and
grace? With what thanks, and with what services art thou able to recompense
him for this inestimable special favor, and grace? What an excerdinge joy
will it be unto thee, when by the virtue of this vocation thou shall see thy
self to have the fruition of almighty God for ever and ever in the kingdom
of heaven, and shall see other of thy companions and acquaintance for want of
the like grace of God to remain everlastingly tormented in the horrible
raginge fire of hell? O good Lord, what a number of things are there included
in this grace to be well weighed, and earnestly considered upon! Tell me I
pray thee, Luc. 23.
when the blessed theife (who with one word purchased life everlasting) sees
him self in that so great glory which he now possesses in the kingdom of
heaven, and sees his companion also in those great horrible torments of hell
fire, and calls to mind withal, that he him self was a theife also as well
as the other, and suffered for his robberies as the other did, and that a little
before he blasphemed our Savior Jesus Christ in like manner as his companion
did, and that yet for all this it pleased almighie God to cast his merciful
eyes upon him, and to give him so great a light, leauinge the other theife in
his darckenes; now in consideringe hereupon, what thanckes think thou does
he render to almighty God for this spetiall grace? How wounderfullie does he
rejoice at so great a benefit? How does he marvel at so great a judgment?
With what a passinge great love does he love him, that would vowchsafe to
prevent him with such a singular and wonderful grace? Now if this seem so
great a benefit unto thee? Remember thy self, that our savior Christ has
bestowed the like inestimable benefit upon thee, when the same louinge Lord
vowchsaffed to cast his merciful eyes so specially upon thee, and did not
with the like manner of calling call thy neighbor, companion, or freinde, who
peradventure had less offended his divine majesty than thou. Consider then
how much thou art bownde to our Lord for this his great benefit, and what a
great occasion is here offered unto thee, to desire even to suffer death for
the love of him.

Besides all this, consider how costly and chargeable this benefit of our
redemption was to our Savior Christ, which was so freely given unto thee. Unto
thee it was given franckly, and of mere grace, Summa S. Thomae. 3. q. 1. artic.
2. and 3. and quaest. 46. artic. 1. and 2.
and it cost him even his own most precious blood, and life also: for it is
manifest that without the same our sins could not be pardoned, nor our
wou^des cured. It is saiede of the Pelican that she brings forth her
yonge-ones dead, and saying them in that case, she stryketh her self upon the
breast with her beak, until she cause bludde to issue out, and therewith she
batheth her yonge-ones, and so they receive heat, and life, Now if thou will
understand how great this benefit is, make account with thy self, that when
thou wast dead in sin, that most louinge and merciful Pelican (our Savior
Christ) moved with most tender piety and compassion stroke his sacred breast
with a spear, and washed the deadly wounds of thy soul with the precious
bludde of his wou^des, and so with his own death he gave thee life, and with
his own wounds healed thy wounds. Be not thou therefore unthankful unto him
for this so great and costly benefit, but as our Lord admonishes thee, be
mindful of the day in which thou came out of Egypt. This day was the day
of thy Passover, Exodus 13.
this was the day of thy Resurrection, for so much as upon this day thou have
passed through the red sea of the bludde of Christ unto the land of
promise, and upon this day thou have risen again from death to life.

Of the particular benefits that almighty God bestows upon us. V.
THESE benefits aforesaiede are general. Other benefits there are more
particular, that be given to particular persons, the which benefits none other
knows but only he that has received them. In this account are reckened
many kinds of benefits, either of fortune, or of nature, or of grace, which
almighty God has given to each one in particular: and also diverse and sundry
miseries, and dangers, both of body, and soul, from which he of his mere
mercy has delivered us. For which particular benefits we are as well bound
to give him thanks, as for the former general benefittes: for so much as they
are more certain signs and tokens of the spetiall and particular love, and
providence, that our Lord bears toward us. Such benefits as these are can
not be written in books, but every one ought to write them in his heart, and
so to join them with the other general benefits, and to give most humble
thanks unto our Lord for them.

Our Lord preserves us many times from secret dangers and snares that
would otherwise fall upon us.
There be also other benefits yet more secret and hidden than these, which
are unknown even to the very party himself that has received them. These
are certain privy dangers, and secret snares, which our Lord is wont to
prevent and disapoynte by his divine providence, for that he understands what
great damage and prejudice they might do unto us, in case he should not cut
them of, and disapoynte their cowerse. What man is able to tell from how many
temptations almighty God has preserved him? and from how many occasions of
sins he has delivered him? and how often times he has stopped the passages
and removed away the deceytefull snares of the devil our enemy, that we
should not fall into them. The devil him self says of the holy man Job:
Job. 1.10.
That almighty God had environed him on every side, that nothing might do
him hurt. And even so is our Lord wont to keep and preserve such as be his,
(as it were a glass preserved in his case,) that nothing may hurt them.

A man may have many secret gifts, and many secret sins, that he knows
not. Psalm. 28.
It may also be that a man has received of almighty God some secret gifts,
although he him self knows not of them: as also a man may, and is wont to
have many secret sins, which he him self that commits them knows not.
Wherefore like as for these kind of sins we ought daily to pray with the
Prophet, and say: Ab occultis meis munda me Domine. Deliver me o Lord from my
secret sins: Even so ought we also every day to yield him most humble and
hearty thanks for these kind of benefits, that by this mean no sin may
remain, without penance, nor benefit without rendringe of thanks for the
same.

Christogram I H S



The end of the other seven meditations for the seven days of the weke at
night.

OF FIVE PARTS THAT MAY BE EXERCISED IN PRAYER. CAP. IIII.
THESE be the meditatio^s (good Christian reader) wherein thou may exercise
thy self in the seven days of the weke, and in so doing thou shall not want
matter whereupon to meditate, But here it is to be noted, that (as we have
already saiede) there be two things that may go before meditation, and
other two that may follow after it. The five parts of prayer.
So that in all there be five parts which may concur in this exercise: to
wit, preparation, readinge, meditation, thankes-geuinge, and petition.

For before we enter into prayer, I. Preparation.
it is very requisite that we do first prepare our heart unto this holy
exercise: followinge therein the manner and custom of musicians, who use to
temper and tune their lute, vial, or other instrument, before they play upon
it. And therefore Ecclesiasticus saiethe: Before prayer prepare thy soul,
Eccles. 18.23. what it is to tempte God.
and be not as a man that tempts God. To tempte God, is to desire that he
should work a miracle in such things, as may be done by other ordinary
means. Saying therefore that the preparation of the heart is such a
principalle mean to obtain devotion, he that goes about to obtein it without
this mean, shows him self to have a desire that almighty God should work
a miracle therein: the which (as Ecclesiasticus saiethe) is as it were a
temptinge of God.

II. Readinge.
After preparation it follows that a man do read that matter which he has
to meditate upon that day, according to the division of the days of the
weke, which we have made heretofore. And this manner of readinge is vndowtedlie
very necessary for such as are but nouices and young beginners in this
exercise, until such time as a man do know what he ought to meditate upon.
But afterward, when by the use and practice of certain days he is well
instructed therein, then this readinge shall not be so neidfull, III.
Meditation.
but that he may forthwith proceed unto meditation.

IIII. Thanks geuinge.
After meditation there may follow out of hand a devout geuinge of thanks
to almighty God for all such benefits as we have received, the which ought
evermore to accompany all our prayers, according as the Apostle exhorts us,
Collos. 4.2.
sayeinge: Occupte your selves very earnestly in prayer: watchinge therein
with thankes-geuinge. S. Augustine.
For as S. Augustine saiethe: What thing is there that we can better conceive
in our hearts, S. Augustine commends the often saying of Deo gratias.
better pronounce with our mouths, and better write with our pens, than this
short sentence, Deo gratias: Thanks be unto God. Nothing can be said more
breifely: nothing can be hard more sweetly, or understood more joyfully, or
done more fruitfully.

The last part is Petition, Petition.
which is properly called prayer: wherein we desire of almighty God all such
things as are behouefull as well for the salvation of our selves, as of our
neighbors, and of all the whole Catholic Church.

These five parts may be exercised in prayer: and emonge other profits and
commodities that are wont to come thereby, this is one, that these points
being dewlie exercised do minister unto a man great plenty of matter
whereupon to meditate: settinge before him all these diversities of meats,
that if he list not to eat of one, he may yet eat of an other: and that
when he has made an end of meditation in one matter, he may forthwith enter
into an other, and so find variety of matter wherein to continewe his
meditation.

I know right well, that neither all these parts nor this order is always
necessary for all persons. Howbeit this manner may serve very well for all
such as are but nouices and young beginners in this exercise, that so they may
have some order and direction whereby to direct them selves at the beginning.
For certain it is, that some things be necessary in the beginning to teach
an art, which afterward when they be once known are but superfluous. And
therefore, of any thing that shall be here treated I will not that any man
should think that I intend to make the same a perpetual law, or general
rule. For mine intent is not in these instructions to make any law, but
only to show an introduction for the direction of such persons as are but
nouices and beginners in this way. In which course after that they shall be once
entered by folowinge this introduction, then the very use and experience they
shall have in this exercise, and much more the holy Ghost will teach them
each thing that they have to do herein. The which being once sayede in this
place, I desire it may be understood in all the rest of this book.

Of Preparation, which is a thing very requisite to be used before prayer,
and meditation. CAP. V.
NOW it shall be requisite for us to treat particularly of every one of these
five parts aforesaid, and first of Preparation, which ought to go before the
others.

We said even now that it was needful to use some preparation of our mind
before we enter into prayer. Preparation unto prayer may be made, diverse
ways. we may prepare our, selves unto prayer by consideringe our sins and
offenses, Prou. 18.17. Exodus 3. Exodus 19.
This preparation may be made diverse manners of ways. For a man may dispose
him self unto prayer by calling to mind his sins, and offenses, and namely
such sins as he has committed that present day, and he may accuse him
self of the^, and desire of our Lord pardon for them, according to the
sayeinge of the Wise man. The just man at the beginning is an accuser of him
self.

This manner of Preparation seems to be as it were the pullinge of of our hose
and shoes to enter into the holy land, and as it were the washinge of our
garments to go to receive almighty God, when he comes to treat with men,
and to teach them his holy law. This manner of preparation we are taught to
use even by nature it self. For we see it is a common manner, that when we go
to request any benefit of any friend of ours whom we have offended, we do
first desire him of pardon, and forgeuenes, before we demand any other thing
of him. This may be done sometimes with the heart only, and sometimes by
sayeinge the general confession, Confiteor Deo, etc. or the psalm: Miserere
mei Deus: Psalm. 50.
or some other like prayers. Wherein good heed must be taken, that these
prayers be not said in post have, but with as great quietness, attention,
feelinge, and repentance of heart as we can.

Howbeit a man ought not to stay over long in this consideration of his
sins, (as some persons do, that both begin and end herewith, yea and
pass all their whole life therein). For albeit this consideration of our
sins be always good, (and at the beginning very necessary) yet it is meet
that it be taken with such moderation, as that it occupy not that time which
should be bestowed about other better matters. Neither is it needful in this
exercise for a man to consider very particularly his sins, and namely such as
the remembrance whereof may move him to some evil cogitations: But it is
sufficient to make as it were a bundell of them all, and to drown them in the
bothomles Sea of the infinite goodness and mercy of almighty God, with good
hope to receive pardon and remedy of them from the same.

we may prepare our selves unto prayer by consideringe the majesty and
greatness of almighty God.
We may also prepare our selves unto prayer, by consideringe the majesty and
greatness of that Lord unto whom we go to speak in prayer. For this
consideration will teach us, with what great reverence, and humility, and with
how great attention, it behooves such a miserable creature as man is, to
speak unto a lord of so great majesty as almighty God is, concerning a
matter of so great importance as is his own salvation. But that thou may
understand somewhat of the majesty of almighty God, thou must consider that
the heavens, the earth, and all that is created, is no more before the
majesty of almighty God, Sap. II.
than a little emyte, or (as the Wise man says) a grain of weight in the
balance. Now if all creatures be no more than an emite before him, what shall
thou then seem to be before him, that art so small a part of the whole?

This consideration of the majesty and greatness of almighty God is as it were
a profounde reverence, that the soul makes within it self before the throne
of that supreme majesty, at what time she enters into his palace to speak
with him. Math. 26.39 Our Savior Christ gave us an example with what
humility and reverence we ought to pray unto almighty God. Genesis 18.27. It
is very good to consider before hand, for what purpose, and end, we go to
pray unto almighty God.
With this manner of humility and reverence the Son of God taught us to
pray, when making his prayer he cast him self prostrate upon the ground:
geuinge us thereby to understand, how humble and lowly a man ought to be, and
how much he ought to consider of his own baseness, and vileness, whenever he
goes about to speak unto almighty God. With this spirit and humble
reverence a man may repete those words of the holy Patriarch, where he
says: I will speak to my Lord, although I be but duste, and ashes.

But above all this, it shall help us very much in this preparation to
consider well what we go about to do, when we settle our selves to prayer.
For if we do well consider it, we go to pray for none other purpose, but to
receive the spirit of almighty God, and the influencies of his grace, and the
joy of charity, and devotion, wherewith we see how the sowles of just persons
are replenished at the end of their long and devout prayers. Now this being
so, thou may perceive hereby, with how great humility, and reverence, and
with how great attention, and devotion, thou ought to come, when thou do
open the mouth of thy soul to receive almighty God. Consider with what great
and feruente devotion the holy Apostles were enflamed, Act. 1.
at what time they expected and looked for the coming of the holy Ghost, and
by that may thou understand, how thou ought to prepare thy self when
thou go about to look for and receive the same holy Ghost, albeit it be
not in such plentiful and abundante wise as the Apostles was. Hereby thou
see, how close shut thou ought to have the gates of thy understanding
and will at the time of prayer from all the cares and thoughts of the world:
and how open they ought then to be unto almighty God alone, that in case he
come to enter therein, he return not back again, findinge the gates shut
against him, or the lodginge taken up and pestered with other ghestes.

Now with this preparation and spirit may thou present thy self in prayer
before the face of our Lord, Luc. 14.
as that sick man of the dropsy did, who stood before him expectinge from
his merciful hand to be restored unto his health: Math. 8.
or as that leperous person did, who kneeled down at his feet, and said
humbly unto him. Marc. 1.40.
O Lord if thou will thou can make me clean. Consider that in like manner
as a little hongrie dog stands before his masters table, fauninge very
earnestelie upon him with his eyes, and all his whole body, lookinge ever for
some little piece of bread to come from his table, and after the same sort
ought thou to present thy self before the rich table of the Lord of
heaven, confessinge thy self to be unworthy of the whole abundaunce of his
mercies, and desiringe him most humbly to bestow some little portion thereof
upon thee for thy relief. With this lowly spirit may thou say the Psalm:
Psalm. 122.
Ad te leuaui oculos meos qui habitas in caelis, etc. The which albeit it be
but short, yet is it very fit and conueniente to stir up and enkendle this
foresaid affection, in preparinge thy self unto prayer.

This manner of preparation of the other thou may (gentle reader) use at thy
liberty: but the first seems to be more convenient for the night, when a man
ought to examine his conscience, and desire pardon and forgeuenes of almighty
God, of all such defectes, and offenses, as he has offended him in that day.
And the second manner of preparation is most fit for the morninge, when he
rises before the day break, to desire then of almighty God the assistance
and succor of his grace, whereby he may the better bestow that day in his
service.

But because to know how to pray as a man ought, To know how to pray as a
man ought, is a special gift of God.
is a very spetiall gift of almighty God, and a work of the holy Ghost,
therefore desire him most humbly both in the one preparation and the other to
instruct thee how to do thy duty herein, and to give thee grace that thou
may speak unto him in thy prayer with such attention, and devotion, with
such recollection and closenes of mind, and with such fear, and reverence, as
is behouefull to be used before so great a majesty: and withal desire him,
that thou may in such wise persevere, and spend that little time in this
exercise of prayer, that thou may in the end arise from the same with new
force, and strength, to do all such things as apperteyne to his service. It
is also a good manner of preparation to say some vocalle prayers before
meditation.


It is thought also to be a good manner of preparation to say some vocalle
prayers before meditation: of which sort there be many in diverse books of
devotion, and namely in the meditations of S. Augustine, and in the Psalter of
David, where there be some very devout Psalms that will help very much to
enkendle and stir up devotion. For it is the property of devout sentences
(being saiede with an earnest mind and attention) to wound the heart, and to
lift it up unto almighty God: the which devour sentences are so much the more
behouefull and necessary for us, by how much we find our spirit to be more
cold, and distracted. The saying of


And these same prayers do serve much better for this purpose when they be in
mitre, as are many Hymns of the Saints, Hymns, proses, and versicles, do
stir devotion.
and the Proses, and Versicles. Forsomuche as (I know not how it is, that) the
words of God used in this kind of style, and harmony, do bring with them a
greater sweetenes, and delighte to our sowles. And therefore we find in the
works of S. Bonauenture (who was a very devout holy man) many of these
Hymns. The like we find in the works of S. Bernarde, and in diverse and
sundry other of the holy fathers. Likewise there is great commendation given
by many learned men (and surely not without good cause) to those three diuout
himnes that Ieronimo de Vida made to the three persons in Trinity, which
being learned by heart, and saiede devoutly, be as it were a most sweite Manna
to sweiten the taste of our soul at the beginning of prayer, and to dispose it
to take a delighte in spiritual and divine matters.

Here I think it necessary to declare with what intention a man ought to come
unto prayer. With what intention a man ought to come unto prayer.
For he must not go thereunto chiefly for his own consolation, and delighte,
(as some that be great lovers of them selves use to do,) but only to fulfill
herein the will of almighty God, and to desire of him his grace, and to
dispose him self for the obteyninge of the same. And herewith he must submit
him self in such wise into the hands of almighty God, that he must be as
ready and content to be without consolations in his prayer as to have them,
remittinge himself humbly into his hands, to dispose of him, and of all
things belonginge unto him, as he shall think good, acknowledginge on the one
side, that he deserves not any thing of him, and beleeuinge on the other,
that although it be so in very deed, yet our Lord of his infinite goodness
and mercy will do whatsoever shall be most convenient and behouefull for his
salvation. And therefore a man ought to content him self a-like, whether the
consolations be great, or little, and to take in good part whatsoever usage our
Lord shall show unto him, accountinge him self utterly unworthy of all
those things that he bestows upon him, and being ready to fulfill all such
things as he shall command him, not in respect of the benefits that he
hops to receive, but in respect of them that he has already received, and
in consideration of his bounden duty unto almighty God. But we see that
many persons do quite contrary to this rule, and be like herein unto young
shrewde boys who unless they be dandeled, and cooxed, will not do the thing
that they are commanded.

I think it also requisite here to advertise, that when a man minds to use
the exercise of prayer in the morninge, we must be careful over night of the
meditation we intend to make the next morninge. So soon as we a wake in the
morninge it is good to occupy our heart forthwith with some holy thowghte.
he do go to bed with this care over night: and like as those that intend
to bake the next day, do use to lay the leven over night, even so must a
man with a godly carefulnes preuente and recommende over night unto our Lord
that thing which he intends to meditate the next day followinge. And in
the morninge so soon as he awaketh, he ought forthwith to occupy his heart
with this holy thought, before any other do enter therein. For at that time
the disposition of our heart is such, that whatsoever thought does first enter
into us, it seasethe and takes possession of our heart in such wise, that we
shall very hardly afterward put it away from us.

And for so much as the prayer of many persons is very acceptable unto our
Lord, It is good to think when we pray how many devout Christians are at
that time prayinge also unto God with us.
therefore thou shall do well to consider in thy prayer both in the morninge,
and eueninge, what a number of Gods servants both me^ and women as well in
monasteries as without be at that time watchinge and perseueringe before the
presence of almighty God, sheedinge many devout tears, yea and perhaps
also disciplininge and whippinge them selves, and sheedinge great abundance of
blood for the love of God: with which persons thou ought humbly to join
thy self, that the presence and sweet remembrance of them may be unto thee a
provocation of devotion, and an example of perseverance in thy prayer, and also
that whenever thou shall find thy self cold and negligent in this exercise
of prayer, and that some thoughts come into thy mind mouinge thee to end the
same, thou may be ashamed, and reprehende thy self, by the example of so
many good and virtuous persons, which with so good attention and carefulnes
do persevere so long time in this exercise of prayer without ceassinge,
offeringe there their bodies and sowles unto almighty God in sacrifice.

OF READINGE. CAP. VI.
In what manner we must read.
AFTER Preparation follows Readinge: the which ought to be done, not lightly,
as passed over in have, but with very great deliberation, and attention:
applyinge thereunto not only thy understanding, to conceive such things as
thou read, but much more thy will, to taste those things that thou
understand. And when thou come to any devout place, thou shalt do well
to stay and pawse somewhat longer thereupon, and to make there as it were a
station, in thinkinge upon that matter which thou have read, and in making
some short prayer upon it, according as S. Bernarde councelleth us, S.
Bernarde.
sayeinge: It is requisite oftentimes to gather and procure a little spirit and
devotion out of the matters that we read, and to break of the course of our
readinge with some kind of prayer, by means whereof, we may lift up our
heart unto almighty God, and talk with him, according as the sense and
matter of such things as we read do requir.

The readinge before meditation must not be over long.
Here must I advertise, that the readinge be not very long, least it occupy
the greatest part of the time, that ought otherwise to be bestowed upon other
more principal and necessary exercises. For as S. Augustine says: It is
very good both to read, and to pray, if we can do both the one, and the
other: but in case we cannot perform them both, Prayer is better than readinge.
then prayer is better the^ readinge: But because in prayer there is some times
labor, and in readinge a facility, therefore our miserable heart does
oftentimes refuse the labor of prayer, and runs to the delighte of
readinge, as the same holy father co^playninge of him self says that
sometimes he has so done.

True it is I grant; that like as when there wants wheaten bread, men do
eat bread of rye, or of otes, because they would not be altogether fasting:
when our heart is distracted, it is good to join readinge and meditation
together.
even so when thy heart is in such wise distracted, that it can not enter into
prayer, then may thou stay somewhat the longer in readinge, or join
meditation and readinge together, by readinge one place, and meditatinge upon
it, and then an other, and an other, after the like sort. For by this means
when the understanding is once bound unto the words of the readinge, it
cannot so easelie wander abroad into diverse imaginations, and thoughts, as
when it goethe freelye, and at liberty. And yet better it were to wrestle all
that time with Almighty God, as the Patriarch Jacob did, Genesis 32.
that in the end when the wrastlinge is done, he may give us his blessinge,
or grant unto us the devotion which we seike for, or some other greater grace,
which he never denies unto them that do faithfully labor and strive for the
love of him.

OF MEDITATION. CAP. VII.
AFTER Readinge it follows that we do meditate upon the place that we have
read. Concerning which point it is to be known, Two kinds of meditations 1.
Imaginatie meditation. 2. Intellectual meditation.

that this meditation is sometimes upon things that may be figured with the
imagination: as are all the points of the life and passion of our Savior
Christ. And some times again this meditation is upon things that do rather
appertain to the understanding, than to the imagination: as when we think
upon the benefits of almighty God, or upon his goodness, and mercy, or upon
any other of his perfections. This manner of meditation is called INTELLECTVAL:
and the other IMAGINARY: and we use both the one manner and the other in these
exercises, according as the matter of the things does require.

And therefore when the mystery whereupon we intend to meditate is the life
and passion of our Savior Christ, How to use imaginary meditation.
or of any other thing that may be figured with the imagination: as of the
last day of Judgment, or of hell, or of Paradise, we must then figure and
represente every one of these matters in our imagination, in such wise as it
is, or in such wise as it passed, and make account, that even there in the
very same place where we are, all the same passes in our presence. And this
manner of meditatinge serves to this end, that by means of such a
representation of these things, the consideration and feelinge of them may be
the more lively in us. Some there be, In imaginary meditation, it is good to
imagine that the mysteries do pass within our own heart.
that imagine that every one of these things whereupon they meditate passes
within their own heart: for sithence our heart is able to contain within it
the form of cities, and kingdoms, it is no great matter for it to co^tayne
also within it the representation and form of these mysteries. And this manner
of meditatinge is certainly a great help also to keep in the mind more
closely recollected, by causinge it to attend to her work, after the manner
of bees, which work their honey combs within their own hyues. Either of
these two ways we may use in this kind of imaginary meditation. For in case
we go with our cogitation to Ieruzalem, to meditate the things that passed
there each thing in his own proper place, it is a thing that does commonly
weaken and hurt the head.

And for this very cause likewise a man must not fix his imagination overmuch
upon the things whereupon he meditateth. we must not fix out imagination
overmuch upon the things that we meditate.
For besides that it wearieth the head, a man may also fall into some deceit
by reason of this vehemente apprehension, in perswadinge him self that he
sees the things reallie in very deed, which he imagines with such
vehemency, and force.

OF THANKES-GEVINGE. CAP. VIII.
THESE three parts being ended, there may follow immediately a
thankes-geuinge unto almighty God for the benefits we have received. And that
we may not interrupte the course of our devotion with diverse affections, and
matters, a man may continewe this part with the former, taking occasion of
such things as he has meditated upon, to give thanks unto our Lord for the
benefit he has done unto him in that meditation: and with this benefit to
join also all other benefits, and to give him most humble and hearty thanks
for them all. In what order we must exercise thankes-geuinge.
As for example, when we have ended our meditation upon any point of the
passion, we may then forthwith give most humble thanks to our Lord for the
benefit of our redemption: and espetially for that it pleased him to redeem
us with so great pains, and torments. And even then also let us give him most
humble thanks for all his other benefits. In like manner, when we have
meditated upon our sins, we may give him thanks for that he has expected
us so long time, and called us to do penance. And when we have meditated upon
the miseries of this life, we may give him thinks for that he has delivered
us from a great number of them. And when we have meditated upon the departinge
out of this world, we may give him thanks for that he has given us life,
and granted unto us so long a time to do penance. And when we have meditated
upon the glory of paradise, we may give him thanks for that he has created
us to be partakers of so great a felicity. And so likewise may we proceed in
all the rest. And afterward (according as we have declared) a man must join
with this benefit all other benefits: as the benefits of creation,
conservation, redemption, vocation, and glorification: of the which benefits
we have treated heretofore in the meditation for Satturdaie at night. And then
for these and other infinite benefits, as well public, as secret, we must
give him as many humble and hearty thanks as we can, and call upon all
creatures both of heaven and earth to help us herein. And with this spirit
we may sometimes say that Canticle: Dan. 3. Psalm. 102.
Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino: or else the Psalm: Benedic anima mea
Domino, and omnia quae intra me sunt, etc.

OF PETITION. CAP. IX.
NOW it remains that we do treat of the last part of all, which is
petition: which contains in it two parts: in the one part, we make petition
unto almighty God for our neighbors: and in the other, for our selves.

The first part may be continued with thanks geuinge, desiringe that all
creatures may serve and praise our Lord, who is so worthy to be praised, and
served, for that he is so merciful and bountiful unto all his creatures. we
must pray for the conversion of all nations and people, unto God. For all the
Governors of the Catholic Church.
And with this affection and desire of the glory of almighty God, let him
pray first and principally for all the universal world, that all nations and
people may know and serve so mighty a Lord. Then for all the Catholic
Church, and for all the governors in the same. As for example, we must pray
for the Pope, and for all the Cardinals, Archebishops, Bishops, and for all
other inferior Prelates, Pastors, and Curates: that they may be careful of
their duty in directinge all the faithful in the knowledge and service of
their Creator.

For all the members of the Catholic Church.
Likewise let him pray for all the members of the Catholic Church: For the
just persons, that it may please almighty God to continewe them in their
virtuous life: For sinners, that it may please him to perdon them: And for
the sowles departed our of this world, For the sowles departed and remayninge
in the greiuous pains of Purgatory.
that it may please him to deliver them out of the greiuous pains of
Purgatory, and bring them to the rest of life everlasting. Let him pray also
for his parents, and for his godfathers, and godmothers, and for his ghostly
father, and for all his kinsfolk, freindes and benefactours, and for all that
be in tribulation, and captivity, and for all prisoners, and sick persons,
unto whom he may (without any distraction or intermission of his prayer) do
the works of mercy, in recommendinge them unto almighty God who created
them, and referringe the necessities of all men into those hands, which were
stretched upon the cross for all men.

what things we must demand for our selves.
After this, he may desire such things for him self, as he perceives him
self to stand in neide of, according to the particular necessities and
miseries that he feels in his soul, and espetiallie when he desires help
and remedy of almighty God against such vices, and passions, as do most
trouble and moleste him, and to grant him such virtues as be most needful
for him. This kind of petition (emonge other commodities) has this withal,
that it renews daily in the soul good purposes, and desires of virtues, and
moves it to be the more earnest in doing that thing, which he has so often
times and so hartelie desired, and it makes him to be the more ashamed of him
self when he does it not, by calling to mind with how great desire and
instancie he has desired our Lord to grant him grace to do it. And of this
mind is S. Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom.
where he saiethe thus: Such as pray earnestly in very deed will not suffer
their heart to commit any thing that is unseemly for such an exercise, but
have ever their eye upon almighty God, with whom a little before they talked,
and were conversant. And so by that cogitation they put a way from them all
the suggestions of the devil, when they think and consider what a heinous
matter it were, that he who had a little before talked with almighty God, and
desired of him chastity, and holiness, with all other virtues, should
immediately run to his enemies side, and open the gate of his soul to receive
in filthy and dishonest delights, and suffer the devil to place him self in
that heart, where a little before the holy Ghost made his abode.

But it is very much to be lamented, that there be some persons that think to
excuse them selves, by saying, that they know not what thing to desire of
almighie God. Suerly, this is no sufficient excuse. For what beast is so
insensible, but that he knows some manner of way how to signify the neide he
stands in? What sick man is there, that can not say, here it greiueth me?
Consider therefore (o man) thy self. Consider (I say) with what vices and
passions thou art most troubled, and molested: If with covetousness, if with
anger, if with detraction, if with vain glory, if with stubbornnes of thine
own will, if with losenes of tongue, if with lightness of heart, if with the
love of honor, estimation, and delights, if with inconstancy in such good
purposes as thou intendest, if with self love, or any other the like
passions, and pestilences of the mind, and discover all these wounds plainly,
one by one, unto that heavenly physician, that he may heal and cure them with
the ointment of his grace.

we must pray to obtain virtues.
After that thou have demanded remedy against thy vices, desire him then to
grant thee all such virtues as be most behouefull for thy salvation. And
because this is a principal part of this exercise of prayer, wherein often
times is spente all the time thereof, with very great taste, and profit, I
think it good to note here unto the devout reader those principal virtues
which be as it were the pillars of the spiritual life, that thou may always
long and sighe for them, and always desire them very insta^tlie of our Lord
in thy prayer.

Of the most necessary virtues, that are to be demanded in Petition. I.
FIRST thou must desire of our Lord these four virtues, which be as it were
the foundation of all the spiritual life: the which virtues we must always
have before our eyes, because they be always necessary in all the steps of
our life.

These virtues be a comely composition of the inward and outward man:
discretion, and attention in all such things as we shall either do, or say,
that every thing may be directed according to the judgment and order of
reason: and withal to bridle our tongue, and to take a dew account of it: and
to use rigor, and austerite in the government of our person. Now emonge these
virtues we have put the comely composition of the inward and outward man in
the first place: because it is the beginning, that disposes unto all the
others. The composition of the inward man consists in having almighty God
present in his heart: And the composition of the outward man consists in
doing all things in such sort, as is seemly for one that stands always
in the presence of almighty God, and that has him always before his eyes, as
the judge and witness of his whole life.

After these, do follow other four virtues, wherein consists the sum of
perfection, which virtues be in such wise annexed and lincked the one to
the other, that the one can not be had without the other. In these virtues
consists the sum of perfection.
These virtues be perfect obedience: Mortification of our own proper will:
Fortitude to overcome all manner of difficulty, and labor: and to have a
hatred and contempt of our selves. For it is manifest that the sum of all
Christian doctrine is a perfect obedience and conformity unto the will of
almighty God, as well in all such things as he commands, we can not have a
perfect obedience and conformity unto the will of God, unless we deny our
own will, and have a holy hatred and contempt of our selves.
councelleth, and inspireth, as in all that he ordeyneth, and disposes
concerning us. This obedience can not be kept unless we have a knife in our
hand, to cut away all the inordinate appetites of our sensuality, and will,
which do withstand the will of almighty God. But this stroke no man is able
to give, unless he have great fortitude of mind to fight with him self, and
to make mortal war against his own inclinations, and appetites. And this
kind of war none other shall ever make, but he that has for the love of God
atteyned to have a true and holy abhorringe and contempre of him self. For
look where abhorringo is, there does easily follow evil entreatinge and
contempt of the thing that is abhorred: but where is nothing but love, there
does a man very unwillingly take the whippe in his hand, to deal roughly
with that thing which he loves. Whereby it appears, that no one of these
virtues is able to move one step, without the help and succor of the others.

After these do follow immediately other four very high and noble virtues,
which be, Humility both inward, and outward: Poverty both of spirit, and of
body: Patience in all adversities, and tribulations: Pureness of intention in
good works, doing all thinge^ that we shall do all only for the love of
God, without mixture of any commodity, or respect, either temporal, or
spiritual.

After these do follow other four virtues: which are the beginning and end
of all perfection: to wit: a most firm faith of such things, as almighty
God says, and promises: and an assured hope in him, as in our true and
louinge father in all the necessities and tribulatio^s that shall happen unto
us: a love of almighty God, which must always burn in our hearts: and
jointly with this love, to have a fear and reverence of his great majesty,
and justice, which must evermore accompany all our works.

And with all these virtues above named, we must join perseverance and
continuance in the exercise of all these virtues, the which causes a man in a
small time to attain to the top of perfection. In these foresaid virtues
does the sum of all perfection principally consist: and therefore all our
study, and diligence, must be employed, in seekinge them by all means
possible, and espetially by prayer, which is the principal mean, whereby all
goodness is obtained.

Here I think good to give this advise, that when a man shall demand of
almighty God any of these virtues, he stay him self therein for a time, and
make as it were a station in every one of them, in co^sideringe briefly the
principal motives that may most induce us to the love and exercise of such a
virtue. As for example. How to desire of God the virtue of Charity.
When we shall desire of almighty God the virtue of charity, which is the
love of God, we may say in this wise: Grant me grace o Lord I beseech thee,
that I may love thee with all my heart, and with all my soul, for that thou
art an infinite goodness, and excellency, that deserves to be loved with
infinite love: and besides this, for that thou art my only benefactor, my
father, my creator, my last end, and the spouse of my soul, unto whom all
love is due. In like manner when thou shall desire the virtue of hope, thou
may say in this wise: How to desire the virtue of Hope.
Give me grace also o Lord I beseech thee, that in all the necessities and
tribulations that shall happen unto me in this life, I may trust in thee,
saying thy mercy is infinite, and thy promises true, and the merits of thy
only begotten son be of infinite value, which do speak and make
intercession for me. After this sort may thou desire the fear of God, and
humility, with other virtues. The form of which petitions I think not meet
to note here particularly in writing. For like as it is said, that that meat
does more profit the sick man, which he him self eats and cheweth with his
teeth, than that which is given unto him in drink: even so is that prayer
wont to be more profitable, which is framed by him that prays with such
words as the holy Ghost teaches him, than that prayer which is made and
compounded with other folks words, which oftentimes be said and passed very
lightly over, without any manner of attention, or affection.

This last part which is petition (besides that it is very easy to be done)
is also very profitable. For (as we said before) it is not only an exercise
of prayer, but also of all virtues, and as it were a readinge and conference of
them all: wherein a man renews all his good purposes, and desires, and
records in his memory the principal points and articles of the law of
God, which is the continual exercise of the just man: Psalm. 1.2.
of whom it is said, that he meditateth upon the law of our Lord both day,
and night.

These five parts aforesaid may be used in the exercise of prayer: albeit (as
we have said) they be not all necessary to be used at all times. For some
times all the time of prayer is spente in meditation alone, or in petition.
Nevertheless I thought good to specify here all these parts of prayer, that
no man might leave of this holy exercise for want of matter, and also that at
such time as devotion fails, (which is no just cause why we should relent
and withdraw our selves from good exercises) a man might have matter whereupon
to occupy him self duringe that time, doing on his part so much as lies in
him, which is the thing that almighty God requires principally of us.

Here is diligently to be noted, that emonge all these five parts of prayer,
the best is, when the soul talks with almighty God, as it does in petition.
For in readinge, or meditation, the understanding discourses with little
labor wheresoever it thinks good. But when we talk unto almighty God, then
the understanding mounteth up on high, and after it follows also the will,
and then has a man commonly on his part greater devotion, and attention, and
greater fear, and reverence of the majesty of almighty God, with who^ he
speaks, and withal an humble, and fervent desire of the thing which he
demands of him. And this mouinge, and liftinge up of the spirit, with all
these acts of virtues accompanienge it, do leave the soul in a more noble
state, and better edified, than any other discource whatsoever it be, as
every man may perceive by experience in him self. For it is evident, that in
the discource of meditation there is none other thing but only a godly
inquisition and consideration of spiritual things, the which as it is an act
of the understanding, so is it of little profit, or commodity: but in the
devour prayer there is made a concurrence and general assembly in a manner of
all virtues, and with there wings the soul lifts it self up on high, and
attayneth to be joined and united with almighty God.

And although this spiritual communication and conference with almighty God
be the best point of all the exercises of prayer, yet emonge all the
communications with him, the best and most profitable is the communication of
love, at such time as we be actually louinge of almighty God, and praisinge
him, and desiringe him with great instancie, and most earnest desires, to
grant us that we may love him. For sithence Charity is the greatest of all
virtues, there is nothing more acceptable unto almighty God, nor more
pleasant and profitable to a man, than the use, practice, and exercise of this
so excellent a virtue.

This the holy fathers do call the exercise of aspiringe unto the love of
God. And to this end were meditation, and prayer, and all other good exercises
ordained. And therefore it is given for a general rule unto all such as do
pray, that they labor and endeavor so much as lies in them, to lift up
their spirit unto this divine communication, which is to speak and treat
with almighty God him self, and espetiallie concerning his love, and the
exercises of aspiringe unto him. And for this cause it shall do well, to leave
this petition of the love of God until the end of all the exercise of prayer,
and so to reserve the best wine for the end of this bankette, to the intent
that when a man is come to the end of his journey, he may stay him self
herein so long as he lists. Howbeit it shall not be amiss both to begin
and end with this petition of the love of God, whenever the holy Ghost
shall open him a way, and direct him unto the same.

Moreover, I think it meet here to give this advertisement, that in all such
things as we shall demand, we do allege always in our behalf the merits
of Jesus Christ our only and true Savior: who (as the Apostle saiethe) Is
our justice, wisdom, sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.
Upon his merits we ought principally to stay our confidence. And his merits
we ought to present before the divine majesty, reckeninge them, and offeringe
them one by one unto the heavenly father, and taking (as S. Bernarde saiethe)
out of that treasure all such things as are necessary for us. For this is
that Lord, that has sanctified and offered him self in sacrifice, to the
intent that we might be holy in deed. Romans 8.31.
Wherefore If God be for us, who shall be against us? If God justify us, who
shall condemn us? Act. 10.43.
This is he (says S. Peter) of whom all the Prophets bear witness: that by
him is obtained pardon and remission of sins. So that in the virtue and name
of this Lord we ought to take a good heart and courage with us, when we go to
make our prayers to almighty God, and have this confidence, that whatsoever we
shall dewlie demand by him shall be granted unto us. For the principal
condition that our petition must have that it may be effectual before
almighty God, Jacob. 1.6.
is (as S. James says) to make the same with faith, and confidence. And this
confidence must not be grounded principally upon our own selves, whereupon
our confidence must be grounded when we make petition unto almighty God.
nor upon our own works, and merits, but upon the works and merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and jointly therewith upon the infinite goodness and
mercy of almighty God, which ca^ never be overcome with any kind of sin,
or iniquity: and besides this, our confidence must be also grounded upon the
truth of the words and promises of almighty God, who has promised in all
the holy scriptures never to fail that man that with all his heart shall
convert him self unto him, and call upon him, and repose his trust and
confidence in him. And albeit he that prays has been until that time never
so great and heinous a sinner, yet let him not therefore be desmayde: S. Jerome.
for (as S. Jerome says) our sins past do not condemn us, if we take no
delighte in them. Whereby it appears, that they be deceived, that in
consideringe their own defectes, and weakness, do mistrust that almighty God
will not hear them: Note the principal foundatio^s of our confidence in
prayer. Psalm. 90.5.
and they do not consider that the principal foundations of this confidence
are the merits of our Savior Christ, and the mercy of almighty God, and the
truth of his holy word, which (as the Prophet says) is a sheelde unto them
that put their trust in him.

CERTAIN ADVISES TO BE OBSERVED IN THESE FIVE parts above named, and
espetially in Meditation. CAP. X.
HAVINGE now spoken of the principal parts of prayer, I think it convenient
to give certain aduises, and instructions, which ought to be observed in them
all, and espetially in meditation, whereof we mind to treat principally in
this place.

The first advise: that in our meditation we must not for the obseruinge of our
ordinary cowerse put away from us any other good thowghte, or consideration,
wherein we find more devotion. I.
THE first advise is (concerning the matter of meditation) that although it be
well done for a man to observe these spetiall points of meditation, according
as they be here before divided by the days of the weke, for to exercise him
self in the^: yet if in the midst of his way there be offered unto him any
other consideration, wherein he finds more sweitnes, or profit, he ought not
to put the same away from him to fulfill his ordinary task. For it stands
not with reason, that we should extinguishe the light which the holy Ghost
has begone to give us in any good thought, for to occupy ourselves in an
other thought, wherein perhaps the same light shall not be given unto us. And
besides this, since the principal end of these meditations is to obtain some
devotion, and feelinge of divine things, it were against reason, when we have
already obtained the same with some good consideration, that we should go
about to seike for it by an other way.

Howbeit although this be very true (speakinge ordinarily,) yet may not a
man therefore take herein so great liberty, as upon every occasion that is
offered unto him, to be moved forthwith very lightly to forgo that thing
out of his hands, which he has as it were in possession, for some other
thing which he is desirous to have: unless it be at such a time, as he
perceyueth a more certain proffit in the one, than in the other.

The second advise: that in our Meditation we must eschew the superfluous
speculation of our understanding, and commit this business to the exercise of
the affections of our will. II.
THE second advise is, that he labor to esche we in this exercise the
superfluous speculation of the understanding, and endeavor to use this matter
rather with affections, and feelinges of the will, than with discources, and
speculations of the understanding.

It is therefore to be noted, that the understanding on the one side helps,
and on the other side it may hinder the operation of the will: to wit, the
love, and feelinge of divine things. For as it is necessary that the
understanding do go before the will to guide it, and give it knowledge what
it ought to love: so when the speculation of the understanding is overmuch,
then it hinders this operation of the will: for so much as it suffers it not
to have place and time to work. And therefore like as it is said of the
poison which is put into treacle, that if it be little it is wholesome, and
necessary, but if it be overmuch it is hurtful: even so likewise may we say
after a sort in this exercise, that the seekinge to know God with simplicity
helps the will the more to love him, but the seekinge to know him with
overmuch speculation hinders the will, and causes the operation thereof for
that time to be the more feeble, and weak. And the reason hereof is, for that
the virtue and power of our soul being finite and streyted within certain
bounds, and limittes, the more it employeth her virtue and force on the one
part, the less remains to be employed on the other: eue^ like the fountain
that runs through two pypes, the more water that it discharges by the one
pype, the less it has to yeilde through the other. And after the like sort
does the soul principally by the operation of the understanding, by the
which (for that it is so noble and so excellent a power) the soul employeth
and powers out all her whole force in such wise, that in a manner she works
nothing at all by her other powers, at such time as the understanding is
very attente, and earnestly occupied in the vehement speculation of any
matter. And therefore we find by experience, that a man may with more
facility preserve the affection of devotion in any exercise of the body
wherein he labourethe with his hands, than when he has his understanding
busely occupied and attente in the speculation of any matter. For the
understanding, and the will, be as it were two balances of our soul, the
which are disposed in such sort, that the ascendinge of the one is the
descendinge of the other, and so contrariewise. So that if the speculation do
increase overmuch, then the affection thereby decreaseth: and if contrary wise
the affection do increase, then the speculation forthwith decreaseth. And this
is the cause why the Patriarch Jacob was made lame of one of his feet at what
time he received benediction: Genesis 32.
for whereas our soul has two feet wherewith to go unto almighty God, The
understanding and the will be the two feet of our soul, whereby it goes unto
God.
which be the understanding, and the will, it is requisite that the one foot^
be weakened, to wit, the understanding in his speculation, if the will which
is the other foot shall enjoy almighty God in the rest and quietness of
contemplation. And so it is seen by experience, that in case at such time as
the soul is enioyenge of almighty God, it do but turn a-side to seek to
understand or search some point or matter appertayninge unto God, it loses
forthwith at the very same instante the devotion which it had, and that
souereine good thing vanishes then away from him, which before he enjoyed.
And therefore not without good cause does the bridegroom advise the spowse in
the Canticles, sayeinge: Turn away thine eyes from me, Cant. 6.4.
for they have made me to fly. Wherefore I counsel a man in this exercise of
meditation to occupy his understanding in speculatio^ with as little
curiosity as is possible, and to content him self with a simple sight and
knowledge of divine things, to the intent that the virtue of his soul
recollectinge all her forces together, may employe her self by this affectiue
part (I mean, by the affections of the will) in louinge and reuerencinge the
cheifest goodness: to wit, almighty God.

we must not meditate upon divine mysteries in such wife as if we studied to
preach them.
Whereby it appears, that those men take not the right trade herein, that in
prayer do meditate in such wise upon divine mysteries, as if they should
study to preach them: the which disorderly manner is rather to cause the
Spirit to wander more abroad, than to recollecte it: and rather to go out of
him self, than to keep within himself. And hereof it comes, that when they
have made an end of their exercise of prayer, they remain as dry, and
without any joyce of devotion, and as easily moved to follow every kind of
lightness, and vanity of the world, as they were before their exercise. For
(to speak the very truth) they have not prayed, but rather talked and
studied, which is a thing far difere^te from prayer. Such persons ought to
consider, that in this exercise of prayer and meditation we rather come to
hear, than to speak. For (as the Prophet says) Such as come to our Lords
feite, Deuter. 33.3.
shall receive his doctrine: as he received it, that saiede: Psalm. 84.
I will hearken, what our Lord speaks within me. Wherefore I conclude, that
all this business of meditation consists in speakinge little, In meditation we
must chiefly exercise the affections of our will.
and in louinge much, and in geuinge place to the will, that it may join it
self with all his forces unto almighty God. And we must not spur forwards
these two powers of the soul a-like, nor walk in this way with equal pases:
but a spetiall dexterity is requisite to be used, to stir up the will, and
to quiet the understanding, that it hinder not with his curious discourses the
operations of love. And thou must make account that in this exercise thou
go in a chariot drawn with two horses, whereof the one is very forward,
and quick, In meditation our understanding is very forward and quick: and
our will is very slow and dull.
and the other very slow, and dull: and that thou must bear the bridles in
thy hand with such dexterity, that the one thou must hasten forward, and
hold the other back, that so they may go together the one by the other.

And if thou desire to have an other more lively example, make account that
the understanding must behave it self toward the will, as the nource does
toward the child which she nourceth, who after that she has chewed the
meat, she then puts it into the childs mouth, that the child may taste
and feed thereupon. For otherwise if the nource should both chewe the meat,
and also eat it up her self, leauinge the child without any meat, it is
certain that she should do great injury to the child, in sufferinge it to
die for honger, by eatinge up that meare which was given unto her for the
child. The understanding is as it were a nource to feed the will in the
exercise of prayer.
Now in this wise must the understanding behave it self toward the will in
the exercise of prayer: for it appertains to the understanding to chewe the
spiritual matters, as the nource cheweth meat for the child, but the
understanding must not retain the same spiritual matters for it self alone,
but after that it has once chewed them, it must offer them to the will, to the
intent that the will may taste and feed thereupon, and be the more enkendeled
and confirmed in virtue, and goodness, with the taste and feelinge of those
spiritual matters.

The victuals that do enter in by the gates of a city ought to pay only a
tribute, and impost: but in case the porter should take up all the victualles
for him self alone, and suffer none to come to the market, it is certain that
the inhabitants of the city would die for honger. Now in like manner, if the
understanding which is as it were the first gate of our soul, (whereby the
spiritual sustenance enters unto it) do take up all that should pass by
it for it self alone, in what case shall the will then be, but even very
hongrie, and dry, and in great necessity of all virtue, and goodness?

The huntinge hounde if he be good, will not eat the hare that he has taken,
but keeps it faithfully until his masters coming: and in like manner ought
our understanding to do, when it has found out any high and secret
treuthes: forsomuche as it must not retain all for it self alone, but reason
would that it should assign them over to the will, that she as the mistres
in this behalf may serve her self with them. And for this respect diverse
devout and simple persons are truly very happy, who as they know little,
so when they come unto almighty God, they are little hindered with the
discourses of their understanding, and therefore in their prayers and
meditations they find their wills more tender, and more pliant, and better
prepared unto every godly affection.

Now if thou desire to know how thou should behave thy self herein, emonge
many other ways that may serve in this case, thou may use this: In every
good thing that thou shall think upon either in prayer, or out of prayer, be
careful to go out of hand therewith unto almighie God, as the young child
does, who with every thing that he finds goes out of hand to his mother,
and tattelleth with her of it. And so in like manner when in thy prayer or at
other times thou find any spiritual iuell, thou must lift up thine heart
to almighty God, either to love him, or to adore him, or to reverence him, or
to praise him for the same, according as the matter requires: and thereby
also to take occasion to humble thy self before him, and to desire of him his
grace. It shall be a great help also hereunto to have the spirit of true
humility, which causes a man to appear before almighty God very poor, and
naked, and to prostrate himself before that most high sovereign majesty,
and to be more careful to desire him of his mercy for the curinge of the
great miseries which he knows in him self, than to search the profoundnes
of his high mysteries to understand them. And by so doing he comes to be
in the presence of almighty God, as a malefactor that is condemned to death
would be when he should enter into the kings palace to ask him pardon: who
would go with such a great and deep impression of his misery, that he
would scarcely have either eyes to see, or heart to think upon any other
thing, but only upon his own present danger.

The therde advise: which prestribeth also bounds and limittes to the will,
that it be neither to excessive, nor to vehement in her exercise. III.
THE former advise teaches us how we ought to quiet our understanding, and
commit all this business to our will: but this present advise prescribes also
bounds, and limittes to the will, that it be neither to excessive, nor to
vehement in her exercise. Wherefore ye must understand, that the devotion
which we seek to obtain, is not a thing that may be gotten with force of
arms, (as some persons think,) who lay on great lode of enforced sighinges,
and sobbinges, imagininge thereby to procure tears, and compassion, when they
think upon the passion of our Savior. For such force does commonly cause
the heart to become more dry, and more unable to receive our Lords
visitation, according as the holy father Cassianus affirms. Moreover it
doethe commonly prejudice and hurt the health of the body, yea and
sometimes leaves the soul so astomed, and aghast, by reason of the little taste
she has there received, that she is loathe to return again to this exercise,
as to a thing which she has tried by experience to have been very painful
and irksome unto her. And therefore if our Lord shall send us tears or other
the like feelinges in our prayer, we ought humbly to accept them, and to give
him thanckes for them. But for a man to wringe them out as it were with force
of arms, it is no wisdom. He must content himself with doing sincerely
what lies in him: that is, he must suppose him self to be present at such
greiuous torments as our Savior has suffered, beholdinge with a sincere and
quiet eye, as well such pains as he has suffered, as also the love and
charity, that moved him to suffer them. And when he has thus done, let him
not vex nor trouble him self any further, though our Lord send him not
tears, and compunction of heart.

And he that can not thus do, but shall perceive him self to be overmuch
troubled in his exercise, let him not strive to pass forwards, but let him
humble him self before almighty God with inward quietness, and simplicite,
and desire him of his grace, that he may be able to proceid in his prayer and
meditation without such great trouble and danger unto him. And in case it
shall please our Lord to grant him this quietness of mind, he shall feel a
more inward hearty devotion thereby, than he was wont to feel with the
disquietnes of his mind, and it shall endure much longer. After this sort
may a man continewe in prayer and meditation a long time together, without
feelinge any heaviness, or grief: but that man can not so do, that shall
meditate after the other enforced manner before specified.

And for this cause we must take diligent heed, that if at any time there do
arise in the soul very fervent motions of sensible devotion, or excessive
sobbinges, and sighinges, we suffer not our selves to be carried away with
the^, but we must temper them with great moderation, and dissemble them as much
as we can, and withal endeavor to keep and continewe that consideration and
thought within us, which caused those fervent motions: I mean hereby, that we
must remove away from us those storms and alterations of the fleashe: to wit,
these vehement sobbinges, and sighinges, and enjoy in our soul with quietness
the light, and devotion, which almighty God has then sent unto us. And after
this sort we shall continewe in our exercise a longer time, and our
consolation shall take deeper root inwardly in our sowles, and shall not give
any outward show thereof with weepinge, sobbinge, and other external signs,
which can hardly be avoided without great pain, in case a man do once
accustom him self very much unto such sensible motions, and feruours, which
the stronger and mightier they show outwardly, the more do they quench the
light inwardly, and be an impedimente unto us that we can not proceed forward
in our prayer, and meditation.

True it is, that at the first beginning of nouices in spiritual exercises
such feruours can very hardly be eschewed. For then the great wonder that a
man has of the newnes and profoundnes of divine things, makes him to enter
into so great an admiration, and astonishmente, that he can not refrain him
self from this feruencie. But after that with the use of daily meditation of
divine things the newnes of them cease, then is his heart quieted: and
although he love almighty God with greater vehemency, yet has he not such
sensible fervor and disquietnes in his love. And so we see, that the new
wine, and the pot of water when it begins first to try the unwonted heat
of the fire, it boyleth so forcibly, that it bubbleth up, and runs over
the brimme: but after that it has boiled a certain space, it seetheth then
much better, and is much hoatter, and yet with less noyce and vehemency. That
man which was lame from his mothers womb, whom S. Peter healed, (as it is
declared in the acts of the Apostles,) so soon as he perceived him self to
be whole and perfetlie cured of his former lamenes, Act. 3.8.
the holy Scripture saiethe, that he walked, and leaped, and praised almighty
God. This man was not contented only to go, but as one that had been so long
time as it were bound hand and feite, and findinge by experience his new
liberty, he then stretched forth his limbs to the uttermost he could, and
leaped, and skipped with great joy, and admiration. Howbeit it is to be
thought, that afterward he would walk more quietly, and not leap and
skippe all his life time: but as then the great joy he had of his new and
unaccustomed health would not suffer him to be in quiet.

The fourth advise: which follows of the foresaid aduises: And here it is
declared what manner of attention we ought to have in our exercise of prayer and
meditation. IIII.
OF all these aduises aforesaiede we may gather what manner of attention we
ought to have in prayer. For in this exercise it is cheiflie expediente for us
to have our heart, not heavy, nor dulle, but lively, attente, and lifted up on
high. In figure whereof we read that the Angel saiede to the Prophet
Ezechiel, Ezech. 2.1.
that he should arise, and stand upon his feite, when the Angel would talk
with him, and declare unto him the divine mysteries. In like manner we read,
that those two Cherubins which Solomon placed at the two sides of the Arc of
the testament, stood with their wings lifted up on high, 3. Reg. 6.
and stretched abroad as if they would fly, to signify what a great
attention and liftinge up of the spirit a man ought to have at such time as he
presents himself before almighty God, to speak and stand before him.

But as it is necessary on the one side to be in prayer with such an
attention, and close recollection of the mind, even so on the other side it
behooves that this attention be qualified with temperance, and moderation, that
it be neither prejudicial to our health, nor any impediment to devotion. For
some there be, that do weary their heads with overmuch violence, whiles they
labor to be attente unto those things, that they meditate upon. And others
again there be, that to avoid this inconvenience, are in their meditation
very slack, and negligente, and very easy to be carried away with every
wind. Now to eschew these two extremities, it is expediente that we use such
a mean, that we do neither with over much attention weary our head, nor with
carelesnes, or negligence suffer our thoughts to go wa^deringe whither so
ever they will. So that like as we use commonly to say unto him that rydeth
upon a kickinge flinginge horse, that he must take good heed how he holds
the reins of his bridle, and keep a mean therein that is, he must hold them
neither to hard, nor to slack, that the horse neither turn backewarde, nor
run to headlonge forward: Out attention must proceed with moderation, and
not with violence. Prou. 30.33.
even so must we endeavor that our attention may proceed in our prayers with
moderation, and not with violence, and with a temperate carefulnes, and
diligence, and not with excessive labor and traueill. Of both these points we
be advertised in the holy Scripture. For of the one Solomon saiethe: Who so
squiseth overmuch the pappes to get out milk, shall wringe out blood. And of
the other point the Prophet Esaie says: Esa. 66.10.11.
Rejoice with her all ye that mourn for her, that ye may suck, and be
satisfied with the breasts of her consolation.

Howbeit in case we feyle of the mean, and do lean unto any of these two
extremeties, Of the two extremeties it is less hurt to have overmuch attention
in our prayers, than no care or regard of our attention therein,
it is less hurt to lean unto overmuch attention, than unto carelesnes and
neglectinge of our attention. For a man is provoked to carelesnes and
negligence by his own corrupt and evil inclined nature: but he is not so
provoked unto atte^tion. And therefore like as a house that is builte upon the
side of a hill should not lose much in the buyldinge, if at such time as it
can not be builte by line and level just vprighte, the buyldinge thereof do
more bend rather upward, than downewarde: even so shall not our attention
take any prejudice, if at what time it cannot continewe in our prayers in such
a mediocritie as we desire, it do rather decline to that extremetie, wherein
is least danger, which is (as we have said) rather to overmuch attention,
than to carelesnes, and negligence.

This advise is of so great importance, that for want hereof we have seen that
certain persons have passed over many years with taking little profit by
their prayers, for that they have been careless, dull, and as it were neither
hoate nor cold therein. And others contrariwise have fallen into great
sickness, and have hurt their heads with overmuch heat, and vehemency,
which they have used in their meditations. But espetiallie we must be well
wary, that at the beginning of meditation we do not trouble and weary our
head with overmuch attention. For by so doing we shall want force and
strength to pass forwards therein: as it commonly happens to the
traveler, when he makes to greatest have in his goinge at the beginning of
his journey.

The fifte advise: that we must not be desmayed, nor give over our exercise of
prayer, and meditation, at such time as we want devotion therein. V.
BUT emonge all these aduises the principal is, that he that prays be not
dismaide, nor give over his exercise, when he feels not forthwith such
sweitnes of devotion, at he desires: as some persons use to do, who are very
much deceived herein. Wherefore it is to be noted, that in very deed the
heart of man is very like unto a troubled water, A man's heart distracted with
business is like a troubled water.
which can not suddenly be cleared again, be the diligence never so great that
is bestowed about it, but it must have time, and space, to be cleared, and
settled by little, and little. And in such case undoubtedly is our heart, which as
it is wont to be troubled with the daily entermedlinge and dealinge in wordly
affairs, so after that it is once troubled, it can not forthwith be settled and
quieted in so short a space again, but it must neides have convenient space
and time for the same. And therefore Ecclesiastes says very well: Eccles. 7.9.
That the end of prayer is better than the beginning: because at the
beginning of prayer the heart is troubled, and disquieted, but in the end it
is more settled, and quieted, and better disposed unto this holy exercise.

Wherefore like as he that will enkendle a fire in green wood, must have
patience, and expecte until the wood be dried by little, and little: and besides
all this, it is requisite, that he continewe for a time in blowinge and
enkendelinge it, and do sheade also some tears with the smoke, if he will
enjoy the fire according to his desire: even so it behooves us oftentimes to
labor and persevere in the beginning of prayer, in case we will in the end
enjoy the sweite and clear fire of devotion, and of the love of God.

Now for this cause it is requisite for him that prays, to expecte the
coming of our Lord with longanimitie, and perseverance. For it is very
conueniente, as well in respect of the glory of his high divine majesty, and
baseness of our condition, as also for the greatness and importance of the
affairs we have in hand, that we do oftentimes attend and watch at the
gates of his sacred pallayce. Prou. 8.34.
Blessed is the man (saiethe the everlasting wisdom) that hears my words,
and watches daily at my gates, and tarieth at the porche of my house, for who
so shall find me, shall find life, and he shall receive salvation of our
Lord. Lament. Ierem. 3.26.
And the Prophet Jeremy says. It is good to expecte the salvation of our
Lord God with silence.

The proud man and he that mistrusteth the promises of almighty God has
neither patience nor humility to expecte our Lords coming: but the humble
man says (with the Prophet:) I expected again, Psalm. 39.1.
and again for our Lord, and he heard my prayer. If the fisher or hunter
have not patience to expecte for the game that he seiketh, what profit shall
he get by his traueill? Now in this our fishinge and huntinge in prayer, being
of so great importance as it is, we may accounte a long time well bestowed,
that is e^ployed in watchinge and expectinge for so rich and so happy a
treasure, as is almighty God.

Of that courageous and constante woman which Solomon describes in his
Proverbs (emonge other notable things) he saiethe thus: That she did as the
merchantes ship, Pron. 31.14.
that brought his bread from far countries. Whereby he gives us to
understand, that when we shall not find this bread of life forthwith
according to our desire, we must then traueill and sail so long time, as
shall be necessary until we find it. Math. 7.
If thou shall persevere in calling, Luc. 11.
(says our Savior) assure thy self that at the length thou shall have
answer. Marc. 11.
For it happens often times that that thing which is denied in the
beginning of prayer, is granted at the end of prayer with great increase.

I have understood for a certain treuthe of a religious father that
perseuered for the space of three years in these good exercises, vsinge daily
to bestow in prayer and meditation after matins two or three hours, and
could get none other fruit thereby but drynes of heart, until such time as
our Lord consideringe the affliction of his soul, powered upon him the
bountifulnes of his goodness with such an abundant benedictio^ of graces, that
he was very well reco^pensed for all the barrennes of the other years past.
And the like is proved daily by experience in many other diuout persons.
Happy therefore are those sowles, that persevere in prayer after this sort:
for vndowbtedlie the greater their perseverance is, the greater abundance shall
they have of his grace. One of the principal things that those persons must
have that do dispose them selves to receive great gifts and favors of
almighty God is longanimitie and patience of heart, to expecte faithfully so
long time for them as almighty God would they should expecte: and in the
mean season to comfort the^ selfs with that hope of the Prophet, which
says: If he shall delay his coming, Habat. 2.3.
I will not feile to tarry for him, for he will suerlie come, and will not
stay over long.

Now when thou have after this sort expected a certain time for our Lords
coming, in case our Lord shall then come unto thee, give him most hearty
thanks for his coming: and if it seem unto thee that he comes not, humble
thy self then before him, and acknowledge that thou art not worthy to receive
that thing which he gives not unto thee: and let this content thee for that
time, that thou have made a sacrifice of thy self, denied thine own will,
crucified thy appetite, striued with the devil, and with thy felfe, and done
at the least what thou could for thine own part. And in case thou have not
adored our Lord with sensible adoration according to thy desire, it is
sufficient that thou have adored him in spirit, and in truth, according as
his will is to be adored. Joan. 4.23.
And trust me assuredly in this point, that this is the most dangerous
passage of all this navigations, and the place where true devout persons are
proved, and tried: and that if thou escape well out of this danger, thou
shall have prosperous success in all the rest.

To conclude, if all this notwithstanding it seem unto thee, that it were but
time lost to persevere in prayer, and to trouble and weary thy head without
any profit, in such a case I account it not any inconvenience, if when thou
have done what lies in thee, thou take then some devout book, and change
for that time thy prayer into readinge: Howbeit with this condition, that thy
readinge be not passed over with to great have, when our heart is very much
distracted, it is good then to entermingle readinge and meditation together.
or speide, but leasurelie, and with great attention and consideration unto
such things as thou do read, and intermingle now and then in places
convenient prayer with readinge, which is a thing both very profitable, and
very easy to be done by all kind of persons, be they never so rude, and
newly entered into this way.

The sixte advise: that we must endeavor to have a long and profounde prayer,
and great abundance of devotion. VI.
AN other advise there is, not much differinge from this aforesaied, nor of
less necessity than it: which is, that the seruante of God do not content
him self with every little taste he finds in his prayer, as some persons use
to do, who when they shead a few tears, or feile a little tenderness of heart,
we must seek in prayer for abundance of devotion.
persuade them selves forthwith that they have then accomplished and performed
their exercise. But surely this is not enoughe for the obteininge of that
thing, which we here seek to have. For like as a little dew, or sprinkelinge
of water is not sufficient to cause the earth to bring forth fruit, (which
does no more but only alaie the dust, and wette the uppermost part of the
ground) but it is neidfull also to have so great abundance of water, that it
may enter into the innermost part of the earth, and there soke and water
throwghe the same: even so if we will have our soul to bring forth the
fruits of virtues, and good worckes, it is not sufficient to have that little
dew and sprinkelinge of devotion, which at the turninge of the head, is dried
up with the least blast of wind or heat of son that comes, (with the
which the soul makes some outward appearance that it is devout, but in very
deide it is not so within) but it is also requisite to have a long profounde
prayer, and great devotion, which after the manner of a great shower of rain
may descend and sink down into the bothom of the heart, and there cause it
to be so well watered and washed therewith, that neither son, nor wind, I
mean hereby, that neither any business, nor cares of the world may be able
to dry it up, nor make any alteration therein. According hereunto we read
of the blessed holy religious woman S. Clare, S. Clare.
that she rose sometimes from prayer, and meditation, so wholly absorpted in
contemplation upon almighty God, that she could not (but with very great
difficulty) frame her heart to deal in such business as she was enforced to
attend unto by reason of her office. This kind of devotion is not like unto
that, which is carried away with the wind, and dried up with every aier: but
it is like unto that devotion, whereof it is written in the Canticles, Cant.
8.7.
That many waters shall not be able to quench the fire of charity, neither
shall the great rivers ouerflowe it.

In prayer it is better to have one long time then two short times.
And therefore we are counseled (and that for very good cause) to take as
long a time for this holy exercise of prayer and meditation as we may. And
suerlie it is better to have one long time for the same, than two short
times. For if the time of prayer be short, all is spente in setlinge the
imagination, and in quietinge the heart: and then so soon as we have quieted
the same, we rise up forthwith from our exercise at the very time when we
should begin it. So that we are like unto the Miner, which in searchinge for
gold gives over digginge at the very time when he finds the vain thereof:
and so loses his former traueyll, when he should presently enjoy the fruit
of his labor. For undoubtedly the fruit and profit of a long and profounde
prayer is wont sometimes to be so great, that a man has thereby store enoughe
to spend many days together, 3. Reg. 17.
and to go with Elias to the mount of almighty God, with the virtue and
force of the food and sustenaunce which he has there received.

One hour and a half or two hours is a conueniente time for the exercise of
prayer.
But to descend more particulerlie in limitinge this time, I am of opinion,
that what so ever is less than one hour and a half, or two hours, is to
short a time for prayer, and meditation. For often times there is spente more
than half an hour in temperinge and tuninge our instrument, (to wit, our
heart,) and in quietinge our imagination, and so all the rest of this time is
little enoughe for the enioyinge of the fruit of prayer. True it is I grant,
that when we go to this exercise after some other holy exercises, as for
example, after matins, or after that we have hard or said Mass, or after
some devout readinge, Early in the morninge before day, is a very fit time
for the exercise of prayer and meditation.
or vocal prayers, our heart is then better disposed unto this exercise. For
then this heavenly fire of devotion is enkendeled with less difficulty in
our heart, which by reason of the former holy exercise is very apt (like
dry wood) to take fire much more quickly therein. Likewise early in the
morninge before day the time of our prayer and meditation may be the shorter:
because then our heart is much better disposed for this exercise, as hereafter
shall be declared. Howbeit in case it be so that a man by reason of his manifold
business, and affairs, have but little time to bestow in prayer, and
meditation, Luc. 21.
yet let him not omit to offer up his myte with the poor widow in the
temple. For (if he fail not of his dewtie herein through his own negligence)
almighty God who provides for all creatures according to their nature, and
necessity, will provide for him also according unto his necessity.

The seuenthe advise: that we must not receive the visitations of our Lord in
vain. VII.
AGREEABLE unto this foresaid advise we will give an other very like unto it:
which is, that when our soul is visited either in prayer, or out of prayer, we
must not suffer any of our Lords special visitations to pass in vain.
with any spetiall visitation of our Lord, we suffer it not to pass away in
vain, but take the commodity and benefit of that occasion, that is offered
unto us. For certain it is, that with this wind a man shall sail more in one
hour, than without it in many days. For as S. Peeter took more abundance of
fish at that one draughte when our Savior commanded him to cast in his
net, Joan. 21.6.
than he had done in all the whole night before: even so does it happen unto us
oftentimes in this heavenly fisshinge, in case we know how to help our selves
by taking benefit of the oportunities, and occasions, that be offered unto us
therein. And therefore for good cause are we advised by Ecclesiasticus,
sayeinge: Eccles. 14.14.
Omit not to enjoy the good day that God sends thee, and suffer not the
least part of his good gift to pass away without taking benefit thereof.

Opportunity is of great force, and helps much in all things, and more in
this exercise of prayer than in any other. For herein it seems, as it were,
Joan. 5.
that the Angel descends to move the water of the fisheponde, and to give it
virtue to heal. Or else to speak more plainly to this purpose, it is as it
were the descendinge of almighty God to draw at the plowghe with a man, and
to help him in his labor: whose help is more profitable, and auailable, than
all the industry and diligence in the world. The mariner when he sees that
the time serves him well to get out of the haven, forthwith he draws up his
ankers, and hoyseth up his sail, and staieth not any longer, for fear of
losinge that good opportunetie, which the time offers unto him. The like
ought all spiritual persons to do when they receive any visitations from
our Lord in their prayer, and meditation: and their diligence should be so
much the greater, by how much this exercise of meditation is greater, and this
divine blast more necessary for prayer, than that for navigations.

And so we read that the blessed holy religious father S. Francis did, S.
Francis.
of whom S. Bonauenture writes, that he had such a spetiall care of this
point, that in case our Lord did visit him with any spetiall visitation
while he was traueylinge by the way, he caused his companions to go before,
and he stayed alone behind, until he had made an end of chewinge and
digestinge that sweit morsel, that was there sent unto him from heaven.
Whosoever they be that do not well observe this point, How such be punished
as make no account of our Lords special visitations in prayer.
are wont commonly to be chasticed with this punishment, that they find not
almighie God when they seike him, because he found not them when he sought for
them.

These be the principal aduises, that are to be observed in the exercise of
meditation, and in every of the other parts that do accompany the same, in
case we mind fully to accomplish this business, and not to leave it in the
midde way. Now it shall do well that we make have to proceed forwards to
treat of the rest, and so to bring this first part to an end, which
perhaps has been longer, than is requisite.

OF SIX POINTS THAT ARE TO BE MEDITATED UPON, in the holy Passion of our
Savior Jesus Christ. THE LAST CHAPTER.
FORSOMVCH as the most holy Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ is the
principal matter of meditation, it is meet that sithence we have hitherto
treated of meditation in general, we do now treat particulerly how we ought
to meditate upon the holy passion of our Savior Christ: to the intent that we
may know, how to behave our selves in this matter.

But here we must first presuppose, that emonge all the devotions in the
world, there is none more secure, none more profitable, or more universal for
all kind of persons, than the remembrance of the holy passion of our Savior
Christ. Albertus Magnus saiethe, Note what great proffit enseweth by
meditation upon the holy Passion.
That it is more profitable for a man to meditate every day a little upon the
holy passion of our Savior Christ, than to fast with bread, and water, all
the Fridaies in the year, and to discipline and scourge him self until he
shead blood, and to say all the whole Psalter from one end thereof to an
other. At the least wise this is very certain, that this holy exercise is a
passinge great help to direct the soul in all virtue, and goodness. For
consideringe that our Savior Christ is (as he him self says: Joan. 14.6.
) The way, the truth, and the life, there is none other exercise more fit
and co^ueniente to direct us to go unto God, to know God, and to enjoy God,
than to fix always our eyes upon our Savior Christ. For though Christ be
unto us the way, the treuth, and the life, in all things wheresoever we
consider him, yet is he most espetially so unto us, when we behold him upon
the Cross. And therefore S. Bernarde said very diuoutly: S. Bernarde.
well may I (o Lord) compass about heaven, and earth, yet shall I not find
the but upon thee cross. There thou lie, there thou sleipest at noone day.

But leauinge now this matter for an other place, I will only treat at this
present after what sort we ought to behave our selves when we meditate upon
the holy passion of our Savior Christ. For there be some simple persons,
that seek nothing else in this holy exercise, but only to sheed a few
tears, in taking compassion upon the bitter pains and sorrows of our
Savior, and so do stay them selves in this point alone, without passinge
any further. And albeit this taking compassion of our Saviors pains be
very good, and necessary, (for so much as it is the foundation of all the rest,
as hereafter shall be declared) yet this is not the only fruit that may be
gathered of this holy tree, but there be others far greater than this:
for so much as out of the meditation of the holy passion does all the profit of
the spiritual life proceed.

Six things to be considered in the passion of our Savior.
Wherefore we must understand, that there be six things (emonge many
others,) that may be considered in the holy Passion of our Savior: To wit,
The greatness of his pains: The greiuousnes of our sins: The excellency of
the benefit: The magnificencie of the goodness of almighty God: The multitude
of the virtues of our Savior Christ, which do very brightelie shine in his
holy passion: And the conueniencie of this mean, whereby almighty God
vouchsafed to work our redemption. These six points ought we to consider for
six effects, wherein consists all the profit of the spiritual life. For
we must passion, that we may be brought thereby in admiration of the wisdom
of almighty God, and be the more confirmed in the faith of this holy
mystery. Of these six points we intend now to treat, and of each one of
them in his due place, and order.

Of the passinge great pains, and torments, which our Savior Jesus Christ
suffered in his most bitter Passion. I.
FIRST, we must consider the passinge great pains of our Savior Christ, to
provoke our selves by that consideration to take compassion of them, as reason
it is, that the members should take compassion of their head. Wherefore it is
to be noted, that the pains which our Savior suffered in his bitter passion,
were (as the holy fathers say) the greatest that ever were suffered, Summa S.
Thomae. 3. q. 46. artic. 6.
or ever shall be suffered in this world. This shall appear manifestly to be
true, if we do consider five principalle causes, from whence the passinge
greatness of these pains proceeded.

And because the greater pains he should suffer, the more perfectly he
should accomplish both the one, and the other, (and he wanted not the forces
of grace to bear as great a burden as he would) therefore he would that his
pains should be passinge great, that so likewise the satisfaction which he
should make for our debt, and the work of our redemption might be also
passinge great.

The second cause (which follows hereof) Psalm. 87.
I am become as a man destitute of all help, I am left emonge the dead,
notwithstanding that I alone am he that emonge the dead by right am free
from sin, and from death. And in an other Psalm he says: Psalm. 68.
I am plunged in the bottom of waters, and of mire, and I find no place where
to stay my feet. This is that forsakinge, which our Savior signified upon
the cross, when he saiede: Math. 27.46.
My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me. Psalm. 21.1.
For at that time his holy humanity was forsaken in the midst of the
furious stream of his pains, and torments, and was left destitute of all
things that might either withstand, or mitigate the force and veheme^cie of
them. Leuit. 16.
This was figured in the law, by those two beasts, that were offered for the
sins of the people, of the which the one was killed, and offered up in
sacrifice, and the other departed away, and was sent into the wilderness,
leauinge her companion alone in the torments. The like was done in this
heavenly sacrifice, where God and man was offered for the sins of the
world, and the one of the two natures, to wit, the humanity, was sacrificed,
and did suffer: but the other nature, to wit, the divinity, departed away,
leauinge her sister and companion all alone to suffer the torments. For albeit
that (as concerning the bond of union) the divine nature never forsook the
humane nature which it had once taken, yet as touching the consolation and
ease of the pains, and torments, (in the inferior part) it did wholly forsake
the same. And therefore we see, that the Martirs when they went to suffer
death, showed them selves very courageous, mearie, and ioyefull, (as we read
of S. Agnes, S. Agatha, S. Laurence, and of many others:) but our Savior
being the very fountain of grace, and of stre^gthe, (through whose virtue
the Martirs had such force, and courage, to be able to do that which they
did,) tre^bled, and sweated even very drops of blood, when he went to
suffer pains and torments for us. For in the martirs the virtue of charity
which redou^ded into the inferior forces of the soul, caused them to have
very great courage, and joy: But in our Savior Christ both these and all
other influences were by spetiall miracle suspended, that so he might drink
the cup of his most bitter pains, pure, and without mixture of any manner of
ease, or consolation.

The therde cause of his so grievous pains S. Chrysostom upon S. John. 2.
(as S. Chrysostom declares, speakinge of the wine, which was turned into
water at the marriage,) it follows that our Saviors body was the most best
co^plexioned, and most tender of all bodies that ever were, or shall be: insomuch
as a holy father saiethe: That if there had been no external violence done
unto our Saviors body, it would have endured a very great number of years,
by reason of the perfection, and tenderness of the composition thereof.

And not only the composition of his body, but also the matter thereof was
very tender: for so much as the matter of it was wholly most pure virgins flesh,
taken of the most pure and virginal bowels of our blessed Lady, S. Bonauenture.
without any other kind of mixture. And for this cause (as S. Bonauenture
saiethe) his body was the more tender, and of a more

The fourth cause of his so greiuouse pains, was the very kind of death
which he suffered, with all the circumstances that happened in all the
continuance of his passion: for so much as each one of them (if they be well
considered) was a kind of martyrdom by it self. And that thou may more
clearly perceive the same, Twelve most greiuous pains which our Savior
suffered in his passion.
begin even from the first entry of his passion until the end of it, and
thou shall find emonge others twelve most greyuous pains, which our Savior
there suffered: the which I will rehearce here very breiflie, notwithstanding
that in every one of them there is very much to be said, and considered.







The fourth was, the punishment with whippinge, and scourginge, which besides
that

The fifte was, that most cruel invention of

The sixte was, those so manifold blasphemies, Areede, who has smitten thee,
Leuit. 22.46.
as if he had been a very dissarde: to clothe him with a purple garment, to
set a reide in his hand, to kneel on one knee before him, to smite him on the
head with a reid, as if he had been a counterfeit king: and besides all this,
to proclaim him through the common streets as a malefactor. Who ever saw
so many kinds of reprochefull injuries heaped together upon one man?

The seuenthe was, that wonderful conte^pte, and despite, which was done unto
him (being the son of almighty God,) when they compared him with Barrabas,
and made less account of him, than of Barrabas. Insomuch as that Lord by
whom all things were created, and in whom all things do live, and are
preserved, was accounted more unprofitable, and more vnwourthy to live, than
Barrabas an infamous malefactor.



veins, and sinowes, which be the iustrumentes of feelinge. Moreover, his
pains were increased with the poyze and weight of his own body, which
always tended and swayed dounwarde: and so it ever rented, and enlarged his
wounds, and augmented the grief of his torments continually: and this caused
his martyrdom to become so extremely greiuous, that although he had no
deadly wound, yet by reason of the passinge greatness of his pains, his most
holy soul departed out of his most precious body.

The tenthe was, that whereas our Savior Fie on thee, that destroiest the
temple of God, Math. 27.
and within three days buildest it again.

The eleuenthe was, to have his most innocent

The twelfthe was such a cruelty, as the like most holy body was all void
of blood, and all the fountains of his veins emptied, and his bowels dried
up, by reason of the great abundance of blood which he had shead, when he
requested a little water, they did not only not grant it unto him, but in
steed thereof they gave him to drink Easell, and Galle.

Now what thing could be more cruelly done than this? True it is, that that
rich covetous man, Luc. 16.
which was tormented in hell had a drop of water denied him when he required
it, but yet he had no galle given unto him. But here they do not only deny
the son of almighty God the thing that he desired, but besides that they
increase his most greiuouse pains with an other new kind of tormente.

Every one of these points being considered severally by it self, will
minister sufficient matter of very great grief and sorrow to any good
Christian heart. And therefore whosoever is desirous to have an earnest and
inward compassion of the pains of our Savior, let him go through every
one of them, and make a station at each of them: and (be he never so hard
hearted) it is not almost possible, but that in some one or other of them he
shall sinde very vehement motions to provoke him unto grief, and compassion.

Howbeit, the pains of our Savior Christ are not thus ended: there be yet
others without all comparison far greater than these, to wit, the pains of
his blessed soul. For all these pains aboue-named, do for the most part
appertain to the pains of the cross, wherein his body suffered outwardly:
but besides this visible Cross, The invisible cross of our savior wherewith
his soul was tormented.
there was yet an other invisible cross, wherein his most holy soul was
crucified within his body, having also four arms, and four nails, (which
were four dolorous considerations) and these were a far greater tormente
unto him, than theverie outward cross. For first of all, there were
represented unto him all the sins of the world

Secondly, there was also represented unto him the ingratitude and damnation of
many benefit, nor endeavor to profit and help the^ selves with this so great
and so costlye a remedy, as he there prepared for them. This was also a far
greater tormente unto him, than the tormente of the cross. For it is a greater
pain unto a labourer to be denied his day wages, and the fruit of his
labor, than the very labor it self, albeit it were very great. And for this
cause our Savior complained by his Prophet Esaie of this injury unto his
father, sayeinge: I saiede: In vain have I travailed: In vain, Esa. 49.4.
and without cause have I wasted my strength. And he complained of this
ingratitude not only to his father, but also even unto men them selves by S.
Bernarde, sayeinge: O man, S. Bernarde.
consider what cruel torments I suffer for thy sake. There is no pain that
tormenteth me so extremely as thy ingratitude does: I call unto thee that
do suffer death for thee: Behold the pains that do torment me: Behold the
nails that do pearse through my hands, and fette: Behold the shameful
reproaches, and despites, where with they dishonor me. And although the pain
which I suffer out wardly be so passinge great yet is the pain far greater
which I suffer in wardly, when I see thee so ungrateful and unkind to wards
me for the same.

In like manner there was represented unto him the horrible sin of that
miserable people of Iewrie, and the terrible punishment that was prepared for
them within a short time after, which vndoutedlie was a greater grief, and
tormente unto him, than the cup of his bitter passion. For if the Prophet
Jeremy signified, that the sin which the Jews committed in goinge about to
kille him, greiued him much more than his own very death, what a grief
would it be to our savior, who had without all comparison far greater
charity, and grace, than the Prophet Jeremy?

There were moreover represented unto Luc. 2.35.
when she saw him suffer between two theiues upon a cross, the which
vndoutedlie was so great a grief and pain unto him, as the love was great
which he bare unto her, which love was inestimable: for so much as next unto the
love of God, he loved her most of all creatures.

Now these four considerations and greifes, were as it were four arms of an
other inward cross, wherewith his blessed soul was likewise crucified within
his holy bodic. So that our savior suffered that day the pains and
torments of two crosses, the one visible, and tho'other invisible. Upon the one
cross his body suffered outwardly, and upon the other his soul suffered much
more inwardly. Now how passinge great the grief was, which proceided of these
four considerations, there is no understanding able to comprehend it: and
yet we may conjecture somewhat thereof, by that outward show of his blouddie
sweat in the garden.

Whosoever then shall attentively consider all these causes, shall clearlie
see how passinge great the pains and torments of our Savior were, which is
the intent of this first manner of meditatinge upon his most bitter passion.
Howbeit this must not be the final end of this exercise, but rather it must
be used as a mean to come to other ends: to wit, to understand hereby what
a passinge great love he bare unto thee, that would suffer so much for thee:
and what a great benefit he did unto thee, in byeinge thee with so dear a
price: and how much thou art bound to do for him, who has done, and suffered
so much for thee: and above all this, how greatly thou ought to abhor thy
sins, and be greiued with them, since they were the cause of his so long and
painful martyrdom. Now for these four ends, (whereof we will entreat in
the chapters followinge) serves this manner of contemplation. Whereby it
appears, that this first manner of meditatinge (by way of taking compassion
of the bitter pains of our Savior) is as it were a mean, or a ladder, unto
all the others. And for this very cause S. Bonauenture made great account of
this manner of meditation upon the passion: because it is sensibly seen, that
this manner of meditation opens the way unto all the other manners of
meditatinge upon the same.

And the same holy father saiethe, that for this purpose it shall be a great
help also for us to take some discipline, which may cause some smarte, and
do no hurt to the body, that so by the feelinge of that so little pain of
whippinge, and scourginge our selves, we may the better lift up our spirit,
to consider somewhat of the passinge great pains, and torments, which the
most tender body of our sweite Savior suffered for our sakes.

How in the Passions of our Savior Christ, appears very manifestly what a
greyuous thing sin is, in the sight of almighty God. II.
THE second point that we have to consider in the passion of our Savior, is
the greiousnes of our sins, whereby to move our hearts to be sorrowful for
them, and to abhor them. Wherefore we must understand, that (as all the
holy learned fathers do affirm) our sins were the very cause why the son
of almighty God suffered such greiuous pains, torments, and crewell death,
as he suffered in this world. For it is certain, that if there had been no
sin to be the mean and occasion of his sufferinge, it had not been neidfull
for him to have suffered as he did. It is not agreed emonge the learned
divines, whether the son of God should have been incarnate, Summa S. Thomae.
3. q. 1. artic. 2. and 3. and quaest. 46. artic. 1. and 2. If man had not
sinned, Christ had not suffered any pains, or death.
in case man had not sinned, (for some do affirm it, and some do deny it,)
but this is holden for a most certain treuthe, that in case man had not
sinned, the son of God should not have died. Whereby it appears, that our
sins were the very cause that moved him to suffer all these miseries, and
that our sins were they that threw him into this prison, and that our sins
were they that nailed him upon the cross.

And think not, because they were not thy sins alone which were the cause
hereof, that thou art therefore worthy of the less punishemente: for
according to the laws of justice, he deserves no less punishemente that
kills an innocente being accompanied with many in committinge the fact,
than if he alone had killed him. So that by this rule thou feast, what great
reason thou have to move thee to abhor thy sins, and to be earnestly sorry
for them, by calling to mind that they were the tormentours which in very
deed crucified the son of almighty God, and caused him to suffer so great
pains, and torments. This is a greater cause to move a man to abhor sin,
and to be sorry for the same, than all other losses and miseries that ensewe of
sin, yea although we should reckon emonge our losses the deprivation of the
everlasting glory and felicity which is lost by a deadly sin, and the
everlasting horrible pains which be purchased by the same.

Now acordinge unto this doctrine, when thou shall be occupied in meditatinge
upon the holy passion, and shall see how the enemies do apprehende our
Savior, and how they accuse him, and buffette him, and how they spette upon
him, and whippe him, etc. think for certain, that thou art in very deed in
company with them, and that thou have joined with them in this conspiracy
against our Savior. So that thou may treulie say, that thy sins do
accuse him, that thy dissolute behaueour binds him, that thy anger and
malice whippeth him, that thy presumption and rashenes buffeteth him, that thy
pride crowns him with thorns, that thy fond braueries and vanities do
clothe him with purple, that thy pleasures, and delights give him to drink
galle, and vinegar, and to be short, that thy disobedience nayleth his hands
and feet upon the cross. For So Much as the pains which thou deseruest by
these thy sins, he vowchsaffed of his infinite charity to suffer for thee.
For it is certain, that the tormentors should never have had power to
tormente him as they did, in case thy sins had not given them force and
strength to do the same.

This is one very profitable way of meditatinge upon the holy passion for
all kind of persons: but it is much more requisite for such as do but newly
begin to enter into the service of almighty God, and do endeavor to cleanse
the sins of their former dissolute life with the holic exercises of Penance.

Of the passing great benefit of our Redemption. III.
THERDLY we ought to consider in the holy passion the greatness of the benefit
which our Savior has done unto us, in redeeminge us by this mean. And
although there be infinite things to be said in this matter, yet at this
present I will do no more, but only note briefly three principal points,
which are to be considered in this most excellent benefit of our Redemption.

How passinge great that is, which our Savior has bestowed upon us by this
benefit of our redemption, there is no tongue able to express. Howbeit we may
conceive somewhat of the first man Adam: for all these miseries were
sufficiently remedied by our Savior Jesus Christ, who bestowed upon us all
such benefits as were contrary unto these miseries: for so much as it is
evident, that he was given unto us to be a universal reparer of all the
euilles and miseries of the world. Now he that were able to reckon how many
the miseries are, whereinto the world has fallen by the sin of the first
man Adam, might also understand, how many the benefits are, that came unto us
by the second Adam, (to wit, by our Savior Christ,) which benefits be
vndoutedlie innumerable.

The second way, is by consideringe not Galat. 3.27.
that all such as have received the Sacrament of Baptism have put on Christ.
Geuinge us thereby to understand, that they all are made partakers of Christ,
and are adorned with his virtues, and merits, and that so being clothed with
this liuerey they seem in the sight of the heavenly father to be such after a
sort (in their degree,) as his own very son seems before him. And
therefore for good cause does Ecclesiasticus allege this wonderful title of
the son of God in his prayer: Eccl. 36.14.
sayeinge: have mercy o Lord upon thy people Israel, whom thou have made
equal and like to thy first begotten son. What dignity, what glory can be
greater than this? Now according hereunto, he that could reckon how many the
virtues, and merits of our Savior Christ have been, might likewise
understand how many the benefits have been that are come unto us by him:
For So Much as we are made partakers of them all by the mean of his passion.

To conclude, by him is given unto us remission of our sins, grace, glory,
liberty, peace, salvation, redemption, sanctification, justice, satisfaction,
sacraments, merits, doctrine, and all other things, which he had, and were
behouefull for our salvation. And by reason of this his so bountiefull
communicatinge, he is called in the holy Scriptures, the father, the
bridegroom, and the universal head of the Catholic Church: because
whatsoever the father has, appertains to his children, and whatsoever the
bridegroom has, he imparteth to his spowse, and whatsoever the head has, the
members are made partakers of the same.

These are the benefits which our Savior Christ has bestowed upon us. But
by what mean has he given them unto us? It is evident that by the mean of
his holy incarnation, and passion, whereby he made him self partaker of all
our debtes, and miseries: and so by taking upon him all our miseries, he made
us partakers of all his benefits. This taking upon him all our miseries is
vndoutedlie a far greater thing, than to make us partakers of al his
benefits. For certainly it is a more wonderful thing in God to suffer
miseries, than to bestow benefits: because as there is nothing more propre
and convenient to his infinite goodness, than to bestow benefits, so is there
nothing more strange and further of from that infinite felicity, than to
suffer miseries. Whereby it appears, that we are much more bound unto him
for the pains and torments which he has suffered for us, than for the great
benefits which he has given unto us: I mean hereby, that we are much more
bound unto him for the manner whereby he has remedied our miseries, than for
the very remedy it self.

But how passinge great was the love wherewith our Savior bestowed all this
upon us? This is without all comparison far greater, with what a passinge
great love our Savior suffered for us.
than all the rest. For certainly the desire which our Savior had to suffer
pains for us, was far greater, than the very pains which he suffered: and
much more pains would he have suffered, if it had been needful for us. Three
hours he continued sufferinge pains and torments upon the cross for our
sins: But what is this in comparison of that, which the greatness of his
charity could have vouchsaffed to do for us? Verelie if it had been neidfull
for us, that he should there have suffered pains and torments until the
day of judgment, the love was so passinge great which he bare unto us, that
he would undoubtedly have done it. So that albeit he suffered much for us,
yet was the love which he bare unto us far greater, than the pains which he
suffered for us. And therefore if we be greatly bound unto him for the great
pains which he suffered for us, much more are we bound unto him for that
which he desired to suffer for us. This consideration is very profitable to
provoke us to give most humble thanks unto him, who has bestowed so great
benefits upon us: and withal to love him, who has loved us much more, than
by his benefits he has showed unto us. Other infinite things there be to be
said concerning this matter: but now they shall remain for an other place:
and somewhat I have specified already in the meditation of the benefits of
almighty God.

Of the wonderful great goodness of almighty God, which appears very
evidently in the holy Passion of our Savior Christ. IIII.
FOVRTHLIE, we ought to consider the passinge great goodness, and mercy of
almighty God, which shinethe more euide^tlie and brightlie in the holy
passion of our Savior, than in any other of his works. Wherefore thou have
deeply to consider therein four things: which are to be considered in all
the whole history of the holy passion, and in every part thereof. The first
is, who suffers: Four principal things to be considered in the passion of
our Savior.
The second is, what pains he suffers: The therde is, for whom he
suffers: The fourth is, for what cause he suffers. Now if thou will stay
thy self awhile in every one of these points, and consider first the
highness, and excellency of him that suffers, which is almighty God: and in
such wise stay in this consideration, that thou art astonished at this so high,
and so wonderful a thing: and afterward co^mest to descend from thence
unto the consideration of the baseness, and vylnes of the most greiuous pains,
and reprochefull injuries, which he was content to suffer: and that not for
Angels, or Archangels, but even for men, which are most vile, and abominable
creatures, and in their works like unto the devils the^ selves: if (as I say)
in each one of these points thou make as it were a statio^, and do compare
the one point with the other, undoubtedly thou shall be greatly amassed, and
astonished, to consider how much so great and excellent a majesty would abase
him self, to redeem so vile, and so base a creature: and then may thou cry
out with the Prophet, and say: Abac. 3.
O Lord I have heard thy words, and was afraid, I have considered thy
works, and was astonished.

But if after all this, thou do consider the cause of his so great abasinge,
and come to understand that it was not for any manner of commodity toward
himself, nor yet provoked by any deserte of ours, but was only moved
thereunto with the bowels of his tender mercy and love toward us, Luc. 1.78.
by the which he vouchsafed to visit us from on high: this point being well
and dewlie considered, will lift up thy mind into such a great admiration and
love of him, that thou will be astonished as Moses was in the Mount, Exodus 3.
when he saw the figure of this mystery, and began to proclaim with a
loud voice the unspeakable great mercy of almighty God which was there
revealed unto him. This was that great languishinge and faintnes of spirit,
which the spowse felt in the Canticles, when she saiede: Stay me up with
flowers, Cant. 2.5.
and comfort me with apples, for I langwise with love. Upon which words S.
Bernarde saiethe: The amorous soul sees here king Solomon with the crown
which his mother crouned him withal: She sees the only son of almighty
God carienge a cross upon his shoulders: She sees the Lord of majesty
whipped and spetted upon: She sees the author of life and of glory thrust
through with nails, pearsed with a spear, and many despitefull reproaches and
contemptes done unto him: And finally, she sees him bestow his most holy
life for his freindes: She sees all this, and in saying it she is pearsed
through with a knife of love, and therefore she saiethe: stay me up with
flower, and comfort me with apples, for I langwishe with love.

Of the excellent virtues, that do shine very brightlie in the holy passion
of our Savior Christ. V.
THE fifte point that we have to consider in the holy passion of our Savior
is the great number of virtues that do shine very clearlie in it: the which
consideration serves to encourage us to endeavor our selves to imitate some
part of that which is there represented unto us. This is one of the highest
manners of meditatinge that is upon the holy Passion. For it is manifest, The
perfection of a Christian life, consists in imitatinge the virtues of Christ.
1. Pet. 2.21.
that all the perfection of a Christian life consists in the imitation and
followinge of the virtues of our Savior Christ. Whereunto the Apostle S.
Peter exhorts us, sayeinge: Christ suffered for us, leauinge unto you an
example, that you should follow his foote-steppes, who when he was evil
spoken of, did not speak evil again: and when he was tormented, did not
threaten them, but delivered himself unto him that did most unjustly condemn
him.

And albeit that all virtues shined so brightly and in such excellent wise in
all the life of out Savior Christ, yet did they much more perfectly shine in
his holy passion. And therefore in his passion principally it behooves us to
behold the beauty and excellency of his virtues: the which do much more
evidently shine there emonge his pains, and torments, than do the flowers
emonge the thorns.

Consider therefore first of all that so profounde humility, Humility.
wherewith the most high and only begotten son of almighty God vouchsafed
to be contemned, and less esteemed than Barrabas, and to be crucified upon a
cross between two theiues, as though he had been a Captain and ringleader of
malefactors.

Consider his so wonderful patience in the midst of so many reprochefull
injuries, Patience.
and torments: and withal his so passinge great magnanimity, Magnanimity.
in that he offered him self so willingly into the hands of his enemies, and
to suffer the greatest pains, and conflictes, that ever were suffered in this
world.

Consider that so constant perseverance, Perseverance.
which he had from the beginning to the end, yea even to suffer death upon
the cross, and to descend into hell, and to finishe the work of our
salvation.

Consider his most fervent charity, Charity.
which passes all understanding, by the which only he was moved to offer him
self in sacrifice for the sins of the world, and to suffer death, that he
might give life not only unto his freindes, but also to his enemies, yea even
to those very persons that shead his most precious blood.

Consider his most abundante mercy, Mercy.
which exte^ded it self so far forth, as to take upon him all the miseries
and debtes of the world, and to make satisfaction for them, as if they had
been peculiarly his own debtes.

Consider that so perfect obedience which he used toward his father,
Obedience.
whom he obeyed unto death, yea even to the death of the cross: where
finally bowinge down his head, he offered up unto him his most holy soul,
geuinge us thereby to understand, that the work of his obedience was then
perfectly fulfilled.

Consider that so passinge great meekenes, Meekenes.
which he showed in all the process of his passion, sufferinge him self to be
carried like a sheep to the bocherie, and like a most meek lamb, that holds
his peace when he is sheared.

Consider his so wonderful silence amongst so many false accusations,
Silence.
and lyinge witnesses, which was so great, that it was able to bring the
very Judge him self that condemned him in a great admiration of him.

Now if thou be desirous to see a most perfect pattern of the contempt of the
world, Co^tempte of the world.
and of all the honors, riches, pleasures, and delights that be therein,
behold our Savior upon the cross so dishonored, tormented, and naked, that
he had none other bed to lie upon, but only a cross: none other pillowe to
rest his head upon, but only a crown of thorns: none other delicates to
feed upon, but only galle, and vinegar: none other persons to comfort him,
but only those cruel scoffinge ministers which wagged their heads at him,
Marc. 15.
and saiede: Fie on thee, that destroiest the temple of God, and in three days
buildest it up again: etc. I conclude therefore, that the Evangelical
poverty, abstinence, and austeritie of life, with all other virtues do no
where shine more evidently than in the cross.

But emonge all these virtues, humility and patience do show them selves
most notably in the bitter passion of our Savior. For patience (as the holy
fathers affirm) was the weddinge garmente wherewith the son of almighty God
clothed himself when he came to be affyaunced with the Catholic Church, and
to be married with her. By which Metaphore they give us to understand, that
albeit our Savior Christ shyned most brightly with the garmente of all
virtues, when he came to celebrate matrimony with the Catholic Church upon
the bed of the cross, yet did he most principally shine there with the robe
of patience. For by means of the act of this virtue, which is to suffer, he
drank the bitter cup of his passion: by the valewe, and merit whereof the
Catholic Church was redeemed, bewtified, and espowsed by our Savior Christ.

Now in these and other the like virtues we ought to fix our eyes when we
meditate upon the holy passion of our Savior: to the intent that we may be
thereby provoked to imitate somewhat of that, which was there done, not only
for our redemption, but also for our example. For the greatest glory that a
Christian can atteine unto in this world, is to have a semblaunce and likeness
unto our Savior Christ: Esa. 14.14.
Howbeit not such a likeness as proud Lucifer desired to have, but such a
likeness of life as our Savior Christ him self commanded us to have, when he
said: Joan. 13.15.
I have given you an example, that as I have done, so should ye do likewise.

Of the conueniencie of the mystery of our Redemption. VI.
THE sixte point that we have to contemplate upon in the holy passion, Summa
S. Thomae. 3. q. 46. art. 3. and 4.
, is the conueniencie of the mystery of our Redemption: to wit, how
co^ueniente a mean this was which almighie God chose, whereby to work the
salvation of man, and to heal and cure him of his miseries. This manner of
contemplation serves to illuminate the understanding, to confirm it more
firmly in the faith of this mystery, and to lift up the heart of man into a
great admiration of the goodness, and wisdom of almighty God, who chose so
wonderful and convenient a mean to heal our miseries, and to relieve our
necessities.

This is so copious and so plentiful a matter to meditate upon, that certainly
if a man should continewe thinkinge upon it until the end of the world he
should always find new reasons of the conueniencie of this holy mystery,
and new causes to induce him to lift up his spirit more and more in
admiration of the high wisdom and providence of almighty God herein. But
because this volume would be to great in case I should treat of this matter
at large: I will therefore at this present only show the order and
foundation of this consideration, to the intent that the devout and religious
soul may hereby have a way opened unto her to prosecute all the rest.

Wherefore it is to be noted, that if we will see what proportion and
conueniencie a mean has with his end, it is necessary to make a comparison
between the same mean, and the end: and the greater helps that the mean
has toward the atteininge of the end, the more proper and conueniente is
the mean for the same end. As for example: If we will examine whether a
medicine be convenient for a disease, we must consider the accidents of the
disease, and the proprieties and virtues of the medicine: and when we have
seen what proportion there is between the one, and the other, we may then
judge whether the medicine be conueniente for the same disease or not. And even
in like manner is it in this case: for whereas it is euidente unto us, that the
passion and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ is a general medicine for all
the miseries and necessities of man, if we will try the conueniencie of this
medicine, we must make a long comparison between the medicine, and the
desease: and in case we be able to search and examine well both the one, and
the other, we shall certainly find, that this medicine is so fit and
convenient for the curinge of this disease, and of all the branches, and
accidents of the same, as if the medicine had been only instituted for the
curinge of each defecte in the disease: the which vndoutedlie is a matter able
to bring a man that should consider of it attentively into a great
astonishement, and admiration. If thou be not fully persuaded herein, tell me
then I pray thee, what satisfaction could be offered more sufficient for
payment of the common debtes of mankind, than the most precious blood which
the son of almighty God shead for us upon the Cross? To cure also the
wounds of our pride, couetousenes, ingratitude, pleasures, delights, and the
love of our selves, with all other evils which proceed thereof, what thing
could be more convenient, than God upon a cross? Likewise to give us
knowledge of the goodness, and mercy of almighty God, to enkendle us more in
the love of him, to strengthen more our confidence, and to awake more our
forgetfulness, and unthankfulness, what thing could be more convenient, than
God upon a cross? Moreover to enriche a man with merits, to exalte him unto
greater honor, to enkendle his spirit in devotion, to comfort him in his
tribulations, to succoure him in his temptations, to help him in his labors,
to encourage him unto great enterprises, and finally to give a perfect example
of all virtues, what thing could be more conueniente, than Jesus Christ upon
the cross? And to comprehend all in one word, if the Evangelical life be
well considered, it is nothing else, but only a continual cross: and so
consequently, what thing could be more conueniente to direct a kind of life
which is altogether a cross, than an other cross?

And if thou be yet desirous to understand this conueniencie more evidently,
consider attentively what thing a Christian life is, (for the leadinge of a
Christian life is the end of all the traueills and pains of our Savior
Christ, Note well this point.
) and the same consideration will declare very plainly unto thee, what
conueniencie there is between this mean, and this end. A Christian life
(taking it in his full perfection) is not such a kind of life as the
Christians use to live at this day in the world: what a Christian life is.
but such a life as our Savior Christ lived, and such a life as his disciples
lived, whose pains, labors, and miseries were so great, that one of them
says thus of them: 1. Cor. 4.9.
We are become a spectacle unto God, unto Angels, and unto men. For truly so
great are our pains, and miseries, and in such wise are we reuyled and
persecuted of the world, that (as though we were wild beasts baited at a
stake) we are spetially looked upon, not only of men, and of Angels, but also
of almighty God him self. And afterward he saiethe thus: Until this
present hour we do sustain hunger, thirste, nakedness, and blows, and have
not so much as a den wherein to hyde our selves. We go from place to place,
and we gain the bread that we eat with our own hands. They curse us, and we
bless them: They persecute us, and we suffer them: They blaspheme us, and we
pray for them: To conclude, in such wise are we turmoyled and contemned of the
world, as if we were the very dust, and dirte, that they tread underneath
their feet: And as though we were most wicked, and abominable men, the
world is fully persuaded, that nothing can be more acceptable unto almighty
God, than to procure our death, and condemnation.

This is (my dear brother) a Christian life. This very Christian life did the
Prophets live, and so did also the Martirs, the Co^fessors, and those blessed
holy Mounkes that lived in the primitive Church in the wilderness. To be
short, this Christian life did all the Saints live. And this Christian life
the Apostle describes very plainly in his Epistle to the Hebrews in these
words: Heb. 11.
The saints were mocked, scourged, apprehended, imprisoned, stoned, sawed in
pieces, tempted, and put to death with the sword: They went in this world
apparailed in sheep and goats skins, very poor, needy, and afflicted, of
whom the world was not worthy: They lived in wilderness, and in solitary
places, aparte from the company of men, and had none other habitation, but the
dens and cliftes of the earth. This is indeed the perfection of the
Christian life, which the gospel teaches us, and which our Savior Christ
came to bring into the world. This Christian life if it be well considered is
a continual cross, and death of the whole man, to the intent that after he is
thus mortified and annihilated he may be able, and desposed to be transformed
into God. For like as there can not be generation without corruption,
(for so much as that thing which is must perish, to the end that that may be
made which is not,) even so this spiritual regeneration and transformation of
man into God can not be made, unless the old man do first die, that so by
death and corruption of the old man he may be transformed into God. Whereupon
it plainly enseweth, that all the Evangelical life is nothing else (as we
have saiede) but death, and a cross. And thererefore what thing can be more
convenient to direct such a kind of life as is altogether a continual
cross, than an other cross? And if there be nothing more apt and
conueniente to engender a fire, than an other fire, and if every thing be
most apt to engender a thing like unto it self, what thing can be more
proportionable and conueniente to engender a cross, than an other cross?
Undoubtedly so it is: and therefore there is nothing of greater force to
encourage and strengthen at this day all holy Catholic men, and women, to
suffer pains, injustice, wrongs, poverty, subjection, discipline, honger,
thirste, cold, nakedness, and to be short, all the troubles, calamities,
afflictions, persecutions, imprisonmentes, torments, and miseries of this
world, and all the austerite of the Evangelical life, than to fix their eyes
upon the cross. Our of this school of the cross came the Martirs. In this
school learned also the Apostles. And this school has likewise taught and
strengthened the virgins, the Confessors, the holy mounkes, and to conclude,
all the Saints, to live a holy austere kind of life. And it was the cross
that has accompanied and comforted them in all their labors, trowbles,
pains, afflictions, and persecutions.

Now when the devout soul finds so many kinds of fruits in this tree of
life for all times, and for all necessities, she can not but wonder at the
high wisdom of that sovereign master, that has found out such an
excellent mean for our remedy: and she is also provoked thereby to
acknowledge the unspeakable goodness of so merciful a father, who being able
to have helped and remedied man with his only will, chose rather to put him
self to so great pains, and dishonours, to the intent that man might be more
honored and more helped by this mean, tha^ by any other.

The order that may commonly be used in meditatinge upon the Passion.
These be the six principalle ways to meditate upon the holy passion: and
the order that may commonly be used in meditatinge upon them, is to begin
at the first, to wit, to consider the most grievous pains which our savior
suffered for us, (the which consideration is as it were the very foundation of
all the others) and from that consideration we may go forwards immediately
unto all the rest, according as the very cowerse of meditation will open unto
us the way, and especially the grace of the holy Ghost, who is the
principalle teacher of these exercises. For as we have declared before, when we
have considered the passinge great pains which our Savior suffered for us, we
may then immediately proceide forwards, and consider the greatness of our
sins, which caused him to suffer so many greiuous pains, and torments, and
withal the passinge greatness of this benefit of our redemption, in that
almighty God would vouchesafe for the love of us to suffer such extreme
pains: And we may likewise consider the highness of the goodness, and mercy of
almighty God, who for the great love he bare unto us abased him self so far
forth, as to suffer so many reprochefull contemptes, villaynies, and
miseries. And above all this we may consider how great examples of virtues our
Savior Christ has given unto us herein: to wit, of patience, obedience,
charity, humility, meikenes, constancy, and of all other virtues, whereof we
have hitherto treated.

Howbeit, althowghe it be a very convenient order of meditatinge upon this
holy mystery to pass orderly by degreis through all these forsaid
considerations, taking our beginning at the first consideration, and so to
proceide in order from one consideration to an other, even to the last: yet is
it not neidfull for a man (so often as he meditateth upon this holy mystery)
to go in this precise manner through them all, (for many times he shall not
have sufficient time for the same,) but let him content him self in his
meditation with that consideration, wherein he shall find most spiritual
taste, and likinge: For So Much as in these exercises we must have respect not
to the great quantity of the matter that is meditated upon, but to the great
devotion wherewith it is done.

The end of the first part of this book.
DEO GRATIAS.
Faults escaped in the printinge of this Book to be amended by the gentle
reader as follows.
Folio 1. Page 1. Line. 13. for lyffe, read life. fol. 1. page 1. lin. 18.
wordlie, worldly. fol. 2. page 1. lin. 25. perfection, perfection. fol. 3.
page 1. lin. 16. vorde, word. fol. 26. page 2. lin. 1. consideration, prayer.
fol. 38. page 1. lin. 23. humilie, humility. fol. 38. page 1. lin. 12.
grievous, greiuous. fol. 70. page 2. lin. 2. pincipalitie, principality. fol.
87. page 2. lin. 2. showed, showed. fol. 81. page 2. lin. 2. tracke, trace.
fol. 107. page 2. lin. 4. sutelie, surely. fol. 115. page 1. lin. 20. encrase,
increase. fol. 133. page 1. lin. 4. inuestured, invested. fol. 138. page 2.
lin. 25. thou had, thou have. fol. 143. page 2. lin. 24. one, own. fol. 161.
page 2. lin. 21. as is, as it. fol. 162. page 2. lin. 30. be but, is but. fol.
174. page 2. lin. 23. as they, as that they. fol. 179. page 1. lin. 1. in
word, in one word. fol. 187. page 1. lin. 1^. consider it, consider them.
fol. 196. page 2. lin. 14. d^eadfull, dreadful. fol. 197. page 1. lin. 23.
harthe, heart. fol. 202. page 2. lin. 21. inuit, inuiteth. fol. 211. page 1.
lin 7. routes, roots. fol. 222. page 2. lin. 13. hear, hair. fol. 230. page
1. lin. 1. they shall, when they shall. fol. 234. page 1. lin. 1. pompes,
pomp. fol. 234. page 1. lin. 3. heir, hair. fol. 234. page 2. lin. 21. all
that, all of that. fol. 238. page 2. lin. 24. for they, for that they. fol.
267. page 1. lin. 29. bene^fites, benefits. fol. 284. page 1. lin. 28. this
means, this mean.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS FRIST PART.
AN exhortation made by the Bishop of Cuenca to the Christian Reader, to
read this book with good attention, and with a desire to profit and proceed
for wards in godliness.

The Epistle of the Awthor. folio 1. The Prologue and Argument of this Book.
fol. 3. Of the great profit and necessity of consideration. Cap. 1. fol. 7.
How Consideration helps Faith.. I. fol. 10. How Consideration helps Hope..
II. fol. 11. How Consideration helps Charity.. III. fol. 13. How
Consideration helps Devotion.. IIII. fol. 17. How prayer joined with
consideration helps all the virtuous affections.. v. fol. 19. How
Consideration helps to wards the obteyninge of the four Cardinal virtues..
VI. fol. 22. How Consideration helps to resist vices.. VII. fol. 22. How
consideration helps to atchieue and accomplish all virtuous works of
Austeritie.. VIII. fol. 24. How consideration excludes not other particular
helps unto virtues.. IX. fol. 24. How the exercises of prayer, and meditation
apperteine not only to Religious persons, and priests, but to the Laity
also.. X. fol. 25. An answer to an objection, that some slouthefull christians
do make against the exercise of prayer, and meditation: sayeinge, that they
are bownde to no more, but to keep the commandments of God, and of his
catholic church.. XI. fol. 28. Of the matter of consideration.. XII. fol.
30. Of the five parts of Prayer. cap. 2. fol. 32. The first seven Meditations
of the seven days of the weke in the morninges. fol. 33. Mondaie morninge: Of
our Saviors washinge his Apostles feet: And of the institution of the most
blessed Sacrament of the Altar. fol. 33. Of the most blessed Sacrament of the
Altar: And of the causes, wherefore it was instituted.. II. fol. 42. Tewsdaie
morninge: Of the prayer of our Savior in the Garden: And of his apprehension.
fol. 50. How our Savior was apprehended.. II. fol. 58. Of those that do
spirituallie bind the hands of our Savior Christ.. III. fol. 61. Wensdaie
morninge: Of the presentation of our Savior before Annas: Caiphas: Herod: and
Pilate: And of our Saviors whippinge at the pillar. fol. 62. Of the troubles
and vexations that our Savior suffered the night before his Passion: And of
the denial of S. Peter.. II. fol. 69. How our Savior was brought before king
Herod, and mocked, and accounted for a fool by him, and his cowertiers. fol.
72. Of the crewell whippinge of our Savior at the pillar. folio. 74. Thursdaie
morninge: How our Savior was crouned with thorns: How Pilate said of him to
the people, Ecce Homo: And how he bare the Cross upon his shoulders. fol. 79.
Of those words of the Gospel, Ecce Homo:. II. fol. 85. How our Savior carried
the Cross upon his shoulders.. III. fol. 89. Fridaie morninge: Of the mystery
of the cross: And of those seven words which our Savior spoke upon the
Cross. fol. 93. A contemplation upon the mystery of the Cross.. 1. fol. 98.
How our Savior was nailed upon the Cross.. II. fol. 100. Of the compassion
the some had upon his mother, and the mother upon her some, hanginge upon the
cross.. III. fol. 101. Of the doctrine that may be learned at the foot of
the Cross.. IIII. fol. 103. What patience we ought to have in all troubles and
aduerseties, followinge the example of our Savior christ.. v. fol. 107.
Satturdaie morninge: Of the pearcinge of our Saviors side with a spear: Of
his taking down from the cross: Of the pittiefull lamentation of our blessed
Lady: and of our Saviors burial. fol. 109. How our Savior was taken down
from the Cross.. II. fol. 114. The pittiefull lamentation of the blessed
virgin Marie. fol. 116. A declaration why the blessed virgin Marie and all just
persons are afflicted in this present transitory life with diverse adversities,
and tribulations.. III. fol. 121. Sunday morninge: Of the descendinge of our
Savior into Limbus Patrum: of the Resurrection of his holy Body: of his
appearinge first to our blessed Lady, and afterward to S. Marie Magdalen,
and to the disciples. fol. 124. Of the Resurrection of the body of our
Savior.. II. fol. 132. How our Savior after his Resurrection appeared to the
holy virgin his blessed mother.. III. f. 144 The seven Meditations for the
same seven days at night. fol. 136. Mondaie night: Of the knowledge of our
selves: and of our sins. fol. 137. The first treatise: Of the consideration
of sins. f. 141. Of the multitude of sins, that thou have committed in thy
former life.. I. fol. 142. Of the sins, and defectes, that a man may fall
into after he is come to the knowledge of almighty God.. II. fol. 145. Of the
accusation of a man's own conscience: and of the abhorrings and contempt of
him self.. IIII. fol. 149. Tewsdaye night: Of the miseries of this life. f.
153. The second treatise of the miseries of man's life. fo. 157. Of the
shortness of this life.. II. fol. 161. Of the uncertainty of our life.. III.
fol. 164. Of the frailty of our life.. IIII. fol. 166. Of the mutabilitie of
this life.. V. fol. 169. Of the deceitfulues of our life.. VI. fol. 171. Of the
miseries of man's life.. VII. fol. 173. Of the last misery of man:which is
death.. VIII. fol. 177. What profit may be taken of the foresaid
considerations.. IX. fol. 178. Wensdaie night: Of the hour of death. fol.
181. The therde treatise: of the consideration of death. fol. 185. Of the
uncertainty of the hour of death: and what agreife it is at that time to
depart from all things of this life.. I. fol. 189. Of the horror and
lothsomnes of our grave.. II. fol. 192. Of the great fear and dowbte the
soul has at the hour of death, what shall happen unto it after it is
departed out of the body.. III. fol. 193. How we come to under stand hereby
the errors and blindness of our life past.. IIII. fol. 194. Of the terror of
the dreadful account we must make at the hour of our death of all our life
past.. V. fol. 196. Of the Sacrament of extreme unction, and of the agony of
death.. VI. fol. 198. How filthye and loath some the body is after it is dead,
and of the buryenge of it in the grave.. VII. fol. 201. Of the way that the
soul takes after it is departed out of the body: and of the dreadful
judgment and sentence that shall be given upon it at that time.. VIII. fol. 205.
Thursdaye night: Of the general day of judgment. fol. 207. The fourth
treatise: of the consideration of the general day of judgment. fol. 211. How
rigorous the day of judgment shall be.. I. f. 213. Of the terrible signs, that
shall go before the day of the general judgment.. II. fol. 215. Of the end
of the world: And of the Resurrection of the dead.. III. fol. 218. Of the
coming of the Judge: of the matter of the judgment: and of the witnesses and
accusers that shall be there against the wicked.. IIII. fo. 221. Fridaye night:
Of the pains of hell. fol. 227. The fifte treatise: of the consideration of
the pains of hell. fol. 230. Of twoe kinds of pains that be in hell.. I.
fol. 231. Of the torments of the inward senses, and powers of the soul.. II.
fol. 235. Of the pain, which is termed by the divines poena damni, that is,
the pain of loss of almighty God.. III. fol. 239. Of the particular pains
of the damned in hell.. IIII. fol. 240. of the eternity of the pains of
hell.. V. fol. 241. Saturdaye night: Of the everlasting glory, and felicity
of the kingdom of heaven. fol. 244. The sixte treatise: Of the consideration
of the glory of Paradise. fol. 248. Of the goodly beauty and excellency of
the place.. I. fol. 249. Of the second joy, that the soul shall have in the
kingdom of heaven, which is the enioyenge of the company of the Saints..
II. fol. 252. Of the therd joy, that the soul shad have in the kingdom of
heaven: which is the enioyenge of the clear vision of almighty God.. III.
fol. 255. Of the fowerth joy, that the soul shall have in the kingdom of
heaven: which is the enjoyenge of the glory of the body.. IIII. fol. 257. Of
the fifte joy in the kingdom of heaven: which is the everlasting continuance
of the glory and felicity of the Saints.. V. fol. 258. Sunday night: Of
the benefits of almighty God. fol. 259. The seuenthe treatise: of the
consideration of the benefits of almighty God. fol. 262. Of the benefit of
Creation.. I. fol. 264. Of the benefit of Conservation.. II. fol. 266. Of the
benefit of Redemption.. III. fol. 269. Of the benefit of vocation.. IIII.
fol. 272. Of the particular benefits that almighty God bestows upon us.. V.
fol. 275. Of five parts that may be exercised in prayer. Cap. 4. fol. 277. Of
Preparation unto prayer. Cap. 5. fol. 278. Of Readinge. Cap. 6. fol. 283. Of
Meditation. Cap. 7. fol. 284. Of Thanks geuinge. Cap. 8. fol. 285. Of
Petition. Cap. 9. fol. 286. Of the most necessary virtues that are to be
demanded in Petition.. I. fol. 288. Note the principal foundations of our
confidence in prayer. fol. 292. Aduises for Meditations. Cap. 10. fo. 293. The
first advise: That in our Meditation we must not for the obseruinge of our
ordinary course put away from us any other good thought, or consideration,
wherein we find more devotion.. I. fol. 293. The second advise: That in our
Meditation we must eschew the superfluous speculation of the understanding,
and commit this business to the oxercise of the affections of our will.. II.
f. 294. The therde advise: Which prescribes also bowndes and limits to the
Will, that it be neither too excessive, nor too vehement in her exercise.. III.
fol. 297. The fowerthe advise: Wherein it is declared what manner of attention
we ought to have in our exercise of prayer, and Meditation.. IIII. f. 299. The
fyfre advise: That we must not be dismayed, nor give over our exercise of
prayer, and Meditation, at such time as we want devotion therein,. V. fol.
301. The sixte advise: That we must endeavor to have a long prayer, and great
abundance of deuetion.. VI. fol. 303. The seue^the advise: That we must not
receive the visitations of our Lord in vain.. VII. fo. 305. Of six points,
that are to be meditated in the holy Passion of our Savior. Cap. vlt. fol.
307. Of the passinge great pains, and torments, which our Savior suffered in
his most bitter passion.. I. fol. 308. How in the passion of our Savior
Christ appears very manifestly what a grievous thing sin is in the
sight of almighty God.. II. fol. 315. Of the passinge great benefit of our
Redemption.. III. fol. 316. Of the wonderful great goodness of almighty God,
which appears very euidentelye in the passion of oun Savior Christ.. IIII.
fol. 319. Of the excellent virtues, that do shine very brightelye in the
holy passion of our Savior Christ.. V. fol. 320. Of the conueniencie of the
mystery of our Redemption.. VI. fol. 322.
The end of the Table.

