A COMPENDIOUS AND A VERY FRVTEFVL Treatise, teaching the way of Dyenge well,
written to a friend, by the flower of learned men of his time, Thomas Lupsete
Londoner, late deceassed, on whose soul Jesus have mercy.

To dye well.
THey say, it is a point of a proud vanity, or a stubburne folly, to keep sure
and certain, whatsomeuer is ons said, always, it seems not to wise men, that
a promis should be sticked by, in as much there may chance greater causes to
break a promys, then the reasons be, why promise should be performed. As if I
have said, that I will suppe with you: hit is not inoughe to bind me against
all chances. I may fall sick, I may have at home some necessary impediment,
the wether may so fall, that it is no going out, many casualties may happen,
that were not in mind, when such promysse was made. Wherefore wise men say, in
all making of promise, there be ever understand some secret exceptions, such
as be these: If I can, If I may, If it be convenient, If no greater cause
happen to let me. By the which exceptions, a promise never byndeth a man
ferther, than is according to be observed and kept.

If I thought (my friend John^ Walker) that you would take mine excuse by the
said exceptions, I would rather by them escape my promise, that I have made to
you, than I would fulfill it. For when I suddenly agreed to your request, that
was to have me write to you the way of dyenge well: I consyderid not at that
time, what the thing was. After I perceived more difficulte in it, then was
mete for my poor wit, specially being (as you may see me) other wise
occupied, in such studies as appertain to my leisure: and of shortly this
lesson to learn the way of dyenge well, has need to have a master, the which
knowethe both what our life is, and what the loss of the same is. Nor no man
in mind can effectuously teach the way to dye well, except he be one that
knows the way to live well. And plainly the matter requires a philosophers
stomach and a sad. For such a one as Marcus Cato was, were a man mete to
entrete this thing: he knew what valor ley in death, the which he sought
both with sword, and his nails, tearing out his own bowelles.

I would think a Catulus or a Mercula should speak lustely to you of death,
saying they showed their courageous heart nothing to esteem life, when the
time required, either to dye with honor, or to live with shame. These men and
such other would show you the way to go to death, long before death came
to you. But none of all the paynymes can either with word or with ensamples
of their acts declare this thing so trewly and effectually, as may he that is
exercised in Christ's philosophye, a Paul, or a Peter, or a Hierom should here
in speak more lively, than al ye subtyl clerks of the old greeks. Yet to me,
for my part, it is an hard thing, either to play with you one of this sort,
or of that sort. It passes my power to speak to you either like Socrates, or
like Chrysostom. So that if the said exceptions be with you admittid in a
promis making, I may trewely deny you the performaunce of, my grauntinge, in
as much when I promised you this thing, there was vnderstandyd, if I could,
and if it were convenient: I another can well declare this way of dyenge, nor
yet me think, it is not convenient for me, living in this commen course of the
worldely folk, to speak of death so ernestly, as a monk of the Charter house
should and might do. But by cause I know your importune desire, to be so set
upon this thing, yt needs you will have me say somewhat herein: I will pray
you so to read me, as the tale not only to be written of me for you, but that
I my self am also an auditor of the same, and as much shall I enforce to
follow the counsel, that in my saying I advise you, as though the hole
work pertayned only to my self. Wherein take this note for your comfortes,
that I write nothing to you, that I wyshe not were in my own power to
execute. Thus I with you, and you with me both of us fast yoked to gethers, let
us endeavor our selfs to be in deed such men as we commend and praise. For
as it is shame to speak one thing and to think an other, so it is a more
shame to write holyly and to live worldly. And as great a rebuke there is in
him that can here and praise good sayings but do there after he will not.

Now than let us not speak only of the way to dye well, but in effect let us
indeuer our minds to have the fruit of this lesson, to make in deed a good
end of our life. And here now without any ferther process I will begin to
pay you my debt, and shortelye you shall know my mind how you may dye well.

As I was bethynkynge me, to write some thing of this matter to the satisfyinge
of your desire, I turned a book, where my memory gave me, to be a story of one
called Canius, that lived under the tyrante Caligula Caesar. This Canius beside
his hye lernyng was a man of a great spirit, the which he well declared in the
manner of taking his death. It chansed him to fall out for a certain cause with
the said tyrante, and many sore words were between them: at the last when
the tone was departing from the the other, this emperor in his fierce ire said:
Well thou fool, make merry if thou wylt, for I have poynted the within few days
to be slain. Thereat Canius turned him with low courtesy and said: My most
gentill prince I heartily thank you.

This answer came from a noble stomach, whereby he showed the mad ragis of
the cruel tyrant to be so far intolerable, that under him death was to be
reckened for a benefit and a good turn: wherefore he thanked him for his
offer, as for a special reward. And great merueil men had to behold this
Philosopher, how merry he was after this tyrants thretenynge. There were.x.
days given of respite, before he should dye, the which time he so passed, that
he never seemed to be in less care, nor to have his mind in better quietness.

When the day came of execution, the kings geyler and hangmanne went abowte
the town with a greatte company of them that should suffer death, the which
passing by this Canius house, they called him to be brought also forth
amongst the other, at the which time Canius was playinge at the chestes
with one of his companions, and hearing them make haaste, he rose and telled
his men, saying to his companion: Look now that after my death you lie not,
nor make no false crakes, that you have won this game. There with also he
bekenid to the gailer and said: I pray you bear witness, that I have one man in
this game more than my fellow has.

In this wise this philosopher playde with death, and shortly his quiet
heart gave a foul check mate to the tyrants cruelty: he showed him self to
be in spirit as far above all kings violente power, as these mighty
princes think to have a strong dominon over all their subjects. The frendis
and familiars of this philosopher were very sorrowful, bewailing the loss of
such a man, to whom: what mean you quod he? Why be you sad?

Why mourn you for me? Is hit not your study to know, whether the soul of
man be mortal or immortalle? The truth of this hard question I now shall
learn: and now shall I see the truth of all our dowtes of heaven and of god.

Thus talking with his friends he came to the place of execution, and there a
little, whylest other were hedded, he stood still in a musing dumpte. What
think you now good Canius, quod one of his friends? Whereupon now muse you so
ernestly? Mary (quod he) I have determynedde with my self to mark well,
whether in this short pange of death my soul shall perceive and feel, that he
goes out of my body. This point I fully entende to take heed of: and if I
can, I will surely bring you and the rest of my fellows word, what I felt,
and what is the state of our souls.

Here was a wonderful caulme stomach in ye myddest of so stormy a tempest, this
man's mind was worthy of an ever lasting life, that was not only to the
death studious of knowledge, but also in the self death found occasion of
learning. It was not possible for any man's mind to continue his study
longer, or to a ferther point than this noble philosopher did.

This story and certain other like, maken me often to reason with my self,
what a strength of knowledge is in man's brain, to search and to find by him
self the truth, if he enforce his wits to learn. For this Canius and many
other were not taught of Christ, as we now be, they had not the rules of
faith, the which show the vndoubtefulle way to come to the perfyghte
knowelege of all preuy misteres, they were not comforted with the preaching of
gods son to set lyttel by this life as we now be. They were not plucked
to conceive a love of virtue above nature: as the holy scripture draws us
from this world to the beholding of an other place, where virtue receives her
crown. Wherefore to me hit is no small cause of marueiling, when I here such
ensamples of natural men, that by them self could in such a manner rise
above their nature, in setting little by that thing, that naturallye every
creature most abhors and fears (for death is the thing that in this
world by nature is made most doubtful, most terrible, most heinous, and
most worthy to be fered, to be eschewed, and by all means, ways, gynnes, or
craft to be escaped) To here then a natural man, without the teching of god,
to rise up in his fantasy above nature, to judge of death far other wise
than nature teaches him, to despise the durance in this life, when he knows
no certaynte of none other world, to use the strength and might of the spirit
ageynste the puisant power of all tyrants: It seems to me a wonderful thing,
and more wonderful the same should be, if I saw not written in holy scripture,
how that from the first creation of Adam, the goodness of god has been so
greatte toward mankind, that he has given us always sufficient grace, to
know the right, to se the hye majesty of virtue, to find out the true
dignite of the soul, to perceive the vanyte of this present life, and finally
to understand wherein stondethe the pleasure of god, and wherein stands his
displeasure. Ever by gods mere goodness man knew what was well to be done,
and what was contrary yuelle to be done. It is a law written in the heart of
man with the finger of god in our creation, to be enduced by reason to praise
always virtue, and to think sin worthy of disprayse. The mind of man has a
grace to see farther than the body syghte can attain to, the mind of man
feleth more subtyllye than our five wits can aproche to, the loss of bloudde
or of breath is a small trifell in the minds consideration, when the mind
uses his own clear syghte, and is not blinded with the darkness of the
body, the whcihe stomblethe at every straw in this world. Every mot
choketh a worldly man. ^orld^^ ^an.
Every litel sownde makes a worldly man trimble and shake. I call a worldly
man him that gives al his care to use his wits in this world, that creapeth
upon such things as be seen, hard, felt, tasted, and smelte, that clymeth
not in no consideration above the myste of this valeye. The most part of men
ever have been of this weak sort and yet stylle the most part of men is
the same. This world ever has his multitude, that honoreth, worshippeth, and
magnifieth nothing beside this short life, and those things that pertayne to
this life. Yet ageyn ever has there benne some and stylle there be some, that
play the philosophers, the which studied to know the dignities and
worthynesses of every thing, how much it should be esteemed, valurid, or
regarded of us, the which labourith to pycke out in every thing what is
good and what is naught. Spirit^ men.
Men of this sort be called spiritualle men. For you must know, that a
tayllour, a shomaker, a carpenter, a boot man, without both learning and
orders, may be spiritual, whenne a master of art, a doctor of divinity, a
deane, a bishop both with his cunninge and dignities may be temporal, seeing
the true diffinition of a spiritual man is to be one, in whom the mind and
spirit chefelye rules. Like wise the temporal man is he, Temporal me^*
in whom this present time of this traunsitorye life has most rome. Thus I
say spiritualle men have ever seen the truth, to ponder and valor
euery-thyng in this world accordyngely. And as to the temporalle mind
nothing seems sweter than to live here, so the spiritual mind fyndeth
swetenes in death, by the which this life ends. For like as the prince of
this world never agreethe with god, nor yet the body with the soul, nor the
earth with heuyn: so he that studieth for this time, has clean contrary
opinions to him that follows the spirit. And as the temporalle man says,
hit is a pleasante thing to live here, and a bitter thing it is to dye: so
the spiritual man thinks it a bitter time to endure the space of this life,
and much joy he conceyueth by the ryddance of the soul from the heavy burden
of this body.

Of these contrary opinyons yo ushall less maruayle, when we have a little
considered the thing it self, what should be death, the which one part of
us so much fears, and an other sort sets so little by the same: and so
by a short process you shall see, whether the said Canius be more worthy of
praise for his little regardyng the deedly punyshement than is Frances
Philippe, Franci^ Philip.
that within few years passed was put to execution with us for treason, the
which dyed so cowardelye, in so greatte panges of fear, that he seemed
extracte from his wits, scante for quaking and trymbling the wreche could
speak one word. The few words that he could with much stutterynge sownde,
were only in the declaration of his despair, nor nothing was seen nor hard
of him, but weeping, lamenting, wryngynge of his hands, with bannynge the
hour and day of his birth, contynually sighinge, as though his heart should
have burste for sorrow.

The difference of these affectes will hereafter be (I think) playner to you,
when we have a little more spoken in this matter. For now good John^, I will
crepe a little nygher to your desire, the which you have, of learning the way
to dye well.

THIS DIENGE well is in effect to dye gladlye. ^o dye ^yll.
For who so ever dies gladlye, he departethe from this life in a sure hope to
live again, being now weary of this world: but another this hope of the life
to come, nor this werynes of the life present, can make in any man a glad
heart to dye. Onles he be one that has lived well here. For in death there can
be no gladness, except therbe a full trust of opteynynge the reward of
virtue, partelye by the trust and faith of a good mind, partly by the mercy
of god, that fulfilleth ever our insufficiency, if we bring ought with us
worthi of his favor. For gods grace supplieth, where our power lacks, if
hit so be that our souls appear before him in an apparel mete for his
presence, the which apparelle requires a perfect faith, and an ernest will of
doing well, al though we have not always done well.

The mercy of god never failethe him, that fully trusts in it: But a full
trust, can not be without the strength of charity, the which ever burns in
the love of doing good: and faith can not be perfect, onles there be good
works, ye which may stur up and quycken in us faith to take a believe, that
by Christ's acts our final demerites may grow to be perfect. Thus a chereful
heart, beset with faith, hope, and charity, takes no pensifulnes in the
remembrance of death, but rather it reioysethe to remember, that by death it
shall pass to life, never more to dye.

Wherefore to dye well ever, is to dye gladly, either to be rid from the
bonds of this prison, or to opteyne the lybertye of heaven: both ways comes
from a good life passed: so that surely no man can dye well, that lives not
well, for ever death is a sorrowful thing to the yuell liver, by cause he has
nothing to lay before the mercy of god, whervppon he may take hope and
trust to be made worthy of the sure life, in the which death medleth not.
Now than if we can gether, what may let us to be glad of death, and what
will bring us to a desire of dyenge gladlye, we shall by the same pycke out
the way to dye well. For in my mind these.ii. be always one, to dye well,
and to dye gladly.

The glad desire of dyinge is let chefely by two things: Two l^tes to d^^
gladly.
one by the fear of death, the the other by the love of this life. The tone of
these follows the the other. For he that loves this life, fears to dye: and he
that fearethe to dye, loves this life. Yet we may speak of each part by him
self, and first let us assaye the greatteste, the which is the fear of
death: than next after we will come to the the other, the which is the love of
this life. If these two blocks be taken out of our stomakes, we shall find an
easy and a plain way to the end of our purpose. For who someuer another
fereth to die, nor loves to tarry in this life, he is redye always to dye
gladdely. But to perform my promis, let me say somewhat of the said fear
and love.

First and chefely the fear of death takethe away all gladness of dyinge,
and thereby after mine opinyon, no man that dies ferefully can dye well: so
that to learn the way of dyenge well we must learn the way to die without
fear. And yet how I should prove, that death is not to be feared, I can not
well tell, saying the hole power of nature shows, that of all things death
is most fearful: and to reason ageynste nature, it were parauenture not so
hard as vain. For what can reason prevail, if nature resist? It is a
thing to far above man's power to strive or to wrastelle with nature, her
strength passes the might of our will, what help someuer we take of reason
or of authority: another counsel nor commandment has place, where nature
does her vttermooste. It is none excuse to say, that men fear death
because they be loathe to leave the commodities of this life, or by cause they
fear the threteninges of purgatory and of hell, or else because they think
upon the sore paineful panges, the which be in the time of death. Nay these
things make not chefely the fear of dying, it may well be that of such
things the fear is increased and made more fulle, but there is a fear before
and bysyde all these things, the which fear nature (I say) gives, as it is
well seen in young chyldern, that have no remembrance another of this life, nor
of the deadely panges, nor of heaven, purgatory, or hell. When we in sport
threten to cast them heedlynge out at some hye wyndowe, they quake, trymble,
and ware pale, showing plain and evident tokens of a natural fear toward
death. And though by learning, or by a curragious mind, sum few amongst
us, seem little or nothing to be moved with death: yet thensample of these
few can not take away the truth, that nature in all the rest works. For
how many be there that only to eschew death suffer all wretchedness, all
beggarie, all pain* in pyckynge up crommes of nouryshement to abide a while in
this light: And the more shamfully, that men for the most part fear to dye,
the greatter proffe there is, that such extreme points of fere against all
shame should not in so many daily appear, when death approaches, onles by nature
some just fear were of the same. For as the excess of fear comes by
weakness of heart and lack of stomach, the which is worthy to be rebuked for
shameful cowardnes: so there is a mean measure offere in death, that may be
reckened honest and just, because nature makes it necessary.

Look you how both old and new stories keep in memory their names that
appeared to dye without fear: as who say, it is to be written for a wonder and
like to a miracle, being a thing beside the course of nature, to here of a
man that can in death over come the passion of fear, as we wonder to here of
some that live without sustinance of meat or of drink. Because I say hit is
a naturalle thing to fear death, we greattely marvel of them that fear it
not. Yet reason says, we should not fear that thing, the which we know
not, and only yuel is worthy to be feared. But saying we know not death, we
may well by reason doubt, whether it be yuell or good. And now before we
speak any more of fear, let us a little consider death by it self, what
thing it is of his own nature, and whether by it self it be good or yuell.

We call ones death the losyng a sonder and departing of.ii. things, What
de^^ is.
the soul from the body: the which departing no man can escape, but
necessarilye dye all we must that be borne in this world. When the body by
any violence loses his sensis, and is spoiled from the quick use of his
principal parts, than departs the soul from him: and in manner the body
leaves the soul, before the soul leauethe the body. For it is not the soul
by him self that goes from the body, but it is the body by his forsakynge
life, that causethe the soul to depart. For where life is not, there the
soul can not abide: and as the body is lively before the soul enters, so
the same dody is deadly before the soul departs. Bloudde in his measure and
temperance between cold and hot, keeps life in the body: the which blood by
innumerable wais of chanses may be altered and constrained to leave his
nouryshyng, whereupon shall ensue the loss of life, and than streighte after
follows the souls goinge away. For well you know, that the soul is one
thing, ^he soul.
and life is an other. Wheresomeuer the soul is, ^he life.
there is life. But it is not true, that where someuer life is, there is the
soul. For trees and herbs have a part of life, and a more part of life is
in muskylles, oysters, and worms: yet a more perfect life is in these bestes
and birds, the which have amongeste them some more some less of lyfes
perfetnes. But though in them life, the which rests in the use of the
sensis, that be to here, to see, to feel, to smelle, to taste, and in swyfte
mouynge is a great work of life, the which things I say, though they be in
the perfection amongist these beasts: yet the hand of god has not given to
any creature living in the earth water or air, to have beside life a soul:
the which is a thing formed after his lykenes, saving only to man, whom he
has put here to rule over things created, like as he reuleth in heaven over
al. It is the creatours will, that nothing in this world shall have a soul,
but man alone: the which soul brings with him the use of reason, a thing
that may teach us both that we have a soul, and that god is he the which
has thus made us to be in this world his chief and most excellent
creature. Reason does thus teach us, yet beside reason we be herein better
instructed by our master the son of god, so that now we can not doubt, that
in us is a thing, the which can not dye. But of surety we evidently se,
not only by reason, but much better by belefe, that the image of god in us is
perpetual and can not not feale any corruption, oneles such as our froward
will may give, whereof grows sin, that is the living death of the soul.
But let us comme to our mattier.

To speak of this bodyly death we now have a greatte fordell in comparison of
some old clerks, that were in doubt, whither there was in man any soul
beside life, more than is in an horse or a gose. They were in doubt whether any
thing of man remained after death, that might feel or perceive either joy or
pain. For as to the faynyng poets, that spoke of delicious gardins for good
spirits, and of diverse sore turmentes for ungracious sowles after this life,
most part of the old clerks gave no manner of credence: and they that believed
other an heaven or an hell, to be ordained for men's sowles, yet they so believed,
that much doubtfulnes was in their belefe, in asmoch as their reason suffised
not to find out the certeyntie of goddis works. From the which doubtis the
infallible doctrine of Christ has now delivered us al, so that as many as
will give ear to the voice of god, they can not mistruste their knowledge, but
that without question both we have a soul, and the same soul is immortal, a
thing that neither in this world nor out of this world can peryshe or feale
any point of death, to lack by the same any jot of his being. I say our
souls contynually without end shall evermore endure, the which be created and
made by god after the form of god. What form that is, it is as hard to show
as it passes our capacity to know what god is, whose shappe and facion our
souls bears.

Now than what shall we say of death? the which by him self is not unlike
to an endless sleep of the body, whereof the body lies without power to use
any sense, being after life like to a stone, that never had life. Wheth^^
death (...) self b^ good (...) yuel.
This change of the bodies state, whether by hit self hit be good or yuelle,
it is an hard thing for us to judge, seeing the trowth is, that no man living
expertlye knows what thing death is: and to determyne of a thing unknown,
hit seems a presumption full of folly. Therefore without any certain
determination, we may for our lernyng debate with reason the thing, as much
as shall be within the bonds of our capacytye, Death not go^^
and first if death were by him self good, it should be no trespace for one
man to kill him self or an other. For in gyuynge to other a good thing or in
taking to our self a good thing, can be no rebuke. Where the deed is good,
there is well doing in the doer: But ever, not only by Christ's teaching,
but also by natural reason manslaughter has be^ iuged an abominable sin.
Wherefore it can not be, that by him self death is a good thing. And again
an yuel thing it is not. ^^athe is (...) yuel.
For Christ dyed wyllyngely, the which will in god and gods son could
not have consented to death, if death had been a thing of his own nature
yuelle. Nor yet hit could not be, that virtue should be praised in the glad
sufferynge of death as now be crowned in heaven many holy marters, the which
couragyouselye took upon them the death. And surely it should not be the
naturalle end of man's course in this life, if it were a thing, by it self
nawght. For yuell magrye man's hedde, is never put to him, as it should be if
death were yuell: the which necessaryly man is constrained to suffer. Death^
another good n^^ yuell.
Therefore it seems true, that death considered alone by hit self, is another
good nor yuell. But when we here of dyinge well or dying yuell, or of a good
death or an yuel death: it is not death by it self that is spoken of, but
rather the circumstances, the manner, the fashyon, the cause of death, or that
goes before death, or that follows death. These be the things that gives
and takes this name of goodness or yuelnes, As to say that death is good, by
cause hit endethe this synnefull life, and is the mean to pass from this
world to heaven: or else when we say, that Judas dyed an yuel death, it is not
meant that the departing of Judas soul from the body was yuell, but the manner
of his dyeng, was the yuel thing, his cursed desperation, his dampnable
mystruste of gods mercy, his dispitefull refusing grace, made his death
yuell. The two thieves, he at the right hand, and he at the left, both dyed
one kind of death, both nailed to crosses, both worthy for their trespaces:
yet it is truth, that the tone died well in a good death, the the other dyed
naught in an yuel death, not for the death by it self, wherein was no
difference, but for the diversity of their.ii. minds in taking of death.
The tone repented him, and asked mercy, whereof he died graciously, the the other
continued in his blasphemynge god, the which stubburne stomach in sin
caused him to dye ungraciously. It is a thing that follows death, and is not
in death it self, whereupon we look, when we judge to be a good end or an yuel.
For by the manner of him that dies, we conjecture the state and condition of
the soul: the which if we find in our fantasy to be in an yuelle case, as in
the danger of goddis curse, we call death yuel, whereby the soul passed to
come to such sorrow. And contrary, if we think the soul to be in the favor
of god, or to be redye to take mercy, we call death good, the which conueyde
the soul to his blys. So that by it self death remains indifferent to be
judged of diverse considerations, other a good end or an yuel end.

Now than we may here say, he that fears death, o fear ath.
shows him self to be in doubt of his souls state, or else to be certain
that his soul is in goddis curse. The which ferefull mind is in them that
have so passed this present life, that either they have done nothing, whereby
they may hope to be rewarded in heaven: or else they have done so vngratiously,
that they can have no trust of escaping damnable punyshement, specially if he
be a christened man. For if he be not christened, and fears to dye, he
declares him self to have none higher thought of life, than the dumb beasts
have, the which make by the law of nature so much of their lyfes, that they
can mind nothing beside, and the loss of their blood makes with them an
hoole conclusion of their being. Wherefore beasts may justly fly and fear
death, as the worste thing that can happen to their state: but a man does
him self to much wrong, if he think him self in no better condition than be
these beasts. It is not in the dyuels power to do manne so great hurt as this
false imagination does. And surely unworthy he is to have in him the power of
understanding, of thynkyng, of prouydynge, of learning, of teaching, of
diuisyng, of reme^bringe, of loving, of hatyng, of resonyng, of counsaylynge,
of infinite moo gifts, who someuer iugeth him self to have no more than a
swyne or an ape has: Look as by the five wits the body knows this or that:
so by these powers of mind, the soul walkith to his understanding, and of an
heavenly mattier is made this marvelous thing, that dwells in man's body for
a time, to be made worthy other of everlasting life, or of everlasting death,
for the damned soul lives in death without end.

But yet what shall we say to the place we left before, ^eathe is ^ot to be
^eared.
that naturally death is feared? Let it be the workynge of nature, yet I see
not but the strength of man's mind fully fastened in faith, may victoriousely
over come all this fear, as we find many ensamples of men that so have done,
not only of them that have benne helped with faith, but also of many
paynymes, the which took a courage to despise death, only of a mighty and
valiant mind to have reason subdewe in them the power of all affects.

I find, a lernedde paynyme wrote that we should another care for life by it
self, nor yet for death by it self. He says that we should care to live well
and to dye well, and let life and death pass without care. For life is not
good, but to live well is good.

If paynymes have this right consideration of life and of death, what shame is
hit for Christened men to care for death? seeing Christ whose words can not but
be true, so vehemently forbyddeth us the same, that paynymes saw by reason to
be done. Again, seeing this death is so common a thing daily in our syghte,
why should we we fear it. Things that syldom chanse may stir up by their
rarenes great fear: things that be ever at hand should by their famylartytie
and custom nousel us to set little by them. Farthermore he that fears
death coming to him, would fear by lykelyhode death, if hit could be with
him, when death is such a thing, that other it is not yet come, or else it is
paste. For no man can say, that death is present. So this fear can never be
joined with the thing that is feared. Again that thing that every man may
do, no man lightly does, that thing that no man can help him self in,
that for the most part all men do. No man almooste studyeth or cares how
well he may live, but how long he may live every man museth, when the troth
is, that it might of all men be opteyned to live well, and no man can further
himself to live long. A like frowardnes is in our remembrance of death, we
busilye labor and enforce to dream of death, the which thing we can not
do: we might find the way to dye well, and this thing we will not do. This
madness John^ I trust, you will put of, and fear not death, the which you
can not escape: But fear an yuell death, the which you may fly.

Among many commodytes of death I reken one chefely to be set by, that it
is good to dye well, to escape thereby thoccasion of lyuinge yuell, and surely
he dyethe well, that for such an intent takes death gladly.

More over consider you well, and you shall see, that in him the which is
curious to live, fortune has a great rule, but in him that can dye gladdely,
fortune has no power. And what a wretchedness it is to be under fortunes
vanity, I report me to them, whom we behold daily diuersely vexed as well
with immoderate lusts of to much welthe, as with passing sorrows of to much
trouble.

Therefore to be out of fortunes thraldom set little by this life, that is
to say, fear not death.

It pleased me to read a paynyms opinion, that said, He is as foolyshe that
fears death, as he that fears to be old. For as after yo^ge age folowith
the old: so after old age straight follows death. And a mad man's point it is
to fear death, saying things uncertain, the which may chance and may not
chance, be only worthy of fear, but things certain without doubt coming,
must be looked for, not feared. The necessity of deaths coming is equal and
without remedy, so that other to complain, or to fly at death hit is a
plain madness. For who can complain to be in the condition, in the which
indifferently al men of this world be?

And again if the pain of dienge were a thing to make death fearful, first
it should be a comfort to remember, that after the pain of death, there
shall be no more pain, and as Epicure says, If it be an extreme soore pain,
it is short. For no vehement pain can be long. This were inoughe to make
death not much to be cared for. Every way death is a thing never to be feared
of a wise man, and never to be out of mind both with good men and wise men.

And as for the fear of death were not he (I pray you) a stark fool, that
would weep and wayle because he was not born to this life a thousand years
agoo? no less a fool is he who so ever soro with because he can not live a
thousand years to come. For these.ii. sayings be even and equally true: you
were not, you shall not be. So that one mind should be in us, as well to
remember we shall not be, as to remember we ones were not. It is no new thing
to dye, our fathers our grantfathers, our great foresiers be gone the way, that
both we shall go, and all that follow us must come the same.

More over in as much no labor, wit, craft, nor diligence preuayleth to
escape death, no power, no riches, no authority helps, but all
indifferentely be called of death, all without choice must follow the train of
death, no corner can hyde us, no walls can defend us, no way nor mean, no
entreaty, no prayer, no suite, nothing under heaven can keep us from deaths
hand. Let us than take a lusty courage of this desperation, saying there is no
remedy: let us manfully go to it.

The most fereful and cowarde bestes, that of nature be made to fly, when they
be driven in to such straytes, that they can rounne no further, they* turn
them, and with the power of their might they enforce to escape. ^^^essitie.
And surely it is ever seen, that those enemies be ever most terrible, the
which be driven by extreme force to fight. For necessite corrects and
chastises our hearts much more sharply, than virtue can do. Whereof a desperate
mind shall do greatter acts, or at the leest no less than a valiant stomach
can do. In this necessity of death we now be all, it is vain for us to fly
or to ron away, our fear can find no place of flight. Let us imagine the
truth as in deed it is, that we be al betrayed to dye. It is so John, that
without doubt we be all kept in a streyte corner to be rydde of this life.
There is no hope of remedy. All this people that you se, how long think you
shall be. It shall not be long, but all shall by the course of Nature be
called hens to death, and there hid. It makes no force neither of the day
nor of the place. There needs no question to be asked either where or when, al
must come to one end, other sooner or later, other before or after? What now
John? does not he seem unto you a shameful cowarde, and a fearful wretch,
a plain kikkes without an heart, that with much intercession, with many
prayers desyrethe a lyttelle delay of death? If you saw one stand in the
number of many that should be hedded, making most instant suit to the
hangman, that he might be ye last that should put his heed to the block, would
you not say, fie upon such a wretched knave, that so much fears death,
being now at the point to dye, whether he will or no? and yet this manner
now is with us all. For the most part it is greattely valured with us to
dye somewhat behind other, none is so nygh death by age, that desires not to
differ from this day until to morrow, when in troth such a weak mind is
in effect deed and buried long before the body fails. Lift up therefore
your heart only because there is no remedy, desire not to fly when there is no
place to run to, let necessite give you a courage, if al other strength
decayith. What a stomach was in the said Canius? of the which sort the stories
make mention to have been many amongst the paynymes.

A tyrante fierselye thretened Theodore the philosopher, that he should dye,
and that his body should lie to crows unburied: wourshyppefully said,
answered this Theodore to the tyrante: Thou may be proud of thy power. By
cause one ounce or two of bloudde is in thy hands. And as for the burialle of
my body, O how folyshe thou art, if thou reken it to be any dyfference,
whether I rotte under or above the ground.

Of such coragious aunsweres the stories of paynymes be fulle. But much more
the books of Christened men be fulle of such ensamples.

Christ's faith made innumerable strong champions, invincible stomachs, not
only toward death but ageynste all the cruel devises that could be found to
make death more paynefulle than death. The holy martyrs were so far from
all points of fear, that they seemed to enforce and to strive to have death
given them. Their myrthe was to suffer the horrible persecution of tyrants. No
reason nor lernyng could work such strengthnes of hearts in men's minds, as
the faith of Christ brought.

Look how sayncte Paul reioyseth in his troubles, how he glories in his
scourgynges, whyppynges, in his prisonment, in his fetters, all his life seemed
to be a contynuall death, yet his heart never gave over, but wexed by the
peynes daily stronger and stronger, to suffer a fresh. Fear of death was so
far from his mind, that he was glad to remember how ones he should dye,
and thereby pass to Christ's presence, whose quarrel he defended in this world
with all his might and power.

Look upon saint Laurence, lyinge broylynge upon the burning cooles, as merye
and as quiet as though he lay upon sweet reed roses: When the turmentours
turned his body upon the fiery gredy ernes, he bad the cruel tirant eat of
his burned side, whiles the the other part was a rostynge. This saying declared
that this ho^y marter feared no death.

How many thousand^ martyrs suffered incredyble peynes of slayinge with
hooks they skyn from the flesh, of scrapynge with tyle stones the flesh from
the bones, of rentynge and tearing membre from member with horses, with bowed
branches of trees, of beatynge with whippes tylle the bowelles fall out, of
hanging, of burning, of Crucyfyinge, of infynite strange and new deuyses
for pain? How many I say, suffered all that cruelle tyrants could imagyn
either with hand, fire, or ironne, rather than they would ons deny them self
to be of Christis profession? When it was proclaimed, that who so ever would
say he was Christened, he should cruelly be put to death. There passed no day,
without a great nu^bre of them that boldly spoke tho words, of the which
should follow so blouddye a slaughter. This was a manifest token, that fear
of death had no manner of place with our blessed martirs, the which with a
constante boldness defied and despised the mighty, cruel, and fierce emperors,
their courage to dye overthrew the ragyng madness of tyrants. The cause of this
myrthe in so pitious martyrdomes was, that this blessed men knew, how Christ
another could nor would deceive them, but yt for their lyttel regarding of this
life, they should opteyne an other life, where their joy should never have
another change, nor decrease, nor end. Therefore my good Walker, mystruste you
not Christ, whose doctrine the heaven and the earth has by innumerable
miracles, this many hundredth years approuyd and confyrmed to be true, the
blood of so may saints have witnessed the same: and the devils with all the
damned spirits, so surely believe the truth of Christ's teaching, that they
trymble and quake thereat. Be not moved with the common ensample of the hole
world, though both spiritual and temporal men, though the pope with all his
cardinals bishops and prestes, though the princes with all their gentylmen
and subjects mangnifye, esteem, love, noryshe, and by all means cheryshe this
life, yet believe you the troth, and think all the world false, where Christ's
saying agrees not with that the world does. If it were possible, that you
saw the angels of heaven live contrary to the preaching of Christ, yet
ageynste them all believe the son of god, and love not to abide in this life,
when Christ calls you hense, make a small valor of this present plesures,
wha^ Christ says all be vanites, and may be turned to endless sorrows: Regard
no honor, no promotion here, when Christ says, the place of honor is in
heaven, and here is none adua^cement, that is not both shame, and also may be
cause of a perpetualle wretchedness. Dispice the ease and rest that these riches
brings, in as much Christ says, that of them be taken many impedimenntes
and lettes to enter into the sure quietness of blessed souls. Think no place
to be for your abydyng in this world, when christ says, here is not your
country, but your father and your dwelling place is in heaven. Haast therefore
hence. This is to say be willing to forsake this strange countray. And
saying the way to your homewarde lies by death, take a courageous stomach to
die, and dye gladly, that you may dye well. Believe I say Christ, and you shall
think it paynefull to be in this life. Believe Christ and you shall be gredye
to be partaker of the heavenly joys, whereupon will follow a plesante
remembrance of death, by the which you shall depart from your pain to
that joy, the which you desire. And hereof is made a glad dyinge, the which
I still name a good dieng. Thus if we can take this fear away we be well
forward, and hereof will easyly ensue the rest, that is to dye gladlye. It is
a true saying, that who so ever fears death, he shall never do a deed worthy
for a living man. Therefore if hit were but only for lyfes sake, it is our
part to despise the fear of death.

Beside this fear of death, Love this ly^^
the love (I say) of this life soore hyndereth the gladness of dyinge, no man
dies gladly, that estemethe much this life. He that rekeneth in this world
him self happy, when he has gotten riches, possessions, authority,
promotion, a ryall state, a princelyke court, abundaunce of welthy fare, a
rule and power both to auaunce his friend, and to undo his foo: this man I say
that glories in his fantasye for these and such other things, can not but
with much sorrow depart hence. To this ma^s heart ye remembrance of death is a
ever grievous thought, his mind can not but lament when he sees the
necessite to be pluckid and drawn from these commodities, in the which
rests the joy, pleasure, and gladness of his mind, he has so steadfastly
accustomed him self to take this world for heaven, that it will not synke in
his brain, to hope of an other heaven: he has so corrupted his taste with
thinkyng this life to be sweet, that needs it must be a bitter thing to make an
end of all his pleasures, and in this case be not only they that have this
world at their will, but also they be in the same case that have naught, and
be gredy of having. As much loves he this world that would feign be rich,
as he that is rich. It is not the having nor the lackyng of abundance in
goods, that makes a sorrowful heart in the remembrance of death, but it is
the mind that valureth and pondreth these present goods to be of a great
price, and worthy to be tarid for. This mind I say, as well in a co^muner, as in
a king, as well in a yoman as in a lord, as well in an hermit, monk, or
friar, as in a merchant plowma^ or vacabunde, as well in beggars, as in rich
men, is the thing that causes sorrow in dying. And gladly no man dies, that
loves the welthe of this life. Wherefore the lerning to die well requires
necessary a lesson, how much the goods of this world be worthy to be
regarded. And let the truth have in your stomach his place, so that if it be
true, that the things of this life be worthy to be loved and to be cared for:
than love you them and care for them. If the truth be other wise, change your
mind, and another love these said things, nor care for them. Of the truth in
this matter no man can dout, that believes Christ, whom if you think to be
god, you must also think it all troth that he says. It can not be otherwise
then Christ testifies, whose preching ever exhorts us to wylful poverty,
the which is another to love ye goodis of this world though we have the^, nor to
care for them, though we have them not: only by Christis teching we should care
for the kingdom of heaven, the which stands in the clennes of conscience,
where ever is a place and a seete for the hie majesty of the holy trinity.
All other things necessary for this life be not to be cared for, nor yet to be
valured more then their dignities requirith: that is to say, no more tha^ is
convenient for instruments and toles to ye pilgremage and passage of this
strange country. For in this world we have no home, our father dwells not in
his region, we be in this life out of our propre country, we should have home
ward to the joyful presence of our own father, yt abides us in heaven, the
which has a greatter charge over us his chyldern here, than he has over the
beasts or birds, the which by his only provision without their care, lacks
nothing for their necessity, Much more (says our master Christ) if we
turned all our care to godwarde, we should not be destitute of such things as
necessarily this present life needs. And where Christ so streytly commands
alms deeds, saying, that who so ever helps not a poor man in his need, he
will not help him nor yet know him at the fearful day of dome, in so much
that it pleases Christ to say, that every poor man represents the person of
gods son, so that he that regards not a poor man, despises the son of god.
In this doctrine what think you? Whether does Christ command alms deades
for the poor man's sake, that should take alms, or for the rich man's sake,
that should give alms? In taking alms I find no virtue, and needs it is a
thing parteynynge to virtue, that Christ would have done. Therefore surely it
is for the rich man's sake. For it is Christ's lesson, that techeth us to have
no inward love to these casual goods, the which we must put from us, where
we see them that want such things. And a proof of a perfect stomach is
taken in him, that utterly leauyth and forsakethe all this world to follow
Christ: the which beddeth the rich man, that will be perfect, to go and
sell all that he has, and deal all to poor men. For as hard a thing it is
to pluck through the small nedels eye a greatte caboull rope, as to bring a
rich man in at heuens wycket: not that it is impossible for a rich man to be
saved, but by cause it is hard for a man in a whelthy state to keep his mind
in a due order to godward, without being drowned or infected by the contagious
lusts and corrupted plesures, the which follows the fortunate life of this
world. And nothing is more in a rich man to be feared, than lest he set his
mind to love his riches, the which love can never stand with the pleasure of
god.

Remember the saying of thappostelle saynct Paul: The love of riches is the
rote of all syn. Therefore let not this love grow in your heart, from whense
should spring the fruit of damnation. Here of my friend walker, I trust you se,
that without question it is Christ's will to have us lyttel regard this life,
and much less to regard all the commodities apperteining to this life. It is
god that says, The losinge of life in this world, is the fynding of life in a
another world: and that weeping, sorrow, pain, tribulation, pouertye, shame,
persecution, and finally death in this life, is laughinge, joy, pleasure, ease,
riches, honor, quietness, and fynallye life, in the kyngedome of god.

Contrary the same master testifiethe, that myrthe, welthe, rest, glory,
abundance, strength, liberty, rule, and finally life in this world, is
lamentyng, grefe, trouble, slander, myserye, wekenes, thraldom, bondage, and
finally death in gods reygne. In this tenor and key sowneth al our holy
scripture. Wherefore my think it is enough to prove to a Christened man, that
the welthy state of this world is vain and ieoperdous, by cause Christ so
teaches and preaches, and surely a greater proof by reason for this matter
with you I will not use at this time. Let Christ be believed, that beddeth
you gether a tresure in heaven, where your riches shall besure from mothes,
worms, and rustynge, from thieves, fire, and water. If your treasure be ones
couched in heaven, streyghte your heart shall also be there: and so shall you
take no pleasure of taryinge in this life, but rather it shall be werines and
tediousnes to you to be here absente from your hearts desire, the which always
stycketh and cleueth to your treasure in heaven, If hit so be that after
Christ's consaille you have there put al your goods and substance. If another
we fear death nor love this life, I think the chief impedimentes and lettis
of our purpose to dye well, be taken away, and now we may a litel devise, what
thing may help us in our journey after these stones and blocks be gone.

In my mind nothing shall further us more to a glad death, What dreth glad
(...)
than shall an ordinate life, that is to live in a just and a due manner after
one rule and one form, ever awake in a quick remembrance of death, as though
every hour were our last space of induraunce in this world. When you rise in
the morning, determine so to pass ye day following as though at night a grave
should be your bed. Let every day be reckened with you as your last. This mind
shall make you bestow well your life, the which is to you uncertain, how
long it shall continue: ye rather in doubt you be, how sone or how shortly
life shall be taken from you. What so ever you take in hand bethink you, that
before you end it, death may oppress you workynge. This is the thing that
Christ would have us do, when he so often warns and admonishes us to take heed and to look about us, because another the day nor the hour of our
calling is certain to us. Therefore it is our part, of a time so much
uncertain to make a time sure, certain, and present, that we never be taken
unawares: by the which means we shall gladly suffer death seeing it is a thing so
long before prepared. For why should it be a strange thing to reken every day
to be the last? I see not but that thing, that happens and chanseth to some
of us, might come to any of us, and like wise all might have that that a few
has. There is no cause to deny, but as well this day you or I might dye, as we
see this day some other deed: and though we be not deed this day, yet it is
trowthe that this day we dye, and dailye sithen our first birth we have died,
in as much that daily some part of our life, has been diminished, and ever as
we have grown, so ever life has decresed. We were babys, we were chyldern, we
were boys, we were young men, all these ages be lost, and till yesterdaye all
time past is gone and lost. This same self day that we now live, is divided
and parted with death. Still without ceassing we approach to death by thexpence
and wast of life. Thus dyinge we always be, though death be not always upon us.
Conceive than this ordinate life in your mind, and bestow your time whilst
you have the time. Above all things ^^y idelnes, the which is a thing both
to the body and to the soul. like a kankerynge rustines, and as an earynge
consumption, hit wastes to naught both virtue and strength. A man the which
is in the life that you be, may sone be corrupted with this contagion of
idelnes, if he be not well ware, and diligently enforce him self to the
contrary. For I se you have a master so affectionate and given to you, yt he
will another suffer you lack any thing mete for your health or quietness, but
also he had rather forbear his own commodities, than for his service you
should be disquieted: So tender he is in all points over you, that if you
ponder well his state and your own condition, you shall find your life better
defended from all storms against the minds rest, than your masters condition
is. He is in such a syghte of the world, that necessarily his study and care
must move him to satysfye the greatte expectation, that his hole country has
of his towardnes. And fortune on the the other side, is so contrary to him, that
needs he must by wisdom procure, with no small thought, how he may in penury
maynteyne the outward face of his reputatyon: so that for your quietness his
mind often labors, where you may do what you will without fear of the
worlds displeasure, without fear of lacking or not having enough for your
necessarys, and much more than necessity requires. Labor have you none, but
that may be rather taken for a pastime, thought to plese your master you need
not take, in as much you may be assured, that he can not nor will not for the
time of his life change his affection toward you. Therefore I say it may be
fered in one of your state, lest idelnes should bread a foul slouens neste, the
which were enough to distroye all lustines of virtue, and to make you long
deed and buried in this world, before life forsakes you. For my good John^, I
will have you know and remember, that idelnes is called the grave of living
men: it is the thing, wherein life dies, and thereby your soul is twyse buried
in you, ons in your body, next in your slothe. The which vice in serving
men most reyneth, and the same is root of many vnthrysty thoughts, whereupon
folowethe a worse idelnes than the the other is. For it is an yuell ydelnes to do
no thing, but a worse ydelnes hit is to do not well. Such an ydel fellow
saint Chrysostomus calls a dissolatynge, or a void baityng place, wherinto
the dyuel entrith, as in to his own house by good right. For where virtue is
not exercised, there the enmy of grace claymith his rule, it is not now mi
purpose to show what you should do, yt you might not only fly idelnes, but also
be well occupied. This were a mattier inoughe for a another work. I have my
intent at this time, if you se that death is not to be feared, and that by
contynuall remembrance of death, you shall prepayre your self to dye gladlye
with a good will: the which you can not do, onles you be in hope of the
everlasting life, and this hope requires some trust in the clenes of a good
conscience, the which ever follows a gracious intent of liui^g well. So yt if
you live well, you shall dye well. And of the way to live well you ca^ not miss,
if you arm your mind to be strong against al suddennes of death. Pray ever
continually without cessing you must: but what is this continual prayer I
would you learned. For of prayer it is but one fynal portion, the saying of
psalms or axing with words of god his grace, the very prayer is to be ever
well minded, to be ever in charity, to have ever the honor of good in
rememberance, to suffer no rancore, none ire, no wrath, no malice, no syn to
abide in your delight, but to be in a continual good thought, the which you may
keep whether you sleep or wake, whether you eat or drink, whether you feast
or fast, whether you rest or labor, and never paraue^ture you can pray better,
than wha^ you must give your self to serve your master, to whom ye course of
your life is due and bounde^ specially when god has given you such a master,
whom your service ca^ not plese without you be studyous to please god. For well
you see, yt with out virtue your service were to your master an unsavory
thing: but (as I have said) it is not now my purpose to apoint you the way of
living well: if you have hard inoughe to dye well, I have for my part now
said enough, and shortly by the same you shall of your self without farther
help find the way to live well. Now that by this I think my promysse
fulfilled, I will at this point bed you farewell, and I pray god give you a
strong courage to pass valy antly through death, to come from thence to
everlasting life, by the help and grace of our master and savior Christ, to
whom let us for ever more render al glory, praise, and honor. Amen.

At Paris the.x. day of Ianuarye.
Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. An. 1534. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


