THE SINNERS GVYDE.
A WORK CONTAIning the whole regiment of a Christian life divided into two
Books: WHEREIN SINNERS ARE RECLAIMED FROM THE BY-PATH OF VICE AND
destruction, and brought unto the highway of everlasting happiness.

COMPILED IN THE SPANISH TONGVE, BY THE LEARNED and reverend Divine, F. Jews
of Granada.

Since translated into Latin, Italian, and French.

And now perused, and digested into English, by FRANCIS MERES, Master of
Arts, and student in Divinity.

1. TIMOTHY. 4. verse, 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, which has
the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. AT LONDON,
Printed by James Roberts, for Paul Linley, and John Flasket, and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bear. Anno. Dom. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON KNIGHT: LORD Keeper of the
Great-Seale of England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel. (*)
IN the shore of the Sea Euxinus, in the land of Colchis, there stood a
Cyttie named Dioscurias, so much haunted of strangers, that, (as Pliny writes
by record of Thimostenes,) it was resorted unto of three hundred Nations of
distinct languages, and that the Romans for the better expedition of their
wares there, had at length lying in the same 130. Interpreters. Saint Jerome
testifies, that men in times past came to Rome from the furthest Coasts of
Spain and France, to see Titus Liuius, whose eloquence was famous throughout
the whole world. Certainly, famous and excellent was that City, that so many
resorted unto, and where the renowned Romans had so many Interpreters lying.
And without all question, admirable was the eloquence of Titus Liuius, that
fetched men from so far to see him. Then undoubtedly (Right Honorable) divine
and learned is this reverend Author F. Ludouicus Granatensis, who^ not only
the spacious Empire of the Latins, but Spain, France, and Italy, have
travailed to see, and tasting the honnyed sweetness of his celestial air, and
finding such supernatural and heavenly treasures in him, have not only com'd
to see him, but have sent thither their Interpreters, there to soiourne, for
the better transportation of his wares and commodities. Only his Meditations
in English, done by ANONYMVS. And his Manuell in the Germane tongue translated
by Philippus Doberniner.
Only, I wondered that England, whose Voyagers were never out-stript by any,
had so sparingly and slenderly visited this famous and renowned Divine: that
she, I say, as Germany had but only one Interpreter lying with him, seeing
that otherwhere she had such abundance of worthy Factors, and rich linguists.

Entering into consideration of the great scarcity of our Traffickers to so
rich a Mine, I discovered certain corruptions, which as dangerous Rocks
threatened shipwreck, to them that sailed unto him. The Poets feign, that a
Dragon kept the Golden-fleece, and yet that hindered not Jason from the
conquest of it: neither did Giants nor Monsters fright Hercules from his rich
spoils and glorious conquests. Cosmographers write, that in the Mountains of
Albania, and Hircania, Countries of Scythia, there are found the best and
freshest Emeralds, the purest Crystal, much gold and precious stones, but
these Mountains are encircled with huge woods, wherein are abundance of
fierce and cruel wild beasts, as Gryphons; Leopards, Tigers, Panthers, and
Dogs of that fiercenes and greatness, that they pull down Bulls, and slay
Lions. But as the Dragon amated not Jason, nor the Monsters amazed Hercules,
and as these Scythian dangers do not hinder men from seeking and finding these
earthly and terrestrial jewels: so should we not be discouraged in this
spiritual pursuit, for a few corruptions and dangers, remembering that all
wrytings, (the sacred Scriptures excepted, which are absolutely pure and
perfect) have a relish of their earthly and corruptible Authors. Nihil ex omni
part beatum, says Horace, and yet we must not do as Lycurgus did, who,
because the Grape was abused by pot companiors, cut down all the Spartan
Vines. For we find by experience, that this Argument Ab abusu ad non vsum,
from the abuse of good things to the abolishing of them, as it has bred
heresies and schisms in the Church: so also rebellions and treasons in the
Commonwealth. Plutarch says, that it had been better for Lycurgus to have
dug Wells and Fountains near unto the Vines, and as Plato counsels,
Insanum Deum alio sobrio repressum, that is, to take away the abuse by mixing
some quantity of water with it. Which gaging and moderation, as I have
performed in this interpretation, by removing corruptions, that as Rocks would
have endangered many: so if other Interpreters, as good Pylots do the same in
this learned Iberian, never had Dioscurias more Interpreters, nor Titus Liuius
more visiters, then Granatensis shall have. For if that most famous and
excellent Philosopher Apollonius Tyaneus (as Philostratus writes) travailed
almost throughout the whole world, and passed even to the Mountain Caucasus,
and to the Brachmanes, Philosophers of India, that he might only hear Iarchas
an Indian Philosopher, in his golden throne professing wisdom among the small
number of his scholars, and disputing of the motion of the celestial Spheres:
what ought not Christians to do, and whether should not they travel to hear
one, not teaching how the heavens are moved, but how men may come to heaven:
yea, how Sinners may be Guyded thither?

And albeit all the works of this reverend Divine are profitable for
instruction in religion, and very available for persuasion to good life: yet
my judgment, (being grounded upon the judgments of grave and worthy
Divines,) does estimate this book above the rest, as Sybilla Cumaea did the
last of her three Books unto King Tarquine. Which with all humility I dedicate
unto your Honor, whom God of his great mercy, has vouchfafed in this decrepit
and ruinous age of the world, to bestow upon our state for the maintenance and
countenance of Religion and Learning, and for the defacing and suppressing of
vice and corruption: like as in times past he gave unto Commonwealths, that
needed such help, David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Hercules, Cyrus, Artaxerxes,
Alexander Magnus, Scipio Affricanus, Julius Caesar, Augustus, Mecaenas,
Constantinus Magnus, Theodosius, Carolus Magnus, Sigismundus, Ferdinandus,
Alphonsus King of Naples, Frederick Duke of Saxon Prince Elector, and Lord
Ernestus his Brother, Laurentius Medices Duke of Florence, and Borsus Duke of
Ferrara, with many other Princes and Nobles, some of which were mighty Pillars
and Protectors of true Religion and Christianity, and others liberal
maintainers and bountiful Patrons of learning and virtue, against all
Licinians, Iulianists, Valentinians, Caligulaes, Neroes, Dioclesians,
Mahometists, Baiazets, Aretinists, Simonists, and such like Monsters of nature,
being cruel persecuters of true Religion, enemies of all humanity, and
destroyers of all learning and discipline, who despising God and all goodness,
did degenerate so far from their forefathers, that they delighted wholly to
spill the blood of worthy men, to burn famous Libraries, to rob the Church of
her patrimony, and to raze and overthrow the Universities and Schcoles of all
Arts and Sciences, as in the tragical Histories of former times is recorded,
and cannot be but with great grief remembered.

All ages have written and spoken great and glorious things of that good
Emperor Great Constantine, for his defense and patronage of sacred
Christianity, and bounty unto the Church and her Pastors: So all Divines and
whole Universities of Scholars do daily bless God, who (in this corrupt and
simoniacal age, and in these dog-daies of the Church and Religion, which
together with learned Divines and worthy scholars, do lie in a desperate
Paroxisme, and most dangerous fit, jointly shaken and assaulted by wicked
Patrons and wretched Atheists) has allotted unto us, not only another
Alexander, that so honored the Poet Pindarus, that at the destruction of
Thebes, he gave charge that the family and kindred of Pindarus should be spared,
but another Mathias of the new Law, nay, a true follower and imitater of
Christ, who daily casts out of the Temple of God all them that buy and sell
in it, and overthrows the Tables of Moneychangers, and the seats of them
that sell Doves, endeavoring with all zealous sincerity, to make the house of
GOD that that it should be, that is, a house of Prayer, not as Simon Magus
would have it, a Den of thieves, and a Cage of unclean byrds.

I humbly entreat your Lordship to accept this small gift, the fruits of a
poor scholars study, and weigh it, not according to my skill, which is but
weak, but according to the soundnes of the doctrine therein contained, which
is warranted by the authority of the holy Scriptures. Quod si ex tua dignitate
spectetur, exiguum est; sin ex animo meo, magnum. Multum enim dat, qui cupit
dare satis, qui dat illud quod habet, qui nihil sibi retinet, qui nihil, quod
in se est, omittit. The Almighty God, who is the exceeding great reward of all
them, that walk uprightly before him, in whose hand is the length of days,
bless and prolong your Honor here among us, to the perfecting and consummation
of that good work he has began (...), even to the utter extirpation of all
Simony, Sacrilege, and (...) merchandising, and to the supportation of all
religious Pre(...) of the Church, and learned Scholiers of the Land: and after
this ^yfe, give your Lordship everlasting glory with him, who gives every man
according as his work shall be. London the tenth of May. Anno. Dom. 1598.

Your Honors in all humble duty: FRANCIS MERES.

TYPOGRAPHVS LECTORI.
Da veniam maculis, quas aut incuria fudit, Aut humana parum cauit natura.
Page. Line Fault. Amended. 34. 13. ye. the. 40. 28. course. corse. 41. 17.
there wants is. 55. 19. captain. captive. 59. 18. them, then. 60. 17.
meditation mediation. 65. 1. shall, will. 65. 33. there wants and. 70. 9. there
wants how. 73. 3. disturbed distorted. 73. 36. lenity leuity. 81. 12. no, now.
104. 3. do, does. 139. 22. gross, grass. 145. 16. water, watch. 159. 34.
there wants side. 225. 6. felicities, felicity. 234. 5. there wants life. 244.
22. tribulation, tribulations 271. 25. would, could. 300. 24. no, on. 335. 18.
ordinarily, inordinatly. 345. 20. more, more. 351. 1. of, and. 355. 16. servant,
servants. 356. 20. by, be. 360. 2. there wants in. 369. 2. there wants him.
395. 13. there wants self by. Page. Line. Fault, Amended 397. 16. many, man.
403. 11. there, other. 405. 1. her, his. 405. 35. inordinary, inordinacy. 410.
25. mithout, without. 430. 18. gain, again. 460. 12. nature, mature. 462. 5.
lenity, leuity. 464. 37. he, is. 464. 37. confirms. confirmed. 464. 37. there
wants that. 486. 5. to, too. 492. 3. fructure, structure. 494. 2. pallable,
palpable. 502. 11. his, the. 503. 13. not, nor. 507. 26. livings, living. 512.
6. there wants the. 513. 28. are, as. 522. 6. there wants in.

Marginall defects.
Page, Against line, there wants. 60. 34, A cloud. 115, 25, Job, 40. 245, 13,
the. 272, 22, Job, 20. 256, 32, for our, read hour.

Hac maiora sunt Errata, que sensum vulnerant, minuscula veroque, vocem
immutant tue humanitati relinquo.

THE PROLOGVE OF the first Book.
SAY ye, surely it shall be well with the just. Esaias 3. This is the embassage
which GOD in times past sent to all the just by the Prophet Esaias, short and
brief in words, but most copious, and exceeding rich in rewards and benefits.
Men are wont to be liberal in promises, but niggards and covetous in
performance of them: God, after a contrary manner, is so liberal and
bountiful in performance, that the words of his promise, are much less then
his deed and remuneration. For what could be spoken more briefly, then Say
ye, surely it shall be well with the just? But o^, how many and how great be
the blessings, which are contained under this small word Well? Which I think
so to be left without any extention or exemplifying, that men might understand,
that it is impossible, that it should be expressed according to the verity and
nature of the thing: neither that this little word should be understood of these
or those blessings, but of all kind of blessings, which are comprehended under
this word Well, without any limitation.

For this cause it was answered to Moses of the Lord, when he asked, what was
his name; I am that I am: no other word being added, Exodus 3.
that God might signify, that his being could not be circumscribed or defined
with words; but that it was a thing universal, which comprehends in it all
kind of Essences, and all perfection, which without any imperfection pertains
to that Essence and being. So in this place the Prophet does put this short
word Well, not adding any explication, that he might signify and intimate unto
us, that the whole university and generality of all good things, that can be
desired of man's heart, are to be found in this word, and be conjoined to it,
which the Lord does promise here to the righteous for reward of his virtue.

This is the chief and principal argument, which (Gods holy Spirit assisting
me) I have purposed to handle in this Book: to the which I will also adioyne
counsels, instructions, and rules, which ought to be observed of those, who
are studious of virtue. According to this purpose this book shall be divided
into two Tomes, The division of the Book.
or two principal parts. In the first shall be showed those most straight and
firm bonds, which bind us to follow and embrace virtue: also the inestimable
and inualuable fruits and profits which are brought forth by this study.

In the latter part or Tome, we will speak of a godly life, which is lead
according to the prescript rule of virtue, Two things required to piety.
and of the admonitions and doctrines, which are required unto it. For there
are two things necessary to a man that will become godly and honest. The first
is, that he desire to be really and indeed endued with virtue. The second is,
that he may know how to be so endued and furnished. For the first of these two,
the first Book is profitable and auailable: for the second, the second. For
they (as Plutarch says) that teach that virtue is to be embraced, but deliver
not the way and manner how to attain unto it, A similitude.
they do as those that light a Lamp to burn, but pour in no oil. Certes
although the second book is very profitable, yet the first book (if I may so
say) is most necessary. The reason is, because to the knowledge of good and
evil, the very light of nature and reason is much conducent, which is bred and
borne with us: but that we should love one, and hate another; embrace one, and
fly from another, very great contradictions and lets do meet with us, and
do arise of sin, as well within, as without man.

For seeing that man is compounded of a spirit and flesh, and both parts
desire their like; the flesh always seeks for things carnal and fleshly, in
which vices reign and bear sway; but the spirit desires spiritual things,
in which virtues have dominion and pre-eminence. Therefore the spirit does
feel and suffer great contradiction and repugnancie of his own flesh, which
has no feeling, but of those things, which delight and bring pleasure; which
desires and appetites, next unto original sin are most vehement, when as by
that, the bridle of original righteousness is lost, with which they were bridled
and restrained. Neither does the flesh only resist the spirit, but also the
world, Which (as S. John testifies) wholly lies in wickedness. 1. John, 5,
The devil also, a capital enemy of virtues, does repugne the spirit, and so
do our corrupt dispositions, and vicious custom, which as an other nature,
especially in those, who have had growth, and are confirmed in wickedness,
through the continuance and diuturnitie of time. Therefore, that a man may
pass boldly through the midst of these difficulties, and that he may approach
near unto virtue in verity, and with the whole desire of his heart, to the
despite of the flesh and all her powers it cannot be denied, but that these
difficulties do happen to man, and that aid and help is necessary for him.

Therefore, that we may come unto this first part, this former Book is made,
and set forth, in the which I have bestowed much pains, and have labored
with all my strength, that I might gather (as it were) into a bundle all the
reasons, which seemed any whit to belong to the quality of this matter, or to
the manner of this writing for the advancement of virtue; by setting before
your eyes the profit and fruits of them, who follow virtue, as well in this
life, as in the life to come: and by declaring the great bonds, by which we
are bound to virtue, seeing that God does command it unto us, whom not to
obey is exceeding heinous; and to which we are obliged, as well for that which
it is in it self, as for that which it is for us, and toward us. I was
especially moved to handle this argument, for that I did daily see the greater
sort and number of men to praise virtue in words, but to follow vices in
deeds. And truly in mine opinion, amongst many other causes of this so great
enormitie, one is, because men, ignorant of the condition and nature of virtue,
do esteem it to be unpleasant, barraine, and painful. For this cause, when
as they are wholly drowned in vices (because they seem more pleasant unto them)
they fly from all virtue, supposing that there is no sweetness in it.

I, pitying the error of these men, willingly underwent this labor, that I
might show how many, and how great be the riches, delights and treasuries; how
great is the dignity, and beauty of this heavenly Bride: and also that I
might demonstrate how unknown it is unto men; that these mine admonitions
might free them from this error, and inflame them with the love of so precious
a thing.

For if it be true, that this is one of the most excellent things, that are in
heaven or earth, and most worthy to be loved and had in honor; without doubt
it is to be lamented, that men are such strangers from the knowledge and desire
of so great a good. A great benefit therefore he shall do to all mankind,
whosoever he be, that endeavors to restore this Lady to her honor, and to
seat her in her royal Throne: for she is the Queen and Lady of all things.

But before I come to my purpose, I will show by a certain example, with what
mind this Tractate ought to be used. Heathen men do write of their famous
Hercules, Cicero in the first book of his offices.
how when he began to wax a man (which time is given of Nature to choose,
what course of life every man will follow and enter into) went into the
wilderness, and there sitting long debating and discoursing with himself, when
he saw two ways, the one of Pleasure, the other of Virtue, which it were
better to enter and walk in: at the length, after mature deliberation,
Pleasure being neglected, he entered into Virtues path. Truly, if there be
any thing in the world worthy of deliberation and advise, this is it. For if
we so often muse upon those things, which pertain to the use of life, and
do so advisedly deliberate of the^; how much more carefully and thoroughly ought
we to weigh and consider of life it self? especially seeing so many and so
diverse kinds of living are found in the world.

Proceed therefore, my brother, this is that, that I would have thee now to
do, and to the which I now inuit thee. Therefore thou must know, that before
all things it is needful, that in this short time thou set behind thee, the
whole rabble of the thoughts and business of this world, and that thou enter
into this spiritual wilderness, and that thou begin to deliberate with thy
self of the manner and way of that life, which it behooves thee to follow
hereafter. Remember, that among all humane affairs there is none, which ought
to be weighed and examined with greater care and attention, and which
requires a longer time in deliberating, then the election of that kind of
life, which is to be followed, and continued till death. For if the beginning
be good, those things that follow will be lawdable. On the contrary part, if
thy choice be faulty, what soever is built thereon will go from ill to worse.
All other consultations, with the errors that are committed in them, are
particular, this only is general, which contains all other under it.

Tell me I pray thee, what may be builded upon an ill foundation? What do all
prosperous events profit? What avail al admonitions and counsels, if thy
life be ill ordered? And what do all adversities hurt, if thy life be well
lead? Math, 16.
For what should it profit a man, though he should win the whole world, and
loose his own soul? Therefore we can speak of no matter or business more
weighty under heaven, of none more proper unto man, or of greater moment: for
we do not entreat here of riches, or of honors; but of the life of the soul,
and of everlasting glory. Do not therefore run over these things carelessly,
slightly, and sleepingly, as without aduisement thou do read over many other
things, oftentimes passing over many leaves, desirous to see an end, before
thou have well examined the beginning: but I would that thou sit as a Judge in
the judgment seat of thine heart, and that thou hear all these words with
silence and quie tnes of mind. These things are not to be posted over hastily,
but to be looked to heedfully and discreetly, because in the^ are handled the
whole regiment of thy life, and what soever thereupon does depend. Consider
how thou would that all the businesses of this world should be ordered
and appointed; for in determining these things, one man's opinion cannot suffice
thee, but have an eye that they be seen to, examined and scanned of sundry
Doctors, Advocates, and Judges, least happily thou offend in them.

Wherefore, seeing that in this case we do not speak of earth, but of heaven;
not of thine, but of thy self; have an earnest care that this thing be not
considered of slothfully and negligently, but with the greatest attention. If
thou have erred hitherto, now at the length cast with thy self, that thou art
regenerated and borne again, and begin to enter into judgment with thy
self, and cut off the thread of thine errors, and begin by another way to
untwist this web. O who will now so bless my labors, that thou may now
credit me, and harken unto me with attentive ears, and that like a good
Judge thou may pronounce thy sentence and judgment, according to those
things which are spoken and approved unto thee; for this thy resolution should
be truly blessed, and thy labor exceeding profitable. I know assuredly that
I request too much, and that a writing cannot be found so effectual and
prevailing, that may effect and perform this request: therefore in the
beginning of this my work (of what esteem or value soever it be) I entreat
this one thing, that he who is the power and wisdom of his Father (who has
the key of David, that he may shut and open heaven to whom he will) would be
here present, and so temper these my writings, that they may yield a
perswasiue spirit and life to those who shall read them.

But if I shall get no fruit of this my labor, yet this shall be a
recompense sufficient for me, that I have satisfied mine own desire and
delight, and that once I have filled and glutted my self, in praising and
commending a thing greater then all praise, as Virtue is, especially seeing
that of a long time I have longed and wished to apply my mind to this study.
This also I have observed throughout all this work (which also I have done in
all the rest of my labors) that I might fit and apply my self to all sorts
and estates of men, spiritual and not spiritual, Clergy and Laity; that as
the cause and necessity is common, so also this Treatise might be as common.
For the good, reading this, shall be confirmed in the love of Virtue, and being
deeply grafted into it, they shall take deep root in it: they that be not
good, perhaps shall understand by this what they have lost and forgon. With
this our labor, good Parents may instruct and teach their children, when they
are but young; that they may be accustomed from their infancy to have Virtue
in honor and reverence, and to be studious of it; seeing it is the greatest
joy that a Father has, to see his son whom he loves, to be a lover of
Virtue, honest in very deed, and beautified and adorned with all kind of
Virtue.

This doctrine moreover will be especially profitable to the^, whose duty it
is in the Church to teach the people, and to persuade them to embrace Virtue:
for here are delivered in order, the chiefest instructions, titles and
reasons, which make us debtors unto Virtue; to the which also as to common
places, every thing may be reduced, which is written of this matter. And
seeing that here are handled those graces and blessings, which are promised in
this world to Virtue (which are displaied and unfolded in her twelve notable
and famous preheminences and prerogatives) and seeing that it is true, that we
have all these good things and blessings by Christ; it consequently follows,
that this doctrine shall bring much light to the understanding of the holy
Scriptures, especially to those places which entreat of the mystery of
Christ, and the inestimable benefit of our Redemption: of the which (amongst
others) the Prophet Esaias, Solomon in his Canticles, and such others, do write
more of purpose.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST BOOK.
THIS first Book, Christian Reader, does contain a large exhortation to
Virtue, which is the watchman and keeper of the commandments of GOD, in which
consists true Virtue. This Book is divided into three principal parts. In
the first part Virtue is persuaded to be embraced of us, with those reasons and
common arguments, which are wont chiefly to be alleged of the holy and
ancient Fathers: as are those bonds, by the which we are bound to our Lord
GOD, as well by that, which he is in himself, as by that which he is for us,
by reason of his inestimable benefits, and also by the necessity of Virtue
herself, which is proved and laid open unto us by the four last things:
which are, Death, Judgment, Heauenly-glory, and Hell. And these are handled in
the first part.

In the second part, the same thing is convinced and proved manifestly by
other new reasons: as are the commodities and profits of grace, which are
promised in this life to the students and lovers of Virtue. Here the twelve
particular prerogatives and privileges are rehearsed, by which Virtue is
famous and renowned: and they are handled and discoursed of severally, and by
themselves. Which prerogatives, although many times they are touched of the
Saints and holy Writers, showing the light, the peace, the true liberty and
joy of a quiet conscience, and the consolations and comforts of the holy Ghost,
which things the righteous enjoy, and all those excellent benefits, which are
circumscribed within Virtues circumference: yet never any man was seen, or
read of me, who handled this matter so copiously, and in that order, as we
do. Therefore it has not been unto me a little trouble, or a small labor to
bring together into one head all these things out of diverse places of
Scripture, and to call the^ by their propper names, to reduce them into order,
to declare and display them, and to approve every one of them severally by
diverse testimonies of the Scriptures and of the Fathers. This diligence was
very necessarily bestowed, that they, who are not moved to love Virtue for the
hope of the good to come, because it seems to be far off from them, at the
least that they might be moved with the profit of that inestimable good,
which Virtue affoordeth in this world. But because it suffiseth not to produce
all the reasons, which prove and establish this question and matter, unless
also the contrary arguments and objections be refuted: therefore the third
part of this Book is occupied and conversant in overthrowing and confuting
them, in which we plentifully answer all the excuses and objections, which
are wont to be alleged of naughty men, why they do fly and eschew Virtue.

Because the matter and subject of these two Books is Virtue, we would not
have the Reader to be ignorant, that by this word Virtue, we barelie or solely
understand the habit of Virtue, but also her actions and duties, to the which
that noble habit is ordered and disposed: because the Figure is very well
known, that the effect is signified by the name of the cause, and the cause by
the name of the effect.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SINNERS GVIDE: In which is contained a large and
copious exhortation to keep Gods commandments.
THE FIRST TITLE. That man is bound to seek after Virtue, and to serve GOD:
and of the excellency of the Divine perfection. CHAP. I.
TWO things chiefly (Christian Reader) are wont to move and stir up the
will of man to any good action. One is the bond, by which we are bound to
justice: the other is the profit and fruit, which proceeds and issues of
this action. Honesty and Profit, are to be considered of in every action.
For it is the judgment of all wisemen, that these two things are to be
considered of in every matter and action; to wit, Honesty and Profit: which
are (as it were) the two spurs of our Will, which prick it forward, and
encourage it to take any action in hand. Of these two, although (for the most
part) Profit is more sought after and desired, yet Honesty is more effectual
and powerful. For there is not any profit or commodity to be found in this
world, although it be great, which may compare with the excellency of Virtue:
as also there is no loss or disco^moditie so great or grievous, which a wise
man ought not rather to choose, then to run into any vice, as Aristotle
auerreth.

Seeing therefore, that it is our purpose and meaning in this Book, to inuit
men to the love of Virtue, and to ensnare them with the beauty of it; I take
it that we shall do very well, if we begin of this more principal part,
declaring the bond, by which we stand bound to Virtue: and therefore to God
himself also, who seeing that he is goodness it self, does commend nothing in
this world, does desire nothing, does not account any thing precious but only
Virtue. Therefore with great care and diligence, let us consider those just
titles and claims, which God has, to demand and exact this so great debt and
bond of us. But seeing that they be innumerable, we will only induce six of
the chiefest, every one of which severally do bind man, with out any excuse,
to him in whatsoever he can or may. The first and greatest, and which can less
be declared or expressed, is, to be him that he is; GOD is that he is.
to which is referred the greatness of his Majesty, and all his perfections.
Hitherto pertain the incomprehensible magnitude of his goodness, mercy,
justice, wisdom, infinite power, noblenes, beauty, faithfulness, truth,
benignity, happiness, majesty, and the other riches and perfections that be in
him; which are such and so immeasurable, that (as a certain famous Doctor
says) if the whole world were full of books, and all creatures Writers, and
all the water of the Sea ynck, first all the books should be filled, first all
the Writers should be wearied, and first all the Sea should be exhausted and
drawn dry, then one alone of his perfections should be described absolutely,
and as it is in deed, and in it self. The same Doctor also says, if God
should create a new man, and should give unto him a heart so ample, capable and
spacious, as are all the hearts of men joined and mixed together, if that heart
should apprehend with an immeasurable and unusual light the quality and
quantity of one of these perfections, it would faint, die, or break in
pieces, by reason of the greatness of that joy and pleasure, which should
redound to it, except it were preserved by the singular power of GOD.

This therefore is the first and the most equal and just reason, by which we
are bound to love God, and to serve and obey him, who is truth it self in so
high a degree, that the very Epicures themselves, who are the ouerthrowers and
destroyers of all Philosophy, (for they deny the divine providence, and the
immortality of souls) do not deny that there is a Religion, which is the
worship and adoration of God. Epicures teach, that God is to be served.
For one of them disputing in that Book, which Tully writ of the nature of the
Gods, confesses and proves very strongly that there is a God; and also he
acknowledges the altitude of his admirable and wonderful perfections; and for
them he says, that he is to be worshipped, adored, and reverenced, for this is
due to the greatness and excellency of this most noble substance. Therefore he
is to be worshipped by that name and title only, if he had not any other.
For if we honor and reverence a King for the only dignity of his presence, A
similitude
although he be without his kingdom, where we receive no benefit by him; why
rather should we not give and exhibit all honor and reverence, to this Lord,
who (as John testifies) has written upon his garment, and upon his thigh,
Apoc. 19.
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. It is he that with his three fingers
does bear up the round Globe of the earth, does dispose of causes, and moves
the heavens; it is he that changes times, alters the elements, divides the
waters, brings forth the winds, engendereth causes, gives influence to the
Planets, and as an universal King and Lord, does nourish and sustain all
creatures. The kingdom of God is not by succession.
That also is of greater moment, that his kingdom is not by succession, or by
election, or by inheritance, but by nature. For even as a man naturally is
greater the^ a Pismier, so that most noble substance in greatness does far
excel all other things created: insomuch that every thing whatsoever it be,
and the whole universal world, in his eyes, have scarce the quantity and
bigness of an Emmot. If that unhappy Philosopher acknowledged and confessed this
truth, why shall not Christian philosophy acknowledge and confess it? This
therefore teaches, that although there be many titles and names, by which we
are bound to God: yet this, that we now entreat of, does excel them all, the
which is of such weight and valuation, that (if there were no other) this alone
deserves all the love and service of man, yea though he had infinite and
innumerable souls and bodies, which might attend and wait upon his worship
and love. That always has been the care and study of the Saints, whose love
were so pure and sincere, Bernard in his 83. Sermon upon the Canticles.
that of it S. Bernard said; Pure love does not take strength from hope, and
yet feels not the hurt of distrust. As if he should say, that true love is
not kindled through hope to worship God, by which it hopes for any reward from
God, neither to wax colder, although it know that it should receive nothing
of him; for it is not moved through lucre and profit but through pure love,
which is due to that infinite goodness.

Although this reason chiefly does bind us unto God, yet it does less move
the weak and imperfect, Why men are less moved with the perfection of God.
and that for two causes. The first is, because our own proper commodity does
move by so much the more, by how much our own proper love has taken deeper
root in the soul. The second is, because many men being rude and ignorant,
do not understand the dignity, and beauty of that supreme goodness. For if
they had received the knowledge of it, this only glory and splendor would so
steal their hearts from them, that being content with it alone, they would
desire no other thing. Therefore I think it not amiss, to open a window to
these men, and to yield them some light, that they may know more of the
greatness of this Lord. This doctrine is borrowed of that excellent and great
Divine Dionisius, who has no other purpose in his mistical Theology, then to
show the dignity of the Divine essence, be ing compared with all other things
created: teaching, that in the contemplation of God, our eyes are to be turned
from all the perfection of the creatures, least we be deceived, being desirous
to measure him by them; but leaving all these inferior things, we must lift up
our minds to the contemplation of one Essence, In the contemplation of God, we
must turn our eyes from al creatures.
which is above all Essences; of one substance, which is above all substances;
of one light, which is above all lights, in comparison of which, all light is
darkness; of one beauty, which is above all beauty, to the which if all
beauty be compared, it is deformity and abomination.

The cloud into which Moses entered, when he talked with the Lord, Exodus, 24.
does signify this unto us, which covered the face of all things, which were
not God, that by this means the true God might be known more easily and more
exactly. This thing also Elias signified covering his eyes with his Mantle, 1.
Kings, 19
when he saw the glory of God passing by. For a man ought to turn away his
eyes from all things, as unworthy, when he will contemplate upon the Divine
glory. This will be showen more manifestly, if we consider the great
difference between a thing uncreate, and a thing created: that is, the
difference between the Creator and the creature. For we see that all the
creatures had a beginning, and that they may have an end; but he neither had
beginning, neither can have end. The creatures acknowledge a superior, and
depend of him: The Creator neither acknowledges superior, nor depends of
any. The creatures be mutable and subject to diverse alterations: the Creator
has neither mutation in himself, nor any alteration. The creatures are mixed
and compound; but in the Creator no composition is found, by reason of his pure
simplenes. For if he was compounded of many parts, he should have one to
compound him, who should be before him, which is impossible. The creatures may
be more, then they are; have more then they have; know more then they know. The
Creator cannot be more then he is; seeing that the perfection of the whole
Essence is in him; neither can he have more then he has, seeing that in him is
the bottomless deepenes of all riches: neither can he know more then he does
know, seeing that his wisdom is infinite, and his excellency eternal, to
which all things are as present. For which cause the great Philosopher
Aristotle called the Creator a pure act, signifying that he is the chiefest
and greatest perfection, to which nothing may be added: for it is impossible
that he should participate more of that substance, whereof he is, neither can
any thing be thought of, which is wanting in him. All creatures do fight under
the banner of mutability, for like needy and poor beggars, they may be moved
to seek for that, which is wanting unto them: but he has no cause at all to
move himself, because nothing is wanting to him, and he is found in every
place. All other things are found to be diverse and differing, and one to be
distinguished from an other: but in him there is found no distinction of
several parts, by reason of his great simplenes: so that his Being, is his
Essence, his Essence is his power, his power is his will, and his will is his
understanding, and his understanding is his intent, and his intent is his
wisdom, and his wisdom is his goodness, and his goodness is his justice, and
his justice is his mercy: which although they have contrary effects (as to
pardon and to punish) yet in him really and in deed they are one and the same;
in so much that his justice is his mercy, and his mercy is his justice; and so
in him these operations and perfections appear only, but are not contrary in
deed, as Augustine has well noted. For he is most mystical and most
powerful, most beautiful and the strongest, stable and incomprehensible,
without place and in every place, invisible and seeing all things, immutable
and changing all things: he does always work and is ever quiet, he does
fill all things and is not included, he is stretched over all things and not
divided: he is great without quality, and therefore immeasurable; he is good
without quality and therefore exceeding perfectly good.

To be brief, that I may speak many things in few words, all things created
as they have their essence ^ircumscript, which comprehends and contains
them: so have they their power limited and finit, to which they are extended,
and their limited labors in which they are exercised, and their circumscript
places in which they stand, and their certain names by which they are called
and demonstrated, and their particular definitions by which they are declared,
and their particular praedicaments under which they are contained. But that
supreme justice as it is infinite in essence, so is it infinite in power, and
in all other things: and as it has no definition, by which his nature is
defined, so it has no praedicament, under which it is contained, no place in
which it is limited, nor name whereby his right propriety may be signified: Yea
rather seeing that he has no name, as Dionysius says, he has all names: for
in him are found all perfections, which in these names are comprehended and
signified. Whereupon is inferred, that as all creatures are finite and limited,
so are they comprehensible: but that divine Essence solely as it is infinite,
so is it incomprehensible of all created intelligences. For even as, (says
Aristotle) that which is infinite has no beginning, so neither absolutely nor
fully can it be comprehended of any intelligence, unless of that, which
comprehends all things.

What other thing do those two Seraphins signify, which the Prophet Esaias saw
standing before the Lord, Ess, 6,
who sat upon an high throne, Every one, says he, had six wings: with twain
he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet; But to signify,
that those excellent spyrits, who have so high a place in heaven, and are the
nearest unto God himself, cannot comprehend all that is found in God: neither
come from one to an other that they may know and understand these things, al
though they see him in his proper Essence and beauty? For even as one standing
upon the shore does see the Sea, A similitude.
and yet does not see the breadth and depth of it; so those excellent spyrits,
and all the other elect, which be in heaven, do see God really, yet they
cannot comprehend either the depth of his greatness, or the altitude of his
eternity. And although God in the Scriptures is said to sit upon the
Cherubines, yet rather he may be said to stand upon them, so that they cannot
approach unto him, much less comprehend him. This is the darkness, which, as
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 18,
he made his secret place, and his pauilion round about him, even darkness of
waters, and clouds of the air; that that might be signified, which the
Apostle says, that God dwells in the light that none can attain unto, 1,
Tim. 6.
and to which there is no passage open: therefore the Prophet calls it
darkness, because it hindrethas well the sight, as the apprehension of God. A
similitude.
For even as (as a certain Philosopher says) although there can be found
nothing more bright and visible then the Sun, yet nothing is less seen then
it, by reason of the excellency of his brightness, and the weakness of our
sight: so although there is nothing in it self more intelligible then God, yet
there is nothing in this life less understood then he, for the same reasons.
Wherefore he that after any manner knows God, after he shall come to the end,
and furthest limit of those perfections, which may be known, he shall
confess, that he must further proceed by infinite ways, and that God is
greater then those infinite ways, then that he may be comprehended: and by how
much the more he acknowledges that ^ncomprehensibility, by so much the more
he understands more of him.

Heere-vpon it is that Saint Gregory says upon those words of Job, Job, 5. In
the 27, Book of his Morals, cap. 36.
Who does great things and unsearchable, and marvelous things without number,
says he, then we speak better of God, when as under the awe of consideration,
through admiration we hold our peace. For then a man conveniently and
seasonably does praise that thing, he cannot utter, when he is silent. In the
same opinion also is Dionysius: In his mist^call Theology. (...). 1.
The secret and mystery ^f the Divinity, says he, which passes all
understanding, we honor and adore with the holy worship and veneration of our
mind, and with ineffable and chaste silence. In which place he seems to
allude to that of the Prophet, according to the translation of Hierome, Psalm,
65.
For thee o God all praise wayteth and rests, and is silent in Sion:
signifying that this is the most perfect praise, which is done by holding the
peace, and by that ineffable and chaste silence: that is by confessing the
incomprehensibility and altitude of that unspeakable substance, whose
magnitude is above all magnitude, and whose substance infinitely exceeds, and
differs from all other substance of things, as well visible as invisible. In
his book of Soliloquies. Cap. 1
Wherefore Saint Augustine also says: When I seek for my God, I do not seek
for a shape of a body, not for the glory of time, not for the cleerenes of the
light, not for beauty, not for the sound of sweet melody, and whatsoever
pleasant tunes: not for the sweet savors and odours of flowers, ointments and
spices, not for honey and Manna pleasant and delightful to the taste, not for
other things grateful and welcome to the touch or embrace, neither do I seek
for any other thing subject to these senses, when I do seek for my God. God
forbid that I should think these to be my God, which also are apprehended of
the senses of brute beasts. And yet when I seek for my God, I seek for
nevertheless a certain light above all light, which mine eye is not capable
of: a certain voice above all voices, which mine ear does not conceive: a
certain savor above all savors, which my nosthrils cannot conceive: a
certain sweetness above all sweetness, which my taste cannot conceive: a certain
embracing above all embracings, which my touch cannot conceive. This light does
shine, where place does not receive it: this voice does sound, whereas no air
does move it: this savor does smell, whereas no blast does carry it: this taste
does there savor, where there is no feeding: and this embrace is there
touched, where it is not sundered.

But if thou will conceive and understand any thing of this incomprehensible
magnitude, behold the frame of this world, which is the work of his hands,
that by the quality of the effect, thou may know the noblenes of the cause;
presupposing that of Dionysius in the beginning, that in all things there is
sound a Being, an Ability, and a Work: which three do so agree between
themselves, Three things are to be marked in every thing, the Being, the
Ability, and the Work.
that of what sort the Being of a thing is, of the same sort is the Ability of
it, and what the Ability of the thing is such is the Work of it. This
principle being thus laid, let us foorth-with enter into contemplation, how
beautiful, how well ordered, and how great this world is: for in the firmament
there are certain stars of such great magnitude, as Astrologers say, that in
their quantity they exceed eighty times the earth and the water, which
together make but one Globe. Then again consider how beautifully adorned the
world is, and how full of infinite variety of things, which are found in the
earth, in the water, in the air, and in every part of it, all which are made
with such perfection, that (monsters being excepted) from the beginning of the
world, even to this day there is nothing found, to which any thing is wanting
to the furnishing or perfection of his Essence. Then consider (as Saint
Augustine says) that God created this huge and admirable frame of the world,
in a moment, and made it of nothing: for he made it without any matter being,
without workmaisters, without any workmen, without any instruments, without
pattern, without any exterior thing containing example, and without space of
time: but only according to the pure and simple conceit of his own will, he
brought forth into light this great work, and this whole universe of things.

Consider furthermore, that with the same facility he created this world, he
could have created infinite thousands of worlds, every one of which should have
been greater, more beautiful, and inhabited of more people. And after he had
made them, he could with the same facility have cast them down again and
overthrown them, and brought them to nothing without any resistance. Therefore
tell me, if according to the doctrine of Dionysius (as it is presupposed
before of us) the power and force of the cause is known by the effects and
work, and by the power and force the Essence is known: What manner of power
shall it be, from whence so great a work proceeded? and if this power be such
and so great, what an one, and how incomprehensible is that Essence, which is
known by that power? This contemplation without all doubt, does far exceed
all humane reach. In this we must further consider, that all these excellent
and great works, not only as they are, but as they might have been, are as
though they were not in the view of that divine power, yea after an infinite
manner they are lesser: for that is infinitely greater, to which this power
does extend it self. Who then will not be astonished, considering of the
greatness of such an Essence, and of such a power? which although a man cannot
see with his external eyes, yet he may make a most certain conjecture, and
gather of the foresaid reason, how great it is, and how incomprehensible.

This wonderful immensitie of God, that great Schooleman Thomas Aquinas does
show in his Breuiarie of Divinity, by this example. We see (says he) in
things corporal, that by how much any thing is more excellent, by so much also
it is greater in quantity; for we see that the element of the water is greater
then the earth, and the air greater then the water, and the fire then the
air: furthermore, the first or lowest heaven, is greater then the element of
fire, the second heaven greater the^ the first, and the third then the second;
and after the same manner, by ascending even to the tenth Sphere, yea even to
that heaven, which is above all the Spheres, whose greatness is incomparable.
That any one may plainly see, if he have any consideration, how little the
Globe and roundnes of the earth and water be, if they be compared with the
heavens. The Astrologers also say, that the whole circumference of the earth
and water, are but as a prick or a point in comparison of heaven: which they
prove manifestly by their demonstrations. For although the circle of the heaven
be divided into the twelve signs of the Zodiac, through which once in a
year the Sun does run, yet in either Horizon only six are seen: for the
bigness and standing of the earth, does take up and possess no more place of
heaven, then a leaf of paper or a tablet will, being placed and set in the
Center of the world, from whence the compass of the heaven may be seen
without let or impediment. Seeing therefore that that heaven which is above all
the Spheres, which is the chiefest and the noblest body of the world, is of
such an inestimable magnitude above all bodies, we may easily understand (says
Thomas) how God, who is without any circumscription the chiefest, greatest, and
best of all things, as well of things corporal as spiritual, who also is the
maker of them, ought and must exceed all things with a certain infinite
magnitude, not in quantity (for he is no body) but in excellency and
nobleness of his most perfect Essence. But that we may return from whence we
are digressed; after the same manner we may search in all other things, how
great and of what condition be the magnitudes and perfections of this Lord. For
it is necessary that they be such as his Essence is. Ecclesiasticus confesses
that, where he speaks of Gods mercy, Eccle. 11.
According to his greatness (says he) so is his mercy: of such sort are all the
rest of his perfections. Such is his goodness, such is his benignity, majesty,
gentleness, wisdom, sweetness, noblenes, beauty, omnipotency, and to be
brief, such is his justice. He therefore is infinitely good, infinitely sweet,
infinitely amiable, and worthy whom all creatures should obey, fear and
reverence: insomuch, that if man's heart could contain infinite love and fear,
and infinite obedience and reverence, all that should be obliged by the bond
and rule of justice, to the dignity and excellency of this Lord. For if as
every one is more worthy and more excellent, so greater reverence is due unto
him, it follows, that seeing the excellency of God is so infinite, that also
infinite reverence is due unto him. Hereupon is inferred, that all that which
is wanting to our love and reverence, whereby we do not come to that measure,
is therefore wanting, because it is indebted to a dignity of such greatness.
Which thing seeing it is so, how great, I pray thee, is that debt, which this
only title, although there were no other, does request of us in the love and
obedience of this Lord? What I pray thee will he love, who does not love so
great a goodness? What will he fear, who does not fear so great a Majesty?
Whom will he serve, who will not attend upon such a Lord? For what is thy will
made, if not to love and embrace that, which is good? If then he be the
chiefest good, what is the cause that our will does not love and embrace him,
above all that is called God? And if it be so heinous an evil, not to love or
fear his Lord above all things, what will it be not to esteem or regard him?
Who would have ever supposed, that the malice of man would have come to so
great impiety? Nevertheless, to that height of peruersitie they are come,
that for a little beastly pleasure, or for a little honor, or for a small
gain and filthy lucre, do offend and contemn so great a goodness. O
blindness to be deplored, o insensiblenes more then bestiall, o deuillish
rashness and presumption. What does not he deserve who dares such things? with
what punishment, with what kind of torture, shall the contempt of so great a
majesty be worthily satisfied? It is certain, that it shall be punished with
no lesser torment, then that which is prepared for such an offense; that is,
that whosoever he be that contemns God, shall be tormented in hell fire
everlastingly, and yet neither shall he worthily be punished.

This then is the first Title, which binds us to the love and service of this
Lord: which bond is so great, that all bonds, by which by any manner of means
in this world we are bound to any person, either for his excellency, or for his
perfection, are unworthy the name of bonds, if they be compared with this. For
even as the perfections of all other things being compared with the divine, are
no perfections: so neither the bonds, which by reason of their perfections and
excellencies are named such, are bonds, being compared with this: as neither
all the offenses made only to the creatures cannot be called offenses, if they
be compared to them, by which the Creator himself is offended. For which cause
David also in that paenitentiall Psalm says, that he had offended the Lord
only, Psalm, 50,
and only sinned against him, albeit he had offended most grievously against
Vrias, who^ he had commanded to be slain, being innocent: and against his
wife, whom he had defiled with filthy adultery, and against all his own
kingdom, which he had so scandalizd. Yet he says that he had sinned against
GOD only; for he knew that all evils, offenses, and inconveniences, were of no
moment in comparison of the filthiness of that sin, for as much as it repugned
the Law of God. Therefore the consideration of that enormitie, did so greatly
afflict him, that he contemned, and set at naught all other iniu^ies and
offenses whatsoever. For even as God is infinitely greater then all creatures,
so also our debt is infinitely greater, in which we are bound to him, and also
the offense greater which is committed against him. For there is no proportion
of a thing infinite, to a thing finite.

THE SECOND TITLE. Of the bond in which we are bound to Virtue: and to attend
upon GOD, by reason of the benefit of our Creation. CHAP. II.
WE ought not only to apply our selves unto Virtue, and to obey the divine
commandments, for that which God is in himself; but also for that which he
is to us: that is, by reason of his innumerable benefits: of which although we
have spoken in another place, for that purpose which then we had in hand,
nevertheless here also we will handle the same things: that they being
before our eyes, we may see plainly, by how many names and titles we are bound
to serve such a giver. Of these benefits our Creation is the first, of which
(seeing that it is known to every body) only I will say that, that man wholly
is bound for that alone to serve and attend upon the Lord, who has created
him. For according to all laws, a man is a debtor of all that he has
received. Seeing that therefore by this benefit he has received his being,
that is, his body, with all his senses, and his soul, with all her powers and
faculties, the consequent is, that he must bestow all them to the service of
his Maker, unless he will be accounted toward him a thief, and an
ungrateful man, being enriched with so great a benefit. For if a man should
build a house, whom shall it serve for, but for the Lord who builded it? And if
a man shall plant a Vineyard, who shall gather the grapes? shall not he that
has planted the Vineyard? And if a Father has a son, whom shall he rather
serve then his father, who begat him.

This is that, which ancient laws do say, that it cannot be esteemed how
great the authority of the father is over his children, which reaches so
far, that it was lawful for a father being in necessity to sell his child:
for in respect of that, that he has given to his child to be that he is,
therefore the father has that power over his child, that he might do with his
child what he would. If therefore the dominion and authority of a father be so
great over his child; what shall be his dominion and authority, from whom is
derived the being of all fathers, as well in heaven as in earth? And if they as
Seneca says, who have received a benefit, ought to imitate and follow the
fertile field, which yields much more, then it receaueth: how shall we make
answer to God, in this measure of gratitude, seeing that we cannot yield more
unto him, then we have received of him, although we yield all that we have? But
if he that yields no more, then he has received, does not observe and keep
this law and rule; Honor is due to God, because he is our father.
what shall we say of him, who yields less, then is bestowed upon him? And
if, as Aristotle says, there cannot be rendered like to God and our parents,
how shall there be given like to God, who has bestowed more upon us, then all
the fathers in the world? But if it be a grievous offense, if a son be
disobedient to his father, what a wickedness will it be to be rebellious to God,
who by so many names is our father? Yea in comparison of whom no man deserves
the name of a father? This is that which the Lord worthily complayneth of by
his Prophet. Mal. 1.
If then I am your father, says he, where is mine honor? If I be your Lord,
where is my fear? Against the same ingratitude an other Prophet also enueieth,
and that with words more stinging and pearcing: D^ut. 32.
Ah perverse and froward generation, says he, ah foolish and unwise people,
do thou render such things to the Lord? Is not he thy father, that has
bought thee, that has made thee, and proportioned thee?

These are they that do not lift up their eyes to heaven, neither do behold
themselves being forgetful and unmindful of themselves. For if they would
view and behold themselves, they would secretly ask themselves, and they would
endeavor to know, what was their first original and their first beginning:
that is, of whom they were made, and to what end they were created? By the
consideration of the creation, man does come to ye knowledge of his Creator.
Ezech. 29.
For by the knowledge of these things, at length they should come to the
knowledge of that, which of duty they ought to do. Because men do not these
things, they live as though they sprung and were begotten and made of
themselves. As lived that cursed King of Egypt, whom God threatens by his
Prophet saying: Behold, I come against thee, Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great
Dragon, that lies in the midst of his rivers, which has said, The river is
mine, and I have made it for my self. After this manner live all they, that
forget their Creator, as though they were created of themselves acknowledging
no maker. Better did Saint Augustine, Augustine in one of his Soliloquies. ca.
31.
who by the knowledge of his making and beginning came to the knowledge of his
Creator, saying in one of his Soliloquies: And I returned to my self, and I
entered into my self, and I said unto my self: Who art thou? and I answered
my self, a reasonable man and mortal: and I began to discourse and dispute
with my self, what this was, and I said: Whence comes o my Lord God this
manner of creature? Whence, but from thee? Thou made me, and not I my self.
Who art thou? Thou art he, by whom I live, thou art he by whom all things
live. Who art thou? Thou o Lord art my true and only God, omnipotent, and
eternal, incomprehensible and unmeasurable, who always live, and nothing
dies in thee. O my God tell me thy humble servant, o merciful God tell me
poor wretch, tell me I pray thee for thy mercies sake, whence is this manner
of creature, but from thee? Shall any man be the maker of himself? Is to be
and to live taken from any other then from thee? Art not thou the chiefest
good, of whom all things are that be? For whatsoever is, is of thee, because
nothing is without thee. Art not thou the fountain of life, from whence
flows all life? For whatsoever lives, lives by thee, because nothing lives
without thee. Thou o Lord then have made all things. Shall I ask who has made
me? Thou o Lord have made me, without whom nothing is made. Thou art my maker,
and I thy work. I give thee thanks, o my Lord God, by whom I live, and by whom
all things live. I give thee thanks o my framer and fashioner, because thy
hands have made me, and fashioned me. I yield thee thanks o my light, because
thou have enlightened me, and I have found both thee, and my self. This is
therefore the first of the divine benefits, and the foundation of all the other.
For all other do presuppose a Being, which is given by this benefit; and so
all are gotten and joined with this as accidents with their substance, in which
they have their ground and footing, that by this means thou may understand,
how large and liberal a benefit it is, and how worthy it is that thou
should deeply and profoundly consider of it. Go too therefore, if God
requires so great a thanksgiving of thee for every one of his benefits, what
do thou think that he will require, for this alone, which is the foundation
of all the other? Especially seeing that it is the condition of the divine
Godhead, that as he is most liberal in bestowing of his benefits, so is he
most desirous, and as it were covetous in requiring thanks for them. Not
because he does stand need of them, but because our duty does will them. For
in the old Testament we read that God did no sooner bestow one benefit upon
his people, but forthwith it being scarce bestowed, he commanded, that it
should be had amongst them in perpetual memory, and that for it they should
give everlasting and immortal thanks. Exodus, 12,
So when he delivered his people from the Egyptian servitude and yoke,
scarsely they were gone out of that Country, when he commanded, that every
year they should celebrate a solemn feast in remembrance of that benefit.
Exodus 13.
For that end also he slew all the first borne of the Egiptians, and forthwith
commanded that all the Israelites first borne should be sanctified unto him,
as well of men as of beasts, which after that should be borne of them, or
amongst them. Exodus 16. GOD requires of us, gratefulnes and thanksgiving.
The Lord sent the Israelites Manna from heaven, wherewith they might be fed,
and he fed them with that kind of meat forty years in the wilderness: as
soon as they had begun to eat it, he commanded them to gather a certain
measure of the Manna, and to put it into a pot, and to lay it up before the
Testimony, that all posterity might have knowledge of this benefit. Not long
after that, he gave them a famous victory against the Amalekites, and said unto
Moses: Exodus 17.
Write this for a remembrance in the book, and rehearse it in the ears of
Joshua.

If therefore God be so careful, that the memory of his temporal benefits
should live for ever amongst his people; what will he not require of us, for
this immortal benefit, seeing that our soul, which he has given unto us, is
immortal? Heerevpon sprung that consideration, which moved the holy
Patriarchs to build Alters, that there might be monuments and remembrances as
often as they received any particular benefits of the Lord: yea they did
remember in the names of their sons received benefits, Genesis 41.
least they should be buried in oblivion. Wherefore a certain holy man very well
concluded, that man should not oftener breathe, then he should be mindful of
his God. For even as he always has a Being, so always ought he to give
thanks to his Lord God for his immortal Being, which he has received of him.
The Bond of this obligation is so great, that also it was not unknown to the
Ethnic Philosophers but there were amongst them, that exhorted men that they
should not be ungrateful to God. Epictetus.
Epictetus a Stoicke Philosopher was wont to say: O man be not ungrateful to
that high power, for benefits received, as are thy sight, hearing, taste, etc.
But more for thy life, which he has given thee, and for other things with
which he nourishes and sustaineth thee. Give thanks to him for the ripe
fruits, for wine, for oil, and for all other things. But especially thou
ought to bless him, because he has bestowed upon thee the light of reason,
that thou may use all them afore-sayd, and that thou may know their valor
and worth. If an Heathen man shall so commend gratitude, and shall exact it so
strictly for common benefits; what ought not a Christian man to do, who has
also received a greater light of faith, and greater, and more excellent
benefits and blessings of God?

But perhaps thou will say; That the benefits of nature are of God.
that these common benefits do seem rather to be of Nature, then of God: to
which why therefore am I bound for the disposition or the order of things,
which are regularly done, and do observe their course? Alas, this is not the
voice of a Christian, but of an Ethnic, yea rather of a Beast. But that thou
may know and acknowledge this more manifestly, hear the same Philosopher,
chiding and correcting such men. Thou will say perhaps that nature bestows
these benefits upon thee: Ah thou too much ungrateful man, do thou not
mark, that in saying that, thou do change a name of God? what other thing
is Nature then God, who is the first and chiefest nature? Not therefore, o
ungrateful man art thou to be excused, when thou say that thou art bound to
Nature, and not to GOD, seeing that not any nature may be found without God. If
thou should obtain any thing of Lucius Seneca, and afterward should
say, that thou art indebted to Lucius, and not to Seneca, thou do not change
thy Creditor, but only his name.

Another reason why we are bound to serve GOD our Lord: because he is our
Creator.
FVrthermore, not only the debt of justice, but also our own necessity, does
bind us to have always a respect and an eye to our Creator: if after that we
be created, we will attain unto felicity and perfection. For we must know,
that those things, which are borne and breed (after a common manner of
speaking) are not forthwith borne with all their perfection. All things that
are borne, are not by and by perfect.
They have many things perfect, yet many things in them are wanting, which
afterward are perfected. That perfection he must add and give, who began the
work. So that it pertayneth to that cause, which gave the first Being, to
give also the finishing and perfection. Heere-vpon it is, that all effects in
their kind, have recourse and look back to their causes, that of them they
may receive their last perfections. Plants do labor as much as lies in them,
that they may find out the Sun, and that they may send forth their roots
into the earth, which produced and brought them forth: Fishes also do not go
out of that water which engendered them: a Chickin being excluded out of the
Egg, by and by does hatch it self under the wings of the Hen, and
follows her wheresoever she goes. The same does a Lamb, who after that he
is brought forth, presently hastes to the dugges of his Damme; and if there
were a thousand sheep of the same fleece and color, yet he knows his own
Damme, and goes always with her: as though he should say: Hence I have
received that I have, hence I will require that which I want. This almost in
all natural things has place, and also it would come in use amongst
artificial things, if either they had sense or motion. If a Painter in
delineating and pourtraying a picture, should leave the eyes imperfect, if that
picture could perceive it, A similitude.
or could be admonished of that it wants, what do thou think that it
would do? whether would it go? it is certain that it would not go to the
palace of a King or of a Prince, because they could not satisfy the desire of
it, nor supply his want: but it would return to the house of his Master, and
there would desire him, that he would make it perfect, and that he would finish
that he began. Tell me, o reasonable man, what is the cause, that thou do
not that, which unreasonable creatures do? Thou art not yet perfect, many
things are lacking in thee, many things are as yet wanting to thee, before
thou art finished or perfected. The first example and pattern, as yet is not
scarce delineated and drawn (as we say) after a rough and rude manner: the
comlines, decking and trimming of the work are yet wanting, which most plainly
conuinceth the continual appetite of that nature: which always as it were
feeling her own necessity, desires always seruentlie, and seeks carefully
that which is wanting to her.

God will afflict thee with hunger, that being compelled by this necessity, he
might make thee enter in by the right gate, and that thou should have
respect unto him. For this cause, he that made thee, would not presently
finish and make thee perfect: and for this cause he would not presently make
thee rich. He did this, not because he is covetous, but because he is loving
and favorable to thee, knowing that it is good, that thou should be such an
one, not that thou should be poor, but that thou should be humble; not
that thou should always be in need, but that thou should always have
respect unto him. If therefore thou be blind, poor, and standing need of
many things, why do thou not run to thy Father that created thee, and to
the Painter that shadowed thee, that he may perfect those things which are
missing and vvanting?

See how ready in this business was King David, Psalm, 119.
Thine hands, (says he) have made and fashioned me, give me understanding that
I may learn thy commandments. As if he should say, thy hands o Lord, have
made all that is good in me; but thy work and thy frame is not yet perfect and
absolute in every part. The eyes of my soul among other things are not yet
perfect, I have not yet that light, by whose benefit I may know and discern,
what is wanting in me, and what is necessary for me. But of whom may I request
that which remains and is behind, except of him, who gave that I have; that
to whom the beginnings are due, to him also the end might be due? Give me
therefore o Lord that light, illuminate the eyes of this borne blind, that I
may acknowledge thee with them, and so that may be perfected, which thou have
begune in me. If therefore it appertains to this Lord, to give the last
perfection to thy understanding, it shall also pertain to him, to give the
same perfection to thy will, and to the other faculties and powers of thy
soul: that by this manner this frame may be finished of the same workman that
begun it. This therefore shall be done without defect, it shall increase
without discommoditie, it shall be enriched without great preparation, and
quiet rest shall be given unto it without the possession of many things.
Through him, a poor and miserable creature is content with his estate; in him
rest contented the clothed and the naked, the destitute, and he that is
regarded, he that wants all things, and he that is happy in possession of all
things. Prou, 13.
Wherefore, worthily said the wise man, He is as rich, having nothing, and is
as poor, having great riches. For the poor, who has GOD, All things without
God, are nothing.
is rich: and on the contrary part, he is most beggarly and poor, who is
without God, although he be the mightiest Monarch in the world. For what do
riches and power profit a wealthy man, being distracted with a thousand manner
of cogitations, being weary of all things, and lothing all things? which
vices proceed of the appetite, which can be satisfied with no riches. What do
costly garments, delicate fare, full storehouses, and such like profit him, to
ease the griefs and bitternesses boiling and seething in his soul?

A rich man, with all his riches lying in his bed, in one night a hundred times
does toss and turn himself, neither can he sleep, because he has not that
he desires; and he fear least that he has should be taken away. Of all
those things, which hitherto have been spoken, that is convinced and proved,
that thou may know how greatly thou art bound to serve GOD, not only for the
debt of this benefit, but also for the complement and finishing of our
felicity and happiness.

THE THIRD TITLE. How we are bound to the Lord GOD, by reason of the benefit
of preservation and governing. CHAP. III.
NOT only man is bound to the Lord his GOD for the benefit of Creation, but
also for the benefit of preservation: for it is he that made thee, and after
he made thee, he also preserves thee, so that thou do depend of his hands,
and thou can no more live without him, then be without him, before thou wast
created. This is no less a benefit the^ that former. For that was but only
once done for thee, but this is alwaie done and renewed, and the Lord daily by
one means or other, does estsoones create thee: for him he continually
preserves, whom he once created. Not less power, nor less love is required
in the one, then in the other. If thou therefore owe so much unto him, who
created thee in a moment; how much more shall thou be indebted to him, for that
he preserves thee continually? thou do not move a foot, which he does
not move, neither do thou open or shut thine eyes without his help. And
if thou do not believe that God does move thy members when thou do move,
thou art not worthy that thou should be called a Christian: but if thou
do believe, that he does yield and bestow upon thee this favor, and yet
dare offend him, I do not know by what name I should call thee.

Tell me, if a man should stand in an high tower, and should hold an other man
in his hand hanging by a small thread, A similitude.
durst he think thou, that sees himself in such a case, slander and rail
at him that holds him? If thou therefore, that art sustained of the Divine
goodness, as hanging by a very small thread, that if God does but a little draw
back his hand, thou necessarily come to naught; how is it possible, that
thou dare provoke to wrath that Divine Majesty, which sustaineth thee, even
in that same time, wherein thou offendest him? In his mystical Theology, ca.
4.
For as Dionisius says) the virtue and goodness of the chiefest Good is so
excellent, that the creatures when they are immorigerous and disobedient, do
receive of his immeasurable virtue the Being and Ability, by which they strive
and strugle against him, that they may both Be, and be able to repugne him.
Which seeing that it is so, how dare thou offend with thy members and senses
that Lord, who preserves thee? O great blindness, o intolerable rebellion. Who
ever saw so impudent a conspiracy? The members do rise against the head, of
which their life and death depends. The day will come, when this injury shall
be manifeste^d, and the complaints of the divine honor shall be heard. Have ye
conspired against God? It is equal and right that the universe of the whole
world should likewise conspire against you, and that God should arm every
creature to the revenge of that injury, and that all the whole circumference of
the earth should war against the ungrateful, and those that will not
acknowledge this benefit. For it is meet, that they that would not open their
eyes, whilst they had time, and were invited of so great a multitude of divine
benefits, I say, that is meet, that their eyes should be opened by the
multitude of torments, which never shall have end. But what will be done, if to
these aforesaid we set before thee, the plentiful, rich and abundant table of
this world, All things created for the use of man.
which the Lord has created for thine use? Whatsoever is found under the cope
of heaven, is either for the use of man, or for the use of that thing, which
attends and wayteth upon man: for if man be not fed (as I may so say) with
flies, that fly in the air, yet he is fed with those birds, which are fed
with these flies: and if he eat not grass and wild herbs, yet he eats the
beasts of diverse sorts and kinds, which are nourished with these herbs. Cast,
and cast again thine eyes upon every corner of the world, and thou shall see
how spacious and large the bounds and limits of thy riches are, and how
plentiful and affluent is thine inheritance. Every thing that goes upon the
earth, that swimmeth in the water, that flies through the air, that shines
in heaven, is thine. But all these benefits are of God, and the works of his
providence are the glasses of his beauty, and testimonies of his mercy, the
sparks of his love, and the reports and praises of his liberality. See how many
Preachers God sends unto thee, that thou may know him. All things that are
in heaven and in earth (says Saint Augustine) do tell me, that I should love
thee o my Lord, and they do not cease to make the same proclamation to all
men, that no man can be excused. If thou have ears that thou can understand
the voices of the creatures, thou shall perceive manifestly, how they all
together teach thee, that thou should love God. For all they in holding
their peace, cry that they were made for thy service, that thou, as well for
thy self, as for them, might serve both thy Lord and theirs. The
expostulation of the elements with man.
Heaven says, I do minister unto thee by day the light of the Sun, and by
night the benefit of the Moon and stars, that thou should not walk in
darkness; and I do give and send unto thee diverse influences, that diverse
things may increase and breed with thee, that thou may not perish thtough
hunger. The air says, I do apply my self unto thee, that thou may breathe
in me: I do cool and refresh thee; I do temper and moderate thine internal
heat, least it consume thee: I have in me diverse kinds of birds, that by their
variety and beauty thine eyes may be delighted, thine ears with their singing
pleased, and thy palate by their taste contented, and satisfied. The water
says, I do serve thee in the appointed times of the year with my rain and
showers; I do refresh and comfort thee with my rivers and springs: I do bring
forth and nourish diverse kinds of fishes, that they may be meat for thee, I
do water thy sowing, thy gardens, and fruitful trees, that thou may be
nourished with them all, I do give thee way through the midst of the Sea, that
thou may traffic with the whole world, and that it may be at thy pleasure
to join thy riches with the wealth of another Hemispheare. What think thou
that the earth will say, which is the common mother of us all, and as it were
the shop and warehouse of all natural things? Truly it will say not without
reason, I do bear thee as an unprofitable lump, I thy mother do carry thee
as it were in mine arms, I do provide thee of necessaries; I do sustain
thee with the fruits of my bowels; I have participatinn and communion with all
the other elements, with all the heavens, and I do partake of all their
influences, and I do fruitfully yield and give thee all my benefits. To
conclude I like a good mother, neither leave thee in life nor death: for in
life I do suffer thee to tread upon me with thy feet, and do sustain and
bear thee up; and in death I yield thee a place of quiet and rest, and I do
hide and enclose thee within my womb. What need I many words? All the world
does cry with a loud voice, Behold with what great love my Lord and Creator
does affect thee, who created me for the love of thee, and willed that I should
serve thee for him, and that thou in like manner should love and serve him,
who created me for thee, and thee for himself.

These are, o man, the voices of all the creatures: mark and give ear now
that there can be no such wicked deafenes, as to hear these voices, and to be
ungrateful for so great benefits. If thou have received a benefit, pay thy
debt by thankfulness, least thou be plagued with the punishment of ungrateful
persons. For every one of the creatures (as very well says a certain Doctor)
do speak to, The creatures do call upon us with three words.
and call upon man with three words, Receive, Render, Beware: that is, receive
a benefit, render thy debt, and beware of punishment, if thou do not render
it.

But that thou may more fervently meditate and think upon these things,
consider how Epictetus a Philosopher, of whom we have made mention before, came
to the knowledge of this Divinity: who wills that in all things created we
should hear and see our Creator, The saying of Epictetus
saying: When the Crow does crook, and does fore-shew any change of weather,
it is not the Crow that does fore-shew this to thee, but God himself. And if
by man's voice thou be admonished of any thing, is it not in like manner God,
who created man, and gave unto him power and ability, that he might be able to
admonish? That thou may know that the Divine power does work sometimes by one
mean, and sometimes by another, that he may do as seems good in his own
eyes. For when things are of any great moment, which he would have signified
unto us, he causes that they be signified of more worthy and more noble
Ambassadors. Furthermore, the same Philosopher goes forwards: At the length
when thou have ended the reading of my counsels and aduises, thou shall say
unto thy self; These things are not spoken unto me of Epictetus the
Philosopher, but of God. For from whence, if not from him has he got this
faculty of pleading and persuading? Therefore not he, but God by him has told
these things to me. Hitherto Epictetus. How shall he be worthy the name of a
Christian, who blusheth and is ashamed to proceed thither, whether this
Heathen man proceeded? Certainly it is a most shameful thing, that eyes
enlightened with the clearenes of faith should not see this, which, eyes set in
the mist and darkness of reason did see.

It may be gathered of these afore-sayd, how unworthy and how vild a thing it
is not to serve the Lord God.
THis being thus, what shall be the Sea of this so great ingratitude, to swim
in the Ocean of so many and great benefits, and not once to remember, of whom
these benefits are bestowed? Saint Paul says, Romans 12.
He that does well unto and blesses his enemy, heapeth coals of fire upon
his head. Therefore if all the creatures of this world be the peculiar benefits
of God, what other thing then, shall the whole frame and machine of this world
be, then a fire of so much vvood and so many fagots, as there are creatures in
the world? What heart then is so hard and senseless, that being in the midst
of this fire does not burn, yea and feel the heat? Is it possible o
Christian, that thou who receauest so many benefits daily and without
intermission, sholdest not lift up (...) eyes sometimes to heaven, that thou
may see, who it is, that bestows so many blessings and good things upon
thee? A similitude.
Tell me, if it should happen that thou being wearied through a long journey,
should rest thy self at the foot and bottom of some Tower or Castle, and
should exceedingly and extremely be tormented with hunger and thirst? If
one in that Tower or Castle should reach thee as much meat and drink as thou
desire, can thou contain thy self, but that thou must needs lift up
thine eyes, and see who it is, that so well deserves of thee? Certainly I
think that thou can not but do it. What other thing does God to thee from
his high and lofty heaven, but reign upon thee without ceasing his benefits?
Give me any thing either small or great, which is not given from heaven and
from above, by the special providence of God. Why then sometimes do thou not
lift up thine eyes to heaven, that thou may acknowledge and love so liberal
a Lord, and so continual a benefactour? What other thing does this carelesnes
show, but that men have put off their own nature, and have degenerated into
the nature of unreasonable beasts? Thou will say, that it is a filthy thing to
say that we are made like unto beasts, and that we resemble beasts in our
conditions; but yet it is reason and meet, Men like unto swine.
that we speak of men according to their deserts. For in this we are like
unto Swine feeding under an Oak, who when their Keeper climeth into the tree,
A similitude.
and beats down the Acorns with his whyp or staff, they are only busied in
eating, and grunting, pushing at one an other, and seeking to drive one another
from their meat, never looking or respecting who gave them this meat, neither
know they how to look up, that they may see from whose hands this benefit
descended. O ye beastly ingratitude of the sons and children of Adam, who
when ye have (besides the light of reason) countenaunces and visages erected
and looking up to heaven, yet ye will not with the eyes of your bodies, lift
up and eleuate the eyes of your minds toward heaven, that ye may see,
acknowledge, and give thanks to him, who bestows so great benefits upon you?
Do thou think, that it pleases God, that men should be excelled and
exceeded in reason of beasts? The law of gratitude is so general, and so
beloved of God, that he would have this inclination imprinted even in wild
beasts, as we see plainly and evidently by many examples.

See Aulus Gellius in the 5. book and 14. chap.
What is more cruel and fierce then a Lion? and yet Appion Polihistor writes,
that Androdus a Dane, the servant of a Roman Senator, being constrained to
take his flight into Africa through the bad dealing of his Master with him,
being daily and unjustly beaten and abused; and that his lurking might be the
more safe and secret, he lived in the wilderness of fields, and in the desert
of sands; and having got into a certain Den far from any frequencie of
people, there he hid and reposed himself. Not long after, a Lion came thither
into the same Den, The notable gratitude of a Lion.
with one of his feet lame and wounded, pitifully complaining, and lamenting
the grief of his wound. At the first, the servant was horribly afraid, but
at the length, the Lion being mild and gentle, came unto him, and lifting up
his foot, showed it to the servant, as though he seemed to desire his help.
Androdus (as says Appion) pulled out a great stumpe or stalk of a tree
sticking in the sole of his foot, and crushed and squeased out the putrified
matter that was festered and corrupted within the wound. The Lion being eased
through the cure and help of Androdus, putting his foot into his hands, he
laid him down and rested himself: and from that time three whole years, the
servant and the Lion lived together, in the same Den, and with the same
food. For what soever wild beasts the Lion hunted and took, he brought the
more principal and daintier parts of them to Androdus; which he with the
midday sun (for he had no fire) roasted and eat. At the length, Androdus
being weary with that kind of life, fled away, the Lion being absent: and
being taken, and brought to Rome to his Master, he was condemned to the
beasts. In the mean time, the Lion was also taken, and brought to Rome, and is
let in for to fight with Androdus. The Lion when he saw him a far of, on a
sudden stood still, as though he was amazed, and after that, as though he
should know him, came unto him leysurely and peaceably. Then he moved his
tail, after the manner and custom of fawning dogs, gently and meeklie, and
licked his legs and hands with his tongue softly, and pleasantly.

Androdus, at these blandishments and allurements of so cruel and fierce a
beast, plucked up his spirits, and at length knew the Lion, and both seemed to
rejoice. For this cause, the man and the Lion were both set free, which Lion
was given to the man by the Suffrages of the people. Afterward (as Appion
proves by the testimony of the whole people of Rome) Androdus led this Lion
by a small thong of leather through out the whole City, about all places
where men meet to talk and to be merry, and much money was given to Androdus,
and a long while after, the people every where cast flowers upon the Lion.
Pliny lib, 8. cap. 17.
Furthermore, one Helpis of Samos sailing into Africa, his ship standing by
the shore and he going on land, espied a Lion fearefullie gaping upon him, for
dread of whom he got up into a tree. But the Lion lying him down at the
root of the tree, with that gaping that he terrified, with that he desired and
besought help and pity. A bone, through his strong and fierce biting and
griping, stuck fast in his teeth, which so hindered his feeding, that he was
almost pined to death. Helpis, seeing the thing, came out of the tree, and
pulled out the bone, he holding and applying his mouth to his hand. And so
long as the ship stayed by the shore, the Lion requited the benefit of his
helper, for he continually and daily bringing his prays to him, feasted all
that were in the ship.

No less admirable is that, which is remembered of another Lion, The like to
this is reported of Henricus Leo, Duke of Saxony. See Krantius in his Saxony
lib. 6. cap. 34.
who fighting with a Dragon, was wonderfully ouerbidden and ouer-matched of
him, so that through the wounds that the Dragon gave him, his life was greatly
endangered: by great chance a certain Knight being on hunting, came that
way, and seeing the Lion in such hazard, helped him, and killed the Dragon. For
which benefit, the Lion followed the Knight, and never left him afterward: and
when the Knight went forth to hunt, the Lion did his part in the chase. But
when as the Knight took ship without the Lion, the Lion seeing himself
forsaken and left of his Master, cast himself into the sea, and by swimming
followed the ship; but being weary through too much labor, he was drowned
in the water, no body being at hand to help him. What shall we say of the
fidelity and gratitude of Horses? Pliny reports of certain Horses, The
gratitude of horses. Pliny, lib. 8 cap. 42.
which lamented the death of their Masters: of others, which shed tears for
the death of their Masters. King Nicomedes being slain, his horse pined away
to death. Some Horses have revenged their masters death with their heels, and
with biting. So a certain King of the Scythians being slain, when as the
conqueror came to dispoyle his slain enemy, he was killed of his horse with
his blows and biting.

These are light and slight, if we compare them with the fidelity, friendship,
and gratitude of dogs; The gratitude of dogs. Pliny lib. 8. cap. 40.
of which the same Pliny does remember admirable things. He writes of a dog
which did fight against thieves, and being sore beaten, would not depart from
his slain Master, but drive away birds and wild beasts, that they should
not tear the dead body. And that a dog, Jason Lycius his Master being
slain, would eat no meat, but died through hunger. But he speaks of
another, admirable beyond the rest, which he testifies to have happened at
Rome in his time, Appius Iunius, and Publius Silius being Consuls. When as
punishment was inflicted upon a certain youth in the matter and cause of Nero
Germanicus, his dog could not be driven from the prison, neither would he
depart from his Master, but his Master being cast into that place, whether
condemned men were thrown, he sent forth lamentable howlings, a great company
of the people of Rome standing about him.

But hear more wonderful things; when one of the standers by had cast meat
to the dog, the dog took it, and laid it upon the mouth of his dead
master. At length, when as by the sentence of the Judge, the dead body was
cast into the River of Tyber, the dog endeavored to keep it up, that it
might not be drowned. What can be worthy of greater admiration? In the time of
Henricus Auceps the Emperor, a certain dog in the palace of Caesar,
Ditmarus, in the first book of his Chronicle.
knowing the enemy of his Master, ran upon him, and with a sudden snatch
bytte his right hand, and as though the matter had been well done, he
returned to his friends, wagging his tail. All that were present maruailing
at it, and he that was bitten being asked in what thing he had wronged the
dog; he confessed, that he had secretly killed the Master of the dog, lying
a sleep, being wearied, his dog striving much against it, but all in vain.

If therefore beasts, in whom there is no reason, but only a certain spark
of a natural instinct, by the which they acknowledge a benefit, be so
grateful, and are aydful in what they may, and do obey and serve their
benefactors; how can it be that man should be so careless, and so forgetful
of him, from whom come and flow to him so many benefits; seeing that he is
enobled with so great a light, to acknowledge benefits received? Is it
possible, that he should suffer himself to be excelled of beasts, in the
law of humanity, fidelity, and gratitude? especially, seeing that they are
infinitely greater, which man has received of God, then those which beasts
can expect of man: seeing also the person, who does give, and the love from
which they are given, and the intent for which they are given, are much more
excellent: and that GOD does not give, that he expects lucre or gain thereby,
but of his mere grace and love toward us? Surely, it is a thing to be
astonished and amazed at, and which does sufficiently and evidently argue, that
there is a certain kind of devils, which do blind our understanding, harden
our will, and disturb our memory, that we may not remember so great a
benefactour.

Furthermore, if it be so great an offense, not to remember this Lord, what, I
pray thee, and how great will it be, to offend him? yea to offend him with his
own benefits? The first degree of ingratitude, says Seneca, is, not to
recompense benefits with benefits: Diverse degrees of ingratitude.
the second is, to forget the benefactour: the third is, to do ill to him who
has done well to thee: and that seems to be most vilde and unworthy: but
who does offend his benefactour with those same benefits which he received of
him, and does convert those benefits to the injury and hurt of his benefactour?
Truly I know not whether any man may be found in the world, who does that
unto another man, which many men dare do unto GOD himself. A similitude.
Who is that man, (although he be never so dangerous and wicked) who when he
has received most ample and large gifts of a King or Prince, that with them
will foorth-with muster together an Army, and set upon the King? And do
thou wretched man, with those same benefits, which God the giver of all good
things has bestowed upon thee, move war against him, and stir up and
set thy self against him? What greater wickedness can be thought of? A
similitude.
Would it not be a wickedness intolerable, if a married woman should give all
her Ouches, Tablets, Ringes, Chains, Earings, and Bracelets (which her husband
gave her, that she might be beautified with them, and to please him,) to an
adulterer, that she may allure him to her love? I do not think that a more
execrable and damnable thing could be thought of in the world; and yet this
injury is done to man of man, to an equal of an equal. But how much
greater, and filthier is it, if such great injury be offered to God?

Men do abuse the gifts of God to the injury of the giver.
And what other thing do men daily, when as they do spend and consume their
fortitude, strength, health, and riches, which God has given them, upon ill
works, and most filthy and dishonest actions? They wax more proud and do
mightily swell through fortitude; they hunt after greater glory through
beauty; in health they more easily forget God; by riches they be come more
covetous, and more greedy to suck out the blood of the poor, by riches they
study how to heap up more riches, they do deck and trim their bodies beyond
measure: they lie in wait for the virginity and chastity of women, and they
do that they, as an other Judas, may sell the blood of Christ; and they as
Jews may buy it at an appointed price. And how may I remember sufficient
worthily the abuse of the rest of the benefits? The water serves their gullet:
they abuse the beauty of the creatures to their lust: the fruits and blessings
of the earth do wait upon their covetousness: The graces and habites of nature
do increase their pride; through too much prosperity they wax mad and
foolish, and through adversity they are so dejected and cast down, that they
make shipwreck of their souls, and run into damnation.

The murderer rises early and kills the poor and the needy, Job, 34.
and in the night he is as a thief, as it is written in Job. To be brief,
whatsoever God created for his glory, they convert it to be instruments for
their madness and frenzy. He should enter into a bottomless pit of miseries,
if any would exactly remember their distilled waters, smells, fumigations,
apparel, Babilonian tapestry: and their diverse kinds of delicates, boiled,
roasted, broyled, fried, and a thousand other superfluities, of the which (that
there might be more skill to sin) not only whole books are written, but also
imprinted, so little shamefastnes there is amongst us, and so great strength
the enticements of the flesh have got. All these precious things, for which we
ought to give to the Lord God infinite and everlasting thanks, they use as the
prouokements of their riotousnes and luxuries: perverting the use of all the
creatures of God, and making them the instruments of vanity, which they ought
to make the instruments of virtue. To be brief, they have vowed and bequeathed
all things which are in the world to the lusts and delights of their flesh: but
nothing to their neighbor, whom God has commended so seriously unto them: For
when they should give any thing to their neighbor, then they are only poor,
then they rip up and record that they are much endebted, in all other things,
neither are they endebted to any man, neither is any thing wanting or lacking
to them. Therefore o my brother, do not suffer, that this so dangerous a
burden laid upon thee do remain to the hour of death; which by how much it
is greater, by so much a straighter account shall be exacted of thee. That God
gives much to him, who is ungrateful, is a certain kind of judgment: but
when he gives to him, that abuses his benefits, it is a token of reprobation.
For in this we show that we have put off all shamefastnes; the beasts in this
kind of virtue do go before us, and are much more thankful to their
benefactour, then we are. Wherefore if the Ninevites shall rise against the
Jews at the last judgment, and shall condemn them, because they were not
moved to repentance by the preaching of Christ; let us beware and take heed,
least God condemn us for the example of beasts, because they do love their
benefactour, whom we do not love.

THE FOURTH TITLE. That we are bound unto Virtue by reason of the inestimable
benefit of our Redemption. CHAP. IIII.
AFter the benefits of our Creation and Preservation, follows the inestimable
benefit of our Redemption. To handle and speak of this benefit, I find my
self so unworthy and so unapt, that I am utterly ignorant where to begin, or
where to make an end. I know not what to speak, neither what to keep close
and silent. If the idleness and slothfulnes of men did not need this prick to
live well, it were better to adore with silence the altitude and depth of such
a benefit, then to obscure and darken it with the harshnes (that I may so
speak) and penury of my tongue. A similitude.
It is remembered in the writings of ancient men, that a certain famous
Paynter, when he would depaynt the funeral solemnity of a certain Kings
Daughter, feigned many of her kinsfolks and alliance standing about the course
with sorrowful and heavy countenances; he joined also the mother unto them,
more mournful and sorrowful then the rest: When he came to delineate and
pourtray the father, he did cover his face with a certain artificial shadow;
signifying thereby that his Art did here fail him. By which new device and
invention he expressed the greatness of his grief. If therefore all our
knowledge is not sufficient to declare the benefit of our Creation, what
tongue, what eloquence, what oratory, can sufficient worthily express the
benefit of our Redemption? God created all things with the only beck and
pleasure of his will; but for man's redemption he sweat thirty three years, he
shed his blood, neither had he any one member or sense, which was not tormented
and vexed with some particular and peculier grief. It seems that an injury
is done to this glorious mystery, if any man shall suppose that he can
express it with humane tongue.

Then what shall I do; shall I speak or shall I hold my peace? I may not be
silent, and I cannot speak. How can it be, that I should keep in silence thy
mercy so unmeasurable, and how shall I declare this mystery so high and so to
be adored? To hold my peace ingratitude, to speak may be called rashness and
presumption. Wherefore o my God, I entreat thine unmeasurable piety, grant
unto me, that as long as I shall speak of thy glory after my rude manner,
those blessed spirits, which are above in heanen, who know how to glorify
thee, may praise and glorify thee for me, and that thy holy spirit may
administer and supply unto me those things, wherein I fail.

After that man was created, and seated in a place of delights in great dignity
and glory, The beginning of man's perdition.
and also was bound to God with so great and straight bonds, as the benefits
were great, that he had received of him, he became disobedient and rebelled:
and of those things, of which he should have taken and received greater causes
of loving his Creator, of those he received and took greater occasion of
treason and disloyalty. Therefore he was thrust out of Paradise, and cast into
banishment, yea, and was adjudged to hell fire; that as he was made a
companion with the devil in sin, so he might be his companion in
punishment. The Prophet Elizeus said to his servant Gehezi, 4, Kings, 5.
Thou have received silver and garments of Naaman: therefore the leprosy of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and to thy seed for ever. Like was the
judgment of God against man, who seeing that he had affected the riches and
treasure of Lucifer (that is his pride and ambition) it was meet that he
should be infected with the leaprosie of the same Lucifer, which was the
punishment of his pride. Behold then man made like unto the devil, being a
follower of his fault.

Therefore when man was so abominable in Gods eyes, and had incurred so great
displeasure, our most gracious and most merciful Lord, did not disdain to
respect us, he did not look to the injury done to his supreme Majesty, but
to the misfortune of our own misery: more lamenting our error, then desirous
of revenge, for the contumely offered unto him: he determined to repair man
and to reconcile him unto him, his only begotten son being our Mediator.
But how has he reconciled man unto him? What humane tongue shall declare this
unto us? The admirable mystery of the incarnation
Christ has procured so great friendship between us and God, that not only
God has pardoned to man all his fault, has received him into his favor, has
made him one and that same with himself through a certain union of love, but
(that which passes all greatness) has made such a likeness and similitude
between himself and man's nature, that amongst all things created, there can
be found no greater conformity, the^ are the Deity and humanity: for they are
not one and the same through love and favor, but also in person. Who ever
durst have hoped, that a wound so largely gaping, should after this manner have
been drawn together? Who ever could have thought, that these two natures,
between which there was so great difference both of nature and of offense,
that ever they could have been so nearly joined together; not in one house,
not at one table, not in one love, but in one and the self same person? What
two greater contraries may be given, then God and a sinner? And what two things
are now more straightly and narrowly combined together, what more commixt, then
God and man? There is nothing higher or nobler then God (says Bernard) and
there is nothing lower or baser then that clay, of which man is formed.

Nevertheless, with so great humility GOD descended upon the earth to man, and
with so great sublimitie earth ascended to God, that whatsoever God has done,
earth may be said to have done it, and whatsoever earth has suffered, God may
be said to have suffered it. Who would have said to man, when he was naked, and
knew that he had incurred the wrath of God, when he sought lurking holes and
corners in Paradise, wherein he might hide himself; who (I say) would have
then said, that the time should come, when this vild substance should be united
to God, in one and the self same person? This union is so near, straight, and
faithful, that when it was to be dissolved, (which was in the time of the
Passion) it would rather rent and break, then faint and forsake. Death might
separate the soul from the body, which was the union of nature; but it could
not pluck GOD from the soul, nor from the body: for that was the union of the
Divine person. For what it once apprehends with so strong a love, it never
forsakes. This is that peace, this is that health and salvation which we
receive by the benefit of our Mediator and Savior.

Although we are such and so great debtors for this benefit, that no man's
tongue can utter it, We are bound to God, not only for our Redemption, but
for the manner of it.
yet we are not less bound to God for the manner of our Redemption, then for
the redemption it self. O my Lord, I am bound to thee in a high degree of
duty, that thou have delivered me from hell, and have reconciled me unto thee;
but much more owe I unto thee, for the manner it self, by which thou have
delivered me, then for the liberty it self, which thou have given me. All thy
works are admirable in all things, and although a man does think when he has
considered one thing, that not any thing remains, which may be added to
further admiration, foorth-with all that wonderment vanishes, when he turns
his eyes to contemplate an other thing. O lord, the glory of thy greatness is
not diminished, if one wonder does seem to expel and put out another: but
these are tokens of thy greater glory.

But what was the mean, o my Lord, by which thou would take away my evils
and wickednesses? There were infinite means by which thou could have helped
me, and given me perfect salvation, without labor, and without any price.
Notwithstanding, so great, and so admirable is thy liberality, that to show me
more manifestly the greatness of thy love and goodness, thou would help me
with so great dolours, that the only cogitation of them was sufficient, to
extract bloody sweat from all thy members, and thy passion (a little after)
through dolor to cleave a sunder the hardest Rocks. O my Lord, the heavens do
praise thee, and the Angels set forth thy wonders. What? did thou need our
good? or were our evils any prejudice unto thee? Job, 35,
If thou sinnest, (says Job) what do thou against him? yea, when thy sins
be many, what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what give thou unto
him? or what receives he at thy hand?

This GOD so rich, so void of all evil, he whose riches, whose power, whose
wisdom cannot increase, or be greater then it is; he that was neither before,
nor after the creation of the world, greater or lesser then he is now; he that
is neither more illustrious, or less glorious, because Angels sing his praise,
and men do glorify him, nay if all the creatures should curse and blaspheme
him; this great Lord, not of necessity, but of mere charity, it not hindering
him, that we were his enemies, he did not disdain to incline and bend the
heavens of his majesty, and to descend into this valley of misery, to be
clothed with the flesh of our mortality, and to take all our debts upon him,
and to cancel them, to suffer and undergo greater torments, then ever any
suffered heretofore, or shall suffer hereafter.

Ah my Lord, for the love of me thou wast borne in a stable, and laid in a
Cratch; The means by which we are redeemed.
for me thou wast circumcized the eight day; for me thou flying into Egypt,
liuedst there in banishment seven whole years; and for me thou did
sustain diverse persecutions, and wast molested and vexed with infinite
injuries. For the love of me thou did fast, thou did watch, thou did run
hither and thither, thou did sweat, thou did weep, and thou did prove by
experience, those miseries which my sins deserved; and yet thou wast without
any sin, neither was there guile found in thy mouth: neither had thou
offended, but wast offended. To be brief, for me thou wast taken, forsaken of
thine, denied, sold, presented now before this Judge, now before that, falsely
accused before them, beaten with fists, spette upon, mocked, whypped, crowned
with thorns, reviled with blasphemies, hanged upon the Cross, dead, and
buried. At the length thou did free me from all evil, dying upon the Cross,
and ending thy life, thy mother looking on: at which time thou wast found in so
great need and misery, that in that thine intolerable thirst, a small drop of
water was denied unto thee, by which thou might refresh and cool the heat
of thy mouth. Not only thou wast forsaken of all external things, but also of
thine own Father. What is worthy of greater admiration, then that the God of
so great a majesty, should end his life upon the cursed tree of the Cross,
with the title of a malefactor? When any man, yea of mean estate, comes to
that misfortune, that he is to be punished with like death for his offense and
fault, and thou by chance do know him, seeing his countenance, thou can
not sufficiently wonder, considering into what an unhappy estate his misery
has cast him, that he must undergo a death so cruel and ignominous.
Wherefore, if it be an admirable thing, to see a common man of inferior degree
to be compassed with so miserable calamity; what will it be to see not a man,
but the Lord of all creatures to be so plunged? Can a thing be seen with
greater admiration, then God himself to be brought into so great misery for
the offenses of one malefactor? And if by how much the person is more worthy,
and more noble, who is slain, by so much his case is more admirable and more
miserable; The Angels were astonished at the passion of our Lord
O ye Angels, to whom the height and excellency of this Lord is so perfectly
known and understood, tell me, what was your grief and discruciatement? What
was your admiration and astonishment, when ye saw him hanging upon the tree?

The Cherubins, whom God in the old Testament commanded to be placed at the
two ends of the Arc of the Covenant, their faces being turned one to another
toward the Mercie-seate, as though they beheld it admiring and wondering, do
signify unto us, that those high and supreme spirits were astonished, when
they did see and behold a work of so great piety; when (I say) they did see
God made the propitiatory sacrifice of the world hanging upon a tree. Nature
herself stood astonished, and all the creatures were suspended from their
functions; the principalities and powers of heaven were amazed, considering
this inestimable goodness, which they knew to be in GOD. What then shall they
do, who do not swim in waters of so great admiration of the Sea? What shall
they do, who are not drowned in the Ocean of this goodness? How cannot he but
be amazed, as another Moses astonished then in the Mount, when the figure and
pattern of this mystery was revealed unto him, and he cried out with a loud
voice, The Lord, Exodus 34.
the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth. Being able neither to say, nor do any thing, but to
proclaim with a high voice that mercy, which God then showed to him? What
shall he do, that covers not his face as Elias did, 3. Reg. 19.
when he saw God pass by him, not in the figure of his majesty, but in the
form of his most lowly humility: not overthrowing Mountains, and renting in
sunder Rocks by his infinite power, but presented to the eyes of a froward
Nation, and commanding Rocks to be rent and cloven in sunder through his
compassion?

Who then will not shut the eyes of his understanding, who will not open the
bosom of his will, that he may perceive the greatness of this love and
benefit, and love this Lord without any mean or measure? O the height of love,
o the depth of unmeasurable humility, o the greatness of mercy, o the
bottomless pit of incomprehensible goodness. O Lord, if I be so greatly
indebted to thee, because thou have redeemed me, what do I not owe thee for
that manner, by which thou have redeemed me? Thou have redeemed me with most
great dolours, with contumelies and ignominies not to be borne; in so much,
that thou wast made a reproach of men, and the scorn of the whole world.
Through thy reproaches thou have honored me; through thy accusations thou have
defended me; through thy blood thou have washed me; through thy death thou have
raised me; and through thy tears thou have freed me, from everlasting weeping,
and gnashing of teeth.

O good Father, who so tenderly love thy children, thou art that good and
true Shepherd, which give thy self food for thy flock. O thou most
faithful Keeper, who lavest down thy life for thy Sheep, which thou tookest
to defend and keep: with what rewards shall I recompense this so great a
benefit? with what tears shall I requite thy weeping? with what life shall I
remunerate thy holy and pure living? There is too huge and great a difference,
between the life of man and God; between the tears of the Creator and the
creature.

But if o man, it be apparent unto thee, that thou art not only indebted unto
God, that he dyed not only for thee alone, but for the whole world, beware
thou be not deceived. The Lord suffered not only for all in general, but also
for every one in particular.
For so he dyed for all, that also he dyed for every one. For by his infinite
wisdom, all they for whom he suffered, were so present to his eyes, that they
were all comprehended as it were in one; and with his unmeasurable love he
embraced all in general, and every one in particular, and he so shed his
blood for all, as if it had been for one. To conclude, his love was so great
and so exceeding, that (as the holy men of GOD do say) if but one only
amongst all men had been guilty and faulty, yea for him alone he would have
suffered all that, which he suffered for all. Mark therefore, and ponder with
thy self, how much thou art indebted to this Lord, who has done so great
things for thee, and would have done much greater, if thy necessity had
required greater.

Of this aforesaid it is gathered, how great an offense it is to offend our
Savior.
I Would that all creatures would tell me, if any benefit greater, if a
greater bond, if greater favor the^ this may be found? Let the whole assembly
and company of Angels tell me, if God did ever such things for them? Who then
is he, that will refuse to offer himself up wholly a sacrifice to GOD? For
three things man owes himself unto GOD.
For three causes (says Anselme) o Lord, I owe all that to thee, that I am:
First, because thou have created me, I owe all those things to thee which are
in me. Secondly, because thou have redeemed me, I owe the same, but by a more
just title. Thirdly, because thou have promised thy self a reward unto me, it
makes me eftsoons to owe my self wholly unto thee. Why therefore shall I not
give my self once wholly to him, to whom I owe my self by so many means and
titles?

O exceeding ingratitude, The hardness of man's heart.
o the hardness of man's heart: a hard heart in deed thou art, if thou be not
bended and moved with so many benefits, if thou do not render over and give
thy self for so many gifts. There is not any thing found in this world so
hard, but that by some Art and workmanship it may be mollified and softened.
Metals melt through fire, Iron is made tractable by the same; the hardness of a
Diamond is broken by the blood of a Goat: but thou, o heart of man, art harder
then any rock, harder then Iron, harder then a Diamond: when as neither hell
fire may break thy hardness, nor the Art of thy most merciful and loving
father may mollify thee, nor the blood of the unspotted Lamb can make thee
tractable. Seeing therefore thou, o Lord, have exhibited and given unto us so
great goodness and mercy, does it seem a thing tolerable unto thee, that any
man should be found, who loves thee not? Who is unmindful of thy benefits?
Yea, which is most insufferable, that blusheth not to offend thee? What loves
he, that does not love thee? For what benefit will he be grateful, who does
show himself ungrateful for thy benefits? How can I not but worship him, but
serve him, who so dearly has loved me? Who with so great diligence has
sought for me, who with so great labor has redeemed me from all evil? John.
12.
If I were lift up from the earth, says our Savior, I will draw all men unto
me. With what violence o my Lord? With what chains? With the violence of thy
love, and with the chains of thy benefits. I will draw thee with the cords of
a man, Ose. 11.
says the Lord, and with bands of love. Who will not willingly be drawn with
thy cords? Who will not suffer himself to be bound with thy bands? Who would
not covet to be bound, and to be overcome of so great benefits? But if it be
such an offense not to love this Lord, what will it be to offend him, and to
violate his commaudements? Is it possible, o man, that thou have hands to
offend those hands, which have been so liberal toward thee, that for thee
they were nailed to the Cross?

When as that lascivious and unshamefast woman would have allured the holy
Patriarch Joseph to adultery, and solicited him to be unfaithful to his Lord,
the chaste young man defended himself after this manner, G^n. 39.
Behold, my Master knows not what he has in the house with me, but has
committed all that he has to mine hand, besides thee, which art his wife: how
then can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? As if he should
say: If my Lord has been so good and liberal unto me, if he has committed
all his goods unto my trust, if he has me in such great honor: how can I
have hands ready to offend so good a Master, who has bound me to him with so
many benefits? In which place we are to note, that he was not content to say,
that it was not decent or meet, that I should offend him, or I ought not to
do this; but he said, How can I do this great wickedness, etc. Signifying that
the greatness of benefits ought not only to bridle our will, but also to take
away our power and strength by any means to offend our Lord God. If these kind
of benefits deserved so great gratitude and thankfulness: what do not the
divine benefits deserve? That man had committed to the hands of Joseph that
which he had, and God has committed to thee those things he has. Now compare
those things which God has, with those things which that man had; and see by
how many ways those are greater and more excellent then these. They are double
and triple, which thou have received of God, if thou comparest them with those,
that Joseph received of this man. All things are given us of God.
Tell me I pray thee, what wealth, what riches has God, which he has not
communicated unto thee? The heaven, the earth, the Sun, the Moon, the
stars, the Seas, rivers, birds, fishes, trees, living creatures, to be
brief, all that is found under heaven, is in thine hands. What? not only
those things, which are under heaven, are in thy power, but also which are
above the heavens, that is the glory of them, and eternal blessedness. All
things are yours, says the Apostle, whether it be Paul, 1, Cor. 3.
or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death: whether they be things
present, or things to come, even all are yours. That is, ordained and appointed
for your salvation.

But what if I shall say that thou only have not those things, which are above
the heavens, By how many ways god is ours.
but that the Lord himself of all heavens is given unto thee by a thousand
ways? He is given unto thee, as a Father, as a Tutor, as a Savior, as a
Master; he is thy Physician, he is the price of thy redemption, he is an
example to thee, a help, a remedy, a keeper. To be brief, the father has
given unto us his son; the son has deserved for us the holy Ghost, whom
the father and the son sends unto us, from whom proceeds all good things.

Seeing therefore that it is as true as truth it self, that God has given all
things into thine hands which he has, how can it be, that thou have hands to
provoke and incense him? Do thou think that it is a thing to be borne, to
be ungrateful to a father so good, and to a benefactour so liberal? Certainly
this seems to be extreme wickedness, but if to this ingratitude thou ioynest
the contempt of the benefactour, and injury or offense, what a mischief will
that seem to be? If that young man (whom before we remembered) took himself
to be so bound and chayned, that he had no power or abillity to offend him,
who had committed unto him all the substance of his house: how will thou find
strength in thy self to offend him, who has given to thee heaven, earth, and
himself? Ah unhappy man, more unthankful then the beasts, more cruel then
Lions and Tigers, more insensible then the stones; is it possible, that thou
can not keep thee from so great wickedness? What Beast, what Lion, what
Tiger, is so unmindful of benefits, that will hurt him, In the sixth book of
his Hexaemeron.
of whom he is benefited? Saint Ambrose speaks of a certain dog, which a
whole night lamented his Master, slain of one of his enemies, with barking
and howling. In the morning many men came to the dead corpse, and amongst others
he also came, that had slain the man. The dog, seeing that homicide, A dog
bewrays a murderer.
made out suddenly against him, and leaping at him began to bite him, by which
thing the wickedness of this privy murderer was laid open and uncovered.

What say thou, o man, if a dog be so faithful for a piece of bread, and
with so great love does affect his Master? Does ingratitude so please thee,
that thou will suffer thy self to be excelled of a dog in the law of
gratitude? If this brutish creture burned with so great anger against the
murderer of his Master, why art not thou also displeased and out of patience
at these, Our sins nailed the Lord to the Cross.
which have killed thy Lord? What be they? They are thy sins: these
apprehended him, these bound him, these scourged him, these violently drew him
to the Cross. Thy sins were the causes of thy Lords death. Those cruel
butchers and hangmen, had not had so great force and power over Christ, unless
thy sins had armed them. Why then art thou not mad angry, why do thou not
whet thy fury against the^, which have slain thy Lord? Wherefore, when thou
see thy Lord slain before thy face, and in thy sight, and that for thee, is
not thy love increased toward him? Why do thou not fret and chafe against
thy sins, which have procured his death? especially seeing that thou art not
ignorant, that the end of all his sayings, doings, and torments was no other,
then that he might stir up anger and hate in our hearts against sin. He died
that he might kill sin: and that he might bind and restrain the power of
our hands and feet hasting to mischief, he had his hands and feet nailed to
the Cross.

With what face therefore dare thou live, that all the labors and sweats of
Christ for thee should be vain, and of none effect, whilst thou still wilt
remain in the same servitude, from which he has freed thee with the effusion
of his own blood? Can it be, that thou do not tremble at the only mention
of sin, when thou see that God underwent terrible and horrible torments,
that he might destroy and abolish it? What could he do more, that he might
draw and hold back men striuinglie rushing into sin, then that God himself
hanging upon the Cross, might be sent to meet them? Who will be so rash and
foole-hardie, that he dare offend GOD, when he sees before him both Paradise
open, and hell enlarging her mouth? yet it is much greater then that, to see
God hanging upon the Cross. He that is not moved with this sight, I know not
truly with what other thing he will be moved.

THE FIFTH TITLE. How we are bound to follow Virtue, by reason of our
Justification. CHAP. V.
WHat had the benefit of Redemption profited us, if the benefit of
Justification had not followed, by which the virtue of that most excellent
benefit is applied unto us? A similitude.
For even as a plaster is of no use, if it be not applied to the wound, or to
the diseased place; so there had been no profit of that heavenly medicine, if
it had not been applied by this benefit. Which duty especially appertains
to the holy Ghost, to whom the sanctification of man is attributed. For he it
is, that by his mercy preuenteth a sinner, and afterward calls him; and
being called, justifies him, and being justified, directs him by the paths
of righteousness, and so brings him by the gift of perseverance to the end of
his course and race, until at the length he bestows upon him the crown of
glory: for this benefit comprehends in it all the other benefits. Amongst all
these benefits, that of Vocation and Justification is the first; What
justification is.
which is, when as by the virtue of this divine Spirit, the chains and snares
of sin being broken and burst, man escapes the rule and tyranny of the
devil; No man can be justified by his own strength
is raised from death to life, of a sinner is made righteous, of a child of
curse and malediction, is made the child of God. Which cannot by any means be
brought to pass, without the peculier help and aid of God: which the Lord
testifies in plain words, when he says: John, 6.
No man can come to me, except my Father draw him, signifying, that no
strength of man's nature can deliver a man from sin, and bring him unto grace,
unless the arm of the divine power help him.

Thomas Aquinas does thus comment upon these words; Even as a stone (says
he) always of his own nature falls downevvards, A similitude.
neither can lift it self upwards, without external help; so man (by reason
of the corruption of sin) does always tend downwards; that is, he does
always slide to the love and desire of earthly things: but if he be to be
lifted up above, that is, to the love, and to a supernatural desire of
heavenly things, he has need of the right hand of the highest, and of the
Divine help. This sentence is to be noted and observed, for by this a man does
come to the knowledge of himself, and understands the corruption of his own
nature, and knows how necessary the continual prayer for the Divine help is.

Therefore (that we may return to our purpose) man by his own strength cannot
be delivered from sin, and brought to grace; because necessarily the hand of
the Lord is required, which must deliver him. But who can declare what other
great benefits are contained in this alone? For seeing without all
controversy, that by this, sin is banished and expelled out of the soul,
which ingendereth many evils in it; how great a good will that be, which does
cast and drive out all these evils? But seeing that the consideration of this
benefit, Justification, what great blessings it brings with it.
does very much stir up man to gratitude, and to the desire of virtue, here by
the way I will declare the great blessings, which this only good is wont to
bring with it.

First, by it man is reconciled to God, and is brought and admitted to his
favor and friendship. For the first and chiefest of all evils, 1. It
reconcileth man to GOD.
which sin brings to the soul, is, that it makes man an enemy to God:
who seeing that he is infinite goodness, above all things he hates and curses
sin. Psalm, 5.
Therefore (says the Prophet) Thou hate all them that work iniquity, thou
shall destroy them that speak lies. He adds furthermore, that God abhors
and detesteth the bloody man and deceitful. This is the greatest of all evils,
and the root and fountain of all the rest; as on the contrary side, to be
loved of God, is the greatest of all blessings, and the cause and original of
them. From this so dangerous an evil, by this benefit of Justification we are
delivered: by which we are reconciled to God, It makes us the sons of God.
and of enemies, made friends unto him; and that not in a common degree of
friendship, but in the highest, which may be found of the Father toward the
son. The Evangelist John, worthily commends this favor and friendship, 1.
John. 3.
when he says, Behold what love the Father has showed unto us, that we should
be called and be indeed the sons of GOD. He is not content to say, that we
should be called, but he adds that we are: that the base estate and small
confidence of man, might evidently know the bountifulnes and liberality of
God: and that we might see, that it is not a name of honor or title, but
rather of the deed and thing it self. But if it be so great an evil to be
hated and reprobated of God, what great good will it be to be beloved of him,
and to remain in his favor? This truly is an Axiom of the Philosophers, that
a thing is so much the better, by how much his contrary is worser. And
therefore it necessarily follows, that that is the chiefest good, whose
opposite is the chiefest evil, as we have said that that is, to be hated of
GOD. But if in this world it be esteemed a matter of great moment, if any man
be had in honor and estimation amongst his Superiors, as with the Emperor,
King, or Prince, or such great and honorable estates, I pray thee what will it
be, to have found favor and grace with the highest Prince, the supreme
Father, and with the most glorious, excellent and noble Lord; in comparison of
whom all the principalities and dignities of this world, are as though they
were not? Which favor also is so much the greater, by how much more it is
freely gy^uen: for it is certain, that as it is impossible for a man to be
able to do any thing before he was created, whereby he might deserve to be
created; (for then he was not any thing) so also without all doubt is it, that
he can do nothing, after that he is fallen into sin, whereby he may deserve
Justification; not because he is not, but because he is evil, and hated of God.

2 By justification man is freed from eternal punishment.
Another benefit follows this going before, that it delivers and freeth a
man from the condemnation of everlasting punishment: of which he was guilty
by reason of his sins. for sin does make a man abominable unto God, and no
man can live without Gods favor, without his own extreme harm. Hence is it
that the sinners forsaking God, because they sin and contemn him, that they
deserve to be contemned, and to be removed out of the sight of God, being
banished from his company, and from his beautiful dwellings: and because they
forsaking God do love the creatures with an inordinate love, it is meet that
they should be punished in all things, and be tormented with eternal pain, to
which, visible punishments being compared, they rather seem painted then true.
To this so great unhappiness that everlasting worm does also come, which
always gnaweth the bowels and conscience of the wicked. But what shall I say
of the society of those cursed spirits, and of all the damned? What shall I
speak of that obscure and lamentable Region full of darkness, and confusion?
Where there is no order, but where continual horror abides: where no joy is
found, no peace, no rest, no content, no hope; but perpetual complaining, and
everlasting gnashing of teeth, exceeding outragiousnes and fury, continual
blasphemy, and eternal malediction? From all these evils the Lord has
delivered all them, whom he has justified, who after that they are reconciled
to him, and received into his favor, they are free from this wrath, and from
the punishment of his vengeance.

Behold an other benefit more spiritual, which is the reformation and
renouation of the inward man, 3. Justification does renew a man.
which was defiled and polluted through sin. For sin does not only deprive
the soul of God, but also does spoil and rob it of all supernatural strength
and fortitude, and of all other riches and gifts of the holy Ghost, with which
it was adorned, beautified, and enriched: by and by after that it is deprived
of these graces, it is wounded, maimed, and deprived also of the natural
blessings. For seeing that man is a reasonable creature and sin is a work
done against reason, and seeing that it is natural, that one contrary should
destroy an other; the consequent is, that by how much more sins are
multiplied, by so much more the faculties of the soul are destroyed and
disturbed; not in themselves, but in their aptnes to work.

By these means sins do make the soul miserable, What mischief sins work
to the soul.
weak, sluggish, and instable to every good work: but procline, prompt and
ready to all evil, weak and feeble to resist temptations, and flow to walk
in the ways of Gods commandments. They deprive her also of the true liberty
and rule of the spirit: and they make her the captain of the devil, the
world, the flesh, and of her own appetites. And by this means she lives in
captivity more hard and intolerable then that of Babylon and Aegipt.
Furthermore, all the spiritual powers of the soul are made also sluggish and
slothful, so that they do not hear divine inspirations and heavenly voices;
they do not see the great evils prepared for them: they do not smell the
sweet favor of Virtue, nor the most beautiful paths and examples of the
Saints: they do not taste how sweet the Lord is, neither do they feel the
scourgings, nor acknowledge the benefits, by which they are provoked unto his
love; and besides all these, they take away the peace and joy of the
conscience, they do extinguish the heat and seruour of the spirit, and do
leave a man filthy blemished, deformed, and abominable in the sight of God,
and in the sight of all his Saints. From all these evils this benefit does
deliver us. For so bottomless are the mercies of God, that he is not content
to have pardoned our faults, and to have received man into favor, unless also
he expel all these evils, which sins bring with them; reforming and renewing
our inward man. By this manner he heals our wounds, he washes away our spots
and blemishes, he breaks the bonds of sin, destroys the yoke of evil
concupiscences, delivers us from the servitude of the devil, mitigateth and
aswageth the fury and rage of our perverse affections and perturbations; and
does restore unto us the true liberty and beauty of our soul: does give us the
peace and joy of a good conscience, does revive our inward senses, does make
them prompt and fit to every good work, and slow to any evil. Makes them
strong and valiannto resist the temptations of the devil, and does enrich us
with all good works. To be brief, he does so absolutely renew and repair our
inward man with all his powers, that the Apostle calls such men, justified,
renewed, yea new creatures. This renewing is so great, that when it is made by
Baptism, it is called regeneration, but when by repentance, it is called a
resurrection and rising again: not only because the soul is raised from the
death of sin to the life of grace, but because after a certain manner it
also imitateth the beauty of the future resurrection. This is so true, The
beauty of a justified soul.
that no tongue of man is sufficient to express the beauty of a justified
soul. This only knows that Spirit, that makes it beautiful and his
Temple, and places his seat and mansion in it. Wherefore if thou comparest
all the riches and honors of this world, and all natural graces, with the
beauty and riches of a justified soul, all will seem most obscure and most
vild in comparison of it. For as great difference as there is between heaven
and earth, between a spirit and a body, between eternity and momentary time,
so great difference also is there found between the life of grace, and the
life of nature; between the beauty of the soul and the body, between the
inward riches and the outward; between the spiritual strength and the
natural. For all these are circumscribed within certain limits, they are
temporal, and appear only beautiful to the corporal eyes, to which a
general coming of God is sufficient; but to the other a special, particular,
and supernatural coming is required. Neither can they be called temporal,
when they bring us to eternity, neither can they be called altogether finite,
because they bring the infinite God to us, in whose eyes they are so precious
and of such valor, that by their beauty they provoke God to love us.
Furthermore, when as God could have wrought all these things by his help and
will, he would not do it; but it pleased him to adorn the soul with infused
virtues, and with the gifts of his holy Spirit, with which not only the very
Essence of the soul, but also all her powers are clothed, and adorned with
these divine habites.

To all these divine benefits the eternal and infinite goodness of God does
join another, 4. By justification God dwells in us.
that is the presence and aid of the holy Ghost, and so of all the most sacred
Trinity, which does turn into a justified soul, and does come, that he may
dwell in her, that he may teach her how to use rightly so great riches, A
similitude.
as a good father, who not content to have given riches to his son, but does
give him also a Tutor, who well knows how to dispose and bestow them.
Insomuch that even as Vipers, Dragons, and Serpents do dwell in the soul of a
sinner, which are a multitude of ill and malignant spirits, who chose their
habitation and abiding in such a soul, as our Savior says in Matthew; Math. 12.
so on the contrary part, the holy Spirit with the whole blessed Trinity, does
enter into a justified soul: Luke, 11.
and casting out al monsters and infernal beasts, does consecrate it for a
Temple unto himself, and does place his seat there, as the Lord expressly
testifies in the Gospel, saying, John, 14.
If any man loves me, he will keep my sayings, and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and will dwell with him. By the virtue of these
words, all the Doctors as well Ecclesiastical as Schoolmen, confess, that the
holy Ghost himself by a certain special and peculier means does dwell in a
justified soul, distinguishing between the holy Ghost and his gifts: saying
moreover, not only these gifts to be given of the holy ghost, but also the holy
Ghost to give himself, who entering into this soul, does make it his Temple
and habitation; placing his seat in it. Therefore he does purge and sanctify
it, and does adorn it with his gifts, that it may be an In worthy of such a
guest.

These benefits afore-sayd do not suffice, 5. Justification does make us the
lively members of Christ.
unless that admirable one come to, which is, that all the justified are made
the lively members of our Savior, which before were dead members, for they did
not receive and take their influences from the head Christ. Hence others, and
those very great prerogatives and dignities do proceed: for hence it is, that
the son of God loves them, as his own members, and has no lesser care of
them, then of himself; he is no less careful for them, then for his own
members, without intermission he pours his virtue and grace upon them, as
the head upon his members; to be brief, the eternal Father does behold them
with favorable eyes, no otherwise then the lively members of his only
begotten Son, united, and incorporated with him, by the participation of his
spirit. Confidence in prayer.
Of the same dignity it proceeds, that when those that are justified, do
ask for favor and grace of God, they ask it with great confidence: for they
know that they do ask it, not only for themselves, but also for the son of
God himself, who is honored in them and with them. For seeing that it may not
be denied, but that which the members do, the head also does the same, it
follows, that seeing Christ is their head, when they ask any thing for
themselves, they ask it also for him. For if it be true, that they (as says
the Apostle) who offend against the members of Christ, Christ is honored, when
a righteous man is honored. Act. 9.
do offend against Christ himself, and if Christ does say that he suffers
persecution, when his members do suffer persecution, as he said to his
Apostle persecuting his Church; why do thou marvel my brother, if I say
that when the members are honored, that then Christ himself is also honored?
Which seeing that it is so, how great confidence will a righteous man have in
his prayer, when he considers, that desiring favor and grace for himself,
after a certain manner he also desires the same of the eternal Father for
his best beloved son? Is it not true, that when favor is done to any man for
the love of an other, that it is done principally for him, for whose love it is
done? For we believe that he that shows mercy to a poor man for Gods sake
that he not only does show it to the poor man, but also to God himself.

Neither here yet is an end of the heavenly benefits: 6. By justification
eternal life is given.
for to all these benefits afore-sayd, this as last is joined, to which all the
other are appointed and ordained, that is, the right and possession of eternal
life, which is given to the justified. For as that our infinite and
unmeasurable Lord, in whom together shines all justice and mercy, adiudgeth to
everlasting pain those that do not repent, so he takes to eternal life all
those that truly repent. And when as he could have pardoned man of all his
sins, and received him into his friendship and favor with communion and
participation of his glory, yet he would not do it; but those, to whom for his
mercies sake he remitteth sins, he also justifies; whom he justifies, those
he makes his sons, whom he makes his sons, those also he makes heirs,
and pertakers of his celestial inheritance together, with his only begotten
son. Hence arises that lively hope, which makes the justified merry and
glad in all tribulation: by reason of the pledge and earnest of this infinite
treasure. For although they see themselves brought into straights, to be
afflicted with infirmities, to be oppressed with the miseries of this life: yet
they know, Romans 8.
that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory, which
shall be showed unto them. And also they know, that this light affliction, 2,
Cor. 4.
which is but for a moment, causes unto them a far more excellent and an
eternal weight of glory.

These then are the benefits, Justification of greater value then creation.
Augustine upon John.
which this one benefit of justification comprehends in it; which
justification Saint Augustine makes greater account of them he does of
creation: for God created heaven and earth with his only word, but that he
might sanctify man, he shed his blood, and underwent many and great torments.
If therefore we owe so many and so great duties to this Lord for our creation,
how many more do we owe to him for our justification? Which benefit, by how
much it was got by greater labors and afflictions, by so much it does more
bind us unto him.

Although there be many great and notable marks and signs, How to know
whether we be justified or not.
by which a man entering into himself, may examine and know, whether he be
justified or no, yet in my judgment the renouation and renewing of man's life is
not the least, when a man has so reformed himself, that he has overthrown
the regiment of sin, has cut off the head of it, and from day to day still
grows to further purity and perfection of life. He that is such an one, let
him be mindful by how just a title he is bound to serve such a Sacrificer, who
has redeemed him, and delivered him from so many evils, and has heaped so
many blessings upon him, which hitherto we have remembered. But if he does still
cleave and stick in his corrupt and depraved estate, I do not know how God
may better move him to forsake that estate, then if he set before his eyes,
all the evils, discommodities, and dangers, which sins bring with them, and
which we a little before have reckoned up; and also show unto him, the
treasury of those great blessings, which do arise of this incomparable and
unspeakable benefit.

Of many other effects, which the holy Ghost works in a justified soul.
THose things which hitherto we have spoken of, do not as yet comprehend all
those kinds of benefits, which the holy Ghost works in the soul of a
justified man, neither is the bountifulnes of GOD circumscribed within those
limits. For it is not enough that the holy Ghost should have brought man
through the gate of Righteousness, and entered him into the school of Virtue,
but after that he is entered, that he should be aided of the same Spirit, Graces
waiting upon the holy Ghost.
and led as it were with the hand in all his ways, until all the waves of
this stormy sea being overcome, he enter safe and sound into the haven of
salvation. For after that the holy Ghost has entered into a justified soul, by
the meditation of the precedent benefit, he does not sit there idly: for it
suffiseth him not to beautify the soul with his presence, but also he
sanctifies it by his virtue, working in it, and with it, After what manner the
holy Ghost sits in y^ soul of a righteous man, and what he does there.
whatsoever is necessary unto salvation. He sits there, as an householder in
his house, governing it; he sits there, as a schoolemaister in his school,
teaching it; as a Gardener in his garden, tilling and trymming it: as a King in
his kingdom, ruling it; as the Sun in the world, enlightening it: to be
brief, as the soul in the body, giving to it life, sense, and motion: not as
the form in the matter, but as an householder in an house. What then is more
happy, what more to be desired, then to have within him such a guest, such a
guide, such a companion, such a governor and tutor, and such an helper? Who
seeing that he is all things, does work all things in that soul, in which he
remains and dwells. Especially as fire, he enlightneth our understanding,
The holy Ghost is fire. A Dove. A cloud.
he enflameth our will, and exalts it from the earth even to heaven: He like
a Dove, does make us simple, gentle, peaceable, and friends to all: He as a
cloud, does refresh and cool us, and defend us from the heat of the flesh,
does assuage and moderate our madness, and the fury of our passions. A wind.
To conclude, he as a vehement and strong wind, does move and incline our will
to all good, seperating it, and drawing it from all evil inclinations, until
at length the justified be brought to that pass, that all vices are odious
unto them, which before they loved; and they love all virtues, which before
they hated: as David plainly acknowledges that it happened to him, for he says
in a certain place, Psalm, 118, Psalm, 119,
That he did hate and abhor iniquity. And in another place, That he had as
great delight in the way of the testimonies of the Lord, as in all riches. The
reason was, because the holy Ghost had instilled and infused into his soul,
the vvormewood of earthly things, and the honny of the heavenly commandments:
wherein thou see plainly, that we owe all our good to this divine Spirit:
insomuch, that if we decline from evil, he is the cause of it, and if we do
good, we do it through him; if we persevere in goodness, we persevere
through him, and if a reward be given for our good, it is given through him.
Augustine upon the 144. psalm.
Therefore it is evident, that it is most truly spoken of Augustine, that when
as God recompenceth our services, he rewards his own benefits in us; and so
he rendereth grace for grace, seeing the deserts are of grace.

The holy Patriarch Joseph, Gene, 42
was not content to give to his brethren corn, which they came to buy in
Egypt, but he moreover commanded, that the money which they brought to buy the
corn, should be put in their sack mouths. After the same manner the Lord
deals with his; for he gives unto the^ life everlasting, and he also gives
them grace and a lawdable life, by which they may come to this eternal life.
Hereunto agrees that, In his 8. homily of the Passover.
which Eusebius Emissenus says, he therefore is worshipped that he may have
mercy, and he has had already mercy, that he might be worshipped. Therefore
let a man diligently examine his life, and let him consider, (as the same
Doctor admonishes him) what great good he has done, from how many evils,
adulteries rapines, thefts, frauds, and sacriledges the Lord has delivered
him; and then he shall know, by how many means he is bound unto him. To a
certain Virgin.
For as Saint Augustine says, all sins are to be accounted as forgiven, from
the which God does keep thee, least they be committed. Therefore, says he,
do not love him a little, as from whom a little was forgiven, but rather love
him much, from whom much is given unto thee. For if he love, to whom it is
given that he may not repay, how much more ought he to love, to whom it is
given that he may have and possess. For whosoever from the beginning remains
honest, he is governed of him; and whosoever of one dishonest is made honest,
of him he is amended; and whosoever is dishonest to the end, of him he is
forsaken. Which seeing that it is so, what other thing shall we do, then cry
out with the Prophet, Psalm, 71,
Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, that I may sing of thy glory, and of
thy greatness every day. Upon which words, Augustine upon the 71. psalm.
Saint Augustine does thus comment. What is this every day? Without
intermission; in prosperity, because thou do comfort me, in adversity,
because thou do correct me. Before I was, because thou made me; when I
was, because thou gave me health; when I did offend, because thou pardonest
me; when I was converted, because thou helpest me; when I perseuered, because
thou crownest me. So fully let my mouth be filled with thy praise, that I may
sing of thy glory every day, and all the day long.

If the son of God himself did give thanks to his Father for a few Barley
loafes, John. 6,
as it is in the Gospel, what great thanks ought we to give, for this great
benefit, that we are so sanctified by his holy Spirit, that we are made his
Temple, and the dwelling and seat of the most sacred Trinity? If we are
bound to give thanks for our nourishment, whereby our Being is vpholden, how
great thanks are we bound to give him, for this our well Being. For we do not
praise a horse, because he is a horse, but because he is a good horse: nor
wine, because it is wine, but because it is good wine: nor a man, because he
is a man, but because he is a good man.

If therefore so many ways we be bound to him, who has created us, how much
more are we bound to him that has made us good? If we owe so much unto him
for the gyfts of our bodies, how much more do we owe for the gyfts of our
minds? if so much for the gyfts of nature, how much more for the gyfts of
grace? To conclude, if so great things be due unto him, because he has made us
the sons of Adam, how much more, that he has made us, of the unhappy sons
of Adam, the sons of God? For much better is the day, in which we are borne
to eternity, (as says Eusebius Emissenus) then in which we are borne to the
dangers of this world. Behold brother, another chain and linck, which with the
former benefits may bind and tie thy heart to desire virtue, and to serve the
Lord thy God.

THE SIXTH TITLE. That the inestimable benefit of the divine Predestination,
does bind us unto Virtue. CHAP. VI.
AMongst all the benefits before remembered, that also of Election is numbered,
which pertains only to them, whom GOD from everlasting has elected to
eternal life; for the which benefit, the Apostle, as well for himself, as
for all the Elect, Ephe. 1.
does give thanks to him, in these words; Blessed be GOD, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in
heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love:
who has predestined us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will. Psalm, 65,
The same benefit the kingly Prophet commends, when he says; Blessed is he
who^ thou chusest and causest to come to thee: he shall dwell in thy courts.

Therefore woorthily this benefit may be called a benefit of benefits, and a
grace of graces. A grace of graces, because it is given before all desert, of
the only infinite goodness and liberality of God: who doing injury to none,
yea giving a sufficient help to every one to salvation, but to some he
extends more largely and bountifully the greatness of his mercy, as an
absolute and bountiful Lord of his riches. It is also a benefit of benefits,
not only because it is greater then the rest, but because it is also the cause
and foundation of all the rest. For when as man is elected unto glory; by the
means of this benefit, by and by the Lord does bestow upon him all other
benefits, Election is the foundation of all benefits. Iere, 31,
which are required to the attaynement of this glory; as he testifies by his
Prophet, saying: I have loved thee, with an everlasting love, therefore with
mercy I have drawn thee. Thou ought not to be ignorant that I have called
thee to my glory, that by it thou may obtain my glory. The Apostle more
plainly does tell this, when he says; For those which he knew before, he
also predestinate to be made like to the image of his son, Romans 8.
that he might be the first borne among many brethren. Moreover, whom he
predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called, them also he justified,
and whom he justified, them also he glorified. The reason of this is, that the
Lord disposing of all things sweetly and orderly, after that he has
vouchsafed to elect any man to his glory, for that favor he bestows many
other upon him; for he gives all things which pertain to the obtaining of
tha^t first favor.

A similitude.
For even as a father, who brings up his so^nne, that he may be a Minister
of Gods holy word, or a Doctor of his Church, does accustom him from his
young years, to ecclesiastical matters, and causes him to apply his study,
and directs the whole course of his life to the proposed end: so our heavenly
Father, after that he has elected any man to the participation of his glory,
he directs him by his fatherly care, to the way of righteousness, which
leads to that glory; and he fatherly leads him in it, until he come to
his wished end. For this so ancient and so excellent a benefit, they ought to
give thanks to this Lord, who feel in themselves some evidence of this
benefit. For let us grant that this secret is hid from man's eyes, yet seeing
that certain marks and tokens of justification are always known, certain
signs also of the divine predestination and election may be had. Perseverance
in good, a sign of election.
For as amongst the signs of justification, the amendment of life is not the
least: so amongst the signs of election this is the greatest, a perseverance
and continuing in a good life. Because he that has lived many years in the
fear of the Lord, and with all care and diligence escheweth sin, he may
godly and religiously persuade himself, that (as the Apostle says) the Lord
will strengthen him even to the end, 1, Cor. 1.
that he may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that as
he has begun, so he shall make an end. Surely it is true, that no man ought
to be careless of his estate, and that no man ought to be secure of his
perseverance, seeing that the most wise Solomon, after that he had lived many
years godly and religiously, in the end of his life failed, and played the
back-slider, and fell very filthily. But this is but a particular exception
from that general use and custom, which we brought out of Paul, and which
Solomon himself teaches in his Proverbs, saying; Proverbs. 22.
It is a proverb, teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old,
he shall not depart from it. So that if he be a dilligent follower of virtue
in his youth, he will be so in his old age. Of these and such like conjectures,
which are found amongst the Doctors of the Church, he that is such an one may
with humility assure himself of the infinite goodness of God, that he is one of
the number of the Elect. For as he hops in the infinite goodness of God to be
saved, so he may humbly presume, that he is one of their number, who are to be
saved, seeing that the one does presuppose the other.

Which seeing that it is so, I pray thee consider with thy self o man, with
how great a pledge the Lord does hold thee bound unto him, for this
unmeasurable benefit, that is, that thou art written in that book, of the
which our Redeemer says to his Apostles, Luke, 10.
In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subdued unto you; but rather
rejoice, because your names are written in the book of life. How unmeasurable
therefore is this benefit to be loved and to be elected from that eternity,
from which God was God? To rest in his most sweet breast, even from the
beginning of all eternity? To be accounted for the adopted son of God then,
when his natural son was begotten, in the glory and splendor of all the
Saints, who were present in his divine understanding?

Consider therefore dilligently all the circumstances of this election, The
circumstances in election are to be considered.
and thou shall see every one of them, to be singular very great benefits: and
also to bring new bonds and obligations with them. Consider first the dignity
of him who has elected thee, who himself is God, happy, and infinitely rich,
and quality: for he is a miserable and mortal creature, subject to all the
infirmities, miseries, and poverty of this life; guilty of hell fire, both for
an other man's, and also for his own

But if none of these things do move thee, at the least let the greatness of
the costs and charges move thee, which the most bountiful Lord determined to
make by reason of this benefit, as are the life of his only begotten son,
and his blood shed in the cause of this benefit, as who had determined from
everlasting, to send him into this world, that he might be the executor of this
determination. Which seeing that it is so, can there be any time long enough,
and sufficient to consider of so great mercy of God? What tongue can ever utter
it sufficiently? What heart can perfectly feel and taste it? To be brief, by
what duties can he recompense it? And with what love can man answer unto this
divine love? Who will be so ungrateful, that will refuse now at the length to
love him, of whom he has been beloved from all eternity? Who will change him
for any other friend? For seeing that in the holy Scriptures an ancient friend
is so highly praised, and had in great estimation, who would change the
possession and favor of this most ancient friend with all the friends of the
world? And if the possession of a thing time out of mind, does give authority
and right to him, that in deed has no right unto it; what shall this eternal
possession do, by which the Lord does possess us, that by the title of this
friendship we may be reputed his? By these it is manifest that no good may be
found in the world, which is to be changed with this good, neither that there
are any such great evils, which are not to be borne for the love of this good.

Who I pray thee can be so dull, An Apostrophe to a beggar but elected.
blockish, and inconsiderate, that being taught by divine revelation, that some
beggar, which daily in the streets from door to door does seek his bread, is
predestinate of God after this manner, would not kiss the earth whereon he
treads with his feet? Would not give place unto him? And bending his knees,
with great humility would not wish well unto him, and gratulate him with these
words; o thou happy and blessed man, art thou one of the blessed number of the
elect? Shall thou rejoice in that happy company of Angels? Shall thou sing that
heavenly music? Shall thou possess that everlasting and eternal kingdom?
Shall thou contemplate and view that bright and glorious shining face of
Christ? O happy is that day, in which thou wast borne, but much more happy is
that day, in which thou shall dye to the world: for then thou shall begin to
live an eternal and immortal life. Happy is the bread, with which thou art
fed; happy is the earth which thou treadest upon, for that does carry an
incomparable treasure. Blessed are the tribulations which thou suffer, and
the need, which does press thee. Because they do open a way to thee, which
leads to eternal life. What cloud of calamities or tribulations shall be so
thick, which will not vanish and be expelled at so great hope?

These and such like are the words, with which we would move and persuade any
man, whom we knew certainly to be predestined. A similitude.
For if any Prince, who is to be the heir of a great kingdom, does pass by
any way, all the inhabitants, their houses being left, flock to that place,
that they may see him, and they admire that blessed (according to the opinion
of the world) estate, which does tarry for that young man, because he is borne
to be the heir of a kingdom; how much more then ought men to admire and
wonder at this most blessed estate? That is, that man is borne and elected
without any merit of his, not that he may be a temporal King in this world,
but that he may reign in heaven with God himself, and with his blessed Saints
for ever and ever world without end? Therefore by these things, my brother, thou
may easily know of that great bond, by which all the Elect for this benefit
are bound to their Lord and Electour. From the which benefit let no man think
himself excluded, so that he will do his duty, and will not be wanting unto
himself: yea, let him give all diligence that by good works (as Saint Peter
admonishes) he may make his calling and election sure: 2, Pet. 1.
for we assuredly know, that he that does this, shall be saved: we also know
that the favor and grace of God does never fail and diaspoynt any man,
neither will at any time leave or forsake him. Therefore let us persevere in
good works in the undoubted certainty of these two truths, and let us hope that
we are of that happy and blessed number of the Elect.

THE SEVENTH TITLE. That man is bound to follow and embrace Virtue, by reason
of the first of these four last things, which happen unto him, which is Death.
CHAP. VII.
EVery one of the fore-sayde titles ought worthily and of right to move a man
to serve the Lord his God, to whom he is bound by so many names and reasons.
But because the greater part of men is more moved by reward and hire, then by
the debt to justice, that is (as others speak) rather by profit then honesty;
we have thought it a thing worth the labor, if to these afore-sayd we add the
great profits and commodities, which are promised to Virtue, as well in this
life, as in the life to come. Here at the first we will speak of two
especially amongst the rest, of the Glory, which we obtain by Virtue, and of
the Punishment, which we avoid by it. These are the two oars, by the benefit
of which we row and sail out of the danger of this troublesome and stormy Sea:
these are the two spurs, by which we are pricked forward to run with
celeritie to the way of this life. Hence it is, that certain holy men,
inspired with the holy Spirit, have wished that Preachers would preach
altogether, or for the most part, of virtues and vices, of glory, and
punishment; of virtues and vices, that they may teach how to live well: of
glory and punishment, that they may move and persuade to live well. It is also
the opinion of Philosophers, and the common judgment of all men, that reward
and punishment are the two counterpoises, by which the Horologe of man's life is
moved. For so great is the misery of our will, that no man desires virtue
being naked, bare and plain, to the which punishment is not adjoined, or which
is not recompensed with some profit. And because no punishment, nor reward can
be thought of greater then that eternal glory, and everlasting pain, we
have purposed at this present to speak of them, before which we will set
other two, because they are first in order, that is, Death, and the General
Judgment. Because each one of them being well considered of, The ^^^^bring and
rehearsal of those things that he will speak of. Ecclus, 7.
they have great motions to incite and stir us up to Virtue, and to fear us
from vice, according to that saying of the Wiseman, Remember the end, and thou
shall never do amiss. By the end, understanding those four that we a little
before have remembered, of the which we will entreat in order, according to the
tenor of our purpose.

Of Death therefore we will take our beginning, which is the first in the number
of those last things that happen unto man; which is so much the more powerful
to move the mind, by much it is more certain, more universal, and more
familiar and common unto him. Especially, if we consider the particular
judgment of all our life, which shall be pronounced of it; which shall not be
changed in that general Judgment, for that which shall be given at the hour
of death, that same for ever shall be ratified. How severe this judgment will
be, and how strickt the account which shall there be required, I will not that
thou learn of my words, In his l^dder to Paradise, in the 6. staire.
but of an history which Johannes Climacus remembers, of which he was an eye
witness, which truly is one of the terriblest and fearefullest, which I
remember that ever I read: these are the words of Climacus. I will not omit to
relate the history of that solitary and monastical man, who dwelled in Choreb.
A terrible and fearful history.
When as of a long time he had lived very dissolutely and loosely, and had not
had at all any care of his soul, at the length he was taken with a disease,
and brought to his last home. And now when as an ecstasy had seized upon his
body, after an hour he came to himself again, and desired all us, that
forthwith we should depart from him, and the entrance of his Cell being
stopped with stones, he remained within twelve years; not at all speaking
any thing to any man, neither tasting any other thing besides bread and water.
There sitting and being amazed, he only ruminated and reuolued those things,
which he had seen in that separation of his soul from his body, and in these
things he was always of so fixed and steadfast a meditation, that he never
changed his countenance, but always continuing thus amazed and astonished,
silently he poured forth abundance of seruent tears.

When he was now at deaths door, and death began to seize on him, the
entrance of his Cell being broke open, we entered in. And when as we earnestly
desired some instruction and doctrine of him, we only heard this of him;
Pardon me. No man can abide himself should be drawn to sin, if he in deed
does soundly carry in his mind the remembrance of death. We meruailously
wondered at him, beholding him, that before was so negligent and loose, to be
so suddenly changed, and to be made another man by this most blessed change.
Hitherto Climacus, who was present at all these things, and what he saw, he
testifies in his writings. So that no man ought to doubt of this deed
(although it seem to some incredible) especially seeing that the witness is
true and faithful.

In this story there are many things which we woorthily ought to fear;
considering the life which this holy man led, and much more the vision which
he saw, whence came that manner of living, which afterward he observed
through out al his life. These therefore sufficiently prove that saying of the
Wiseman to be true, Ecclus, 7^
Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss. Go to therefore, if this
consideration does so surely draw a man from sin, let us carefully run over
those things, which are wont to be spoken of death, that we may obtain that
excellent and notable good. Remember therefore (my brother) that thou art a
Christian, and a man; because thou art a man, it is certain that thou must
die; because thou art a Christian, it is certain that thou must give an
account of thy life, after that thou art dead. Here the faith, that we hold
and profess, excludes all doubt: and thus the experience teaches us, which
we daily see before our eyes. So that no man is free from this cup, but all
must drink of it, whether he be Emperor, King, or whatsoever he be.

That day sometime will be, when as thou shall live in the morning, Death
certain, but the hour of death uncertain.
but shall not live at night. That day at the length will come, (but when it
will be, whether to day or to morrow, it is altogether uncertain) in the
which thou thy self, who now read these things which we write, being
strong and lusty, measuring thy life with longnes of desires, and thy days
with multitude of businesses, thou shall see thy self lying in a bed,
expecting the blow and sentence of fearful death, spread over all mankind,
from which no man can appeal to any other Judge. But most of all we must
consider, how uncertain that hour is; for that is wont to come (for the most
part) when it is least looked for, and when as man is secure in all things, and
does least think of it: but being busied and earnest about the business and
necessities of this life, does cast with himself to live and ouer-passe many
days. For which cause it is said, that it comes like a these in the night,
who is wont then to come, when as men do soundly sleep, and being secure,
do think of nothing less then of the theft so nearly hanging over them.

Before death come, great and grievous infirmities go before, which are to be
considered with all their accidents, griefs, vexations, molestations,
loathings, decocted syrrups, fumigations, pills, gargarismes, and other
medicines; and also of the long nights, which at this time bring much
teadiousnesse and weariness. A similitude.
For even as he that would conquer a Castle, at the first does make way to the
ruin with his greater shot; after he does assault, invade and possess it; so
before death, great infirmity is sent, which does so vanquish and break the
natural strength, that it gives no rest to man, whether it be by day or by
night: but without intermission, shakes and wringeth all the chief members of
the body; so that the soul can no longger defend her Castle, neither can any
longer be preserved in it: wherefore the relinquisheth the body, and having
escaped, flies out of it, and goes to another place.

But when as the infirmity does draw to that pass, that either the sick
party or the Physician begins to doubt and despair of life, good God, what
streights, what oppressings, what griefs do then crush and tear the
miserable heart? For then the whole race and process of thy precedent life
does come in^o thy mind; then is it represented unto thee, that thou must
leave all those things which here thou so deerly love, wife, children,
friends, parents, riches, honors, titles, offices, and other things, which
leave off to be, and take end with thy life. After these things, those last
accidents grow on, which are joined with death it self: which are much greater
then these going before. The forehead waxes hard, the skin is stretched out,
from whence cold sweat breaks forth: the eyes wax dim, sail, and are
writhen about with intolerable pain; the ears grow deaf, the nose does
sincke down, the nosthrils are filled with filth, the countenance waxes
pale, the mouth is disturbed, the tongue is immovable, and cease to do his
duty any more; the taste perrisheth, the lips wax blewe and wanne: the breath
gathering it self from the bottom of the breast fails: the hands wax cold,
the nails wax black, the pulse languisheth and is very little, but very
thick, sometime it cease, and sometimes strikes softly; the feet die, and
loose their natural heat.

What need I many words? all the flesh is turned to corruption, and all the
members, and all the senses, are disturbed and troubled by reason of their too
hasty separation. After this manner a man must at his departure out of this
life, recompense the labors and sorrows of those, by whom he entered into this
world: bearing those griefs at his end, which his mother bare, when she
brought him forth. And so the proportion of man's departure and entrance into
this world is notable: for both is full of sorrows, his ingresse has the
sorrows of another, his egresse his own.

Whilst man is tossed in this straight, suddenly the agony of death is at hand:
the end of life is presented to the memory, the horror also of the grave,
and the infelicity of his body, which straightwayes is to be meat for worms:
but especially the soul is plunged, which as yet remains in the body, but
after an hour or two being separated from the body, it knows not what
entertainment or dwelling place it shall have. Then thou will think that the
judgment of God is present at hand: then thou shall see before thee all thy
sins, which will accuse thee before the judgment seat of the Divine
justice: then thou at the length too late wilt acknowledge how filthy the
crimes were, which thou so easily did commit: then with many cursings and
execrations thou will banne that day, in which thou did offend; thou will
bitterly curse the pleasures and delights, which moved thee with their
enticements to sin. In that hour thou can not sufficiently wonder at thy
self, and thy lenity, who for things so vain, and of no moment (as those
were, which thou wast wont to love with so inordinate love) have cast thy self
in danger to suffer so intolerable pains; of the which in that most
sorrowful hour thou shall make no small experiment. For the pleasures passing
away, and the judgment of them approaching, that which before of it self was
but little, and now cease to be, shall seem to be nothing: but that which is
great of it self, and present at hand, thou shall suppose that it is greater
then it is; because at the length thou shall manifestly know it with all the
circumstances. The danger in which he that dies is.
When as therefore thou shall see that for matters so vain and light, I will
not say filthy, thou have deprived thy self of so great blessings, and casting
thy eyes here and there, thou shall see thy self on every side compassed
about with griefs and tribulations, (because longer thou can not live; and
for repentance there is neither place nor time; the number of thy days are
come to an end: they cannot help thee, whom thou have loved with so an
inordinate love: much less the Idols, which thou adoredst: what do I say that
they cannot help thee? Yea, those things which thou louedst most, and which
were in the greatest estimation with thee, these then most of all shall vex
and torment thee) tell me I pray thee when thou see thy self left in this
danger, what mind, or what courage will thou have? Whether will thou go? What
will thou do? Whom will thou call unto? To return to life it will be
impossible, but to depart out of life it will be intolerable; to stay longer
in this life it shall not be given unto thee: what then will thou do? In that
day (says the Lord God by his Prophet) Amos. 8.
I will even cause the sun to go down at noone: and I will darken the earth
in the clear day, and I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your
songs into lamentation: and I will make it as the mourning of an only son,
and the end thereof as a bitter day. O fearful words, o dreadful sentence
shaking all hearts. In that day, says he, the sun shall go down at noone:
for in that hour the multitude of their offenses shall be set before sinners,
and they seeing the divine justice to cut off the thread of their life: some of
them shall be stricken with so great fear and trembling, and shall be so
destitute of all hope and trust, that they shall suppose themselves to be
reprobate, and utterly excluded from the divine mercy.

Be it, that as yet they are in the noone midday, that is, that they are in
the course of their life, (which is time as yet to for sake their sinful
ways, and to lay hold on Christ) yet they shall persuade themselves, that this
time is ouer-past, and that all grace and favor is shut up from them. The most
powerful and mightiest perturbation of the mind is fear, Fear the mightiest
perturbation of the mind.
which supposes every small thing to be great, and always dreadeth things
absent as present. If a small fear of any thing does this, what shall that
true fear do, conceived of so fearful and capital dangers? Be it, that yet
they survive, and that they are placed in this life in the midst of their
friends: nevertheless they suppose that they as it were experiment and feel
the dolours and punishments of the damned. At one and the self same time they
think themselves alive and dead: and they being caught with the sorrow of
present things, which they are to leave, they begin to feel the future evils,
which they fear. They judge them blessed and happy, who are left in this
world, and of this envy new sorrows arise and increase. When the sun goes
down at noone to the wicked.
Therefore then the sun goes down at noone unto them, when they casting
their eyes every way, shall see every where entrance into heaven to be shut and
denied unto them, neither any beam of light shall appear or shine unto them.
For if they look unto the mercy of God, they shall suppose themselves
unworthy, that God should have mercy on them: if they fly unto the divine
justice, they shall suspect that all cruel tortures are prepared for them: and
that hitherto their day has been, but now that the day of the Lord does hang
over them; yea, they shall think that even now it begins. If they call to
mind their life past, every part of that does reprehend them: if they behold
the present time, they see that now they are dying: if the future time, which
is now at hand, they see the Judge sitting upon his tribunal, and expect
judgment from him. Being compassed with so many causes of fear, what will
they do? whether will they go?

The Prophet proceeds, Those things which before seemed pleasant, in death
are bitter.
And I will darken the earth in the clear day, that is, those things which
heretofore were wont sweetly to delight thee, now they shall exceedingly
torment thee, and shall strike and thrust through thy soul with intolerable
stings and pricks of grief. It is pleasant and delightful to a man living and
in health, to see his children, to enjoy his friends, to govern his household,
to have much riches, and to possess with pleasure, whatsoever the mind
desires. But then all that pleasure shall be turned into sorrow. For all these
afore-sayde with most bitter torments, shall rend and cut in pieces thy
miserable conscience, and they shall be sharp spears to wound their lovers.
It is natural, that as the possession and presence of a thing, which we love,
does joy us and make us merry, so the absence of the same thing does bring
heaviness and sorrow. Hence it is that the sons do fly the presence of
their dying father, and the loving and religious wife being full of anguish,
does hide her self from her husbands face, least by her presence she might
increase his dolours. For although the soul, being by and by to be separated
from the body, has a long and dangerous journey to go, yet the great grief
does not permit any observation of the terms of humanity and ciuility, neither
does it grant the soul even now iourneying before her departure, to bid
farewell to her friends. If thou my Reader at any time shall come to this
pass, thou shall surely understand that I speak nothing but truth; but if
thou as yet never camst into this danger, at least believe them, which have had
experience of these things. Ecclesiasticus, 43.
For they that sail over the Sea, (as the Wiseman says) tell of the perils
thereof.

If therefore they be such and so great, The account that shall be required of
us.
which go before this dolorous and lamentable separation, what manner and how
great do thou think that they will be, which shall follow after? If the
preparation be so great, what shall the solemnity it self be? For
straight-wayes after death, the account shall follow, which that most just
Judge shall require of the soul, which how mightily it is to be feared, I
would not have thee to learn of the men of this world, who as they dwell in
Egypt, that is, in a Land of darkues, so they live in great blindness and
intolerable errors. But in this matter ask counsel of the Saints of God,
who dwell in the Land of Goshen, in which always the light of truth shines,
and they will teach thee not only with words, but also by examples, how
greatly this account is to be feared. Without doubt King David was a most holy
man, nevertheless so great was his fear, which he conceived being mindful of
rendering this account, that he said in his prayer to the Lord, Enter not o Lord
into judgment with thy servant: Psalm, 143.
for in thy sight shall none that lives, be justified. Arsenius. In the life's
of the fathers, Part 2,. 153.
Arsenius was a holy man, who yet when he should dye began to weep, and to
tremble after that manner, that his Scholars, who stood about him, being
moved at this his trembling, asked and said unto him, Father why weepest thou?
Why do thou tremble? What do thou also fear? To whom he answered: I
fear in truth and verity, and this fear, which now is with me, has always
been in me, by which I became a solitary and a Monastical man. Histories
report of Agathon, Agathon in the some book.. 51
that he dying had his eyes three days open, and never shut, neither ever
moved them. But his brethren touching him, said; o holy Father where art thou
now? He said, I stand in the sight of Gods judgment: his brethren said
moreover unto him; do thou also fear? To whom he answered; always as
much as lay in me I purposed to keep the commandments of God, but I am a
sinful man, and how should I know, whether my works please God? To whom his
brethren said, do thou not trust in thy works, because they are according to
Gods word and rule? To whom he answered, I do not trust in my works in the
sight of God, because in his judgment and sight all our best works are
imperfect and full of infirmity, but only in Christ Jesus my Redeemer, in whom
I assure my self to have all righteousness and perfection. No less fearful
is that example, In his ladder to Paradise, in the 7, staire. A fearful
example of one Stephanus, that led a solitary life.
which Johannes Climacus remembers of an other man, that led a solitary life:
and that we will set down here with his own words, (for it is especially to
be noted) to the edefying of men's souls. A certain man called Stephanus,
says he, dwelling in this place loved a solitary and a quiet life. This man
when he had lived many years solitarily, being adorned with many singular
virtues of Christianity and sanctification, built himself a Cell at the
bottom of that hill, in which in times past Elias beheld his holy and divine
vision. He so venerable for life and conversation, that he might furnish
himself with more integrity and purity of living, he came to a place of
Anchorites, which place was called Faith. In which place when he had passed
over many years with a most straight kind of life: for this place was utterly
remote from all humane consolation, and almost not come to of any man (for it
was almost seauenty miles distant from any dwelling of man) in the very last
part of his life he departed thence, desirous to dwell in the Cell of that holy
Hill.

There were two Disciples of Palestina, very religious, who also diligently
observed the Cell of this old man. In which when he had continued a few days,
he fell into sickness, whereof he dyed. But a day before his departure,
suddenly he fell into an agony and astonishment of mind, and with open eyes
he looked about, first to the right side, then to the left side of the bed, and
as though certain required an account of him, all they that stood about him,
heard him say sometimes thus: So in truth it is: but for this I have humbled
my self, and broken of my sins by repentance. Sometimes he said: No truly,
but ye lie, I have not done thus. Then again thus; So it is indeed, this is
so; but I have wept, and with weeping (as with a gunneshot) I have battered
down that partition wall, which kept Gods countenance from me, and God has
heard my prayers and my tears. And again, ye rightly accuse me. In some also
sometimes he said, So it is truly, and to these I have not that I may say,
unless God be merciful unto me, and God is more merciful, then man can be
sinful, if man will be sorrowful. And surely, this invisible and most sharp
judgment, was a fearful and a terrible sight, in which also (that which is
more terrible) they objected unto him, what he had not done, (ah woe is me) he
being a man of such sanctity and holiness of life. In many of his sins he
said, that he had not what he might answer; even this man said so, who had
almost forty years led a solitary life, and had the grace of those tears,
that wash and blot out the hand writing of GOD against us. Certain affirmed to
me of a truth, that this man, whilst he was in the wilderness, nourished a
Leopard with his own hand. And whilst this strict account was required of
him, and whilst he was in this sore conflict, he departed this life. Hitherto
are the words of Climacus: which sufficiently declare, how greatly careless
and negligent men ought to fear the separation of their soul and body; when
as the very Saints themselves are found to fear so greatly.

But if any one ask, why the Saints placed in this danger, do fear with so
great trembling, to this Saint Gregory answers in the fourth book of his
Morrals, Why the Saints do fear in death. In the 4. book of his Morrals,
chap. 2.
in these words: The mind of the Elect, when it remembers those things which
it has done, is greatly feared with the dread of judgment. Now it looks
perfectly into it self; but as yet it does not raise up it self unto
security, because whilst it considers how great the cumbrance and horror of
the last examination is, it carefully trembles between hope and fear;
because the just Judge coming, he knows not what of his trespasses he will
impute unto him, and what he will forgive. For they are not therefore secure,
if outwardly in outward action they have not offended, but they are careful
for their thoughts, by which their mind is forced hither and thither. In the
11. book of his Morrals, chap. 21. In the 24. book of his Morrals. chap. 7.
For as much as they can do, that they may not offend outwardly, so much they
cannot do, that they may not offend inwardly in their thought. Therefore
oftentimes, the elect unwillingly offend in thought, which they mark
diligently in themselves, and consider what great gilt it is before the eyes of
God. And when as for these things they always fear the strict judgment of
God, yet then especially they do fear, when they coming to pay their debt
unto nature, do see themselves approaching to the strict and exact Judge. And so
much more pearcing is the fear, by how much more the eternal retribution is
near.

Moreover, before the eyes of their heart at that time no fantastical thing
does fly, because all such matters being taken away, they only consider
themselves and him, to whom they are approaching. Fear increases by the near
retribution of justice, and by the neerenes of death so much, by how much the
strict judgment is near, and as it were touched. Although they remember that
they never offended in those things, which they know, yet they fear those
things which they know not; because they cannot utterly judge of and discern
themselves; therefore their end growing near, they are terrified with a
greater fear. Note.
Neither is the soul of man then feared without cause, seeing that after a
very short time it shall have that judgment which never can be changed.
Hitherto Gregory.

If therefore holy men with so great reason have feared this judgment, what
ought not they to do, who are not such ones? Yea, who have spent the greatest
part of their life in following the vanities of this world? who so often have
offended God? who hitherto have lived most carelessly? who never have had any
care of their salvation? who have never been touched with any regard, to
prepare themselves for this hour? If the just do so greatly fear, what shall
the sinner do? When as the Cedar of Libanus is shaken, what will the sprigge
of the wilderness do? 1, Peter, 4.
If the righteous scarcely shall be saved, (as says S. Peter) where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear?

Tell me (I pray thee) what do thou think of that hour, when as thou
departing out of this life, shall enter into that judgment alone? naked? poor?
without any one that may defend and maintain thy cause, besides thy good works
which thou have done, and only thy conscience waiting upon them? that
tribunal will be very sharp and severe, where it is not handled of life or
death temporal, but eternal. And if in rendering thine account thou art found
wholly oppressed with debts, alas, how horrible will be the dolours and vexations
of thy mind? O how full of confusion will thou be, and how abundant in
unprofitable repentance? how void will thou be of all advice and counsel, and
how destistute of all comfort? Truly great was the trouble and distraction of
mind among the Princes of Judah, when as the victorious sword of Sesac King of
the Egyptians, 3, Reg. 25.
did tyrannize in all the streets of Jerusalem; when as by the present pain
and punishment, they acknowledged their passed faults, and old errors. But
there is no comparison between that confusion and this, Nothing is of force in
the hour of death.
of the which we now speak. In that hour what will sinners do? whether will
they turn themselves? who shall defend them? Tears will not profit them;
there all repentance will be barraine and unfruitful; In that hour, neither
prayers shall be heard, neither any promises shall take place, or any
suretieshippe be accepted. When as the last moment of life is come, and the
hour glass run out, now there is no more time left for repentance. But if
these foresaid things will not profit, much less shall riches, nobility, or
honors help; for the Wiseman says, Riches avail not in the day of wrath:
Prou, 11,
but righteousness delivers from death.

When as the unhappy soul shall see it self compassed and enclosed in these
streights, what will it do? what will it say? with what other words will it
lament this lamentable estate, The lamentation of a sinner. Psalm, 18.
then with those which the Prophet used in times past, when he said, The
sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of wickedness made me afraid:
the sorrows of the grave hau^e compassed me about: the snares of death
ouertooke me. Woe is me poor wretch, into what a laborinth have my sins
led me? How suddenly, and thinking nothing less, has this hour entrapped
me? How has it rushed upon me, I never dreaming of it? What do now my honors
profit me? what do now my dignities help me? What do all my friends for me?
what profit do now my servant bring me? what fruit do I now reap of all
my riches and goods, which I was wont to possess? For no a small piece of
ground of seven foot will contain me, and I must be content with a dwelling
in a narrow Coffin, and with lodging in a poor winding-sheete.

But that which is worst of all, my riches shall remain here behind me, which
I have scraped together with so great toil and sweating; others shall enjoy
them, and shall spend them on their pleasures. Only my sins which I have
committed in gathering them, wait upon me, that I may suffer deserved
punishment for the^. What can I make now of all my pleasures and delights,
seeing they are all ouer-past, only their dreggs are my portion, which are
scruples and bytings of conscience, which like thorns do pearce me, and do
run through my miserable heart, and shall torment it with everlasting
tortures? O my intolerable blockishnes, o my madness and folly, to be cursed
with a thousand execrations; how could it be, that I unmindful of this time,
have not prepared my self to eschew these present calamities? How often have I
been admonished of this day, but with deaf ears I ouer-passed all
counsel? vvoc is me, why did I not receive instruction? why have I not
obeyed and harkened unto my Teachers? and to the words that they taught me? I
lived irreligiously in the midst of the Church, and amongst Gods people I have
polluted my self with all kind of sin. With these and such like
lamentations, sinners will deplore and bewail their miserable estate; and
these (most commonly) will be their meditations, considerations, and
confessions.

But least thou my brother sholdest fall into the like straights, I pray thee
that thou would examine all these things aforesaid with diligent regard: and
that they being often meditated upon, thou would every where and always set
them before thine eyes: but amongst others lay up chiefly these three things
deeply in thy mind, and in a faithful memory: the first of which is, that
thou consider the greatness of the punishment, which thou shall feel in the
hour of death, for thy multitude of sins, by which thou have offended the
divine goodness: the second is, that thou diligently ponder, with what great
desire thou will then wish so to have led thy life, that in that hour thou
might have God propitious and favorable unto thee: thirdly, that thou
remember how great, and how severe a repentance thou would enter into, if
time should be granted unto thee. Therefore live so now, as thou would
desire and wish that thou had lived in that hour.

THE EIGHT TITLE. That man is bound to desire Virtue, by reason of that second
last thing that happens unto him: which is the last Judgment. CHAP. VIII.
AFter death follows the particular judgment of every one, and after that
the universal judgment of all: when that shall be fulfilled, which the Apostle
says: 2, Cor. 5.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil. Here we will speak of the rigor of that strict
account, which shall be exacted of us in this judgment; and what will follow
after the sentence of this judgment; that man may see, that he not only is
invited unto Virtue, but rather that he is drawn and constrained. First
therefore we are to consider, that one thing amongst other, which holy Job
wondered at, that although man is so weak a creature, yet God who is so great
and mighty, enters with great rigor into judgment with him. Insomuch, that
there is no word, no thought, no inordinate and disordered motion, which he
has not written in the book and record of his justice: that he may exact a
most strict account of it. After a long discourse he at length says thus. Job.
13.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy? Will thou
break a leaf driven too and fro? And will thou pursue the dry stubble? For
thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities
of my youth. Thou put my feet also in the stocks, and look narrowly
unto all my paths, and make the print thereof in the heels of my feet. Such
one consumes like a rotten thing, and as a garment that is moth-eaten. Job. 14.
And a little after: Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and
full of trouble. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down: he vanishes
also as a shadow, and continues not. Do thou think it meet to open thine
eyes upon such an one, and to bring him with thee unto judgment? Who can bring
a clean thing out of filthiness? All these things said holy Job, greatly
wondering at the severity of the divine Justice, which he saw that God did use
upon man, being a creature so frail, and so ready to fall into all evil: who
drinks in iniquity like water. But if he should use this severity upon Angels
(who are spiritual creatures, and much more perfect) it were less to be
meruailed at: but that God should use it upon man (whose passions and evil
inclinations are innumerable) and that by exacting so strict an account, that
in his whole life he does not wink at one idle word, nor does let pass our
minute of time ill spent, this does exceed and pass all admiration. For who
does not fear, and exceedingly tremble, when he hears those words of the
Lord, Math. 12.
Verily I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof at the day of judgment. Go too therefore, if an
account shall be given of those words, which offend no man; what shall become
of dishonest words? Of unchaste thoughts, of hands full of blood? Of the eyes of
adulterers? To be brief, of all the time of thy life evil spent in the works
of iniquity? If this be true (as it is most true) what tongue, what eloquence,
can remember so great things of the rigor and severity of this judgment,
which shall not be much less then the truth of the thing? Or which can be
equalized with it in any manner of respect? How will wretched and miserable man
stand astonished and amazed, when in the assembly of so many Senators, and in
the presence of such a Council, an account shall be required of a little word,
which he has spoken such or such a day without purpose or fruit? Who will not
be amazed at this demand? Who durst have said these things, unless Christ
himself before had spoken them? Who durst have uttered them, unless he had
affirmed them? What King was ever found, that did expostulate, or was grieved
with his servants for so small a fault? O the depth of Christian Religion, how
great is the purity, which thou teach? How strict is the account, which thou
exactest? And with how severe a judgment do thou examine and search out all
things? How great will that shame be, The shame of sinners in the last judgment.
with which wretched and miserable sinners shall be there confounded? When as
all their iniquities and enormities, which closely they committed within the
walls of their houses, whilst they lived, whatsoever also dishonest or filthy
thing even from their birth to their death they have polluted themselves with,
all the corners of their heart, and every secret, shall be discovered and opened
in this Court before the eyes of the whole world? Who there shall have a
conscience so pure, that when these things shall begin to be done, will not
straight-wayes change color, and tremble throughout every part of his body?
For if a man does blush, and is ashamed to tell his faults secretly to an
other; how great will that shame be, with which sinners shall be confounded in
the sight of God, and all the world? So great shall that shame be, that the
wicked, Ose. 10. How fearful the sentence of the Judge is. Math. 25.
as the Prophet testifies, shall cry out, saying to the mountains cover us,
and to the hills fall on us. But be it that these be tolerable: but what will it
be, when as those most sharp and keen arrows of that final sentence, shot
from Gods mouth through their hearts, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels? Alas with what dolours
will sinners be tormented hearing this sentence; Job, 26.
When we can hear but a little portion of his words, says Job, who can
understand his fearful power? This voice shall be so horible and of such force,
that the earth in the twinkling of an eye shall be opened, Job, 21.
And suddenly they shall go down to the grave, as the same Job says, those
which now take the Tabret, and Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organs,
and they that now spend their days in wealth. This fall Saint John describes
in the Revelation, Apoc. 18,
in these words; And after these things, I saw another Angel come down from
heaven, having great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory. And
he cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying: It is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon the great City, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold
of all foul spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. And a
little after, the same Evangelist adds, saying: Then a mighty Angel took up
a stone like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying: with such
violenee shall the great City Babylon be cast, and shall be found no more.

After this manner the wicked shall be cast into that pit and dark prison,
full of all confusion, which in this place is understood by Babylon. What
tongue shall be able to express the multitude and abundance of pains, which
they shall suffer? The pains of the damned.
There their bodies shall burn with living fire, that never shall be put out;
there without intermission, their souls shall be gnawne of the worm of
conscience, which shall suffer them to take no rest; there shall be continual
weeping and gnashing of teeth never to have end, which the holy Scriptures do
so often threaten and repeat. The blasphemies of the damned
In this place of desperation, those wretches being damned, raging with
extreme madness, shall turn their fury against God, and shall rage upon
themselves, eating their own flesh, tearing their own bowels, most furiously
renting one another flesh with their nails, and continually blaspheming the
Judge, who condemned them to these pains. There every one shall curse his
miserable estate, and his unhappy birth, repeating without ceasing that
sorrowful complaint, and those mournful and forsaken lamentations of Job,
Job, 3.
Let the day perrish wherein I was borne, and the night when it was said,
there is a man child conceived. Let that day be darkness, let not GOD regard
it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. But let darkness and the
shadow of death stain it: let the clouds remain upon it, and let them make
it fearful as a bitter day. Let darkness possess that night, let it not be
joined unto the days of the year, nor let it come into the count of the
Months. Yea, desolate be that night, and let no joy be in it. Let them that
curse the day, (being ready to renew their mourning) curse it. Let the stars
of that twilight be dim through the darkness of it: let it look for light
but have none: neither let it see the dawning of the day. Because it shut not
up the doors of my Mothers womb: nor hid sorrow from mine eyes. Why dyed I
not in the birth? or why dyed I not when I came out of the womb? Why did the
knees prevent me? and why did I suck the breasts? This will be the music,
this the song, which the unhappy and miserable, shall sing without end. O
unhappy tongues, which pronounce nothing but blasphemies; o unlucky eyes, that
see nothing but calamities and miseries; o miserable ears, which hear nothing
but complaints and gnashings of teeth; o unhappy bodies, which have no other
refreshing but burning flames. What mind shall they have there, who whilst thy
lived here, triflingly bestowed their hours, and spent all their time upon
pleasures and delights?

O what a long chain of miseries, have thy short pleasures wrought and made
for thee. O foolish and senseless, what shall the allurements of the flesh now
profit you, which you then so much delighted in, since ye are now cursed to
eternal mourning and bewayling? what is become of your riches? where are
your treasuries? where are your delights? where are your joys? The seven
years of plenty are past, and other seven years of dearth and scarcity are
come, which have devoured up al their plenty; no memory or footstep being left
of it. Your glory is perished, and your felicity is drowned in the Sea of
sorrow; you are come to that scarcenes and sterilitie, that a small drop of
water is not granted unto you, by which the fierce flaming heat of your
throat may be cooled, which so exceedingly does torment you. Not only your
delights have not profited you, which you enjoyed in this world: but they shall
be the causes of greater torments. For then shall be fulfilled that which is
written in the book of Job, Job, 24.
The pitiful man shall forget him: the worm shall feel his sweetness: he
shall be no more remembered, and the wicked shall be broken like a tree: then
the sweetness of the delight of evil things shall be turned into the wormwood of
sorrow, when the memory of fore-passed pleasures (according to the exposition of
Saint Gregory) shall be get greater bitterness of present griefs: they
remembering what sometimes they have been, and what place they now are in: and
that for that so soon passed away, now they suffer that, which shall endure
for ever.

Then at the length, too late they shall acknowledge the deceits of the devil,
and being in the midst of errors, they shall begin in vain to utter those
words of the Wiseman; Wisdom. 5.
We have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not
shined unto us: we have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and
destruction, and we have gone through dangerous ways: but we have not known
the way of the Lord. These shall be the complaints, these shall be the
lamentations, this shall be the perpetual repentance, which the damned shall
there make world without end, when it shall profit them nothing, because the
time is past and gone, in which they should have brought forth fruits worthy
of repentance. All these and every one of them, if they be considered, In the
22. homily to the people of Antioch.
are pricks and motives unto Virtue. Wherefore also Saint Chrysostom does use
this argument also in his Homilies, that he might stir up the people to
Virtue. That thou may prepare thy soul, (says he) as the dwelling and
habitation of God, remember that horrible and exceeding fearful day, in which
we all standing before the throne of Christ, shall render an account of things
done here: our sins shall be laid open before the eyes of all people, and
our actions shall be revealed and shown to all those that know them not, where
the fiery River, and the vnsleeping worm are, where all things are naked and
open. Where the books of our hearts shall be opened, and our secret and hidden
deeds done by day or night, by ignorance or forgetfulness, shall be read
manifestly, and all those things that now lie hid, shall be revealed.

Think therefore, that we must come before a Judge that cannot be deceived:
where not only our actions, but also our words and thoughts shall be judged;
where we shall receive dreadful and terrible pains for those things that
seem but small unto us. Always remember these things, and never forget that
unquenchable flame. Have an eye to him, coming to judge the quick and the
dead. Think upon the thousands, and ten thousands of Angels waiting upon the
Judge; now let thy hearing prevent the sound of the Trump, and that fearful
sentence of the Judge condemning. Let thine eye foresee some cast into utter
darkness, others excluded and shut out of the gates, after much labor of
virginity. Consider some to be gathered as tares, For what sins men are
damned
and to be cast into a fiery furnace, and others delivered to the vnsleeping
worm, and to mourning, and to gnashing of teeth: this man to be judged for
his unreasonable laughter, that man for iniuring his neighbor, or because he
has offended his brother; this man to be condemned for faults that he has
forgot, another man for an idle word; this man to be damned for his ill
meaning, another for slanderous railing; one for anger to suffer intolerable
punishment, another for ignominy; some to be deprived of the knowledge of
Christ, and to hear, Math, 15.
Verily, I say unto you, I know you not: because they have done those things,
which Christ has forbidden.

These things therefore being thus, what ones ought we to be, or what tears
ought we to shed, and to say: Oh that mine head were full of water, Ierem. 9.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night. But
that we may escape this dreadful punishment, Psalm, 95.
Come ye, let us come before the face of the Lord with confession, and with
diligence and amendment of life, let us call upon the name of our Lord God;
Psalm, 6,
For in the pit, who shall praise or confess thy name? God has given all
things double unto us, two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet. If therefore
one of these be hurt, by the other we comfort and relieve our necessity. But
he has given but one soul unto us; if we shall loose this, with what shall
we live? Therefore let us look to provide for this, let us prefer nothing
before the safety of it, because this is also judged with the body, and is
freed and cleared together with it, and together with the body, does appear
before Christ's tribunal. If thou then shall say, my money allured me, Math,
16,
the Judge will say unto thee: have thou not heard, What shall it profit a man,
though he should win the whole world, if he lose his own soul? If thou
shall say, the devil deceived me, he also will say unto thee, Gene, 3,
that it profited Eve nothing, to say, The Serpent deceived me. Therefore we
remembering these things, come, let us raise and stir up our selves, before we
be ouer-taken, before that great day of the Lord come and appear, of which the
Prophet says; Mala, 3.
Behold, it comes, and who shall endure it? Or who shall abide the day of his
coming? That is a fearful day of hurly burly, and of darkness. But thou will
say; How then may I escape these foresaid evils? I will tell thee: not only
keep thy body pure and unspotted, but when thou have suffered injury, do good
for it, if thou be accused, be thou patient. When thou do fast, be not
boasting of it; for fasts are not commended for abstayning from meat, but for
abstayning from sin. Search the Scriptures, and see how first the Prophet
sees a Hasill-wand, and afterward a burning Cauldron, demonstrating unto us,
that the fire does consume those that do not bear the chastisement and
correction of the rod. So by Moses the pyllar of fire showed, Exodus, 19,
that they that observe the law, receive the light, but the disobedient receive
fire. Read the Scriptures of our Savior, and learn, how that when we go
hence thither, Psalm, 49,
no body can help us. The brother shall not redeem the brother from endless
torments, nor the friend his friend, nor the parents their children, nor the
children their parents.

And what do I speak of miserable men, when as if Noe, Job, and Daniel come,
they cannot entreat the Judge? But thou will say; Whence may I know this to be
true? Look upon him that having not his wedding garment, was excluded, and
none entreating for him. Look upon him that had the talent committed unto
him, and did not increase it, and how for him no body entreats. Look upon
the five Virgins, shut forth, neither the other five entreats for them,
which also Christ calls foolish; because, after they had trodden pleasures
under their feet, after they had cooled the furnace of concupiscence, then
they were found fools, and not without cause, because they observing that
great duty of Virginity, did not keep that small commandment of Humility.
Look upon the Judge in the day of judgment, placing the Sheep on his right
hand, and the unprofitable Goats on his left, and saying to those on his right
hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, receive a kingdom prepared for you. But
those on his left hand to be cast into utter darkness, and that no body does
help and succor them being cast out. For it is a true speech; Behold the man
and his work. Luke, 16.
Thou have heard how Dives never pitying Lazarus, was tormented with flames,
and desired a drop of water. Thou know how that Abraham himself could not
ease his pains, although he desired and beseeched him. Therefore hereafter we
regarding and respecting our selves, before we are confounded and utterly cast
down, let us give the glory to God. It is better here that thy tongue should
be dried up through fasting, then to keep it moist, and there to desire that
moisture, which being denied, is eternal pain. Here with small labor we
may avoid great torments. Certain excellent comparisons.
And if we be so delicate and tender in this life, that we can not suffer
patiently a fever of three days, how shall we in the life to come be able to
suffer everlasting fire? If we do fear the sentence of death pronounced of
an earthly Judge, which takes only from us life of a few years: why do we not
fear the sentence of this Judge, which depriueth us utterly of an eternal
life? If we are terrified seeing the execution of some horrible punishment,
which in this world is inflicted upon some malefactor, when we see the
Sargiants with the Hangman to draw the malefactor to punishment, to beat
him, to hang and quarter him, or to burn him. Yet all these are rather solaces
then sorrows, if they be compared with the punishments to come. For these
torments are ended together with life; but there neither the worm shall dye,
nor the tormenter shall be wearied, nor the fire shall ever be extinguished. In
so much, that if all things, which thou shall compare with this punishment, be
fire, be sword, be beasts, be what torment thou will, yet it is a sleep, and a
shadow in comparison of this. But what will the condemned do, when they see
themselves deprived of so great a good, and condemned to so great misery? What
will they do? What will they say? How will they breathe? And all these in
vain. For after the ship is drowned, the Sailors are for no use: neither is a
Physician profitable, when the diseased dye. Then although too late, they shall
disclaim their errors, Repentance too late.
and say, this was to be done, and this not. Although we often have been
admonished, yet we have not obeyed. Then the Jews at the length shall
acknowledge him, that comes in the name of the Lord, but this too late
knowledge shall nothing profit them. For there shall be no time. O us wretched
and miserable, Our accusers.
what shall we bring for our excuse in that day, when as heaven, the earth, the
Sun, the Moon, the day, and the night, with all things that are in the
world, shall accuse us, and shall cry out for reuengement upon us, bearing
witness of our evils? Yea, if all should hold their peace, yet our own
conscience would lift up her voice against us, and accuse us. All these things
are out of Saint Chrysostom; by which it is manifest, how greatly he shall be
stricken with a vehement fear, who shall come unprepared to this sentence. This
same Saint Ambrose feared, Ambro^e upon Luke.
when he says: woe unto me, if I shall not rise at midnight to confess and
praise thee o Lord. Woe to me, if I shall deal craftily with my neighbor. Woe
unto me if I shall not speak the truth. The axe is laid to the root of the
tree; let it bring forth those fruits of grace, which it should of repentance.
The Lord is at hand, that requires fruit, he gives life to the fruitful,
but casts the barren into the fire.

THE NINTH TITLE. That man is bound to the exercise of Virtue, by reason of the
third last thing that happens unto him, which is the glory of Heaven. CHAP.
IX.
EVery one of those things, which hitherto we have spoken of, by very good
reason ought to have sufficient force to inflame our minds with the love of
Virtue. But because the hardness of man's heart is so great, that after all this
it cannot be moved with all these; we will add an other motive, What things
are handled in this chapter.
no less effectual then the praecedent. It is the greatness of the reward,
which Virtue promises to her lovers: that is, the glory of Heaven; in which
two things are to be especially looked unto: the one is the excellency and
beauty of the place, that is, of the heaven of heavens: the other is the
dignity and greatness of the King, that dwells there with all his elect.

As touching the first: The beauty of heaven is gathered by conjectures.
how great the beauty is, and how great are the riches of this place, no
humane eloquence can utter: but by certain conjectures we may come as it were
aloof of to some knowledge of it. The first conjecture is the end.
Amongst these conjectures the first is the end of that work: for the end is
one of the circumstances, which are wont especially to declare the condition
and excellency of a thing. The end therefore for which the Lord has made this
place, is, that by it he might manifest his glory. For although he has
created all things for his glory, Prouer, 16.
as says Solomon, yet properly and peculierly he is said to have created
heaven for this end; for in it after a more special manner, his dignity,
greatness, and magnificence does shine and appear. For even as King Assuerus,
that reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, Esther, 1.
over an hundred, and seven and twenty provinces, made a great feast unto all
his Princes and his servants, even the power of Persia and Media, in the City
of Susan, by the space of an hundred and fourscore days, and that with all
majesty, cost, and royal magnificence: that he might show the riches and
glory of his kingdom, and the honor of his great majesty: So the great King
of Kings determined to make a most solemn and sumptuous feast in heaven: not
by the space of any time, but throughout all eternity: that in it he might
show the vnmeasurablenes of his riches, of his wisdom also, of his liberality
and goodness. This is that feast, of which the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias, 25.
when he says; And the Lord of Hoasts shall make to all people in this
mountain a feast of fat things, even a feast of fined wines, and of fat things
full of marrow, of wines fined and purified. That is, of meats most delicate,
most precious, and most sweet.

If therefore the Lord God does make that solemn feast, that in it he may
manifest the greatness of his glory: if his glory be so great, what shall the
feast be? What the riches? How precious all things that to this end are
prepared? The power of the Lord.
But we shall understand this better, if we consider the greatness of the power
of this Lord. His power is so great, that with one word he created this
admirable frame, and that with one word in like manner he can destroy it
again. Neither could he have created one world with one word, but infinite
worlds: and in like manner again he could have destroyed so many with one
word. Furthermore, whatsoever he does, he does it without labor: so that with
the same facility, that he created a small Pismire, he could have created the
greatest Cherubin and Seraphin: for he feels no burden, he sweateth not
under a greater weight, neither is he eased of a less. For he can do all
things that he wills, and whatsoever he wills, he works by his only
will. Tell me therefore, if the power of this Lord be so great, and if the
glory of his most holy name be so great, and so unmeasurable his love, what
think thou will be his house, the joy, and the feast, which he to this end
has prepared? What can be wanting to this work, Reasons why heaven should be
absolute and perfect.
why it should not be absolute in every respect? There shall be no defect of
his hands, because he is infinitely mighty and powerful. There shall be less
defect of his brain, because he that made it, is infinitely wise. There shall
be no defect of his will: because he is infinitely good. Neither shall this
work be hindered through want of riches, because the maker is the Sea and
Ocean of all treasure. What then will this work be, where there is such and
so great preparation? What shall that work be, that comes out of that shop,
in which such vvorkmaisters work together, as are the omnipotency of the
Father, the wisdom of the Son, and the goodness of the holy Ghost? Where
the goodness wills, the wisdom disposes and orders, the omnipotency
can do all that, which the goodness wills, and the wisdom orders,
although all these are one and the same in diverse persons.

We have also an other conjecture, The second conjecture.
meet for this purpose, not unlike to the former: For God prepared not this
house only for his own honor, but for the glory and honor also of his
elect. Consider therefore how careful God is to honor his friends, John, 12.
and to perform his promise, by which he promised that he would honor all
them that do administer unto him. All things obey the righteous even in this
world.
This is manifested by the effect, seeing that he has given to them that live
in this world, dominion, and rule over all creatures. This is manifest in
Joshua; at whose commandment the Sun stood immovable in the midst of heaven:
no otherwise then if he had had in his hands the bridle of the frame of the
whole world, Joshua, 10.
The Lord obeying (as the Scripture says) the voice of a man. 4, Kings, 20.
We see the like in Esaias; who gave to King Hezekiah his wish, whether he
would, that the shadow of the Sun should go forward ten degrees; or go
back ten degrees, for with the same facility that he could do the one, he
could do the other. Is not the like power seen in Elias, 3, Kings, 17, 18.
who by his word stayed the clouds that they should yield no rain as long
as he pleased? And afterward by the virtue of his prayer, he brought back
the clouds and obtained rain, and watered the earth with showers and dewes?
Not only such things in life are granted unto the Elect, but the Lord does
honor them so far, that he has given this power after death to their bones
and ashes. 4, Kings, 13.
Who will not praise God, that the bones of dead Elizeus revived a dead man,
whose body through fear of the thieves of Moab was cast into the Sepulcher
of the Prophet? Yea, Acts, 5.
he has not only given this virtue unto the bones and ashes of his elect, but
also to their shadows, the shadow of Peter restored them to health, whom it
shadowed. O admirable God, o exceeding and infinitely good, who has given to
man what he took not to himself, Christ gave more to his Saints then he used
himself.
or which he himself used not: for it is not read of Christ, that his shadow
healed the diseased, which notwithstanding the Scripture testifies of Peter.

If God be so ready to honor his Saints, yea in a time and place not ordained
nor destined for their reward, but appointed for labors and miseries: how
great do thou think that glory will be, which he has prepared for his
beloved, in a place proper for reward and recompense, to honor them, and that
he may be honored in them? He that so greatly desires to bestow honor, and
can so easily do it, let every one consider with himself, how ample,
precious, rare, and magnificent those things ought to be, which he has
prepared for the honor of his Elect? In this place also may be considered the
incomparable liberality of this Lord, in rewarding the services of his
servants. The Lord commanded the Patriarch Abraham to sacrifice his only and
dearly beloved son, who being obedient to the commandment, and preparing
himself to the sacrifice, Genesis 22.
he heard of him. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing for my sake, thou
have not spared thine only son. By my self have I sworn, because thou have
done this thing, and have not spared thine only son. Therefore will I surely
bless thee, and will greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of the heaven,
and as the sand which is upon the Sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies. More-ouer, amongst thy sons I will give thee one, who
shall be the Savior of the world, and he shall be both thy son, and the son
of GOD. Does this seem unto thee an ample reward? This is a reward worthy of
God; for God is God in all things. He is God in recompencing; he is God in
correcting; he is God in all other things.

David on a certain night considered with himself, how he himself dwelt in
a house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of GOD remained within the Curtains: and
he began to think of building an house unto the Lord. And the same night, the
word of the Lord came unto Nathan, 2, Reg, 7.
saying: Go and tell my servant David, thus says the Lord: vvilt thou build
me an house for my dwelling? I do swear unto thee, I will build thee an
house for ever, and for all thy posterity with a perpetual kingdom: neither
shall my mercy depart from it. So he said, and so he did: for to the coming of
Christ they reigned in the house of Judah, who descended of the family and
seed of David, who^ Christ followed, who shall reign for ever. Therefore, if
the glory of Heaven be a recompense, and an universal remuneration of the
divine worship and service done unto God of his Saints; and if God be so
liberal in this recompense, it is no hard thing to conjecture, how great the
glory to come of the blessed will be.

We have another conjecture, The 3. conjecture.
if we consider how great the price is, which God requires for this glory;
notwithstanding he is so liberal and bountiful. The price that must be given
for the celestial glory.
For after sin, he would not grant this glory to any man at a lesser price,
then at the death and blood of his only begotten son, Jesus Christ: insomuch
that this heavenly life, is not given to man but for the death of God, and for
the sorrows of God, celestial joy is given to man. And because God hanged
upon the Cross between two thieves, now man reigns amongst the assembly of
Angels.

Tell me (if by any mean it may be spoken) what manner of good is that, which
that the Lord might give it unto thee, first he must sweat out his own blood?
he must be apprehended, bound, beaten, mocked, crowned with thorns, and
crucified? What will it be (I pray thee) that the Lord, who otherwise of his
own nature is so liberal, has prepared that he might give unto men, for this
so inestimable a price? He that kuoweth well how to fish in this depth, he by
this conjecture shall know the greatness of this glory, more manifestly then by
all others which may be imagined.

God also exacteth, as an appendix of this former, the greatest thing that may
be exacted of man for this celestial glory; that is, he take up his cross,
that he pull out his right eye, and cast it from him if it offend him; that he
forsake Father and Mother, with all other things created, if they at any time,
persuade any thing contrary to the divine commandments. And when we have done
all things that we can, the Lord wills, that we say that we are unprofitable
servants: he wills that glory be given unto him only, and all things to be
esteemed as his sole and mere grace. Which he confirms by Saint John, when
he says, Apoc. 21,
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, I will give to him that is a
thirst, of the well of the water of life freely. Tell me, what ones and how
great are they think thou, for the which the Lord requires so hard things:
which when we have given or done, yet he would have us to confess, that they
are given unto us freely, of his mere grace? Tell me therefore, if the Lord
our God be so magnificent, and so liberal in bestowing his graces, if his
divine goodness has granted to all men in this life, the use of things so
different, if all the creatures of heaven and earth indifferently serve all,
and the possession of them be common, as well to the unjust as to the just, who
deservedly can doubt, that much greater are those supreme blessings, which he
has prepared only for the righteous? Who was ever found, that freely bestowed
so great treasures upon him, to whom he was not indebted? How much greater will
he give, if he shall be indebted to any? He that is so liberal in bestowing
gifts freely, how liberal will he be in repaying and rewarding a debt? He that
bestows so great things freely, what will he not give to him that continues
faithful? If the magnificence of those things which he gives, be so
inestimable, what shall be the splendor of those things, which he will repay?
Certainly it cannot be spoken, nor be expressed by any words, how great that
glory will be, which the Lord will give to his Elect, seeing they are so great,
which of his great bounty he bestows upon the unthankful.

The situation and height of the place may somewhat teach us also of the
quantity and quality of this glory: The fourth conjecture. The quantity and
quality of the glory, by the greatness of the place. Psalm, 26.
that this heaven of heavens, which is above the seven Spheres, as it is
greater then all the heavens, so it is the noblest of all, the most beautiful,
the most glorious, and the most worthy. This place the Scripture calls, The
Land of the living: that he might signify, that this Land which we inhabit,
is a land of those which be dead. But if in this region of death, the creatures
be so noble, so precious, and so excellent: what shall those there be, in the
land of the everliving? Turn thine eyes into what part soever thou will of
this visible world, and behold how many and how beautiful things are found in
it. Behold how spacious the greatness of the heaven is, how great the
splendor is of the Sun, Moon, and of all the s tarres: how beautiful the
earth is, being beautified and adorned with so great multitude and variety of
plants, byrds, and other living creatures.

How pleasant a thing is it to see the plainness of the field, The beauty of
the earth
the highness of hills and mountains, the greenes of Valleys, the streaming
of fountains, the abundance of rivers, which like veins run through the
whole body of the earth: and that which is more, what great pleasure it is to
see the largnesse of the Sea, full of so many and so admirable things? What be
the standing pooles? what be the lakes of pure and clear water? what other
things be they, then the eyes of the earth, and the looking-glasses of heaven?
What be the meddowes clothed and adorned with the pleasantnes of Roses and
other flowers? No other thing then a clear heaven in a fair night, adorned
with stars. What shall I speak of the veins of gold, silver, and other
metals in most rich Mines? What of Diamonds Carbuncles, Emeralds, and other
most precious Iemmes, which seem to contend by their beauty and brightness,
with heaven and with the stars themselves? What of the shapes, and the
diversity of colors, which are seen in byrds, and in other living creatures
and flowers?

Let the pleasantness of Art, if it please you, be joined to the beauty of
nature, and the beauty of all things shall be doubled. Because by Art, diverse
and excellent pieces of curious workmanshyp are wrought in gold and silver; by
Art vessels, images, and pictures are made no less pleasant then artificial;
gardens and Orchards by singular industry are set and planted: buildings of
Churches, palaces of Kings, are so cunningly made of gold, marble, and other
things, that they carry men's minds into admiration and astonishment. If
therefore in this base element, and the lowest of all, which is called the Land
of the dead, there be so many, so delightful, beautiful, and pleasant things;
how many, and how great think thou, shall those things be in that highest
place, which by how much it is higher then all the heavens, and all the
elements, by so much it is nobler, by so much richer, by so much more
beautiful? Especially, if we consider those celestial bodies, which are
obuious to our sight (as are the stars, the Sun, and Moon) in splendor,
in virtue, in beauty, and in perpetuity, by so many degrees to excel and
exceed all inferior things; what then will those things do, which are hid from
mortal eyes, and are only open to immortal sight? this excellency can
scarcely be presupposed or thought upon.

We know that there are three kind of places, appointed of God unto men in this
life, The 5. conjecture. Three kind of places appointed to men, of GOD.
according to the diversity of times: the first is, the mothers womb after
conception: the second, is this world, straightwaies after birth: the third,
shall be heaven after death, if we have lived well. In these orders of places,
there is that proportion, that by how much more the second is more excellent
then the first, by so much the third is more excellent then the second, as well
in the continuance and perpetuity of the time, as in the largeness and
beauty of the place, and in all other things. For the diuturnitie and longnes
of the first life, it is certain that it is no longer then nine months: the
second life at the most is but an hundred years: but the third is endless,
and eternal. Moreover, the greatness of the place of the first life, is no
larger then the womb in which it is contained: of the second, this large and
spacious world: but of the third, the place is so much the greater and more
spacious then the second place, by how much the second is larger then the
first, and the same excellency that it has in largenes and greatness, the
same it has in beauty, fairenes, riches, and in all other things. If therefore
this world by so much is more large, more beautiful, and more rich then the
mothers womb; how great will the largenes, the beauty, the riches, the
nobility be of that heavenly place?

This same thing the difference of the inhabitants dwelling in these two places
do manifestly declare. The 6, conjecture. From the noblenes of the inhabitants.
For the frame and fashion of the building ought to be suitable to the condition
of the inhabitants dwelling in it. This, as we have said, is the land of the
dead, that of the living: this is full of sinners, that of the righteous and
just: this of men, that of Angels: this penitentiaries inhabit, that, those
that have obtained the remission of sins: in this dwell the militant, in that
the triumphant: to be brief, this is the habitation of friends and enemies,
that of friends only, and of the elect. If therefore the difference of the
inhabitants be so great, how great think thou shall the difference of places
be? Especially seeing that God does make all places conformable to the
inhabitants. Psalm. 83.
Great and glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God. Thou art large
and great in space and latitude, fair and beautiful in fight and view,
precious in matter, noble in society, sweet in exercises, rich in all
blessings, and free from all evils. In all things thou art great, for he is the
greatest that made thee, and the end is most excellent for which thou wast
made; and thy inhabitants also are most noble, for whose use thou wast made.

All these pertain to accidental glory. But there is an other glory greater
without all comparison, Essential glory.
which is called essential, and consists in the sight and possession of God
himself, of which Saint Augustine says, he himself shall be the reward of
Virtue, who gave Virtue, who shall be seen without end, loved without loathing,
and praised without wearines. In so much that this reward is so great, that a
greater cannot be: because it is neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea, nor any
other creature: but the Creator himself, and the Lord of all, who also as he
is one, so he is the most pure and simple good, in whom all other good things
are found.

For the further intelligence of this thing, we must know, that one of the
wonderful things, which are in this substance, is this, that we have spoken
of; that is, that it being but one and the most simple, yet it includes all
the perfections of all things, and that in the highest eminency of perfection.
For seeing that he is the Creator and maker of all, God is the perfection of al
things.
and it is he that governs, and directs all to their last end and
perfection: it cannot be, that he has not that, he gives to another, or
labors with any penury of that thing, that he so abundantly distributeth
to others. Hence it is that all the blessed spirits do rejoice in seeing all
things in him alone; yet every one according to the proportion of that glory,
which they have gotten. For even as now the creatures are as it were looking
glasses, in which the beauty of God may after some manner be seen; so then God
shall be the looking glass, in whom the beauty and fairenes of all creatures
shall be seen: and that vision shall be much more perfect, God all in all.
then if it were seen in the creatures themselves. So that God will be there
the universal good of all his Saints, the perfect felicity and satietie of all
their desires. There God will be a looking glass to the eyes of his Saints,
music to their ears, Nectar and Ambrosia to their palats, and ordoriferous
Balsanum to their smelling. There we shall see the variety and beauty of the
seasons, the pleasantnes of the Spring, the brightness of Summer, the
fruitfulnes of Autumn, and the quiet of Winter. To be brief, there shall be
whatsoever may delight our senses, and every faculty of our souls. There (as
Bernard says) will be the fulness of light to our understanding, the abundance
of peace to our will, and the continuance of eternity to our memory. There the
wisdom of Solomon shall seem ignorance: there the beauty of Absalon shall
seem deformity: there the strength of Sampson shall seem weakness: there the
life of those men, that lived at the beginning of the world, shall be as it
were death: to conclude, there we may worthily call the treasuries of all
Emperors and Kings, stark beggerie and poverty.

If these things be so, o wretched man, (as they are in deed) wherefore, and
to what end do thou desire to stay longer in the Land of Egypt, and to
gather stubble? Why do thou drink troubled and foul water out of all
cesternes, despising the vain of felicity, and the fountain of living waters?
Why do thou love to beg and ^o live of alms, when thou shall find such
abundance in heaven? If thou desire pleasure, lift up thine heart, and see
how delightful that good is, that contains in it the delight and pleasure of
all good things. If this life created does please thee, how much more shall
that life please thee, which created all things? If health given make thee
merry, how much more shall he make thee merry, that gives all health? If the
knowledge of the creatures be sweet and acceptable, how much more sweeter shall
the Creator himself be? If beauty be acceptable unto thee, it is he at whose
beauty the Sun and Moon admire. If thou desire nobility, he is the
fountain and original of all nobility. If thou desire long life and health,
he is eternal life. If thou desire satiety and abundance, he is the fulness
of al good things. If thou delightest in the wel-tuned music and harmony of
mortal men; there Angels do sing most sweetly, and the Organs of the City of
God, are heard there with great delight and pleasantnes. If the friendship,
familiarity, and society of good men do like thee; there thou shall find all
the elect, having one mind and one heart. If thou thirstest after riches and
honors, in that house of the Lord they are found in great abundance. To
conclude, if thou desire to escape all kind of punishments, tribulations,
and miseries; there thou shall find liberty and freedom from them all.

God commanded in the old law, The mystery of Circumcision.
that upon the eight day Circumcision should be celebrated; that secretly he
might let us understand, that upon the eight day of our Resurrection, which
succeeds the seventh day of this life, God will circumcise and cut off all
the griefs, sorrows, miseries, and calamities of them, that for his love
whilst they lived have circumcised and cut off their appetites, lusts, and
sins. What thing then can be found out more blessed or happy, then this
estate of living, most free from all kind of misery? Augustine in the 17,
chapter of his Manuel.
What, says Saint Augustine, is more blessed then this life, where there is no
fear of poverty, no infirmity of sickness? No man is hurt, none angry, none
enuieth, no concupiscence is kindled, no appetite of meat, no ambition of
honor or dominion, does urge or move thee. There is no fear of the devil, no
deceipts of devils; the terror of hell is far of, there is neither death of
body or soul, but a pleasant life through the gift of immortality. Then there
shall be no mischiefs, no discords: but all agreement; because there shall be
one concord of all the Saints. Peace and joy embrace all things, all things
are at quiet and rest, there is continual brightness and shining, not that
which is now, but much more bright and clear, Apoc, 21.
because that City, as it is read, needs neither Sun nor Moon: but the
Lord almighty shall enlighten it, Dan. 12.
and the Lamb is the light of it. Where the Saints shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the
stars for ever and ever. Wherefore there is no night, no darkness, no
concourse of clouds, neither any distemperature or vnseasonablenes of heat
or cold: but there shall be such a temperature and moderation of all things,
which neither the eye has seen, Esaias, 64.1, Cor. 2.
nor the ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man: except
of them, who are found worthy to enjoy it, whose names are written in the book
of life. But above all these things it is, to be consociate with the assembly
of Angels and Archangels, and of all the celestial powers: to behold the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, to see the Apostles, and all the Saints: to see also
our parents. These are glorious, but much more glorious is it, to behold the
countenance of the Lord, and to see that light not to be circumscribed; that
will be superexcellent glory, when we shall see God in himself, we shall see
and shall have him in us, whom to behold there shall be no end.

Augustine in the 15. chapter of his Manuel All things to be suffered for the
heavenly glory.
O my soul, says the same holy man, if we daily should suffer torments, if
for a long time we should endure hell it self, that we might see Christ in his
glory, and have society with his Saints: were it not a thing worthy to suffer
all bitterness and all cross, that we might be pertakers of so great good, and
so great glory? Therefore let the devils lie in wait for me, let them prepare
temptations: let fastings weaken my body, let hard and course clothing afflict
my flesh, let labors oppress me, let watchings dry me up, let this man cry
out against me, let this or that disquiet me, let cold benum me, let my
conscience murmur against me, let heat burn me, let my head ache, let my
heart boil within me, let my stomach fail me, let my countenance wax pale,
let every part of me be enfeebled; let my life forsake me in grief, and let my
years end in sorrow: let rottennes enter into my bones, and flow under me, so
that I may rest in the day of tribulation, and that I may ascend to the holy
hill. For what shall be the glory of the righteous? How great the joy of the
Saints, when as every face shall shine as the Sun? Hitherto S. Augustine.

If this good be so great, and so universal, what shall the felicity and glory
be of those blessed eyes, which shall behold all these things? How excellent a
thing will it be to see the beauty of this City? And the glory of the
Citizens? The face of the Creator? The magnificence of the buildings? The
riches of the Palace, and the common joy of that Country? How pleasant a
thing will it be to see the orders of the blessed Spirits? The authority of that
holy Senate? And the majesty of those venerable Seniours and Elders, Apoc. 4.
which Saint John saw, Sitting upon thrones in the sight of God, clothed in
white raiment, and having on their heads crowns of gold? How sweet and how
pleasant will it be to hear those sweet angelical voices, the consent of their
music most excellently composed of master singers, such Psalmody of such
holy singers, such Symphonie so metrically ordered, not of four or five
voices, as that is which we now use, but tuned and ruled with the variety of
so many numerous and harmonious voices, as there be Elect? What great pleasure
will it be to hear their most sweet songs, which S. John heard in his
Revelation. Apoc. 7.
And they worshipped God, says he, saying; Praise and glory, and wisdom, and
thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for evermore, Amen.

If the glory and pleasure be so great to hear this harmony and consent of
voices; what will it be to see the concord of bodies and souls so conformable
and uniform? But how much more admirable will it be, to behold so great union
of men and Angels? What do I say of men and Angels? Yea, so great an union
between man and God himself? Above al these it cannot fitly be imagined, how
acceptable and welcome a thing it will be to see those most spacious fields, and
fountains of life, and those most delicate feedings upon the mountains of
Israel. What will it be to sit at that royal table, to have a place amongst
those invited Nobles, and to dip thine hand into the dish with God, that is, to
enjoy one and the same glory of God? There the Saints shall rest, shall rejoice,
sing, praise, and going in and out, they shall find pastures of inestimable
delight. If the rewards of Virtue be so great and so precious, which our
Catholic faith do promise us, who will be so blind, slothful, negligent, and
so perverse, that is not moved to contend with his whole strength, for the
obtaining of a reward so copious, ample, and large?

THE TENTH TITLE. That the last of those four last things, that happen unto
us, that is, Hell fire, does bind us to seek after Virtue. CHAP. X.
THE least of those good things, which hitherto we have remembered, ought to be
sufficient to beget a love of Virtue in our minds, by which we may obtain so
great blessings. Now if to this unmeasurable glory, the greatness of the
torments of hell be added, which are prepared for the wicked, who will be so hard
hearted, and of so rebellious a mind, that vices being forsaken, will not
hereafter willingly embrace Virtue?

For the ungodly and perverse shall not comfort themselves with this voice, Be
it that I am wicked and ungodly; what then? Shall I not enter into that heavenly
glory? Shall I not rejoice with God* In this consists al my punishment. Of other
things I am not careful, because I shall have neither glory, nor any other
punishment. There are but two ways.
O my brother, thou art deceived, the matter stands not so. For it is of
necessity, that one of these must happen unto thee; that either thou shall
reign eternally with God, or that thou shall be tormented with the devils in
everlasting flames. For between these two extremes, there is no mean.

Jeremy, 24.
This is excellently shadowed out unto us, in the figure of those two baskets,
which the Lord showed unto the Prophet Jeremy before the gate of the Temple:
for one basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first ripe: and
the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be eaten, they were so
evil. The Lord by this spectacle, would show unto his Prophet two kinds of
men, one, to whom he would show mercy, the other, that he would punish
according to his justice. The estate and condition of the first kind of men
was passing good, neither can a better be given: of the other exceeding ill,
then which a worse cannot be found. The condition and lot of the good is to see
God, which is the chiefest of al blessings: but the misfortune and unhappiness
of the wicked shall be, to be deprived fo^^uer of the sight of God; which evil
is the worst of al evils. These things ought they diligently to consider, and
always to meditate upon, who fear not to commit sin, when as they see so
great a burden, and so cruel and direful punishment appointed for sin.

Porters and Cariers, A similitude.
when they are called to carry a burden on their shoulders, first they look
diligently upon it, then they peise and lift it up, and try whether they be
able to undergo it, and whether they can carry it; and thou o miserable man,
to whom sins are so pleasing, that for a little pleasure, have enthralled thy
self to carry the burden of it; ah mad man, first prove and assay how great
the weight is of the burden, (that is, of the punishment, which thou shall
suffer for this pleasure) that thou may understand, whether thou have
strength to bear it.

That this proof may be made more conveniently, I will bring hither a certain
consideration, by the which after some manner thou shall be able to understand
the quality and greatness of the torments of hell: that thou may make a trial,
whether thou be sufficient to bear the burden, which thou undertake to
carry, The greatness of the punishment by reason of ye greatness of God.
when thou sinnest. Let this then be the first consideration, the greatness and
infinite immensity of God, who will chastise and punish sin, that we may see
what an one God is in all his works. This is it that I would say, that God is
great and admirable in all things: not only in the sea, in earth, and in
heaven: but also in hell. In so much, that if the Lord be God in all his works
(as we see that he is) he will be God also in his wrath, in his justice, and in
the punishment of sinners. For this cause the Lord says by Jeremy, Jeremy, 5.
Fear ye not me, or will ye not be afraid at my presence, which have placed
the sand for the bounds of the Sea, by the perpetual decree that it cannot
pass it, and though the waves thereof rage, yet can they not prevail, though
they roar, yet can they not pass over it? That is, over the limits appointed
of me. As if he should say, is it not meet that ye fear the arm of the Lord
so mighty, whose greatness this admirable work does sufficiently show? He
therefore that is great in all his works, shall he not be great in punishing of
sinners? He that for one thing is worthy, whom we do reverence and adore,
shall he not be worthy for an other thing, that he may be feared? For this cause
the same Prophet, although he was innocent, and sanctified in his mothers
womb, so greatly feared the Lord, when he said; Ierem. 10.
There is none like unto thee, o Lord: thou art great, and thy name is great in
power. Who would not fear thee o King of Nations? For to thee appertains the
dominion: for among all the wise men of the Gentiles, and in all their
kingdoms there is none like thee. And in an other place, I kept me far off
from men, because my heart was full of the fear of thy wrath. Although this
Prophet was certain that this wrath was not kindled against him, yet it was so
great that it brought fear upon him. Therefore it was said very well, Psalm.
105. Job, 26.
That he beholds the earth, and he makes it to tremble, he touches the
mountains and they smoke. And that the stars and pillars of heaven tremble
and quake at his reproof. And it is said of him not without reason, that
before his majesty those great principalities and supreme powers do tremble;
not because they are not secure of their own glory, but because the greatness
of the divine Majesty does strike fear and trembling into them. If therefore
they that be perfect be not without fear, what shall they do, that are guilty
and contemners of the divine Majesty? They are those, upon whom he will pour
out the fury of his indignation. This is one of the principal reasons, why the
greatness of this punishment is to be feared, as S. John plainly teaches in
his Revelation, where he after this manner speaks of the scourges and
torments of the Lord. Apoc. 18.
Therefore shall her plagues come at one day (he speaks of Babylon) death,
and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the
Lord God, which will condemn her. The Apostle also was not ignorant of the
strength of this Lord, and therefore he said, It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the Lord. Heb. 10.
It is not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of men, because they are
not so mighty, but we may escape their violence, and fly from their fury;
neither have they such authority, that they can thrust the soul into hell.
Therefore our Savior said to his Disciples; Fear not them that kill the body,
Math. 10.
but cannot kill the soul: but rather fear him, who can cast both body and
soul into hell fire. These be the hands, into which the holy Apostle says
that it is a fearful thing to fall. Of these things it is no hard matter to
gather, what is the nature of those hands, of which Ecclesiasticus speaks; If
we do not repent, Ecclesi. 2.
we shall fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands of men. By
all which it is most manifest, that as God is great in power, in Majesty, and
in all his works, so he will be great in wrath, in justice, and in the
punishments of the wicked.

The same also is yet more plainly seen in examining the Divine justice, The
greatness of the justice of GOD.
the effects and executions of which, be these punishments. This is after some
manner known by the effects, that is, by the fearful punishments of God,
inflicted at diverse times upon wicked men, sundry of which are remembered in the
Scriptures. Numb. 16.
How terrible was the punishment of Dathan and Abiron, and of all their
accomplices, whom the earth (opening her mouth) swallowed up, with their Tents,
and all their substance, and they went quick into hell; because they had stirred
up sedition against Moses and the Priests? Who ever heard such like kind of
threatenings as those that are read in Deuteronomie? and they are purposed and
threatened against the^, who do not observe the Law of the Lord: where amongst
other horrible and fearful threatenings, Deuteronomy, 28,
thus says the Lord; Thou shall be besieged in all thy Cities, throughout all
thy Land which the Lord thy God has given thee. The husband without the
knowledge of his wife, shall eat his sons, and so shall ye wife without the
priuitie of the man, that they might eat alone.
And thou shall eat the fruit of thy body, even the flesh of thy sons and
thy daughters, which the Lord thy God has given thee, during the siege and
straightnes wherein thine enemies shall enclose thee: So that the man that is
tender and exceeding dainty among you, shall be grieved at his brother, and at
his wife that lies in his bosom, and at the remnant of his children which he
has yet left. For fear of giving unto any of them of the flesh of his
children, whom he shall eat, because he has nothing left him in that siedge
and straightnes, wherewith thine enemy shall besiedge thee in all thy Cities.
The tender and dainty woman among you, which never would venture to set the
sole of her foot upon the ground, for her softness and tenderness, shall be
grieved at her husband which lies in her bosom, and at her son, and at her
daughter, and at her after birth, that shall come out from between her feet,
and at her children, which she shall bear: for when all things lack, she
shall eat them secretly, during the siedge and straightness, vvhere-with
thine enemy shall besiedge thee in thy Cities.

Horrible and to be trembled at are these punishments: yet both these, and al
other, with which men have at any time been punished in this world, are no
other thing then a small shadow, and a figure of those punishments, which tarry
for the damned in the other world: for that shall be the time in which the
Divine justice shall shine, upon and against those, that here have refused his
mercy. But if the shadow be so horrible, who shall be able to sustain the truth
of the matter, and the thing it self? If now, when as the Divine justice is as
yet tempered with mercy, and the cup of the wrath of the Lord is mixed with the
water of his grace, be so bitter; what will it be, when it shall be drunk pure
without mercy, especially of those that would show no mercy to their
neighbor; although the punishment will always be less, then the desert and
merit of the sin?

Neither only does the greatness of the justice argue the greatness of the
punishment; Of the mercy of God, the greatness of the punishment is gathered.
but also the greatness of the mercy, of the goodness of which wicked men
presume so much. For what is more admirable, then to see GOD clothed with man's
flesh, and in it to suffer all kind of torments and reproaches* even from his
entrance into this life, to his going forth of it, which he ended upon the
Cross? What greater mercy, then to come into this world, and to take upon him
the debts of the whole world, that he might disburthen the world of them? and
to shed his blood for them who shed his blood? Therefore, as the works of the
Divine mercy are admirable, so are the works of the Divine justice to be
feared: for there is not in God lesser or greater, but seeing that God is wholly
and all that he is in himself, therefore as much as his mercy is, so much
necessarily is his justice, A similitude.
in those things that pertain unto it. For even as by the greatness of one
arm, we gather the quantity of the other; so by the greatness of the arm of
the Divine mercy, we measure also the quantity of the Divine justice: seeing
that there is one and the same measure of them both.

Now therefore tell me (I pray thee) if in that time in which GOD would show
his mercy to the world, The two co^min^s of Christ compared.
he wrought so admirable things, and so incredible to the world, that the
world supposed them to be foolishnes: when the time of his second coming shall
approach, in which he determines to show the greatness of his justice, what
do thou think that he will do? having so many more greater occasions, by
how much there shall be more and greater offenses of men. For the mercy of GOD
had not any thing that might provoke it, or desire it, seeing there was nothing
in man's nature, that might deserve it: but the Divine justice shall have so many
pricks, motives, and pullers on for reuengement, as there has been sins
committed in this world: and of these sufficient conjectures may be taken, how
great and how terrible the Divine justice will be. This thing Saint Bernard
excellently declares in a certain sermon of the Nativity of our Lord: In his
first Sermon of the Nativity of our Lord.
Look how mild and gentle he was (says he) in his first coming, so hard and
inexorable will he be in his second: and as now there is no man that may not be
reconciled, so after a short time, there shall be no man that may. Because, as
the gentleness and benignity appeared beyond all hope and esteem, so we must
expect the sharpnes and severity, of the judgment to be. God is unmeasurable
and infinite in justice, as he is in mercy: great to pardon, great to punish:
but mercy does challenge the first place, that if we will, justice might not be
found, upon whom it should be extended. This says Bernard. By this it
sufficiently appears, how that by the mercy of God, the quantity of his
justice may be gathered.

The divine Psalmographer does most excellently show the^ both; Psalm, 68.
This is our God (says he) even the GOD that saves us: and to the Lord God
belong the issues of death. Sure God will wound the head of his enemies, and the
hearie pate of him that walks in his sins. Thou see by these my brother,
that the Lord is as severe to his enemies, and to those that rebel against
him, as he is kind and merciful to his friends. The same thing the Divine
patience does most plainly teach, which he uses as well toward the whole
world, as toward all sorts of men, good and evil. For we see many men so
disordered and dissolute, and of so reprobate a life, that from the first time
that they begin to open their eyes of reason, even to the last day of their
life, do consume and spend the greater part of their life in offending God,
and contemning his divine commandments: having neither respect nor regard of
the promises, threatenings, benefits or counsels of God, or of any other thing.
Nevertheless, in all the time of their life, the great goodness of God wayteth
for them with great patience, not cutting off the thread of their life: not
ceasing to call them by many ways to repentance, although he see no token of
amendment in them. But when that long patience shall come to an end, if he shall
pour upon them the storehouse of his wrath, (whom so many years by little and
little he has been gathering into the bosom of his justice) with what force,
with what violence, think thou that they shall be overwhelmed?

What other thing would the Apostle signify, when he said, Despisest thou the
riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance, Rom, 2*
not knowing that the bountifulness of GOD leads thee to repentance? But
thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy self
wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment
of God. Who will reward every man according to his works. What is it that he
says, thou heapest wrath unto thy self, but that he may signify, that as
one gathering a treasury, does daily add a penny to a penny, and does heap
riches to riches, for so the mass does increase: so the Lord does every day
enlarge the heap of his wrath, as the wicked man by his ill actions, does
increase accounts to be rendered for them. Tell me (I pray thee) if any man in
gathering treasure, should so closely and diligently stick to it, that neither
any day or hour should pass, in which he would not add somewhat to it, and
that by the space of fifty or sixty years: if at any time afterward he
should unlock his door, and enter into his treasure house, what great store of
treasure should he find there? O unhappy man, do thou not mark, that
neither day nor hour passes, in which thou do not augment the heap of
Gods wrath, which is reserved for thy destruction? that is, increased and
augmented by every sin that thou committest. For although there were no other
thing, but the dishonest look of thine eyes, the impure thought, or unclean
desire, and the hatred of thine heart, the word and perjury of thy mouth, these
were enough alone to fill the whole world. But if to these all thy other vices
and sins be joined, meditate (I pray thee) what an unmeasurable mass of the
wrath of GOD thou have heaped to thy self by the space of so many years? If
the ingratitude and maliciousnes of perverse men be well searched into, they
will show unto us the greatness of the Divine punishments.

That this is true consider the goodness and liberality of GOD toward men:
consider moreover that which he did and said in this world, with that which he
suffered for them all. Consider also the commodities and necessaries for the
use of men, prepared of him, that they might live well: and all other things
that he has pardoned unto sinners, or winked at, how many blessings he has
bestowed upon them, and from how many evils he has delivered them, and many
other kind of favors and benefits, which daily he bestows upon them. All
these things increase and multiply the heap of Gods wrath. Moreover, call to
thy mind, the forgetfulness and negligence of men toward God, and also their
ingratitude and rebellion, lastly, their blasphemies and contempt, as well of
God himself, as of his commandments; which are so great, that not only they
look for no gain or profit of their sinning, but oftentimes, of only
maliciousnes, they tread foolishly all that under their feet, which the Lord
has commanded. He therefore, that without any reverence or shamefastnes
despises so great a Majesty, no otherwise then if he were some Fig Tree
God; who so often, Heb. 10.
as Paul speaks, has trodden underfoot the son of God, and has counted
the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified; he
that so often has crucified him with his works, worse then the works of
Pagans, what other thing is to be looked for of him, when the hour of
rendering an account shall come, then that he give the honor to God, The
punishment ought to be like to the sin.
or suffer so much punishment, as he has injured God? For seeing that GOD is a
just Judge, it is his duty to bevvare, that the punishments be not less then
the injuries done: but that they be like to the sin of him who has been
injurious. In this case, if it be God to whom the injury is done, what
sentence shall be pronounced against the body and soul of the condemned, that
the injury done may be recompensed by worthy punishment? But if in the
satisfaction of the offense done to God, the blood of the son of God was
necessary, in supplying the dignity of the person, which was wanting and
failing for the greatness of the punishment, what shall it be, when the
recompense shall be performed, not by the dignity of the person, but only by
the severity of the punishment?

From the person of the executioner, that is, of the devil, the greatness of
the punishment is gathered.
But let us come from the condition of the Judge, to the condition and quality
of the executioner (whose part it will be to execute the sentence and decree of
the Judge.) If it be demanded who it shall be, I say that it shall be the devil.
From whose hands what is to be hoped, I think that no man will doubt. Yet that
thou may understand after some manner, how great the cruelty is of the
executioner: I pray thee consider, how cruelly he handles them, which are
committed to his power, as was holy Job. Thou do see this cruel Tyrant
after that manner tyrannizing over this innocent man, Job, 1.
that after a greater or more cruel manner, he could not tyrannize over any
reasonable creature: having not the least pity or compassion. Did he not burn
his sheep and his servants with fire brought from above? Did he not by the
Sabaeans steal away all his Oxen and Asses, and by the Chaldaeans steal all
his Camels, and slay his servants with the edge of the sword? Did he not
overthrow his houses, and with the fall of them kill his children? Did he not at
the last smite his body with sore byles, from the sole of his foot to the
crown of his head, neither left him any other thing, besides a dunghill and a
potshard to s^rape him? He left him a wife, and unsound friends, not for his
comfort and solace; but that they by their speeches, might be as worms to gnaw
and devour the very intrals and bowels of poor and miserable Job. All these
things he could, and dared to do against a man, God permitting it. But what
cruelty and extreme tirannie did he practice against our Savior, especially
in that night, in which he was delivered to the power of darkness? This can
not be expressed in a few words. If therefore this enemy, with all his
confederate Catchpols be so cruel, and so direful and extreme an
executioner, and so bloody an enemy to all mankind: o wretched man, what will thou do, when thou shall see thy self delivered into his hands, that he may
exercise all his cruelty upon thee, according to the decree of the Divine
justice? Alas this matter is too horrible. Neither must thou think that this
punishment is for one night, for one day, or for one year, but that it shall
endure for ever, that is, throughout all eternity. What does it seem unto
thee? do thou think that thou art committed to the hands of a good man? O
what an obscure and black day will that be, when thou shall understand thy
self to be committed to the power of Wolves so ravenous? But that thou may
better understand, what friendshyp is to be looked for of these devils, I will
relate unto thee a notable example, recorded long ago of Saint Gregory.

There was of late, In the 4. book of his Dialog^ chap. 37.
says he, a certain young man that remained amongst us, his name was
Theodorus, of a dissolute life, and most negligent of his health and safety.
In this same plague which lately has consumed the greater part of our people,
he was strooken with it in his groyne, and was brought to deaths door. Whilst
he was drawing to his last home, certain brethren came unto him, that they
might pray to God for him. Now already the utmost parts of his body were dead,
only vital heat remained in his breast. All the brethren began to pray so
much the more earnestly for him, by how much he hasted more speedily to his
end. Then on a sudden, he began to cry out to the brethren kneeling about
him, and with his exclamations to interrupt their prayers, A fearful and
horrible example.
saying; Depart, depart. Behold, I am given to a Dragon to be devoured, who by
reason of your presence cannot devour me. He has already swallowed up my
head into his mouth; give place, that he may no more torment me; but let him
do that he is to do. If I be given to be devoured of him, why am I delayed by
you? Then the brethren began to say unto him: Brother, what is that which thou
speak? Call upon the name of Jesus Christ our deliverer. He answered,
saying: I would call upon the name of Christ, but I cannot; because I am
oppressed with the scales of this Dragon. When the brethren heard this, they
fell prostrate upon the ground, and began with tears to pray more fervently
for his release and deliverance. And behold on a sudden, the sickman began
to cry out, saying; I give thanks to God, behold the Dragon which would have
devoured me, is fled, he durst not stay, being feared by your prayers. Now
pray, and I will pray with you, that God through Christ, would forgive my
sins, for now I am ready to be converted, and to leave this sinful life, the
which he did.

Of the same devils Saint John speaks in his Revelation, by the manner of an
horrible figure. Apoc, 9. A description of the devils power.
And I saw (says he) a star which was fallen from heaven unto the earth, and
to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. And he opened the
bottomless pit, and there arose the smoke of the pit, as the smoke of a
great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by the smoke of the
pit. And there came out of the smoke Locustes upon the earth, and unto the^
was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power. And it was
commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any
green thing, neither any tree: but only those men, which have not the seal
of God in their foreheads. And to them was commanded that they should not kill
them, but that they should be vexed five months, and that their pain should
be as the pain that comes of a Scorpion, when he has stunge a man.
Therefore, ^ those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and
shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them. And the form of the
Locustes was like unto horses prepared unto battle, and on their heads were
as it were crowns like unto gold, and their faces were like unto the faces of
men. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the
teeth of Lions. And they had Habbergions, like unto Habbergions of iron: and
the sound of their wings, was like the sound of Charrets, when many Horses
run unto battle. And they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were
stings in their tails. Hitherto Saint John. Tell me now, my brother, what
was the mind of the holy Ghost, (for he is the Author of this Scripture) when
under that horrible and fearful figure, he would signify the greatness of
the scourges of the Divine justice? What other intent had he, then that by this
terrible horror he might admonish men, that they be not unmindful what the
wrath of the Lord God is, and what be the instruments of his justice: what be
the punishments of the wicked, and what is the power of our adversaries: that
we being admonished by the fearful terror of these things, may fear to
offend God? For what is that star, which fell from heaven unto the earth, and
to whom the keys of the bottomless pit were delivered, but that most bright
Angel who fell from heaven, to whom was given the power of darkness? And what
be those Locustes like unto Horses prepared for the war, but hellish Furies,
Armies of damned companions, assistants, helpers, and ministers unto him, who
are devils? what is the grass, what the green plants, which they are
forbidden to hurt, but the just, who are green, and do flourish by the dew of
the Divine grace, and do bring forth fruit to eternal life? Who be they
that have not the seal of God in their foreheads, but they that have not the
spirit of God, who is the seal of his servant, and of the Sheep of his
flock.

Therefore, against those miserable and wretched ones, such an Army of the
Divine justice is prepared, that both in this life and in that to come,
according to their merrits, they shall be tormented and tortured of the devils
themselves, whom they have served, Exodus, 8.
no otherwise then the Egiptians were vexed of the water-flies and frogs,
which they adored for Gods. How horrible and fearful a thing will it be then,
in that damned and cursed place to see so many terrible monsters, and hagges so
dreadful? How fearful will it be there to see that hungry Dragon, fretting
and fuming with horrible madness: that great Behemoth, of whom it is said in
the book of Job, that his tail is like a Cedar, that drinks up rivers, and
feeds on Mountains?

Those things that hitherto have been spoken of us, do sufficiently declare,
The conclusion.
how intolerable the punishments of the wicked shall be. For what is to be
looked or hoped for of all them, but horrible punishments? What is to be looked
for of the greatness and infinitenes of God, I say of the greatness of his
justice, in punishing wicked men and sinners? what of the greatness of his
patience, which so gently does forbear, and expect the repentance of sinners?
what of the multitude of his benefits, with which he does load sinners, that
with the sweetness of them, he might draw and allure them unto him? What of the
greatness of his hatred, which he has against sin? for that sin, that
offends an infinite Majesty, merriteth an infinite hate. What of the
greatness of the fury of our enemies, who are so mighty in torments and
tortures, and so ready to do ill? What I say is to be looked for, or to be
hoped of the greatness of all these things, but a mighty and unheard of
punishment of sin? If therefore the punishment be so great which is prepared
for sin, neither may any escape it, neither does it ever fail; (for so our
says does tell us) what is the reason, or rather the blindness of them, who
believing and confessing these things, do not regard the intolerable burden,
which they take upon them when they offend? For they committing but one sin,
are bound to this punishment, which by the foresaid reasons is proved to be so
great and so unmeasurable.

Of the eternity of these punishments.
But besides that those things which hitherto we have remembered, be
sufficient to beget in us very great fear and terror, yet they shall be much
more effectual, if we consider the perpetuity of these punishments. For if
there were any end, or intermission, or refreshing to be found in them, at the
least after many thousand years, certainly it would be a great comfort to
these miserable and wretched souls. But what shall I speak of Eternity,
which knows none other end, then that which the Eternity of GOD himself
has? Which space is so long, that (as a famous Doctor testifies) if any of
those damned should shed but every thousand year one tear, A fearful saying.
greater abundance of water should flow out of his eyes, then this whole
world should be able to contain. What thing more terrible can be spoken or
thought upon? But if all the torments which are in hell, were as the pricking
of pinnes, yet for their Eternity they might suffice to move a man, to undergo
with a cheereful mind, the punishments, tribulations, crosses, and what soever
miseries are in this world: at least, that he may escape Eternal punishment.

O that this word Eternal, might always stay and dwell in thy mind, how
profitable would it be unto thee? We read of a certain man, very studious and
contemplative of the vanities of the world, who when on a certain time he fell
into the cogitation of this Eternity, fearing a thing of such continuance,
which should have none end, he began thus to reason with himself: There
cannot a man of a sound wit be found in this world, who would accept the
government of the whole world, with that condition, that for the space of
thirty or forty years together, he should stretch himself upon a bed strewed
with roses and springing flowers: which thing if it be so, what is the madness,
frenzy, and dotage of men, that will for a thing of very small moment,
embrace a burning fiery bed, upon which he shall be roasted and broyled for ever
and ever? This only consideration was so profitable to that man, and wrought
so great fruits in him, that forthwith vices being forsaken, he sought after
Virtue, and in a short time, in such manner profited in them, that he became
an holy man, and a Prelate of the Church.

What will the delicate tenderlings of this world say, who for the noise of one
gnat, do pass whole nights without sleep, when they shall see themselves
stretched upon this bed of burning fire, and to be burned in every part with
living flames? And that not for one night, but to endure for ever. To such the
Prophet Esaias speaks in these words, Esaias, 33.
Who among you shall dwell with the devouring fire, who among you shall dwell
with the everlasting burnings? Whose shoulders are so hard or of Iron, that can
bear such a burden so long a time? O nation bewitched and senseless, o men
blinded of that old deceiuer, who does muffle and hood-winke all the world with
his deceipts and guiles. What I pray thee is more strange from reason, then
that men regard and respect every small trifle, that pertayneth to this life:
and in a matter of so great moment, are so inconsiderate and negligent? If we
do not see these things, what will we see? What will we fear, if we do not
fear these things, or what shall we foresee, if we do not foresee these
things? But if these things be so, why do we not embrace virtues with great
alacrity of spirit, although they be hard and difficult* at the least that we
may eschew these evils?

It is most certain, that if God should grant to thee a choice, and say; all
the time that thou live, thou shall either be tormented with the gout, or be
extremely vexed with the toothache, which disease neither night nor day, shall
suffer thee to take any case or rest: or if thou would be free from these
diseases, thou shall enter into some austere and straight kind of living,
which thy nature can hardly brook: consider with thy self which of these thou
would choose. I do not think that a man can be found so foolish, who (for
the only love of himself) would not choose rather this straight kind of
living, then that he would endure so long time these griefs and dolours.
Seeing that therefore the discruciatements and dolours that we speak of, are
infinitely more grievous, and in diuturnity of time without any comparison
longer: and this austere and straight kind of living, which God requires of
thee, is much more less, then that thy nature can brook and bear: what
madness is it then to be unwilling to undergo so small labors, and so short
troubles, by which thou may escape those eternal torments? Who does not see
that this is the greatest error of this world, and intolerable madness? But
the reward and fruit will be, that whilst a man will not free himself here
from so great evils, by a small labor of repentance, that there he shall make
everlasting sorrow, and repentance without any fruit or profit. We have a
figure of this thing in the furnace, which King Nabuchodonozer commanded to be
heated in Babylon, The flame of which mounted above the furnace nine and forty
Cubits; Dan. 3, A notable Allegory.
for the defect of one Cubit, it came not to the number of fifty, which
signifies the year of Iubily: that we may understand, that although these
eternal flames of Babylon, that is, of hell, do burn above measure and most
cruelly do torment the miserable and wretched being damned, yet they shall
never come to that, to obtain the favor of a true Iubily. O punishments
without profit, o barren tears, o sharp and bitter repentance, yet void of
all hope and solace. How little of those things, that there the damned suffer
without fruit, if they here had suffered willingly and patiently, might have
preserved them from these evils? How easily might they have been delivered,
and for how small pains?

Therefore let fountains of tears flow out of our eyes, and let sighs without
ceasing be fetched from the bottom of our hearts. Mich. 1.
Therefore I will mourn and howl, says the Prophet, I will go without
clothes, and naked; I will make lamentation like the Dragons, and mourning as
the Ostriches; because the plagues of my people are grievous. If these things
were suspected of men, and if there were no credit to be given to these
things, or if they were doubtful and uncertain, after some manner it were
tolerable, if men fell into this error. But we professing all these things most
assuredly, and with a most undoubted belief, and knowing most certainly, Math.
5.
(as our Savior says) That heaven and earth shall pass; but not one jot or
one title of these things shall escape, till all things be fulfilled. And saying
plainly, that all these things are to be holden most religiously, and yet
living securely and negligently, this does pass all wonder and admiration.

Tell me, o blind and witles man, what thou do find worthy amongst the
riches and goods of this world, that may be compared with this price? Grant
it, says Saint Jerome, that there is in thee the wisdom of Solomon, the
beauty of Absalon, and the strength of Sampson: let the years and life of
Enoch be promised unto thee; possess the riches of Craesus, and the power of
Octauian: what shall all these things profit thee, if at the length thy body be
given for meat unto worms, and thy soul carried of devils to hell, be
delivered to everlasting torments, to be tortured with the rich Glutton.

Let these things suffice for the first part of our exhortation to Virtue. In
the next, we will speak of the several and particular prerogatives and
privileges of Virtue promised to the virtuous.

The end of the first part.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SINNERS GVIDE: In which are handled the temporal and
spiritual blessings, which in this life are promised to Virtue: and more
particulerly, the twelve more notable and famous privileges and prerogatives,
which are found in Virtue.
THE ELEVENTH TITLE. That we are bound unto Virtue, by reason of the
inestimable blessings, which are promised in this present life. CHAP. XI.
SVrely I know not, what they can pretend, or what excuse they can make, who
do not embrace Virtue, seeing there be so many reasons, which do enforce men
to that study. For it is no small thing for the defense of this matter, to
allege that there is a God: and what the studious of Virtue deserve, what is
given, and what is promised unto them; on the other side, what threatenings are
menaced and denounced against the vicious, and against those that fly from the
study of Virtue. It is a wonder that among Christians, so many men are found
wicked and vicious. A similitude.
Therefore not without cause may some man ask, why amongst Christians, who
believe and confess all these things, there be so many found, who neglect
virtues, and do follow vices? For it is not to be meruailed at, that there be
many such among infidels, who seeing they know not Virtue, have it in no price:
even as a ditcher, if he by chance find a Iem, does little esteem it:
because he knows not the virtue and price of it. But that Christians, who
know and believe all these things, do live as though they believed not,
unmindful of God, servants of sin, bondslaues unto their own passions and
appetites, by so much more addicted to visible things, by how much more they
are careless of invisible things, ready to all kind of sin, no otherwise,
then if death were not at all, neither that they should come to judgment,
neither that any glory of heaven was to be looked for, and to be brief,
neither hell to be feared. This I say, is greater then all admiration.

Therefore, Whence this negligence is.
as I said, it may worthily be demanded, whence this negligence grows, and
whence this stupiditie of understanding, and this diabolical inchauntment (if
I may so call it) comes unto men. This mischief has not one only root, but
many and diverse. Amongst others, and those not the least, is a certain
general error, in which men of this world do live, supposing all that God
promises to the lovers of Virtue, to be reserved to the life to come; and that
in this present world, nothing is to be looked for. Therefore, seeing that man
does so greatly desire reward, and especially is led by profit, but not
unless it be present, and is mooned with those things, which are obuious to
the outward senses, when he sees nothing present, he smally accounts of that
which is to come. So the Jews seem to have done in the time of the
Prophets: For when as Ezechiell (by the commandment of God) did set before
the^ great promises, or did denounce against them direful comminations, they
mocked, and with a certain contempt, hissed at them all, Ezech, 12,
saying; The vision that he sees, is for many days to come, and he
prophecieth of the times that are far of. So the scornful contemned the
sayings of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias, 28,
and said; Precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line,
line unto line, there a little, and there a little. This is one of the
especial reasons, that withdrawes perverse and froward men from the observance
of Gods commandments, persuading themselves, that there is no reward ordained
for Virtue in this world; but all things to be reserved for the world to come.

To this that great Wiseman respected, Eccle. 8.
when he said, Because sentence against an evil work is not speedily
executed, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to
do evil. The Wiseman adds also another thing, and that is, the worst among
all things that are done under the Sun, All things happen a like to the good
and evil.
and that it does give great occasion to the wicked to sin, that it happens
ill to the righteous, as though they had done the works of the wicked: and
the wicked oftentimes does live so securely, as if they did the works of the
righteous: Eccle. 9.
or that all things come alike to all; and the same condition is to the just
and to the wicked; to the pure, and to the polluted; to him that sacrifices,
and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner, he that
swears, as he that fears an oath. Whereupon he says, The hearts of the
sons of men, are full of evil, and madness is in their hearts whilst they
live, and after that, they go to the dead. That which Solomon here speaks,
the wicked and ungodly them selves do confess by the Prophet Malachie,
saying: It is in vain to serve God: Mala. 3.
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandments, and that we walked
humbly before the Lord of hosts? Therefore we count the proud blessed: even
they that work wickedness, are set up, and they that tempt God, yea, they
are delivered. These things the wicked say, and these are the things which
especially hold them in impiety: for they suppose it a very hard thing, as
Ambrose says, to buy hope at their own perrill: that is, to compass future
blessings with the loss of present, and to give those things that are in their
hands, for those which sometimes hereafter may be given.

To banish and expel this most pestilent error, I know not whence to take a
fitter beginning, then from those words and tears of our Savior, with which
in times past, he did lament and weep over that miserable City of Jerusalem,
saying: O if thou had even known at the least in this thy day, Luke, 19,
those things which belong unto thy peace: but now are they hid from thine
eyes. Our Savior did consider on the one part, how great the blessings were,
which were brought into the world for the use and good of that people, together
with his person: for all the graces and heavenly treasures, descended from
heaven together with Christ; on the otherside, he looked to this people,
offended at his lowly humility and base estate, and that they would not
accept of his blessings, and that for this sin, they should not only lose
these treasures, but also their whole Commonwealth, and their City.

Therefore the Lord exceedingly lamenting, wept most abundantly, and broke
forth into this short and imperfect sentence: the which the shorter it is, it
has the greater signification. This same affection, and these words may be
fitly applied to our purpose. For considering on the one part the beauty of
Virtue, and the graces and riches, which attend on her; and on the other part,
how far these things are removed and hid from the eyes of men, drowned in
earthly things, and also how Virtue does sweep the ground, and being despised
in all the world, cannot find a place for her self, do thou not think
that we have just cause to weep, and to say with our Lord, O, Men are
ignorant of those good things that are in Virtue.
if thou had even known at the least in this thy day, that is, o that God
would now open thine eyes, that thou might see the treasures, magnificence,
riches, peace, liberty, light, tranquillity, delights, favors, and all the
good things and blessings, which like Hand-maydes attend and wait upon Virtue,
in what great price and esteem would thou have her? With what great desire
would thou long and thirst after her? With what great diligence and labor
would thou seek and enquire after her? But now all things are hid from
carnal eyes: for they not seeing any thing besides the outward bark of Virtue,
never tasting the inward sweetness of her, think that there is nothing in her,
but that which is hard, sharp, and unsavory: they think, that she is not
current in this present life, but to be used in the other: and if there be any
goodness in her, that it pertayneth wholly to another world, and not to this.
Therefore they disputing according to the flesh, do say, that they will not buy
hope by danger, neither that they will hazard present things for things to
come. So speak they that are offended at the exterior figure of Virtue: for
they are ignorant of the Philosophy of Christ, Virtue like unto Christ.
neither know they that Virtue is like unto her Master Christ; who although
outwardly he bear the shape and image of a most poor and base man, yet
inwardly was the God and Lord of all creatures. The self same thing is also
read of the faithful and believers in Christ, that they are dead to the
world, Colos. 3.
and that their life is hid with Christ in God. Therefore as the glory of
Christ was hid in this world, so is all theirs that imitate and follow his
life. A similitude.
We read that in ancient times, men were wont to make certain Images, which
they called Sileni: these were rough and unpolished without, but within they
were curiously wrought with great Art. So that the deformity was outward, and
the beauty inward. Deluding on the one part the eyes of the ignorant, on the
other drawing into them the minds and eyes of the wise. Such certainly were the
life's of the Prophets, such the life's of the Apostles, and such the life's of
all good and faithful Christians, as was the life of the Lord of all.

Helps of God, by which we overcome the difficulty of Virtue
Thou therefore, that have nothing more often in thy mouth, then that Virtue is
conversant about hard and difficult things, ought to cast thine eyes upon
those helps, which God has provided for us to overcome these difficulties: as
are virtues infused into us, gifts of the holy Ghost, the Sacraments of the
Gospel, with many other graces and divine helps, which are to us, that which
oars and sails are unto ships in sailing, and wings unto birds in flying.
Thou must behold the name and essence of Virtue, which by her own nature, is a
most noble habit. Which if it be true, Virtue is an habit.
it follows by a common manner of speaking, that she will work and labor
with us with ease and delight: for this is proper unto all habits. Thou must
remember that God has not only promised to his the blessings of glory, but
also the blessings of grace: partly for this life, and partly for the other:
Psalm, 84.
according to that of the Prophet, The Lord will give grace and glory. Which
two are two storehouses filled with all good things: one for this life, the
other for the other. That thereby at the least may be understood, that there is
somewhat more in Virtue, then outwardly is seen. To be brief, thou must
consider, that seeing that the Author of Nature does not fail in any necessary
thing, (because he gives to all his creatures, those things that are
necessary) and seeing that in the world there is nothing more necessary, nor
any thing of greater moment then Virtue, that he would not leave her in the
hands of a will so weak and crased, of an understanding so blind, of an
appetite so ready to all evil, and of a nature so disordered, and so corrupt
through sin: but that he would provide her of help and hability, by aid of
which she might sail through this Sea. For it was not meet, nor convenient,
that seeing the Divine providence was so careful in giving to flies, spiders,
and pismires hability, and all instruments necessary to preserve their life:
that he should be unmindful of man, and that he should not give him those
things, which are necessary for the attainement of Virtue. I will say more, if
the world and the devil do bestow upon their servants, for the service that
they yield them, so many kind of tastes, pleasures, and delights, at the least
so in appearance: how is it possible that God should be so barren and
unfruitful to his friends and faithful ministers, that he should leave them
in the midst of their labors and tribulations, fasting, and with hungry and
dry mouths? How? do thou think then that the condition of Virtue has so
much gall, and that there is so much honny in the flowers of vices? Do thou
think that God will permit and suffer, that one should enjoy delights, and
another be exercised with troubles, and many tribulations? Thou art deceived.
Hear what God answers to the lamentations of the wicked, by the mouth of
his Prophet: Return and see, Mala. 3.
what difference is between a righteous man, and an unrighteous, and between
one that serves God, and him that serves him not. In so much, that God is not
content with the pre-eminence, which the just shall have over the unjust in the
life to come: but in this present, he says, Return and see, as though he
should say, A comparing of the life of good men, and ill men.
I would not that you should only look to the world to come, that you may
know the glory of the blessed, and the greatness of their felicity: but return
now, and see the difference in this life, which is between a good man and an
ill man; consider of the riches of the one, and the poverty of the other, the
joy of the one, and the sorrow of the other; the peace of the one, and the
war of the other; the light in which the one lives, and the darkness in
which the other walks; and then ye shall know indeed, how much more blessed
and happy, the estate of the righteous is, then your opinion of them.

The like answer God gave to certain others, who being deceived with the
same persuasion and error, mocked the good, saying as it is in Esaias; Esaias, 66.
Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall
be ashamed. As if they should say, Let the Lord declare the greatness of his
power and glory, and let him show unto you his favor, that by this way we may
know the prosperity and felicity, that they have, which serve the Lord, above
them which serve him not. To which words, the Lord does presently annexe the
joy and prosperity of the righteous, saying, Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and
be glad with her, all ye that love her, Divine bladishments, with which the
righteous are cherished.
rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her, that ye may suck and
be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation: that ye may milk out and be
delighted with the brightness of her glory. For thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will extend peace over her like a flood, and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be
joyful upon her knees. As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your heart
shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the
Lord shall be known among his servants. As if he should say, as men by the
greatness of heaven, of the earth, and of the sea, and by the beauty of the
Sun, of the Moon, and of the stars, do come to the knowledge of the
omnipotency and excellency of God, by the means of such excellent and famous
works: so also the righteous do come to the knowledge of the greatness of the
power, riches, and goodness of GOD, by the ineffable graces and gifts, which
they receive of him, and which they feel and perceive in themselves. For even
as God by the punishments and scourges, which he inflicted upon Pharao,
declared to the whole world the greatness of his severity against the wicked;
so by the gifts of his graces and unmeasurable benefits, which daily he
bestows upon the good, he shows the greatness of his goodness, and his
singular love, with which he embraces them.

Blessed and happy without all doubt, is that soul, which by gifts and
benefits received of God, does show the greatness of his goodness: but
unhappy and miserable is that soul, which by punishments and torments, does
make manifest the greatness of the Divine justice. Wherefore, seeing that the
greatness of all these which we have spoken of, is so inestimable, what shall
the rivers be, which flow from these most fluent fountains? Add moreover that
to these sayings: If that the way of Virtue seem to thee barren and fruitles,
what is it that divine Wisdom speaks of herself, Riches and honor are
with me, even durable riches and righteousness. Prou, 8.
I cause to walk in the way of righteousness, and in the midst of the paths
of judgment, that I may cause them that love me to inherit substance, and I
will fill their treasures. What be these riches, what be these goods, if not of
the heavenly which exceed all the riches of this world, what may be compared
to them, who walk in the way of righteousness, which is Virtue herself, Good
men truly rich.
of the which we speak? For if here there be not found riches, more
excellent, and by this name more worthy then those, which the world promises,
why does the Apostle give thanks to GOD for the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.
saying: that in all things they were made rich? Calling them absolutely rich;
signifying, that others were not to be called properly rich, but rich in this
world, or rich men of this world.

All this aforesaid is explained by a notable sentence of the Gospel.
ALthough this aforesaid seems to be expounded and approved plainly enough;
yet for the further confirmation of it, I will join moreover a notable
sentence taken out of the Gospel, by which our Savior answers to Saint
Peter, demanding what reward he, and his fellow Disciples should have, who for
the love of their Master, had left and forsaken all. Verily, Mark. 10.
I say unto you, (says he, as it is in Mark,) there is no man that has
forsaken house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an
hundred fold, now at this present: houses and brethren, and sisters and
mothers, and children and lands with persecutions, and in the world to come,
eternal life. These be the words of Christ, which are not lightly to be passed
over.

For first, thou can not deny, but that here is made a difference and a
distinction, between a reward, which is given in this life, and that, which is
in another: whilst one is promised as to come, the other is offered as present.
Thou can also less deny, but that these promises are ratified and certain;
neither ever do they deceive them, to whom they are promised: For heaven and
earth shall perrish, but one jot, or one title shall not escape of these
things, till all be fulfilled: although they seem impossible. For even as we
believe, that God is three and one, because he said so, although otherwise it
seems impossible; so we also must believe this truth, although it passes
all understanding, for it has the testimony of the same Author, who only is
truth it self in all his sayings.

What this hundredth fold is.
Tell me therefore I pray thee, what is this hundredth fold, which is given to
the righteous in this life? For we see for the most part, that to them is not
given great dignities, not lofty honors, not large possessions, nor the
magnificent furniture of this world: but that many of them do live in corners,
buried in the oblivion and obscurity of the world: expecting their last hour
in poverty, misery, and calamity. Which seeing that it is so, how can the
infallible truth of this sentence be defended, unless we confess, that God in
this life does give to his those gifts, what goods be those that God bestows
upon the good.
and those spiritual riches, which may satisfy a man without any external
pomp of this world, with greater felicity, with greater joy, sufficiency and
quiet, then the possession of all the goods of this world. Neither is this so
much to be meruailed at: For as we believe that it is not of any necessity to
God, that he should nourish men's bodies with bread only, (for he has many
other means to that end) so is it not necessary to him, that he should
satisfy souls with temporal blessings only. For he can do this most easily
without them: as he has most certainly done in all his Saints. Who were
endued with that spiritual joy and mirth, and with that affection of devotion,
that their prayers, exercises, tears, and delights, exceeded all the solaces
and pleasures of this world. And after this manner it is most certainly
verefied, that an hundredth fold is received for that little they left: for they
receive for deceiptfull and apparent things, those that be undoubtedly true;
for things uncertain, certain; for things corporal, spiritual: for
carefulnes, security; for troubles, quietness; for perturbations, peace and
inward tranquillity; to conclude, for a life impure, vicious, and abominable,
they receive a life splendent through virtues, and most acceptable to God and
Angels. So also thou, if thou shall despise temporal good for Christ, thou
shall find in him inestimable treasures: if thou shall contemn false and
feigned honors, thou shall find in him those that be true: if thou shall
renounce the love of thy father and mother, for this he will delight thee, with
greater blandishments and cherishing, and thou shall find for a temporal
father an eternal; and if thou shall cast from thee those pestiferous and
venomous pleasures, thou shall have in him sweeter, pleasanter, and holier
delights.

When thou shall come to this point, To the virtuous those things are
unpleasant, which before did please.
thou shall see manifestly that all things which before did please thee, are
now not only not grateful unto thee, but that they do bring unto thee an
hatred and dislike of them. For after that heavenly light has illuminated our
eyes, by and by there is begot a new face of all things, and diverse from the
former; and all things do seem to have put on a certain new shape, by which
they show themselves to our eyes; and therefore that which before seemed sweet,
is now bitter, and that which before appeared bitter, is now sweet: that which
before terrified us, does now like us: that which before was beautiful, now
seems filthy; and although it appeared to be such before, yet now it seems
not such, neither that it was well known before.

Therefore after this manner stands the truth of Christ's promise, when for
the temporal goods of the body, there are given spiritual blessings of the
soul; and for those goods, which are called the goods of fortune, there are
given the blessings of grace, which without all comparison are greater, and
more effectual and forcible to enrich and satiate man's heart, then all
external blessings. For the more confirmation of this matter, I will not omit
to remember a notable and famous example, taken out of the book, called, The
book of famous and illustrious men.

When as, A notable example.
says the Author, Saint Bernard preached the word of God to the people in
Belgia, and that with a most fervent zeal converted the inhabitants to God,
amongst many other, who being touched with the grace of the holy Ghost, were
converted to a better life, there was a certain noble Knight famous among the
Belgians, called Arnulphus: who was bound and tied to the world, with very
many and mighty bonds, and who was exceedingly ensnared and entangled with
wordly vanities. This man when at the length he bad farewell to the world, and
betook himself to a virtuous and heavenly kind of living, this holy father
so rejoiced at his conversion, that he said to them that were present, that
Christ was no less miraculous in the conversion of Arnulphus, then he was in
the raising of Lazarus, seeing that Christ had raised him being so fettered
with the chains of so great sins, and buried in such deep pleasures, and
had brought him to newnes of life. Arnulphus also was no less admirable in his
proceeding; then he was in his conversion. And because it is too long to relate
here all the virtues of this man, I will only repeat that, which makes for
our purpose. This holy man was many times so payned with the Windy-colicke,
that often his life was endangered by it, and he strove with death. When on a
time he had lost together with his speech all his sense, so that there was
scarcely left any hope of longer living, they applying a little physic unto
him, forthwith again he began somewhat to breathe, and by little and little
to come unto himself. At the length on a sudden he began to praise the Lord,
crying out with a loud voice: All things which thou have spoken, o blessed
Jesus, are most true. And he repeated these words very often. Those religious
men that stood about him, meruailed at him, and asked him how he did, and why
he said so. He answered none other thing, but doubled the same, saying over
again, All things which thou have spoken, o blessed Jesus, are true. Some that
were present said, that the greatness of his pain and disease, had disturbed
his reason and judgment, and that this disturbance did cause him so to speak.
To whom he aunswering, said; It is not so my brethren, but I do speak with a
sound judgment, and with a good understanding, that those things are most
true, which our Savior Jesus Christ spoke. They said unto him again, surely we
confess as much, that it is so, but for what intent do thou speak it?
Because, says he, he says in the Gospel, that whosoever for the love of him
shall forsake his parents, he shall receive an hundredth fold in this world, and
shall have life everlasting in the other. The sweetness and pleasure of the
righteous, yea in their greatest greefes and sorrows.
The experience of this I have now in my self, and I confess with all my
heart, that now I have received an hundred fold in this life: for the greatness
of the grief which I now suffer, is so sweet unto me, for the certainty of
the hope which I have of my salvation, that I would not change my Christ with
the hundredth fold of all those things that are in the world. And if I that am
so great a sinner, do receive so great consolation in my griefs and pains,
what shall holy and perfect men receive in their reioycings? For that spiritual
joy, which has brought this hope unto me, does far exceed all that
worldly joy, which I possessed in this world. When they had heard these things,
all they that stood by meruailed, that a man unlearned and illiterate, should
utter so great mysteries: but surely it was the holy Ghost, that dwelled in
his heart, that spoke these things in him.

Therefore by this example it is very manifest, that God with out any pomp or
preparation of these temporal blessings, can give to his, much more
abundance, and many more precious blessings, then those were, which they left
for him: and by consequent it is hence evident, how shamefully they err, who
think that no reward is destined and ordained for Virtue in this life. The
proposition.
To banish therefore this error so dangerous (besides those things which have
been spoken) the twelve privileges and prerogatives which follow, shall be
most profitable, in which we will handle and discourse of the twelve admirable
fruits and preheminences, which attend and wait upon Virtue in this life: that
by them the lovers of this world may understand, that in Virtue there are found
many more excellent blessings then they suppose. And although to the perfect
knowledge of this, the experience and use of Virtue herself were necessary,
(that thereby we might the better know her riches and commodities) yet that
which is wanting in this respect, Faith shall supply, which confesses and
acknowledges the truth of the divine and holy Scriptures, by the testimonies
of which I will approve all things, which I am to speak of this matter: that
we should at no time doubt of the excellency of Virtue.

THE TWELFTH TITLE. That the first privilege or prerogative of Virtue, does
bind us unto her: which is the special providence, by which God directs all
good men to all good, and chastises the iniquity of the wicked. CHAP. XII.
The providence of God, is the fountain of all good things.
WE being about therefore to speak of the twelve privileges and prerogatives
of Virtue, we will begin of the first and principal, from which, as from a
lively fountain, all the rest do flow, and that is, of the providence and
fatherly care, which God uses toward them, who do serve him. Although there
is in him a general providence over all his creatures, yet he has a singular
and a special providence only over them, whom he has chosen, that they
should be his: and seeing that he accounts of them as of his sons, he has
also given unto them a childs heart, and a filial spirit, and he in like
manner, bears toward them, the heart of a most loving and tender Father, and
therefore he has over them a care and a providence, equal unto this love.

But how great that providence is, it cannot be understood, unless of them,
which have tried, or at least have seen, or have read with industry and
attention those places of Scripture, which speak of this providence. Whosoever
shall do this, he shall see that generally all these things are directed to
that end. For all things have reference and are turned about these two points,
Two things are to be considered of in every place of Scripture: the
Commandment and the Promise.
no otherwise then the heaven about his poles, that is, about the
Commandment, and the Promise. For here, the Lord commands obedience to
man, and obseruaunce of his precepts; there he promises great rewards to them
who observe and keep them, and threatens fearful punishments to them, who
break and violate them. This doctrine is divided after that manner, that all
the morrall books of the sacred Scripture do command and promise: and the
historical do show the true effect of this or that; showing how differently
GOD carries himself toward the good and evil. But seeing that God is so
magnificent and so liberal, and man so miserable and so frail; he so rich in
promising, this so poor in giving; greatly different is the proportion of that
which he commands, in respect of that he gives: so that he commands few
things, but gives very many: he commands love and obedience, both which,
he himself gives, and for them he offers inestimable blessings, as well of
grace, as of glory, both in this life, and that to come. Amongst these, we
give the first place to his love and fatherly providence, which he bears
toward them, who are received of him for sons: which love exceeds al love
and providence, which all earthly fathers have, or can have toward their
sons. The reason is this, because even to this day, there has not been found
any Father, who has laid up and prepared so great blessings for the good of
his children, as GOD has prepared and provided for his children: that is, the
participation of his own glory. Neither has any Father labored or taken so
much pains as he, who has for them shed his own blood: To conclude,
neither does any Father watch and keep his with so great care and diligence,
as God does his, who are daily in his eyes, and to whom he is present in all
their tribulations. This David confesses in his Psalms, Psalm, 41.
when he says, Thou vpholdest me in mine integrity, and do set me
before thy face for ever. That is, thou never turnest thine eyes from me, for
that contitinuall care thou have of me. Also he says in another place, The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, Psalm, 34,
and his ears are open unto their cry. But the face of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth.

But because the greatest riches of a good Christian, is the providence which
God bears over him, and this the more certain it is, and better known unto
man, the greater is his joy and confidence: Testimonies of the divine
providence.
I think that I shall do a thing worth the labor, if I shall add and bring
hither, more places and testimonies of the sacred Scripture, seeing that every
one of them, are as the Charters and Letter-pattents of a King, and new
confirmations of the rich promises, and legacies of his divine will. Therefore
Ecclesiasticus says, Ecclus. cap. 15. and 34.
The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, and he knows all the
works of man: he is their mighty protection and strong ground, a defense from
the heat, and a shadow for the noone day, a succor from stumbling, and an
help from falling, he sets up the soul, and lightneth the eyes* he gives
health, life, and blessing. Hitherto are the words of Ecclesiasticus, out of
which it is evident and plain to every man, how many kind of duties there be,
which GOD supplyeth in the preservation of man. This the Prophet David
confirms, The paths of man are directed by the Lord, Psalm, 37,
for he loves his way. Though he fall, he shall not be cast of, for the Lord
puts under his hand. Consider (I pray thee) here, what ill can happen unto
him, who falls upon a bolster so soft, as is the hand of the Lord our God?
And in another place: Psalm, 34,
Many and great (says he) are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all. He keeps all his bones, not one of them is
broken.

In the New Testament also, more excellent and magnificent things are spoken of
this divine providence, where the Lord says, that he only has not a care of
the bones of the righteous, but also of every one of their hairs, Luke, 12,
and 21.
that they fall not, nor perrish without his providence: willing after this
manner of speaking, to insinuate and intimate unto us, his greatest and
speciallest providence toward them. For of what thing shall not he have care,
who has a care of all our hairs? If this seem too much unto thee, hear that
which is no less, which God speaks by his Prophet, Zach, 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye It had been sufficient
to have said, he that touches you, touches me: but it is more that he says,
he that touches any part of you, touches the apple of mine eye.

Neither is our most bountiful Lord content, The Angels do keep us.
that he himself should alone watch-ouer our safety, but he also wills,
that the Angels should be ready to do us service: for so we read in the
Psalms: Psalm, 91,
He has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways:
they shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. Did thou ever see (I pray thee) such a Chariot or Wagon, as are the
hands of Angels? See therefore how the Angels, who are our elder brethren, do
bear the righteous in their arms, who are their younger brethren: who as yet
know now how to walk alone, but must be carried in the arms of their elders.
And this they do not only in life, but also in death, at the history in the
Gospel testifies of the rich Glutton: Luke, 16,
in which we see that the beggar Lazarus, after death was carried of Angels
into Abraham's bosom. The divine Psalmographer confirms this: Psalm, 34,
The Angel of the Lord, pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. How mighty and strong this guard is, the translation of S.
Jerome does more express: The Angel of the Lord compasses and encircleth
them that fear him, that he may deliver them.

What King was ever found, that had such a guard as our Lord has given unto
us? This is most manifestly seen in the books of the Kings: the King of Syria
coming to take the Prophet Elizeus, 4. Reg. 6.
brought a great Army with him, which the servant of the Prophet seeing,
feared, and began to tremble. But the Prophet turning to his prayer: prayed the
Lord, that he would vouchsafe to open the eyes of his unbelieving servant,
that he might see the Army, which stood for the defense of the Prophet, being
stronger by infinite thousands then that, which came to hurt and wrong him. And
he opened the eyes of his servant, and he saw the Mountain full of horses, and
of fiery Charrets, for the defense and guard of Elizeus. Like to this guard is
that, which is mentioned in the Canticles, in these words, What shall you see
in the Shulamite (which is the Church, Cant, 6.
or any soul living in the state of grace) but as the company of an Army? that
is, an Army of Angels. This same also in the same book is explaned by an
other figure, Cant. 3,
when it is said; Behold Salomons bed, threescore strong men are round about
it, of the valiant men of Israel. They all handle the sword, and are expert in
war, every one has his sword upon his thigh, for the fear by night. What
other thing is this, then that the holy Ghost by this figure might teach and
show, the great care and singular providence, by which God defends and
watches over the souls of the righteous? For whence is it (I pray thee) that
man being conceived in sin, living in a corrupt flesh, bent to all evil,
should pass so many years among so many snares and dangers, without
destruction and utter ruin of himself, God turturneth evils into good, to
those who^ he loves.
if he were not preserved and sustained by the Divine providence? Which is so
great, that it does not only preserve men from evil, but also oftentimes it
does turn the very evils, into which men fall through carelessness and
negligence, into a matter of greater good: that is, as often as by that they
are made more wary, more humble, and more thankful unto him, who has drawn
them back from so great danger, and has pardoned them so great a sin.

Rom, 8.
For this cause the Apostle says, Unto them that love God, all things work
together for the best. If this favor and friendship be worthy of admiration,
He is not only good and gracious to the righteous, but also to their family
Exodus 20.
that shall be more worthy, that God does not only show this mercy to his
servants, but also to their sons and Nephews, and to all things, that
appertain unto them: as God himself testifies, saying; I am the Lord thy
God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that hate me: And
showing mercy unto thousands to them that love me, and keep my commandments.
An example of this we have in David: for God would not cast off his sons in
so many ages, although their sins had oftentimes deserved it. And that only
in respect of David their Father. Genesis 17, and the 24.
The same thing the Lord shows in Abraham, when he directed his servant in
his way, and prospered his business, when his master had commanded him, that
he should fetch a wife for his son Isaac. Neither only is he good and
gracious to the servant for the deserts of the master; but that which is much
more, for the love of a good servant, God has a care of an ill Master. God
blesses a wicked master, for the sake of a good servant.
So he blessed the house of Putiphar the Egiptian, as the Scripture says, for
Joseph's sake, and increased all his substance as well in his houses, as in his
fields, notwithstanding that Putiphar, Joseph's master, was an Idolater. What
bountifulnes, what providence can be greater then that? Who is so mad, that
will not serve a Lord so liberal, so faithful, and so loving toward all
them, that wait and attend upon him, and not only toward themselves, but
also toward all things that is theirs?

Of the names that are attributed unto the Lord in the holy Scripture, by
reason of this providence.
BEcause this divine providence does extend it self to many and wonderful
effects, therefore God has in the holy Scriptures diverse names. God is called a
father.
He is most usually and solemnly called a Father: as in like manner God in
most places of the Gospel, calls us his most loving sons. And not only in
the Gospel, but also in many places of the old Testament. For so the Prophet
says in his Psalms; Psalm. 103,
As a Father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him: for he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we
are but dust. Because it seemed but a small thing to another Prophet, that he
should be called a Father, seeing that his love and providence does exceed the
love of all fathers, he says; Esaias, 63.
Doubtless thou art our Father; though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not. As if he should say, Those that are fathers according the flesh,
are not worthy that name, if they be compared with thee.

But because in the love of parents, God is more then a mother. Esaias, 49.
the love of the mother is commonly wont to be the more vehement and tenderer;
the Lord is not content with the name of Father, but will also be called a
Mother, and more then a Mother, as he himself says in Esaias, in most sweet
words; Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of
her womb? Though they should forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I have
graven thee upon the palm of mine hands: thy walls are ever in my sight. What
words can be spoken with a more tender love? Who will be so blind, or so
blockish, who understanding this, will not rejoice? Who will not be revived?
Who will not lift up his head, hearing that he has such a pledge of the love
and of the divine providence? For he that considers that it is God that
speaks this, whose truth is for everlasting, neither does he ever deceive:
whose riches have no end, and whose power is infinite, whom shall he fear?
What shall he not hope for? How shall he not rejoice at those words? When he
hears this assurance of his estate? this providence? and this certain
demonstration of love? What? I will yet speak more. For the Lord is not
content to have compared his love to the common love of mothers; but he
chooses one among all other, which excels al others in love, that is the
Eagle; with whose love he compares his love and providence, Deuteronomy. 32.
saying; As an Eagle provoking her young ones to fly, fluttereth over her
birds, stretches out her wings, takes them, and bears them on her wings.
This same thing the same Prophet also testifies in words more clear, before
the people being now ready to enter into the Land of promise: The Lord thy God
has borne thee, Deuteronomy. 1.
says he, as a man does bear his son, in all the way which ye have gone,
until ye came unto this place.

We are the sons of God, and so are we called. Ier 31.
And as he himself does take upon him the name of a Father and of a Mother; so
he gives unto us the name of most beloved sons, as Jeremy testifies; Is
Ephraim, says he, my dear son or pleasant child? Yet since I spoke to him,
I still remembered him: therefore my bowels are troubled for him: I will surely
have compassion upon him, says the Lord. Every one of these words, because it
is God that spoke them, are worthy that they should be well considered of: for
they are very forcible to mollify our hearts with divine love, seeing that he
has loved us, being unhappy and miserable creatures so tenderly, and does
cherish us so lovingly.

God a Pastor or shepherd.
By the same reason of the divine providence, God after that he had taken upon
him the name of a Father, he would also be called a Pastor or Shepherd, as
we may see in the Gospel. That he might declare how far this pastoral
love, and sheepheardly care does extend it self, he said, I am the good
shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. O Lord how do thou
know them? with what eyes do thou behold them? As the Father knows me,
says he, so know I the Father. Which is, with the same eyes that my Father
beholds me, I behold the Father; and with the same I look upon my sheep. O
blessed eyes, o happy aspect. O supreme providence. What greater glory, what
greater treasure, what greater riches can be desired of any one, then with such
eyes to be beheld of the son of God; that is, with the same eyes, that the
Father beholds him? For although this comparison in every point is not equal
(for the natural son deserves more, then the adoptiue) yet great is that
glory, that it is worthy to be compared with this. Yet what ones, and how great
the works and benefits of this providence are, God by his Prophet Ezechiell
does most plentifully teach, Ezechiel. 34
in these words; Behold, I will search my sheep, and seek them out. As a
shepherd searches out his flock, when he has been among his sheep that
are scattered, so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all
places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. And I will
bring them out from the people, and gather them from the Countries, and will
bring them to their own Land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by
the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the Country. I will feed them
in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be:
there shall they lie in a good fold, and in fat pasture shall they feed upon
the mountains of Israel. I will feed my sheep, and bring them to their rest,
says the Lord God. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that
which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen the weak, but I will destroy the fat and the strong, and I will
feed them with judgment. And a little after: And I will make with them a
covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of this Land:
and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. And I
will set them, as a blessing, even round about my mountain, and I will cause
rain to come down in due season, and there shall be rain of blessing.

Tell me I pray thee, what could our good shepherd promise more? Or how could
he describe this his meaning with words more sweet, more loving, or more
elegant? For it is certain, that God speaks here not of a material flock,
but of a spiritual, which are men: whereupon concluding this chapter, he
says, And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture are men: Neither promises
he gross or abundance of temporal blessings; which are common to good and
evil: but abundance of spiritual graces, and of special providence, with
which the Lord does govern and rule this spiritual flock, as a shepherd, so
says Esaias, Esaias, 40.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the Lambs with
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall guide them with young. What I
pray thee can be spoken more lovingly or more cherishingly? Of the offices and
benefits of a shepherd that whole Psalm speaks, whose beginning is, The
Lord does guide me, for which S. Jerome translateth, The Lord is my shepherd.
Diverse names of God.
After this beginning, he proceeds to remember all the duties of a
shepherd, which in this place we will not set down, because they are in
every place found, and this psalm may be read of any one. Neither here in
like manner will I remember, that as he is called a shepherd, because he does
feed, so is he called a King, because he does govern and defend; a Master,
because he teaches; a Physician, because he heals; a Carier, because he
bears us in his arms; a Watcher, because he watches for our defense; of
which names the Scriptures are full. Among all these names, there is none more
loving, which also demonstrateth this providence, then the name of a
Bride-grome, God is called a Bridegroom. Ierem, 3.
by which name in the Canticles, and in other places of Scripture he is called.
By this sweet and loving word, he inuiteth the soul of a sinner, to call upon
him: Call me, and still cry unto me, (says he, by the Prophet) Thou art my
Father, and the guide of my youth and virginity. The which name is greatly
honored of the Apostle. For after those words, with which he that was first
formed spoke to his wife Eve, Gene, 2.
Therefore shall a man leave his Father and his Mother, and shall cleave to his
wife: Ephe 5.
and they shall be one flesh: the Apostle adds; This is a great secret, but
I speak concerning Christ, and concerning the Church. Which is his Bride, as
is every soul of man placed in the state of grace. What therefore is not to be
hoped of him, who has such a name, as this is? especially, seeing that it is
undoubtedly true, that this name is not given unto him in vain, or without
reason?

But why in searching the Scriptures, do we seek for this name or that, God
all in all.
when as all names which promise any good, do agree to this Lord: especially,
seeing that whosoever loves him, or whosoever seeks him, may find in him
all good that he desires? Ambrose of virginity.
This is that which Saint Ambrose says in a certain Sermon; Christ is all
unto us: If thou desire to heal thy wounds, he is a Physician; if thou be
ouer-heated with feauers, he is a fountain to cool thee; if thou be
burdened with unrighteousness, he is righteousness; if thou need help, he
is strength; if thou fear death, he is life; if thou desire heaven, he is
the way; if thou hate darkness, he is light; if thou seek for meat, he is
food. See (I pray thee my brother) with how many names and titles Christ is
noted, and set out unto us, who notwithstanding, is one in himself, and most
simple. For although he is one in himself, yet he is all things in us, and
that for the releeuing of all our necessities, which are innumerable.

There should be no end, if I would recite all the authorities of the
Scripture, which pertain to this matter; yet I have brought a few of many, to
the comfort of them, who wait and attend upon God, and that we might provoke
and allure those to his obedience, which do not serve him: for it is certain,
that there is no greater treasure under heaven then this. A similitude.
For even as he that has warred in any voyage under an earthly King, and has
gotten Letters in which great rewards are promised unto him, How pleasant are
the promises of the divine providence unto a righteous soul.
he keeps them with great care, he often looks upon them, he is rejoiced
at them, they comfort his heavy heart in tribulation, and at length he comes
to the King with them, desiring that was promised to him: so the servants of
GOD do keep all these words, and divine Charters and Letter-pattents in their
hearts, which are more certain, then the Letters of all Kings which are upon
the earth. In these is their trust; with these they are comforted in their
labors; for these they are confident in dangers; and in tribulations they add
consolation unto them; to these they run in all their needs: these do
inflame their minds with the love of this Lord, and bind them unto him, to
lay, and pay out, and sustain, all things for his worship and service; seeing
that he himself, so faithfully does promise himself wholly for our use, who is
all things in all. In this appears one of the principal foundations of a
Christian life, to have known by experience this truth. Tell me, I pray thee,
can any thing be imagined richer, precioser, better, or more to be desired then
he? Can any one think of a greater good in this life, then to have GOD a
Shepherd, a Physician, a Master, a Supporter or Caryer, a strong wall, a
defense, a guard, and to conclude, a Bridegroom, and all in all? What can any
one have in the world, that he can give to his friend, to be compared to the
least of these benefits?

Great cause therefore have they to rejoice and be glad, The providence of God,
does yield great matter of rejoicing to the good. Psalm, 32,
who possess so great a good: neither only to rejoice, but also to comfort
themselves, and to cheer up their drooping spyrits, and to glory in him above
all things. Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, says that royal
Singer, and be joyful all ye that are upright in heart. As if he should say,
Let others rejoice in the riches and honors of the world, others in noblenes
of birth, others in the friendship and favors of Princes, others in the
excellency of their dignities: but rejoice and glory ye in deed and truth in
so great a good, whose Lord is God, who possess God, whose inheritance God is;
for by so much your good is more excellent, by how much God is more excellent
then the creatures. This expressly confesses the Prophet in the Psalms,
saying; Rescue and deliver me, Psalm, 144,
o Lord, from the hand of strangers, whose mouth talks vanity, and their
right hand is a right hand of falsehood: that our sons may be as the plants,
growing up in their youth, and our daughters as the corner stones, graven after
the similitude of a palace: that our corners may be full, and abounding with
diverse sorts, and that our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousand
in our streets: that our Oxen may be strong to labor: that there be none
invasion, nor going out, nor no crying in our streets. Blessed are the people
that be so, yea, blessed are the people, whose GOD is the Lord. Why do thou
speak this o David? The reason is in a readiness. For he that possesses GOD,
he has that good, in which all goods are found, which may be desired. Let
them glory that will in all other things, I will glory only in the Lord my
GOD.

So also that holy Prophet did glory, who said; I will rejoice in the Lord:
Abac. 3.
I will joy in the God of my salvation. The Lord God is my strength: he will
make my feet like Hindes feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high
places. This then is the treasure, this is the glory prepared for them in this
world, who serve the Lord. This is one, and that the greatest reason, which
inuiteth us to serve God, An expostulation of God with man.
and a just complaint is it, that God has against them, who will not serve
him, seeing that he is so good a Lord to them, so faithful a defendour, and so
sincere an Advocate. With this complaint, in times past he sent Jeremy, that he
might expostulate and chide with the people, saying; Ierem. 2,
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from
me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? And a little after:
Have I been as a wilderness unto Israel? or a land of darkness? As if he
should say: No: Seeing that this Land has received of mine hands so many
victories, and so much happiness. Wherefore says my people then: We are
Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Can a maid forget her ornament, or a
Bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me, days without number, who am
their ornament, glory and beauty. If God after this manner lamented in the old
Law, when as his favors and graces were not so perfect, what great cause
has he now to lament, seeing that his graces are so much the more excellent,
by how much they are more divine, and more spiritual?

Of that manner of providence, by which God espieth out the wicked, to chastise
their maliciousness. CHAP. XIII.
IF thou be not moved with the love of so happy and blessed a Providence, in
which the good do joy, The wicked are neglected of the lord.
at least let the fear of that Providence move thee (if it be lawful so to
call it) with which God does espy and watch over the wicked; which is, to
measure them with their own measure, and to handle them according to the
oblivion and contempt offered to the divine Majesty: forgetting them, who have
forgotten him, and contemning them, of who^ first he was contemned. But that I
may speak this after a more homely manner, God commanded his Prophet Hosea to
take unto him a wife of fornications; that he might demonstrate the spiritual
fornication of that people, Hosea, 1.
who had refused and put away their lawful Bridegroom and Lord, to play the
fornicators. And he willed also, that the Prophet should have of that wife,
sons of fornications, and the third begotten, he should call by an Hebrew
name, signifying, Not my people, that he might show thereby, seeing that they
for their sins would not acknowledge GOD, nor serve him as their God, that he
in like manner would not acknowledge them, neither would have them for his
people. And that he might confirm this sentence, Hosea, 2,
he says by the Prophet a little below, Plead with your Mother, plead with
her: for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband: as if he should say,
as she has not kept the faith and obedience of a good wife toward me, so in
like manner I will not keep that love and providence, which a good husband is
wont to show and use unto a good wife. See how plainly our Lord teaches us
here, how he does mete unto every one according to his own measure: whilst
he deals so toward men, as men deal with him.

Therefore the wicked do live as neglected and forsaken of the Lord, and they
are in this world as a patrimony without an heir, as a school without a
master, as a ship without a guide, and as a flock without a Pastor, laid
open to the devouring greedines and voracity of Wolves. After this manner, he
threatens them by the mouth of his Prophet, Zach. 11.
saying: I will not feed you; that, that dies, let it dye: and that that
perishes, let it perish: and let the remnant eat every one the flesh of his
neighbor. The same thing Moses obiecteth to Israel in his song; I will hide,
says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.
my face from them: I will see what their end shall be: for they are a froward
generation, and children in whom is no faith. He says, I will consider what
their end shall be, that is, I will stand idely, and will see what end their
misery shall have at length; neither will I bring any release unto them.
Besides these things that have been spoken, much more plainly speaks Esaias
to the people of this kind of providence, under the name of a Vineyard, in the
person of the Lord, against which (when it had been tilled, and much cost, and
many benefits bestowed upon it, neither brought forth tolerable fruits) he
pronounces this sentence; And now I will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard: Esaias, 5.
I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: I will break
the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. And I will lay it wast: it
shall not be cut, nor dug, but briars, and thorns shall grow up: I will
also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. That is, I will
take away all the aid and help, with which I have hitherto defended it: which
being taken away, destruction and ruin will follow. Does not this kind of
providence seem fearful unto thee? Tell me, what greater danger, or what
greater misery, then to live without the defense of the Divine providence? To
be left, and laid open to all the persecutions of the world, to the injuries
and calamities of this life? How dangerous a thing it is to live in this world
without the divine help.
For seeing that the world is a tempestuous sea, and as it were a wilderness,
full of thieves, and fearful beasts, and seeing that there be so many, and so
great discomodities and misfortunes of man's life: seeing that our enemies are
so many and so strong, with whom we must fight; seeing that so many snares are
hid, and so many nets laid, and to conclude, every where so many and so great
difficulties sown and dispersed in our ways: and man being a creature so
frail, weak, naked, blind, unarmed, faynting, and void of counsel: if the
shadow and supportation of God fail him, what can he do poor weak creature,
among so many strong enemies? A Dwarf among so many Giants? Blind among so
many snares, alone, and unarmed among so many armed and powerful enemies?

Neither is here an end of the evil: God does not only permit evils, but
also he sends them.
for God does not only turn his eyes from sinners and the unrighteous, and
that he permits and suffers them to fall into diverse kind of errors and
afflictions: but he also sends evils among them, and armeth the creatures
against them. Insomuch, that the eyes, which before were open for their profit
now they watch for their hurt and ruin: as God himself manifestly testifies
by the Prophet Amos; Amos, 5.
I will, says he, cast mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good. As if
he had spoken more plainly, I will change providence with providence: for that
with which before I did water for their defense, now it shall be for their
punishment, and for a recompense of their iniquity. The same thing he speaks
more plainly in Hosea; Hosea, 5.
And I will, says the Lord, be unto Ephraim as a moath, and to the house of
Judah as a rottennes, that I may devour and destroy them, as a garment is
consumed of moaths. And because this kind of persecution seemed too long, but
somewhat more gentle, presently after he adioyneth an other more terrible, and
more fierce and ravening, saying; I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, as a Lions
whelpe to the house of Judah: I, even I will spoil, and go away: I will take
away, and none shall rescue it. Tell me, I pray thee, what greater misery then
this can be thought upon? Neither is the testimony of this providence more
obscurely remembered by the Prophet Amos. For when as the Lord had commanded
that the sword should devour all the ungodly, for the sin of covetousness,
forthwith he adds: He that flees of them, Amos, 9.
shall not flee away: and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered.
Though they dig into the hell, thence shall mine hand take them: though they
clime up to heaven, thence will I bring them down. And tho ugh they hide
themselves in the top of Carmel, A fearful place.
I will search and take them out thence: and though they be hid from my sight in
the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite
them. And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I
command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes upon them
for evil, and not for good. Hitherto Amos.

Tell me, I pray thee, who is that man, who reading these words, and being
mindful that they are the words of God himself, and seeing what this manner
of providence is, which God uses against the reprobate, does not tremble both
in body and soul? Considering how angry and terrible an enemy God is to him,
to whom he shows himself an enemy, and whom he hates? Whom he hunteth out
with so great diligence? Whom he snatcheth up wheresoever he finds? Upon
whose destruction he watches with so great a care? In how great danger a man
lives having God his enemy and angry with him.
How can this man rest? How can he eat having such eyes opposed against him?
Such wrath? Such a persecutour? An a^me so mighty stretched out against him?
For if it be so great danger to fall from, and be deprived of the favor of so
great a Lord; what will it be to have all the armies of the Divine providence
turned against him, especially when as the sword, which before was drawn out
for thy defense against thine enemies, now does set upon thee for revenge? The
eyes which were over thee for thy safety, now watch for thy destruction? The
arm that was stretched out to support thee, now is armed to kill thee? And the
heart which mused upon thoughts of peace and love for thee, now is full of
thoughts, of sorrow, and affliction? And he that should be thy buckler, shadow,
and refuge, is now become a moath to devour thee, rottennes to corrupt thee,
and a Lion to destroy thee? How can a man sleep securely, who when he
sleeps, has God over his head with a naked sword ready to kill him, and
watching over him as that rod of Jeremy, for revenge and and punishment? What
counsel shall this miserable man take against the counsel of God? Of what
arm shall he call for help against this arm? What providence shall he oppose
against this providence? Who ever moved war against God, or opposed himself
against him, and went away conqueror? Holy Job says; Job, 9.
If he would dispute with him, he could not answer him one thing of a
thousand. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has been fierce
against him and has prospered?

To conclude, this evil is such and so great, that of the greatest
punishments, with which God threatens and chastises the wicked in this life,
it is one, and not the least, when he withdraws from them the hand of his
fatherly providence: as God himself testifies in diverse places of the holy
Scripture. Hence is that; Psalm. 8.
And my people have not hearkened unto my voice, and Israel has not obeyed me;
so I gave them over to their own lusts, and they followed after their own
inventions. That is, they daily fell from ill to worse. Hosea, 4.
And by Hosea; Seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will also
forget thy children. Even as therefore there can nothing happen worser, or more
heavily to a woman, then to be forsaken and divorced from her husband; nor to a
Vineyard, A similitude.
then to be neglected of the Lord, and no more to be trimmed (for then
forthwith it degenerates, and grows wild) so nothing can happen worse to a
soul, then to be forsaken of God. What the soul is without God.
For what is the soul without God? It is as a Vineyard without one to dress
and trim it: as a garden without a Gardener: as a ship without a Pilot: as an
army without a Captain: as a common wealth without a Governor: or (that I may
speak more fitly) as a body without a soul. Thou see therefore, my brother,
how God does encompasse thee on every side, for this cause, that if thine heart
will not be moved with the love and desire of fatherly providence, at the least
that it might be moved with the fear of reprobation, and forsaking: least
perhaps he forsake thee, neither any more stretch his hand out unto thee. For
oftentimes, they that are not moved with desire of good things, are moved with
the fear of some great evil.

Of the second privilege or prerogative of Virtue: that is, of the Grace of
the holy Ghost, which is given to the virtuous. CHAP. XIIII.
THis fatherly providence, of the which we have spoken a little before, is (as
we have said) as it were the fountain and original of all other privileges,
and benefits, with which God enricheth, and beautifieth his friends in this
world. For to this providence it pertayneth, to provide them of all
necessaries, to the obtaining of the last end, which is the last perfection and
blessedness: by helping them in all their needs, and by creating in their
minds all aptnes, disposition, virtue, and other habits, which are requisite
unto that end.

Of the number of these, the first is the grace of the holy Ghost, After the
divine providence, the grace of the holy Ghost is ye beginning of all blessings.
which next to that divine providence, is the original and beginning of all
other privileges and celestial gyfts. This was the first robe with which the
prodigal child was clothed, after he was received into his Fathers house. If
thou demaundest of me what this grace is? I answer, that this grace,
(according to Divines) is a participation of the Divine nature: that is, of
sanctity, goodness, purity, and of the nobleness of God himself: by whose
help and benefit, What the grace of the holy Ghost is.
man does cast from him all the baseness, vildnes, and rudenes, which he took
and received from Adam; and is made partaker of holiness, and of the Divine
nobleness: putting off himself, and putting on Jesus Christ. The Fathers show
this by the example of iron cast into a fire; A similitude.
which remains iron still: yet pertaking of the nature of fire, it is pulled
out altogether shyning and glowing, as though it were fire in deed. I say,
that the same substance of iron remains with the name: but the heat, the
splendor or shyning, and all other accidents, are not of the iron, but of the
fire. After the same manner grace (which is an heavenly quality, Grace does
deifie.
which God infuseth into the soul) has that admirable virtue and effecacie,
that it transformeth man into God: after this manner, that still remaining a
man, yet he is made a partaker of the Divine purity and nobleness; Gala, 2.
as he was a partaker, who said; I do not now live, but Christ lives in me.

Furthermore, Grace is a supernatural form, and divine, which makes that a
man leads a life comfortable to the form, Grace is a supernatural form.
from which it proceeds: which also is supernatural and divine. In which
thing, after an admirable manner, shines the Divine providence: which as it
wills that man should live a double life, Two souls of man.
natural and supernatural, so has it provided for the same a double form:
which are as it were the two souls of these life's: one by which we live this
first life, another, by which we live the other. For even as from the soul,
which is the natural form, all the powers and senses do proceed, by whose
help we live this natural life: so from grace, which is the supernatural
form, al virtues and gyfts of the holy Ghost do proceed, by the benefit of
which we live a supernatural life. Therefore this is, as the provision of two
kind of instruments, by help of which, we labor in diverse exercises.

Grace is also a spiritual ornament of the soul, Grace is a spiritual
ornament.
wrought by the hands of the holy Ghost, which does make the soul so
beautiful, and so acceptable in the eyes of God, that he receaueth it for his
daughter, and for his Bride. Of this ornament the Prophet glories, Esaias, 6,
saying; I will rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be glad in my God,
because he has put upon me the vesture of salvation, he has covered me with
the garment of righteousness, as a Bridegroom adorned with a crown, and as a
Bride decked with Jewels. Which are all virtues, with all the gyfts of the
holy Ghost, Psalm, 44.
with which the soul is adorned at the hands of GOD. This is that golden
vesture, wrought about with great variety, with which the Queen was clothed,
who stood before the King her Spouse: for from grace, all the colors of all
virtues and celestial habits do arise, in which the beauty of the Queen
consists.

Of these it is easily gathered what be the effects, which grace works in
those souls, 1. The work of grace, makes a man acceptable to God.
wherein it dwells. For the special effect of it is, to make a soul so
acceptable and beautiful in the eyes of God, that he takes her to be his
daughter, his spouse, his temple, his dwelling, in which he enjoys his
delights with the sons of men. An other effect of it is, not only to adorn
the soul, but also to strengthen it with those virtues, which proceed from
it. 2. It strengthens man.
Which are as the hairs of Sampson, in which consisted not only his beauty,
but also his strength. As well from this, as from the former effect of grace,
the soul is praised in the Canticles, where the Angels admiring the beauty of
it, say; Cant. 6,
Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, pure as
the Sun, terrible as an Army with banners? Whereby we know, that Grace is as
a shield covering the whole body, or as a complete Armor, which armeth a man
from the head to the foot, and makes him beautiful and valiant, and so
valiant, that, if we believe a certain learned Schoole-man, a little grace is
sufficient to conquer and overcome all the devils, with all sins that
reign and rule in the world.

There is also a third effect of grace, that it makes the soul so acceptable
and excellent in the sight of God, 3. It makes our works acceptable unto God.
that as many works as it does deliberatiuely and advisedly, (which are not
sins) are acceptable unto him. That not only the acts of virtue, but also
natural works, as to eat, drink, sleep, and such like, are acceptable
before the Lord.

The fourth effect is, that it makes us the sons of God by adoption, 4 It
adopteth us to be the sons of God.
and heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and also worthy to be written in the
book of Life, in which all the names of the righteous are written: and by
consequent, it gives unto us a lawful claim and title, to that most rich and
heavenly inhearitance. This is that privilege and prerogative which our
Savior praised so greatly in his Disciples, then, when they returned merrily
unto him, Luke, 10.
saying: Lord, even the devils are subdued unto us through thy Name: to whom
our Savior answered; In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subdued unto
you: but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven. For it is
certain, that this is the greatest good, that man's heart can think upon, or
desire in this life.

But that I may speak many things in few words, it is grace that makes man
fit to all good: The Forest of the effects of grace.
which makes the way to heaven plain before us: which makes the yoke of the
Lord, easy and sweet unto us: which leads man by the way of virtue: which
heals our weak nature, and makes all that seem light unto us, which while
it was weak, seemed intolerable: it is that, which after an ineffable manner,
reformeth and armeth all the powers and faculties of our souls, and that by
the means of those virtues, which proceed from it: it enlightneth the
understanding, it inflameth our will, it strengthens our memory, it
tempereth and moderateth our part concupiscible, least it run into all evil:
it confirms the part irascible, least it be slow and too sluggish to work
well. Moreover, because all our natural passions, which are found in these two
inferior powers of our appetite are as it were step-dames unto virtue, and
doors, whereby devils oftentimes enter into our souls, it has appointed, as it
were Sentinels in each of these parts, which watch and keep it: that is, a
certain infused virtue, coming from above, which does help man, and makes
him secure in danger, which arises by means of those passions. So to defend
the soul from the appetite of gluttony, it sends Temperance: to defend it
from the lust of the flesh, it sends Chastity, and to defend it from
ambition, it sends Humility, and so in the rest.

But there is one thing, Grace makes our souls the dwelling and temple of God.
which exceeds all the fore-sayde, that is, that grace makes God to dwell in
our soul, that dwelling in it, he may govern it, defend it, direct it in the
heavenly way: God therefore sits in our soul as a King in his kingdom; as
a Captain among his army; as a Master in his school: and as a Pastor among
his flock, that there he may exercise, and undergo spiritually all these
offices, and administer all providence. Go to therefore if this precious
pearl, out of which so many good things come, be a perpetual companion unto
Virtue, who will not willingly imitate that wise Merchant in the Gospel, who
sold all that he had, that he might buy this alone?

Of the third privilege of Virtue, which is a light, and a certain
supernatural knowledge, which our Lord gives to them, who seek after Virtue.
CHAP. XV.
THE third privilege, This knowledge does proceed from grace.
which is granted unto Virtue, is a certain special light, and a certain
wisdom, which our Lord does bestow upon them, that are righteous; which also
proceeds from that grace, of which we have hitherto spoken. The reason is,
The first reason.
because it is a function and duty of grace to heal and recure nature being
weak, feeble, and decayed. Even as therefore it heals the appetite and will
weakened through sin, It is a property of grace to illuminate the
understanding.
so also it recureth the understanding, being exceedingly obscured and darkened
by the same sin: that by this benefit the understanding may know, what it
ought to do; and by the will there may be ability and power to do, that which
now it understands is needful for to be done. Not unlike to this is that
Saint Gregory has in his Morals; Not to be able to fulfill that which man
understood, was a punishment of sin: as also that was a punishment of the
same, not to understand that. Psalm 27.
Therefore said the Prophet; The Lord is my light, against ignorance, and my
salvation, against impotencie. In one is signified what is to be desired, in
the other strength is given, by which we may attain unto it. And so as well
this as that pertayneth to the same grace. Hence it is that besides faith and
prudence infused, which enlighten our understanding, that it may understand,
what it ought to believe, what also to do, the gifts of the holy Ghost do
increase also in us, Four gifts of the holy Ghost belong to the understanding.
four of which pertain to the understanding; that is, the gift of wisdom,
which is given for the knowledge of high and lofty matters; the gift of
Science, which is given, that we may understand lower matters; the gift of
understanding, by which we come to the knowledge of the mysteries of God, and
to the congruencie and beauty of them; and the gift of counsel and advice, by
whose help we know the actions of this life, and how to govern and rule,
whatsoever happens to us in it. All these beams come from the splendor of
grace only, which therefore is called in the holy Scriptures, Grace why it is
called an Unction.
an Anointing or Unction. For it teaches all things, as Saint John speaks.
Wherefore, even as oil among all liquid substances, is the fittest to preserve
light, and to cure wounds: so this divine Unction does cure the wounds of our
will, and does illuminate the darkness of our understanding. This is that most
precious oil, better then all oil; Psalm. 23.
of which the kingly Prophet speaks; Thou have anointed mine head with oil.
It is certain that he speaks here not of a material head, nor of material
oil, but of a spiritual head, that is, of the superior part of our soul, in
which our understanding is, as very well shows a learned man, writing upon
this place: and of spiritual oil, which is the light of the holy Ghost, by
which our lamp is preserved, that it is not put out. Of the light of this holy
oil this good King had much, who thus speaks of himself; Psalm, 51.
Thou have taught me wisdom in the secret of mine heart.

The second reason.
An other reason may be also given of this. For seeing that it is the office of
grace, to make a man endued with Virtue; it cannot execute this, unless first
it move a man to sorrow and repentance of his former life, and stir up the
fear of God in him. Unless before it works, that man does deadly hate
sin, and desire heavenly blessings with great feruency, and altogether
contemn these worldly vanities. But the will cannot obtain these and the
like, unless before it has the light of understanding, and a knowledge
proportionable, by which the will may be stirred up. The will is a blind
faculty.
For the will is a blind faculty, which is not moved except the understanding
go before, carrying a light, and showing good and evil in all things, that
the affection toward them may increase or decrease. Hence it is, that Thomas
Aquinas says, even as the love of God does increase in the soul of a
righteous man: so also increases the knowledge of the goodness, favor, and
beauty of the same God, and that by an equal proportion: that if one of them
increase an hundredth degrees, so many also increases the other. For he that
loves much, he understands many causes of love in the thing beloved; but he
that loves little, understands but few. And that which is clearly
understood of the love of God, this also is understood of fear, hope, and of
the hatred of sin. From which men would no more abhor, then from other
things, unless they understood that it was an evil, then which nothing in
this world is more worthy of horror and execration.

Seeing therefore that the holy Ghost wills that these effects should be in
the soul of a righteous man, he wills also that there should be causes in
it, from whence they may come. As he wills that there should be diversity of
effects in the earth, so also he wills that diverse causes and celestial
influences should be wrought in it. Furthermore, seeing that it is true, as we
before have proved, that God does dwell by grace in the souls of the
righteous; and that God is light, Enlightening every man that comes into the
world, John, 1.
as Saint John says; it is not to be doubted, that by how much the soul is
purer and cleaner, by so greater a clearenes the beams of the divine light do
shine in it. God is the Glass of a purified soul.
Wherefore Saint Augustine calls God the Glass of a purified soul: for he
makes it shine with the beams of his light, teaching it all things, which are
necessary to salvation. What marvel is it, that he does bestow this benefit
upon men, who has not denied such a like thing to lower and more inferior
creatures, which by the instinct of the Author of nature know all things, God
has given knowledge to beasts, to fly hurtful things, and to embrace
wholesome,
which belong to their preservation? Who has taught the beasts among so many
kind of herbs, which grow in the fields, to know which are wholesome, and
which are hurtful? To feed upon these, and to leave the other untouched? To
know also what creature is enemy unto them, and what is a friend? To fly a
Wolf, and follow a dog? It is certain that they have learned this of none
other, the^ of the Lord. If therefore God has infused this knowledge into
unreasonable creatures, that they might be preserved in their natural life,
how much more ought he to provide for the righteous, that they may have
greater knowledge, whereby they may be preserved in a spiritual life? For
this is no less necessary for men, by reason of those things that be above
nature, then those things are for beasts, which concern their nature. For if
the Divine providence has been so careful to provide things of nature, how
much more shall it be careful for those things, which pertain to grace?
which by how much they be more excellent, by so much they exceed the powers
and faculties of humane wit.

What this supernatural knowledge is.
This example not only proves that there is such a light of the
understanding, but also it shows what it is: for it is not a knowledge so
speculatiue as active, not so contemplative as practike: neither is it given,
that we may understand, but that we might work: not that we should be
subtle and witty in disputing, but industrious and laborious in working.
Therefore, not only it remains in the understanding, as Sciences got in
Schools; but by the power of it, it moves the will, inclyning it to all
that, to which such kind of knowledge does provoke and excite. For it is the
proper instinct of the holy Ghost, who as a most perfect master, teaches his
very often with this perfection, all that which it behooves them to know. This
the Bride confesses in the Canticles; Cant, 5.
My soul, says she, melted within me, after that my beloved spoke. By which
sentence it appears, what is the difference between this learning, and that,
which is delivered in schools: for that only enlightneth the understanding,
but this moves the will also, and delights it, and by her virtue does pierce
all the corners of our souls, working and effecting all that, which pertains
to the reformation of them: Heb. 4,
as the Apostle declares, when he says; The Word of God is lively, and mighty
in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, even
unto the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and
the marrow. For it makes a division between the part animal of a man, and
the part spiritual: seperating the one from the other, dissoluing that most
dangerous bond of friendship, which was wont to be between the flesh and the
spirit: for when the spirit is mingled with the flesh, it is made one with it:
which bond is dissolved by the word of God, making, that a man lives a
spiritual life, and no more a carnal.

This therefore is one of the especial effects of the Divine grace: one also
of the especial privileges, in which those that are endued with virtue, do
joy in this world. But (although those things which we have spoken of, be
sufficiently proved of us) least any man be so carnal, that he should
complain, that these things are obscure to be understood, Testimonies of the
Scripture as concerning this knowledge. John, 14. John, 6,
and hard to be believed, I will confirm them with most evident testimonies,
as well of the old Testament as of the new. In the new Testament Saint John
tells, that Christ said at his last supper; The holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to
your remembrance, which I have told you. And in another place: It is written in
the Prophets; and they shall be all taught of God. As if he should say, the
time shall be, when as men every where shall be taught of God. Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me. The
same the Lord promises by the Prophet Jeremy; I will give my law into their
bowels, (and that which before was written in tables of stone) I will write in
their hearts: Ierem. 31,
So that all men are to be taught of the Lord. The Lord in like manner willing
to show how great the majesty, glory, and prosperity of the Church should be,
thus among other things he speaks in Esaias: Esaias, 54.
O thou afflicted, and tossed with tempest, that have no comfort, behold, I
will lay thy stones with the Carbunkle, and lay thy foundation with Saphirs,
and I will make thy windows of Emerauds, and thy gates shining stones, and all
thy borders of pleasant stones. And all thy children shall be taught of the
Lord. And in another place; I am the Lord thy God, Esaias, 4^.
which teach thee to profit, and lead thee by the way, that thou should go.

Of this which has been spoken, we may easily know that there be two kinds
of sciences; one of the Saints, another of Wisemen, one of the Righteous,
another of the Doctors. The science of the Saints is that, of which Solomon
speaks, The science of the Saints is prudence. Prou. 9.
Because science consists only in the understanding, and belongs unto
contemplation: but it is the property of prudence to wish the best things, In
the first book of his great Morals, chap. 34.
and to choose and do them, says Aristotle. And it is required not that we
may know, what things be right, but that we may become honest and righteous.
How often do we find this wisdom promised unto us in the Psalms? In one
it is said, The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, Psalm. 37.
and his tongue will talk of judgment. And in another. I will give to thee
understanding, and I will teach thee in the way wherein thou go, and I will
set mine eyes upon thee. Again in another Psalm he demands, as a thing of
great moment, and worthy of admiration, Psalm. 25.
What man is he that fears the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall
choose. As if he should say, who is he to whom the Lord does give such a
benefit, that he himself must be his master, and teach him the law, according
to which he must live? Psalm. 94.
In another place he calls this man happy. Blessed, says he, is the man,
whom thou chastisest, o Lord, and teach him in thy law. Psalm. 25.
In the Psalm cited a little before, where we read; The Lord is a foundation
to them that fear him. Jerome.
Jerome translateth: The secret of the Lord is revealed to them, that fear
him, and his covenant to give them understanding. Which gift is nothing else,
then a great light of the understanding, a sweet food of the will, and a great
recreation of the whole man. Which knowledge the same Prophet oftentimes
calls the food of the soul, sometimes the water of refreshing, a table
prepared against his enemies. For this cause the same Prophet in that divine
Psalm, Psalm. 119.
whose beginning is, Blessed are those that are upright in their way: so often
does desire of God that light, and that knowledge. Give me, says he,
understanding, and I will keep thy law, yea, I will keep it with my whole
heart. And a little after: I am thy servant o Lord, give me understanding, that
I may know thy testimonies. And afterward, Let my complaint come before thee,
o Lord, and give me understanding, according unto thy word. To conclude, this
is that petition which he repeateth so often, which he had not craved with so
great importunity, unless he had very well understood the force and efficacy
of this doctrine, and the manner and means, which God uses in bestowing of it.

Which seeing that it is so, The dignity of this doctrine.
what greater glory can there be, what ampler dignity, then to have such a
master, to frequent such a school, where the Lord God himself sitting in a
chair, prosesseth this learning and heavenly philosophy? If men, as Saint
Jerome testifies, See S. Jerome more at large in his 103. Epist to Paulinus.
c. 1. Philostratus in the life of Apollonius Tyaneus.
in times past came to Rome from the furthest coasts of Spain and France,
that they might see Tytus Liuius; whose eloquence was famous throughout the
whole world: And if that most excellent and famous Philosopher, Apollonius
Tyaneus, travailed almost throughout the whole world, and passed even to the
Mountain Caucasus, and to the Brachmanes, Philosophers of India, that he might
only hear Iarchas, an Indian Philosopher, in his golden throne prosessing
wisdom among the small number of his scholars, and disputing of the motion
of the celestial Spheres; what ought not men to do, that they may hear God
himself, who sits in the chair of their hearts, not teaching how the
heavens are moved, but how men may come to heaven?

But that thou may know that this doctrine is not unfruitful, or common,
Psalm, 119,
hear what the Prophet speaks of it, I have had more understanding then all
my Teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understood more then the
ancient, because I kept thy precepts. More abundantly yet does the Lord
promise to his by the mouth of his Prophet; Esaias, 58,
And the Lord thy GOD, says he, shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy
soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered
garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. What be these
blessings, with which the Lord will satisfy the souls of the righteous, but
knowledge of things belonging to salvation? For in these he shows, how great
the beauty of virtues be, and how great the filthiness of vices are: how great
the vanity of the world is, how great the dignity of grace is, the greatness of
glory, the sweetness of the consolation of the holy Ghost, the goodness of GOD,
the malice of devils, and to be brief, how short the life of man is, and how
great and intolerable is the common error of the^ living in it. With this
knowledge, as the same Prophet testifies, a man is often lifted above the
highness of all mountains, and there does contemplate of the King in his
beauty, and his eyes beholds the earth a far off. Hence it is, that
celestial blessings seem such unto him, as they are in truth: because he
sees them nearly: but terrestrial things seem small; for besides that they
are such, also he beholds them a far off. The contrary happens to
perverse and wicked men: who behold heavenly things a far off, and earthly
things nearly and just before their eyes. For what this wisdom is profitable.
This is the reason, why they, that participate of this heavenly gift, are not
puffed up with vainglory in prosperity; neither are troubled or cast down
in ad uersitie. for by the benefit of this light they see, of what small moment
it is, that the world can either give or take away, if it be compared with
those things, which are in the Lords power. The wiseman witnesses this,
Ecclus, 27.
when he says: A man grounded in wisdom, is steadfast as the Sun: as for a
fool, he changes as the Moon. Which sentence Saint Ambrose expounding in a
certain Epistle, Ambrose to Simplicianus, Epist. 7.
says thus: For a wise man is not broken through fear, is not changed
through power; is not exalted in prosperity, neither is drowned in adversity.
For where there is wisdom, there is courage of mind, there is constancy
and fortitude. A wise man therefore is one and the self same in mind, he is
not lessoned, nor increased through the change of things; neither as unstaid
does he flote here and there, to be carried about with every wind of doctrine,
but he remains perfect in Christ, grounded in charity, an d rooted in faith.

Let it not seem strange to any, that this wisdom is a thing of so great
virtue; for it is not earthly wisdom, as we have said, it is not that puffed and
vain wisdom, which causes to swell, but that which edifieth: it is not that
which with speculation only enlightneth the understanding, but that which with
her heat gives motion to the will: as it in times past moved the heart of
Saint Augustine, of whom it is written, that through joy he wept, as often as
he heard the Psalmody and Psalms of the Church, The dignity of that wisdom.
which sounded so sweetly: the sound entered into the in most part of his heart,
and there through the heat of devotion, truth was resolved in his bowels, and
showred tears from his eyes, which were to him, as he says, most sweet and
pleasant. O blessed tears, happy School, and happy wisdom, which brings
forth such fruit: what may be compared with her? Man knows not the price of
it, Job, 28.
for it is not found in the Land of delicate livers. The depth says, It is
not in me: the sea also says, it is not with me. Gold shall not be given for
it, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof. It shall not be
valued with the wedge of gold of Ophir, nor with the precious Onix, nor the
Saphir. The Gold nor the Crystal shall be equal unto it, nor the exchange
shall be for plate of fine gold. Which commendation of wisdom, this most holy
man concludes in these words; Behold, the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and
to depart from evil, is understanding.

This therefore my brother, is one of those great rewards, by which thou art
invited to Virtue, seeing she has the key of this treasure. After this manner
the Wiseman inuiteth us unto her in his Proverbs, Prou, 2.
My son, says he, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments
within thee, etc. Then shall, thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God: The understanding of the righteous increases. Prou, 4.
for the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. This knowledge continues not in one and the same state, but
daily is increased by new lights and knowledge, as the same Wiseman testifies.
The way of the righteous, says he, shines as the light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day: that is, unto that blessed eternity, in which we
shall no more say with the friends of Job; Job, 4,
A word was spoken unto me secretly, and mine ear has received a little
thereof: that is, of her divine and hidden inspirations: but there we shall
hear openly, and shall see God himself.

This is that wisdom, The darkness of the wicked.
which the sons of light enjoy: but the wicked on the contrary, do live in
the horrible darkness of the Egiptians, which may be felt with hands. A figure
of which thing was, that it is said in the Land of Goshan, where the children
of Israel dwelt, Exodus, 10,
there was light: but in Egypt for three days space, there was such thick
darkness, that it might be felt: which represented that obscure and dark night
and blindness, in which sinners live, Esaias, 59,
as they confess in Esaias, saying; We have waited for light, but lo, it is
darkness: for brightness, but we walk in darkness. We grope for the wall like the
blind, and we grope as one without eyes: we stumble at the noone day, as in
the twy-light: we are in solitary places as dead men.

Tell me, I pray thee, what greater blindness can be thought of, or greater
disorder happen, then that is, into which the wicked do daily slide? What
greater blindness or ignorance is there, then to sell the right of the
byrth-right, that is, the inhearitance of the kingdom of heaven, for a little
pleasure of the world? then not to fear hell? not to attain Paradise? not to
have hated sin? not to have a regard of the last judgment? to set at
naught the promises and threatenings of the Lord? not to remember death? which
every hour hangs over their heads? not to prepare themselves to give an
account, not to think that it is momentany, and for a time that delights,
but for ever that tormenteth? Psalm, 9,
They have not known (says the Prophet) neither have they understood: they
walk in darkness, and they shall go from darkness into darkness. They shall
go, I say, from inward darkness, to outward darkness: from the darkness of this
life, to that of the life to come.

Other men's sentences and judgments, are to be heard.
I suppose that I shall do advisedly, if at the end of this matter, I do
admonish thee, that although all is most true, which has been spoken of this
heavenly wisdom, and light of the holy Ghost: yet no man ought, albeit he be
justified, rashly or proudly to gainsay the judgments of men, but humbly
submit himself, to the judgments of his elders: especially to theirs, whom
GOD has appointed Doctors and Pastors of his Church. Gala, 1,
For who more abounded with this light then S. Paul? Who more then Moses, who
spoke face to face with the Lord? Nevertheless, Exodus, 18,
one of them went to Jerusalem, that he might confer of the Gospel with the
rest of the Apostles, which he had learned in the third heaven: the other also
contemned not the advice of Iethro his Father in law, although he was an
heathen man, and unacquainted with the knowledge of the true God. The reason of
this is, because the inward helps and aids of grace, do not exclude these
outward of the Church. For after both manners the Divine providence would
provide for our weakness, A similitude.
to which both helps are necessary. For even as the natural heat of our
bodies is helped of the exterior heat of heaven: and as nature (although most
careful to preserve it self) does receive much help of external medicines,
created to that end of God: so also the light and inward help of grace, is
much helped by the light and doctrine of the Church.

Of the fourth privilege of Virtue, that is, of the consolations and comforts
of the holy Ghost, which the righteous enjoy in this world, and which they joy
in. CHAP. XVI.
I Could, after the inward light of the holy Ghost, by which the darkness of our
understanding is enlightened, appoint for the fourth privilege Charity, and
the love of GOD, by which our will is inflamed, especially, seeing that the
Apostle himself, does put this in the first place, among the fruits of the
holy Ghost. But because here we do rather speak of the privileges and
prerogatives, which virtues bring with them, then of the virtues themselves;
Charity being the Prince of all virtues: we will not here speak of it,
although it also might be referred to this order, and our purpose, not as a
virtue, but as an admirable gift, which God is wont to give to those that apply
themselves to the study of Virtue: and that which after a certain ineffable
manner inflameth the inmost part of our will, and inclines it to love God
above all things, which may be beloved. Which love, the more perfect it is, the
more sweet and delightsome it is. For this cause, not unfitly it may be
inserted into this number as a fruit, or a reward, as well of other virtues,
as of it self. Notwithstanding that I may not seem an ambitious and too
curious a prayser and commender of virtues, of which so many and so great
things may be spoken, I will set in the fourth place the joy of the holy
Ghost, which is a natural propriety of the same charity, and one of the
especial fruits of the holy Ghost, as Saint Paul testifies, writing to the
Galathians. For even as we said a little before, that light and knowledge,
which God does bestow upon his friends, not only does stick in the
understanding, but also does descend to the will, where it does diffuse her
beams, and disperse her brightness; so that the mind is made glad, and
rejoices in the Lord after a certain ineffable manner. In so much, as the
natural light sends from her heat, which we feel: so this light being
spiritual, does beget in the soul of a righteous man that spiritual joy, of
which we speak; according to that of the Prophet, Light is sown for the
righteous, Psalm. 97.
and joy for the upright in heart.

This matter is so plentiful and copious, that never too many things may be
spoken of it. But for the purpose of this book, it shall be worth the labor
to show, how great this joy is: for the knowledge of this greatness is very
profitable, and very forcible to draw the minds of men to the love of Virtue.
For no man is ignorant, that as all kind of evils are found in vices; Evil
men think that there is no pleasure in Virtue.
so all kind of good things, as well honest as profitable, are perfectly to be
found in virtues, only pleasure excepted, which naughty and wicked men deny to
be in virtues. Seeing that therefore man's heart desires nothing so much as
pleasures, these men say (at least their works speak, if not their words) that
they had rather have pleasure imperfect, then that which wants pleasure, with
all her perfections and prerogatives. This is that Lactantins Firmianus said in
times past, Because, says he, bitternernes is mixed with virtues, and vices
are seasoned with pleasures: and men eschew bitterness, and are enticed with the
sweetness of pleasures; many forsaking virtues, with great earnestnes follow
after vices. This is one, and the only cause of so great a mischief, and he
that shall bring men from this perilous error, he shall not bestow a small
benefit upon them, and he that shall prove by most evident arguments, that the
way of virtue is much more playner and sweeter then the way of vices, he shall
mightily help them. This is that we would now prove and demonstrate with
most firm arguments and clearer then any light, especially with the
authorities of the divine Scripture, seeing that they are more certain and
sound proofs, then those which may be brought for this matter from any other
place. For the heaven and the earth shall sooner perish, then any jot or title
of them.

Tell me therefore, o blind man, wrapped in miserable errors, if the way of
the Lord be so bitter, as thou imaginest to thy self, Psalm. 31.
what means that of David. How great o Lord is the sweetness of thy goodness,
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? In which words the Prophet
does not only express the greatness of the sweetness, which is given of the
Lord to the righteous: but also he does render a reason, why the wicked do not
know it: because the Lord has laid it up from their eyes. What other thing
means that of the same Prophet; My soul shall be joyful in the Lord: Psalm.
35.
it shall rejoice in his salvation. All my bones, that is, all my strength and
might, shall say, Lord who is like unto thee? Tell me, what other thing is
this, then to say that the joy and mirth of the righteous is so great, The
flesh also of the righteous rejoices.
that although it be directly taken in the spirit, it does redound
nevertheless for the abundance and plenty thereof also upon the flesh, that
which before knew not to be delighted, but in carnal things, now for the
communion and participation of the spirit, is delighted in spiritual things,
and rejoices in the living God, and that with so great joy, that all the bones
of the body being full of this admirable sweetness, do force a man to cry out,
Lord, who is like unto thee? What pleasures are like thine? What joy, what
love, what peace can any creature give comparable to this of thine? What
means this also of the same Psalmist; The voice of joy and deliverance, Psalm,
118.
shall be in the tabernacles of the righteous? What I say, means that,
unless that he might signify that true joy and deliverance are not found in
the houses of sinners, but in the souls of the righteous. What also means
the Prophet, Psalm. 68.
when he says; The righteous shall be glad and rejoice before God: yea, they
shall leap for joy, but that he might show the joys and spiritual
feastings, with which God oftentimes wonderfully does refresh the souls of
the righteous, with the sweetness of all celestial things? In which banquets
there is drunk that most sweet wine, which the same Prophet praising says;
Psalm. 36.
They shall be satisfied and drunk with the fatnes of thine house, and thou
shall give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures. With what other words
could the Prophet have more cunningly or lively depainted, and expressed the
greatness of these delicates, calling them drunkenness and a river of pleasures,
that he might show the force and efficacy, which they have to draw the minds
of men from earthly things, and to convert them to God? This is understood by
this drunkenness. For even as a man, A similitude.
who is overcome with much wine, loses the use of his senses, neither
differs much from a dead man, by reason of the strength of the wine: so when
any one is full of that heavenly wine, he dies to the world, and has all his
senses with all their desires shackled and fettered. Furthermore, what means
that of the same Prophet; Blessed is the people, that can rejoice in thee?
Psalm. 89.
Some body perhaps might have said, Blessed is the people, who have plentifully
all things necessary for them, who is encompassed with strong walls, and
environed with mighty bulwarks; who is guarded with choice Servants and
Soldiers; How great the spiritual joy is.
But this most holy King, who knew all these, does not speak so, but he says
that he is blessed, who has learned by experience, what it is to joy and
rejoice in the Lord: not with every kind of joy, but with that, which is
worthy of the name of joy: which, as Gregory says, is a joy of the spirit so
great, that it cannot be expressed, nor showed by any external signs. Blessed
therefore is the people, who so has profited, and has made such progress in
the sweetness and love of God, that knows by experience, what this joy is,
which neither that most wise Plato could understand, nor that most eloquent
Demosthenes utter with words, but it is only known to an humble and pure
heart, in which God dwells.

God as he is great in justice, so is he great in mercy.
If God be the Author of this joy, I pray thee consider, how great it ought to
be which proceeds from God: for it is certain, that as the divine punishment
is like to God himself; so also his comfort is wont to be like and conformable
unto him. But if his punishment, when he corrects man, be so great, how
great think thou shall his consolations be, when he does comfort man? If he
has a hand so heavy to smite, how light shall it be, when he stretches it
out, that he may stroke and cherish his friends? Especially seeing that this
good God is much more marvelous in his works of mercy, then in his works of
justice. Moreover, tell me I pray thee, what is that Celler of wine, of most
precious wine, into which the Bride does glory that she was brought of her
Bridegroom? What is that banquet, to which that same Bridegroom does call his
friends, when he says, Cant. 1.
Drink my friends, and be drunken my beloved. What drunkenness is this, How
great the force is of ye sweetness of the heavenly wine.
but the greatness of the divine sweetness and joy, which does so alienate and
infatuate the heart of man, that a man seems as it were to be carried beyond
himself. For it is wont to be commonly said, that a man is drunk, when the
wine that he drinks is of greater measure, and more abundant, then that his
natural heat may concoct or digest: for then the wine ascends into the
brain, and so rules over man, that now he does not rule himself, but is
ruled of the wine. Which thing if it be so, tell me I pray thee, what shall be
the state of that soul drunken with that heavenly wine? When it is as it were
a vessel full of God, and of the divine love: so that it is not able to bear
so great a burden of pleasures, neither is her whole capacity sufficient, to
bear and carry so great felicity and happiness? Holy Effrem.
So it is written of holy Effrem, that oftentimes he was so full of the wine of
this heavenly joy and delight, that the frailety of his body being unequal to
the burden, he was not able to undergo the greatness of the pleasures; and
therefore he was constrained to exclaim and cry out; o Lord, depart a little
from me, for the frailty of my body, is not able to sustain the greatness of
thy delights. O admirable goodness, o unmeasurable sweetness of this supreme
Lord, which is with so large an hand communicated to his creatures, that the
strength and valor of their minds, is unable to carry the abundance of so
great joy. Therefore with this heavenly drunkenness all the senses of the soul
are brought a sleep: this does bring the sleep of peace and life, by this
the soul is lifted up above it self, it knows, loves, and tastes more,
then it could by her natural essence. A similitude.
Hence it is that as water set over fire, when it does wax hot, as though it
had forgot the own proper nature (seeing that all heavy things are carried
downwards) boyleth and swells aloft, imitating the nature and lightness of the
fire, by whose force it is hoysted and elevated with that motion: so also the
soul inflamed with that heavenly fire, is exalted above it self, is whirled
about with a certain force, and is carried up to heaven, whence that fire is
sent; it boyleth with a most seruent desire of God, and with a most vehement
force runs into his embrace: it stretches out it self, and lifts up her
arms on high, trying, if she can fly unto him whom she loves. But when she
sees that she cannot come unto him, she cease not to desire him; Spiritual
languorment.
and when she knows that she is frustrated of her desire, yet one comfort
does yet remain, to send into heaven sighs and groans fetched from the bottom
of the heart, and to say with the Spouse in the Canticles; Cant, 5.
I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem; if you find my beloved, that you tell
him that I am sick of love. Which kind of languishment, the Saints do say to
spring of that, that man is hindered, and cannot bring the unmeasurable desire
of his heart to his wished end and purpose. Do not destroy thy self, says a
certain Doctor, for this impatient desire; for this languishment is not
deadly, but for the glory of God, John, 11,
that the son of God may be glorified by it.

But what tongue can eloquently and learnedly enough utter the greatness of
these delights, which the friends of God enjoy in that flourishing pageant of
Solomon, or bed curiously wrought of the wood of Libanon, whose pillars are
of silver, and the pauement of gold? This is the place of the spiritual
marriages, which therefore is called a bed, because it is a place of rest and
love; I say a place of perfect rest, of lively sleep, and of celestial
pleasures: which how great they are, none can know, but those that have learned
by experience.

Conjectures of the greatness of the spiritual delights. 1.
But we may attain to some knowledge and science of these things, out of most
weighty and pregnant conjectures: for he that diligently considers the
greatness of the goodness, and love of the son of God, who for the love of
mankind underwent so unheard of reproaches and torments, he shall understand
that it is impossible, that it should be difficult and hard to come by, that
we seek for here, when as that is altogether nothing, in comparison of them.
What will he not do for the righteous, who has done such things for the
unrighteous? what friendship will he not show to his friends, who has
vnder-gone so cruel punishments for his enemies? This is somewhat disclosed,
and bewrayed unto us in the Canticles, where so many fair and loving speeches,
so many delights are read of between the Bridegroom and the Bride, who is the
Church, or any soul under the estate of grace; where so many loving and
amiable words are spoken one to the other, as no eloquence, no love can feign
or imagine greater or more loving.

We have another conjecture in respect of men, I say of righteous men, and true
lovers of God. For if thou narrowly siftest and look into their hearts, thou
shall find there a seruent desire, and a serious meditation, by what manner of
means they may chiefly serve their Lord GOD, and that for his love, if it
might be, they would be cut into a thousand pieces; at the least, that they
might please and gratulate him in some matter, which they knew might be
grateful and acceptable unto him, of whom they are so dearly loved, and are
daily laden with such heaps of so many benefits, recreated with so many
solaces; and governed with so great providence. Tell me now, if man, who is a
creature so unfaithful, and unapt to any good, come to this degree of
faithfulness with God, what will he do again to man, whose goodness, whose
charity, and whose faithfulness is infinite? If his property be, that he is
holy with the holy, Psalm, 18,
and good with the good; and the goodness of man come to so great perfection,
whetherto (I pray thee) shall the goodness of God proceed? If God strive with
the good in goodness, how great I pray thee, shall that excellency be in
this glorious striving? And if, as we have spoken a little before, a righteous
man does wish to be dismembered, and to be pulled into a thousand pieces, because
that he burns with the love of God, at least that he might please God? what
will not GOD himself do, that he may cherrish this righteous man, and do
good unto his friend, that he might comfort him whom he loves? This can
neither be expressed with the tongues of men, nor be apprehended with the
understanding; wherefore it is said of the Prophet, Esaias, 64,
Neither that the eye has seen, nor the ear has heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for them that fear him.
Which is not only to be understood of the blessings of glory, 1, Cor, 2.
but of those, which are of grace, as Saint Paul testifies.

Does it now appear unto thee, Virtue has her delights.
my brother, that the way of Virtue has her delights and pleasures? Do thou
think, that all the allurements of the lovers of this world, may be compared
with these delights? What comparison can be between Christ and Belial? light
and darkness? earthly delights and heavenly pleasures? the enticements of the
flesh, and the joys of the holy Ghost? To conclude, the delights of the
creatures, and the sweetness of the Creator? For it is most certain, that
things by how much they are more noble, and more excellent, by so much they
are more powerful to procure greater pleasures. Tell me what other thing the
Prophet meant, Psalm, 37,
when he said; A small thing unto the just man, is better then great riches
unto the wicked. Psalm, 84,
And in another place: A day in thy courts, is better then a thousand
other-where: I had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my GOD, then to
dwell in the Tabernacles of wickedness. To be brief, what other thing mean
those words of the Spouse in the Canticles; Cant, 1,
Thy breasts are better then Wine? and a little after, We will rejoice and be
glad in thee, being mindful of thy breasts above wine? That is, mindful of
the most sweet milk of thy consolations and comforts, with which thou
refreshest, and nourishest at thy breasts thy spiritual children; which is
sweeter, and more pleasant then all wine. By that wine he understands not
material wine, (as neither in the breast of God we know that there is milk)
nor the delights and joys of the world, such as the whore in the Revelation
begins to her lovers, Apoc, 17,
sitting upon many waters, and having a golden cup in her hand full of
abomination, and of the filthiness of her fornication, making drunken and
perverting the judgment of all them that dwell in Babylon, least they should
foresee their destruction, and repent them of their wickedness.

How the righteous are refreshed in their prayers after a singular manner, with
these divine consolations.
IF in prosecuting this matter thou shall ask me, in what matter the righteous
chiefly enjoy these consolations, of which we have hitherto spoken, God
himself will make answer unto thee by the mouth of his Prophet; Esaias. 56, The
pleasure of the righteous, is felt in their prayers
Also the strangers that cleave unto the Lord to serve him, and to love the
Name of the Lord, and to be his servants: every one that keeps the Sabbath
and polluteth it not, and embraces my covenant, them will I bring to mine holy
mountain, and make them joyful in mine house of prayer. For in this exercise
GOD especially and particulerly rejoices his Elect. For as Laurentius
Iustinianus in a certain prayer, says, the hearts of the righteous are
inflamed with the love of their Creator, Of ye chaste wedlock of the Word, and
of the soul. c. 22.
and are oftentimes lifted above themselves, and do think that they are in
the company of Angels, and there in the presence of the Creator, they sing,
love, breathe, praise, sorrow, joy, eat and are hungry, drink and are a
thirst, and by every way contend to be transformed into their Lord, whom they
do contemplate by faith, worship by humility, seek by desires, and enjoy by
love. Then they shall acknowledge how true it is of our Savior, John, 17.
That they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves. Which as a river of peace
is diffused and dispersed through all the powers of the soul, illuminating the
understanding, rejoicing the will, renewing the memory, and gathering all her
cogitations to God: there they embrace him with the arms of love, and have I
know not what in them; they desire to hold him with all their strength,
neither will they that he should depart from them.

And as Jacob, Gene, 32,
who strove with the Angel, would not let him depart; so the heart after his
manner strives with the Divine sweetness, neither will let it depart, but
valiantly keeps it, as a thing, in which he has found all that he sought
for, and desired; and says with S. Peter in the mount: Math, 17.
Lord, it is good for us to be here. The soul placed in this estate, very
well understands the phrase and right idiome or propriety of the book of
the Canticles, but especially it tuneth and accenteth that most sweet song;
Cant, 2,
His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me. And,
Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples: for I am sick of love. Then
the soul set on fire with that divine flame, greatly desires to be
dissolved, and to be delivered out of this prison, tears are her bread day and
night, as long as this deliverance is deferred. Death is her wish, and life her
patience. Without intermission she repeateth that of the Canticles; Cant, 8,
O that thou werest as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother, I
would find thee without, I would kiss thee, the^ they should not despise me.
Then wondering at herself she thinks, after what manner these treasures have
been hid all the time past, and seeing all men capable of so great good, she
desires to go into all streets and highways, and to cry out to all men, and
to say; Whether have ye, ye fools and unwise? What seek ye? Why do ye
not hasten? Why do ye not contend, that ye may enjoy this blessing? Psalm, 34,
Taste and see, how sweet the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in him.
For after that she has tasted of the spiritual sweetness, all flesh is
unsavory unto her, all society is a prison unto her, all solitariness shall
seem a Paradise: and her delight shall be to cleave unto the Lord, whom she
loves. All honor shall be a burden, all household government, and disposing of
riches, shall be to her a kind of martyrdom. She shall not suffer any thing,
either in heaven or in earth to disturb her pleasures; and therefore she will
watch, that no external cogitations or cares enter into her heart. There shall
be but one love unto her, one desire, she shall love all things in one, and
shall love one thing in all. Very well said the Prophet, Who^ have I in heaven
but thee? Psalm, 73.
and I have desired none in the earth with thee. My flesh fails, and mine
heart also: but GOD is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever.

He that comes to this happiness, he thinks not that he has any more an
obscure knowledge of divine things, The change of the righteous.
but he supposes that he does see with other eyes: for he feels those
motions and those changes in his heart, which are as infallible arguments and
most firm testimonies of the truth of his faith. When the day is stormy, and
brings tediousness, he desires a quiet night, that he may pour out his
soul before the Lord, and that he may pass the night with God. No night is
too long, yea that which is the longest, seems to be the shortest. How a
long night is to be passed.
If it be a clear night, he lifts up his eyes, that he may contemplate and
behold the beauty of heaven, the splendor of the stars and Moon, and all
these things he considers of with new eyes, and with new joy far different
from the former. He considers of them, as Images of the beauty of his
Creator, as glasses of his glory, as messengers and interpretors, who declare
his majesty, as testimonies of perfection, which is in him; as gyfts which the
Bridegroom sends to his Bride, to continue and increase love, even to that
day, in which he shall take her with his hand, and in his heavenly palace
shall solemnize with her that everlasting marriage.

The whole world seems one book unto him, which speaks of the wonders of
God, one Epistle which he sends to his beloved, and one instrument of his
love. These be the nights, my brother, of the lovers of God, this the sleep,
which they sleep. Therefore with this sweet and amiable humming and
murmuring, and with this acceptable and delightful harmony of the creatures,
the quiet soul is brought to bed, and begins to sleep that sleepelesse
sleep, Cant. 5.
of which is written, I sleep, and my heart watches. When as therefore this
most sweet Bridegroom sees his spouse sleeping in his arms, he keeps and
preserves her in that living and vital sleep, and commands that none do
awake her, Cant. 2.
saying, I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds
of the field, that ye stir not up, nor waken my love until she please. Tell
me, what nights seem these unto thee? What night of the children of this
world can be more sweet or pleasant? Who at this time walk, laying snares, and
setting nets for the chastity of virgins, and innocent Matrons, that they may
destroy their good names, and their own souls, rushing both body and soul
into destruction, heaping and storing up for themselves the wrath of God,
against the day of the wrath of God, and their own perdition?

Of their comforts and consolations who first begin to serve God, and are
Punies and Nouices in his School.
TO all things which hitherto have been spoken, perhaps thou will ahnswere
with one objection, saying: these consolations and blandishments, which we
have hitherto handled, are not common to all, but proper unto the perfect: but
that one may become perfect, many things are required. It is true, that these
belong to such men: yet our most kind Lord, by the sweetness of his blessing
does meet with them, who first begin; giving unto them at the first, as unto
children, milk, and afterward teaching them to eat bread, and more solid
meats. Does not that solemn day come into thy mind, Luke, 15.
which the father celebrated for his prodigal child? Do thou not know of
the feast, and the guess invited? Art thou ignorant of the music and
rejoicing, that there was made? What do these things mean, but to signify
the spiritual joy, with which the soul is delighted, when she sees her self
brought out of Egypt, and delivered from the hand of Pharao, and from the
servitude of the devil? How shall not that pleasant banquet be prepared for a
servant made free? How shall he not inuit all creatures, that they may meet
together, and with him give thanks to his deliverer? How shall not he sing
first, and thereby also inuit others, Exodus 15.
saying: Let us sing unto the Lord; for he has triumphed gloriously, the
horse and him that rode upon him, has he overthrown in the Sea? Which thing
if it be not so, where is the providence of God, which provides for every
creature most perfectly according to his nature, fragility, age, and capacity?
For it is certain that men yet carnal, and drowned in the world, cannot tread
this unusual and unfrequented path; neither tread the world under their feet,
unless the Lord stretch forth his hand, and prevent them by the like sweetenes
and delectablenes. It pertayneth therefore to the divine providence (when it is
determined to take man from the world) to prepare this way, and to make it
plain, The entrance and beginnings of conversion have their pleasures.
that this new trauailer may walk more easily by it, those difficulties being
taken away, which might terrify him, and draw him back to the world. A most
excellent and plain figure of this way is that, by which the Lord brought the
children of Israel into the Land of promise, of which way thus writes Moses;
Exodus, 13.
When Pharaoh had let the people go, God carried them not by the way of the
Philistims Country, though it were nearer: for God said, least the people
repent when they see war, and turn again to Egypt. The same providence that
then God used, in bringing his people out of Egypt, into the Land of promise,
he now uses in bringing those to heaven, whom he first takes out of this
world.

We must know in this place, that although the comforts and delights of the
perfect are very great, and excellent, yet so great is the goodness and piety of
our God, especially toward little ones, and young beginners, that he
respecting their poverty, he himself does help them to build them a new
house, and considering that they are conversant among many occasions of
sinning, and that their passions are not as yet mortified, that they might
carry away the victory, that they might be delivered from the violence of their
flesh, that they might be driven from the milk of the world, and be tied in
such straight bonds of love, that they should not return into Egypt and to
their fathers house: he fills them with a joy and consolation so powerful,
that although they be but beginners, and that they have made but an entrance,
yet they have according to their proportion, a certain likelihood and
similitude, of the delights and joy of those that be perfect. Tell me, I pray
thee, what other thing would God signify by those feasts of the old Testament,
when he says that the first and last day should be of equal worship and
solemnity? L^uit. 23. Number. 28.
The six days between were of less solemnity, but the first and the last
were beyond the rest famous, and had their peculier prerogatives. What other
thing is this, then a shadow and an image of this we speak of? Upon the first
day the Lord commanded that the same solemnity should be kept, In the beginning
and in the end of the conversion there is a solemn feast.
which was upon the last; that we may understand that in the beginning of the
conversion, and in the end of the perfection, the Lord does celebrate a
solemn feast for all his servants, in these considering their proceedings, in
the other, their great necessity: using toward these, justice with mercy, and
toward the other, using only grace or mercy; to one giving the reward of
Virtue, to the other help in need. When trees blosome and flourish, and when
they have their ripe fruit, they are most fair to the eye. The day wherein the
spousage is contracted, and wherein the marriage is solemnized, and the wedding
consumated, are more solemn and renowned then the rest. In the beginning the
Lord does affiance, and betroth the soul to him, but when he takes her into
his house, he makes a feast for her at his own cost and charges, and that
feast is not conformable or aunswerable to the merrits and deserts of the
Bride, but to the riches of the Bridegroom, sending all things, and all
provision out of his own houses, Cant, 8.
and saying: We have a little sister, and she has no breasts. Therefore it is
necessary that he nourish his own creature, with the milk of an other.
Wherefore the same Bride talking with her Bridegroom, Cant. 1.
says, The young damsels have loved thee. He does not say the women or
Matrons, which are souls founded and rooted in virtue; but he says young
damsels, young maids, which are souls, which first begin to open their eyes,
and to look upon this new light: these, says the Spouse, have loved thee. For
such are wont to feel great motives and pricks in the beginning of their
conversion, as Thomas Aquinas shows in a certain work of his. Whence joy
and carefulnes arises in the nouices of Christ.
Amongst other causes of this alacrity and ioyfulnes, he says that this is
one, the nouelty of their estate, of their love, of their light and knowledge
of divine things, which then they know, but did not know before. For the
nouelty of that knowledge does beget in them exceeding admiration and love,
joined with incredible sweetness and gratitude, which they exhibit unto him, of
whom they have received so great good things, and of whom they are delivered
and freed out of so great darkness. A similitude.
We see by experience that a man, when he enters into any famous City, or
royal Palace, the first day he walks wondering, his mind hanging in
suspense by reason of the nouelty of things, that there he sees: but when he
has stayed longer in that place, and has seen the same things oftener, that
admiration is diminished, and that pleasure lesned, with which he did see them
at first. The same thing happens to them at the first, when as they enter
into this new City of grace, by reason of the nouelty of things, which by
little and little are uncovered and laid open in it. Therefore it is not to be
meruailed at, if the Nouices and Punies of piety, do feel greater feruours in
their souls, then those that be ancient: for the nouelty of the light and
knowledge of divine things, Luke, 15.
does work in them a greater alteration. Hence it is that Saint Bernard has
very well noted, that the elder son did not lie, when he said: Behold, so
many years have I served thee, neither ever have I omitted thy commandment,
yet never did thou give me a Kid, that I might banquet with my friends. But
after that this thy son, who has spent and consumed his substance with
harlots, came, thou killest the fatted Calfe. A similitude.
New love works like new wine, and water in a Cauldron is so long quiet,
until it begins to feel the heat of the fire: then forthwith it boyleth,
swells, and is carried aloft. But afterward, although the heat be more
intense and augmented, yet the water is more quiet, and not so swelling,
leaping, and bubling up, as it was, when it first began to wax hot. The Lord
most courteously and most amiably does embrace them, who first enter into his
house. The first day they eat with all pleasant allurements, and all things
are delightsome and acceptable. Also the Lord does himself toward these
younglings and incipients, as Merchants are wont, who first bring out a show of
their merchandise, that by that the buier may estimate the whole thing, and
thereby be the more willing, and be sooner drawn on to buy. The love with
which parents embrace their young children, although it is not greater then
that, by which they love those that be elder, yet it is more tender and more
fair and pleasant. These must walk alone, the other are carried in their
arms, these are sent to labor and take pains, the other are nourished
deliciously, and left to do what they will: these unless they get their
living, they often are hungry, the other being idle and doing nothing, are
desired and entreated to eat, yea, meat is put into their mouths.

Out of this friendship and sweet fellowship of the Lord, a spiritual joy at
the length arises in them, of which the Prophet speaks, Psalm, 65,
Thou waterest abundantly their furrows, thou multipliest their generations,
and their growing and braunching shall prosper and rejoice through thy dewing
and dropping upon them. What generations be these? What branching and growing,
and what dewing and showring, unless the dew of the divine grace, by which the
spiritual plants are watered, which newly have been transplanted into the
Lords Orchard? Of these therefore, says the Prophet, that they are rejoiced
and refreshed with the dew and showers of his water, which is sent from above:
that he might signify the great joy, which they partake in the nonage of this
new visitation, and celestial benefit. But least thou should think,
because he calls this friendship, or grace a dew or small shower, that
therefore according to the signification of the name, it is little and small,
which is given to young beginners: Saint Augustine says, they drink of the
river of Paradise, one drop of which is greater then the Ocean, which alone is
able to quench the thirst of the whole world.

The argument of them does not overthrow this, Why the wicked do not feel the
sweetness of God.
who say, that they do not feel these joys and consolations. For if the
palate, which is corrupted and distempered by ill humors, does not taste the
sweetness of meat (for that which is sweet seems bitter, and that which is
bitter, sweet) what marvel is, it if he that has his soul corrupted with
the worst humors of vices and inordinate affections, and so accustomed to the
fleshpots of Egypt, that he loatheth Manna, and the bread of Angels? Purge thy
palate with the tears of repentance, and that being purged, thou shall taste
and see, how sweet the Lord is. If these things be so, tell me, my brother, I
pray thee, what be the goods of this world, if they be compared with these,
they shall not scarcely seem dirt and dung? Blessedness two fold.
The Doctors teach that there is two kinds of blessedness, one imperfect, the
other perfect: one present, the other to come: one of the way, the other of the
Country, this the blessed enjoy in glory, the other the righteous enjoy in
this world. What other thing is to be wished of thee, then that here thou may
begin to be happy, and that thou may receive in this life, the pledge, and
earnest of the divine espousals, which there are solemnized by words for the
present, but here they begin by words for the time to come? O man, says a
learned Divine, seeing thou may live in this Paradise and enjoy a treasure so
inestimable, go and sell all that thou have, and purchase for thy self this
precious and fertile possession; especially seeing that it is not dear: for it
is Christ that sells it, yea, rather which gives it freely. Do not defer
this purchase to the time to come: Time is very precious.
for one minute of this time, which now vainly slideth from thee is more
precious then the treasures of the whole world. Although this purchase at the
length be given unto thee, yet be thou sure, that with great grief thou shall
complain, that thou have wanted it so long: and sorrowing with Saint
Augustine, In the 31. chapter of his Soliloquies.
thou will say, I have loved thee to late, and after the time that I should, o
thou beauty so ancient, and so new; I have loved thee in the evening. This
blessed man always lamented his slownes, although at the length he was not
frustrated of his crown. Therefore attend thou diligently, least thou at one
time or other complaynest with the like sorrowing, that now by thy negligence
thou do loose those blessings, which the righteous enjoy in this life by
grace, and the blessed in the other by glory.

Of the fifth privilege of Virtue, which is the tranquillity and peace of a
good conscience, which the righteous enjoy: and of the torment and inward
biting, with which the wicked and ungodly are tortured. CHAP. XVII.
AFter the joy and consolation of the holy Ghost, an other joy does succeed,
which the righteous have from the testimony of a good conscience. For the more
evident understanding of this privilege, we must know that the Divine
providence, (which bountifully provides, that all the creatures have those
things that are necessary for their preservation and perfection) when it
wills that a reasonable creature should be perfect, has provided most
plentifully and copiously, that not any of those things should be wanting,
which belong unto his perfection. And because the perfection of this creature,
consists in the perfection of his understanding and will, which are two of
the chiefest and principallest faculties of our soul, one of which is
perfected by Science, In what thing consists ye perfection of man.
the other by Virtue, God has created universal principles of all sciences in
our understanding, whence their conclusions proceed: and in the will he has
ordained a seminary or seed plotte of all virtues: for he has put in it a
certain natural inclination to all good, and a dread or horror of that which
is evil: so that the will naturally rejoices in the one, and is heavy in the
other, murmuring against that, as against a thing which it naturally abhors.

Which inclination is so natural, and so effectual, that although by chance
it be weakened through a daily custom of ill living, yet it cannot utterly
perrish or altogether be extinguished. We have a figure of this in the book of
Job; in each of the calamities and losses of this man of God, always there was
a servant remaining, which brought him word of the misfortune and misery. After
the same manner this servant is never wanting, nor ever leaves him who
sins. The Doctors do name this servant, the Keeper or Watcher over the
conscience, which in all shypwracks escapes safe, and among all the dead, it
only dies not, which cease not to present before the eyes of the wicked,
the good which they have omitted, when they sinned, and the evil which they
have committed. In which thing, the care and love of the Divine providence,
shines with a wonderful beauty, by which it loves and embraces virtue,
after that it has appointed for her a perpetual stirrer up, that she sleep
not; a perpetual Preacher that never keeps silence, and a master, who
always directs her to all good.

Epictetus.
The Stoicke Philosopher Epictetus, very well understood this, who said; Our
Parents delivered us, being children, to a Schoolemaister or Tutor, which
might attend us, that we should not be hurt: but God has committed men to
be kept of their own conscience seated within them, which conscience and
Keeper is not to be contemned, because it both would displease God, and we
should become enemies to our own conscience.

The conscience is the Master and Teacher of good men, but a tormentor and
^orturer of the wicked,
Even as this conscience is, as it were a Teacher and Master of good men: so on
the contrary part, it is a tormenter and torturer of the wicked, which
afflicts and excruciateth them inwardly, and without intermission accuses
sinners for their sins committed, and mingleth Wormwood with all their
pleasures, insomuch, that scarce they bite of the Garlic of Egypt, but a
tear does fall from their eyes. This is one of those plagues, with which the
Lord in Esaias does threaten that he will torment the wicked, saying; And I will
make Babylon a possession to the Hedgehog. Esaias, 14,
For by the just judgment of God, the heart of the wicked, which here is
understood by Babylon, is given into the power of the Hedghog, that thornie and
pricking creature, that is, into the hands of the devil, and also into the
power of the thorns and pricks of the conscience, which sins do bring with
them: which as sharp thorns and needles, do thrust through and rent the heart
of man. But if thou ask me what be these thorns, I say, that one is the
filthiness and enormity of sin, The first thorn.
that of it own nature is so abominable, that a certain Philosopher said; If
I knew that God would pardon me, and that men were ignorant of it, yet I should
blush to sin, for the only filthiness of sin. Plato.


Another thorn is, The second thorn.
when the sin brings with it an offense or injury to another man; for then
as it were the blood of Abel is represented to his eyes, which cries for
vengeance before the Lord; there is an example of this in the books of the
Machabees: 1. Match, 6,
all the injuries, and all the evils which Antiochus the King had done at
Jerusalem, came into his mind, he being now at the point of death; by the
which remembrance he came into such tribulation and anguish, and into those
floods of heaviness and sorrow, that he said, And now do I remember the
evils that I have done at Jerusalem: for I took all the vessels of gold and
of silver that were in it, and sent to destroy the inhabitants of Judah without
cause. I know that these troubles are come upon me, for the same cause, and
behold, I must die with great sorrow in a strange Land. The third thorn.
Infamy is another thorn, which follows sin, whicha sinner knows of will
he nill he; and therefore he cannot but grieve: for naturally men wish well
unto themselves, and are afflicted with the contrary. Seneca in his 3. book of
benefits, chap. 17. Certain other thorns.
For there is not a more grievous punishment, as a certain Wiseman says, then
public hate. An other thorn is the necessary fear of death, the
incertainty of life, the fear of rendering an account, and the dread and
horror of everlasting punishment. Every one of these are several thorns,
which grievously pierce and prick the heart of the ungodly: insomuch, that as
often as the memory of death comes, on one side so certain, on the other so
incertaine, he cannot but be sad and heavy, as says Ecclesiasticus. For he
sees that day, which shall avenge all his iniquity, and bring an end to his
vices and pleasures. Neither is there any man, who can altogether cast the
remembrance of this from him, seeing that nothing is so natural to a mortal
man, as to die.

Hence it is, The fear of an evil conscience.
that being in any dangerous estate, he quaketh and trembles through fear,
being doubtful whether he shall die, or not, for the vehemency of his own
love, and the perturbation of fear, makes him to fear a shadow, and to
dread, where there is no such cause. Therefore, if in the Land destructions and
common infirmities do arise, as the plague, Earthquakes, thunder and
lightning, a sinner straight-waies fears, and is troubled, and is altered
through the fear of an evil conscience, persuading himself that these shall
light upon him. All these thorns together prick, goare and thrust through
the hearts of wicked men, as very largely remembers one of Jobs friends, Job,
15,
The wicked man, says he, is continually as one that trauaileth of child, and
the number of years is hid from the Tyrant: A sound of fear is in his ears,
and in his prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him. This sound, is the
clamors and cries of an ill conscience, which continually biteth and accuses
him: in the midst of peace he fears the deceits of his enemies, for although
he lives peaceably, and content with that he has, yet the fear of an evil
conscience is never absent. He believes not that he may return out of
darkness into light: that is, he cannot believe that it is possible, that at any
time he should be freed from the darkness of this miserable estate in which he
lives, and obtain that peace and tranquillity of a good conscience, which as
a most pleasant light rejoices, and illuminateth all the corners of the soul.
He sees the sword on every side of him, which way soever he turns his
eyes, he sees a naked sword before him, insomuch, that when he moves
himself to get his bread, when he sits at the table, where men are wont
to be most merry, a thousand fears are present with him, for he knows that
the day of darkness is prepared at hand: that is, of death, judgment, and
definitive or final sentence, insomuch that Affliction and anguish shall make
him afraid: they shall prevail against him as a King ready to the battle,
foote-men and horsemen, shall hemme him about.

After this manner this friend of Job does describe the cruel torment, which
those miserable and wretched men do suffer in their hearts. For fear, as the
Philosopher says, does wait upon the wicked, by the Divine dispensation.
Not unlike to this, is that of Solomon, The wicked flies, when no man
pursues, Prou, 18. In his second book of Confessions.
but the righteous is confident as a Lion, and without fear. Saint Augustine
comprehends all this in few words; Thou have commanded o Lord, and truly it
is so, that every inordinate soul should be a punishment unto it self. That
for the most part is seen in all things. All disordered things are evil.
Similitudes.
For what is found in the world inordinate or disordered, which naturally is
not unquiet, troubled, and restless? Bones out of joint, and removed from
their natural place, what griefs do they bring? That element that is without
his Sphere, what violence does it suffer? the humors of man's body when they
exceed their quantity, and natural temperature, what infirmities do they not
bring? Seeing that therefore it is so proper unto a reasonable creature to live
orderly and according to reason, if he whose life is out of order and square,
his nature does suffer and is tormented: Not without cause, says Job, Who has
resisted God, and has had peace? Saint Gregory has commented upon these words
thus, He who wonderfully has created all things, Gregory in the 9. book of
his Morals. cap. 2.
he has ordained that the things he has created should agree within
themselves. He infers out of this, that as often as the Creator is resisted,
so often that agreement of peace is dissipated and broken: because, says he,
they cannot be orderly, who loose the disposition of the high government. For
they that are subject to God, cannot remain in quiet, if they suffer confusion
in themselves: because they find no peace in themselves, they resist and
contradict that which comes from above from the Author of peace. So that high
Angelical spirit, who being subject unto God, might have continued in his
high estate, suffered the repulse and foil of himself: because through the
unquietness of his own nature he wandered out of himself, and out of his order.
So the first parent of mankind, because he resisted the precept of his founder
and Author, he presently felt the contumely of his own flesh: and because he
would not by obedience be subject to his Creator, he was prostrated and cast
down under himself, and forthwith lost the peace of his body. This says
Saint Gregory.

That therefore is a torment, in which the wicked live by the just judgment of
God: and it is not the least misery of those punishments, which they suffer in
this world. Almost all the Fathers of the Church do testify as much, and
among others Saint Ambrose; Ambrose of duties.
what greater punishment, says he, then the wound of the inward conscience?
Is not this more to be flyed then death? then loss? then banishment? then
sickness? then sorrow? Isidore says, A man may fly all things, but his own
heart: Isidor. in Syn.
for he cannot depart or leave himself; for whether so ever he goes, the
guiltines of his conscience does not leave him. And in an other place; No
punishment is more grievous, then the punishment of conscience. In the 2. book
of his Soliloquies.
But will thou never be sad or heavy, live well. A secure and safe mind does
lightly sustain sadness. A good life has always joy: but a guilty conscience
is always in torment. A guilty mind is never secure; for an evil mind is
tortured with the stings and pricks of the conscience. This is so true, that
also the very Ethnic Philosophers not acknowledging, or believing the
punishments, by which our faith punishes wicked men, through all their works
have confessed the same thing. Seneca Epist 43.
Hear Seneca; what profits to hide thy self, and fly the eyes and ears
of men? A good conscience calls company together, but an ill conscience is
fearful, and trembles in solitarines. If the things that thou do be
honest, let all men know: if dishonest, what skilleth it if no man know? O thou
wretch and miserable, if thou contemnest this witness; for thy conscience, (as
it is in the Proverb,) is a thousand witnesses. The same Author says also in
another place, The greatest punishment that sin can be punished with, In his
book of manners.
is, to have committed it. In another place repeating the same thing, Fear
(says he) no man more, that knows of thy sins, then thy self. For thou
may fly another, but thy self thou can never. For wickedness is the
punishment of it self. Cicero also in a certain^ Oration, Cicero in his
Oration for Milo.
reasoning of this matter, says; Great is the force of the conscience on both
sides: that they fear nothing which have offended nothing; and they that have
offended, think always that punishment is before their eyes.

This then is one of the torments with which the wicked and ungodly are
incessantly afflicted and tortured: which begins in this life, and shall be
continued in the other: for this is that immortal and never dying worm, as
says Esaias, which wringeth and gnaweth without end the consciences of the
wicked: this is for one depth to call another depth, as says Isidore; when as
sinners pass from the judgment of their own conscience, to the judgment of
eternal damnation.

Of the joy of a good conscience, with which the righteous are greatly
delighted.
FRom this scourge, from this tribulation, and from this little hell (if I may
so call it) righteous and good men are freed and delivered. For they have not
these pricks and stings of the conscience; but they rejoice and delight in the
flowers and most sweet fruits of Virtue, which the holy Ghost has planted in
their souls, as in an earthly Paradise, and in an Orchard well trimmed and
tilled, in which he also is delighted. So Saint Augustine speaks, A peaceable
and a quiet conscience is a Paradise.
writing upon Genesis: yea, in man himself the joy of a good conscience is
Paradise: Whereupon the Church also in the Saints living temperately, godly,
and justly, is rightly called a Paradise, abounding with the affluence of
graces, and chaste delights. In his book also of Catechizing the ignorant, he
says thus, Thou who seek for true rest (which after this life is promised
to Christians) here thou may also taste of it sweetly, amongst the most
bitter troubles of this life, if thou shall love his commandments, who has
promised it. For soon thou shall perceive and feel that the fruits of
righteousn es are more sweet, then those of iniquity: and more truly and more
pleasantly thou shall rejoice of a good conscience amongst troubles, then of an
ill conscience amongst pleasures. Hitherto Augustine. Out of whose words thou
may easily gather, A similitude.
that the joy of a good conscience is so much and so great, that as honey is
not only sweet of itself, but also it makes that sweet, which before was
not sweet: so a good conscience is so merry and so pleasant, that it makes all
the troubles and tribulations of this world seem pleasant and delightful.
Furthermore as we have said, that the filthiness and enormity of sin does
torment the wicked, so on the other side, the beauty and dignity of Virtue,
does make merry and comfort the good: Psalm, 19,
as in manifest words the Prophet testifies, The judgments of the Lord (which
are his divine commandments) are truth, they are righteous altogether. And
more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold: sweeter also then
honey, and the honey comb. But how the kingly Prophet was delighted in keeping
the commandments of the Lord, he testifies of himself in another Psalm,
saying; I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, Psalm 119.
as in all riches. The which sentence of the father his son Solomon
confirms; It is joy (says he) to the just to do judgment, Prou 21,
but destruction shall be to the woorkers of iniquity. Which judgment is no
other thing then Virtue her self, and that a man should do as he ought. Which
joy although it rises also from other causes, yet especially it arises from
the dignity and beauty of Virtue, which (as Plato says) is beauty inestimable.

To be brief, the fruit and sweetness of a good conscience is so great,
Ambrose in his 2, book of Duties.
that Saint Ambrose in his books of Duties, is not afraid to say, that in it
consists the happiness of the righteous in this life. His words be, So great
is the renown and splendor of honesty, that the tranquillity of conscience,
and the security of innocence make the life blessed and happy. Moreover, even
as the Philosophers without the light of faith, knew the torments of an evil
conscience; so they knew the joys of a good conscience. In the 3, book of his
Tusculane Questions. In the 2, book of his Tusculane Questions. Socrates. Bias.
Seneca.
Amongst others, Cicero in the books of his Tusculane Questions, speaks
thus; The age and time of man passed honestly and virtuously, does bring so
great comfort, that no grief of mind does touch them that have so lived, or
if it do, it is but lightly. The same man also says in an other place; Virtue
has no larger or fayrer a Theater then the conscience. Socrates being asked
who could live without perturbation? He answered, He that is guilty to
himself of no evil. Bias, when he was asked, what wanted fear in this life?
He said; A good conscience. Seneca also says in a certain Epistle; A wise man
is never without joy: and that proceeds from a good conscience. Out of which
it is manifest, how excellently these agree with that sentence of Solomon,
Prou. 15.
All the days of the afflicted are evil: but a good conscience is a
continual feast. A greater thing could not be spoken in so few words. By which
the wiseman signifies, that as they that sit at a banquet, are made merry by
the variety of meats and dainty cates, and by the presence of their friends,
with whom they live: so the righteous are made merry by the testimony of a good
conscience, and by the sweet savor of the divine presence; from which they
have received and feel in their souls so evident a pledge of salvation. But
the difference is this, that the mirth of the banquets of this world are
bestiall and earthly: but this is celestial and for ever: that begins with
hunger, and ends with loathing; this begins with good life, and
perseuereth and ends with glory. But if the Philosophers have had this joy in
so great price and esteem, without hope of any other thing in the life to
come: how much more ought Christians to exult and rejoice, who know how great
good things the Lord has prepared for them, both in this life, and also in the
other?

Furthermore, The testimony of a good conscience, has fear mingled with it.
although this testimony ought not to be without a holy and religious fear,
yet this fear does not trouble or diminish that joy, but after an admirable
manner does strengthen, confirm, and comfort it, in whom it is. By which it
is insinuated unto us, that then our hope is more lawful and sound, when it
has this holy fear joined unto it, without which, hope shall be no hope, but
false presumption.

Behold, my brother, here is a new privilege, which the the righteous enjoy;
2, Cor. 1.
of which the Apostle speaks; Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience: that in simplicity and and godly pureness, and not in fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world.
These be the things that can be spoken of this privilege. But neither these,
nor many more suffice, to declare the excellency of it to that man, who has
not had experience of it himself. A similitude.
For the taste of any delicious meat, cannot be expressed or described with
words to him sufficiently, who heretofore has not tasted of it: Seeing that
without doubt this joy is so great, that oftentimes, when a godly man is much
afflicted and tormented, and casting his eyes about, no where sees any
comfort: yet turning his eyes into himself, and beholding the peace of
conscience, and the good testimony of it, he is fully strengthened, and filled
full of wonderful comfort. For he understands very well, that all other
things, (let them succeed as they will) do bring small profit: but a good
conscience is profitable for all things. And although no man can be sure and
certain of it, yet as the morning sun when it is scarcely risen, A
similitude,
and is not yet seen, enlightneth the world with the neerenesse of his
brightness: so a good conscience, although it be not fully and plainly known,
yet it rejoices and gladdeth the soul by her good testimony. Chrisostom in
his 25. homily of the right way.
This is so true, that Saint Chrysostom says; all abundance of grief and
trouble falling into a good conscience, does no otherwise perrish, and is
extinguished, then if a spark of fire should fall into the bottomless Ocean.

Of the sixth privilege of Virtue, which is the confidence and hope of the
Divine mercy, which the righteous rejoice in: and of the miserable and vain
trust and repose, in which the wicked live. CHAP. XVIII.
HOpe and Confidence does accompany and follow the peace and joy of a good
conscience, in which the righteous live, of which the Apostle speaks, Rom, 12.
Rejoicing in hope, patient in trouble: counsayling us to rejoice in hope, and
to have patience in trouble: for Hope tells us, that we have a strong helper,
and a bountiful rewarder. This is one of the chiefest jewels and treasuries of
a Christian life: this is the possession and patrimony of the sons of God;
this is the safe and secure haven, and true remedy of all the miseries of this
life. But we must here note (least perhaps we be deceived) that as there be
two kinds of faith, one dead, which brings forth no fruit, and this is the
faith of evil and wicked Christians: the other is a lively faith, full of
charity, and fruitful unto every good work, which the righteous have, which
leads unto life: Hope two fold.
so also there are two kinds of Hope or Confidence, one dead, which gives not
life unto the soul, neither strengthens it with her works, neither
comfort it in tribulations. Such is the hope which the wicked glory in. The
other is a lively hope (as the Apostle Peter calls it) which as it is a
thing that has life, 1, Peter, 1,
so also it brings forth the effects and fruits of life: which are to raise
up the mind, to comfort, to rejoice it, and to support it in that way, which
leads to heaven, and to recreate, refresh, and encourage it in the troubles
of this world: as that holy woman Susanna was strengthened and refreshed, of
whom it is written, that being already condemned, when she was led to the
place of execution, where she should have been stoned to death, she was not
discouraged, but she hoped in God, and her heart had sure affiance in the Lord.
Such was the hope of David, Psalm, 119,
when he said; O think upon thy servant as concerning thy Word, wherein thou
have caused me to put my trust: the same is my comfort in my trouble. Many and
marvelous be the effects of this lively hope, in that soul wherein it
dwells, and so many the more, by how much it more participateth of the love
of God, which gives life unto hope.

Of these effects the first is, that it strengthens a man in the way of
Virtue, Effects of true hope. 1.
through the hope of a reward: for the more sure and certain he has the
pledge and pawn of this reward, by so much more cheerfully he runs through
whatsoever tribulations of this world, as all the holy Doctors of the Church
confess with one mouth. Hope, says Saint Gregory, does raise up the soul
unto eternity, Gregory in the 6. book of his Morrals.
and therefore it feels no evils, which it outwardly bears. Origin says,
the hope of future blessings, does bring rest to those that labor: as to
those that contend in battle, the hope of victory and reward does mittigate
the grief of their wounds. In his 9. homily upon Exodus. Upon the 12. Psalm.
Saint Ambrose does subscribe unto this: Hope of profit, says he, does
steal away our labors, and does hide the fear of danger. Of the same mind
is Saint Jerome; All labor, and every work, says he, is wont to become
easy, and to be made light, Ierom in an Epistle.
when the reward of it is thought upon: and the hope of reward, is the solace
and comfort of the labor.

Saint Chrysostom is more copious in this point, In his 17. homily upon
Genesis.
Always, says he, the hope of future blessings, do make lighter the present
discommodities. Any body may see this in Merchants, who pass and sail over
the large and bondlesse Seas, and suffer shypwracks, Similies.
Pirates, and many other dangers, by which their hope is often frustrated,
neither yet do they so leave of, but they assay and try the same things again
and again. We also may say the same of Husbandmen: for when as they have
deeply furrowed the ground, and diligently have tilled it, and sown it,
oftentimes they are frustrated of their hope, either through drought, or too
much moisture, or through blasting, and some other calamity. Nevertheless,
they do not so leave of, but again, when the season approaches, they exercise
their husbandry. And in another place; Upon Saint Matthew.
If any man sets by a laborious life, let him despise and hate slothfulnes:
for if to Mariners the threatening billows and fearful waves of the Sea do
seem tolerable: if storms and winters are tolerable to Husbandmen, if
wounds and slaughters to Soldiers, if grievous blows and stripes seem light
and tolerable to champions, for the hope of temporal and perrishing
commodities: much more when heaven is prepared for a reward, we ought not to
esteem or account of these present troubles and afflictions. Exceedingly does
a promise and a blessed end mittigate the labors. Do not thou therefore, o
Christian, think or conjecture, that the way of Virtue is rough and sharp, but
look to the end of it. Be not deceived in beholding the pleasant way of vices,
but look to that downfall and destruction, that it leads thee to.

That holy man said very truly and well. Which of us wishes or desires to
walk in a way strowed with Roses, and planted with diverse flowers, if the
assured end of it be death? And who will refuse a rough and difficult way, that
leads unto life?

This hope does not only add courage unto us, to obtain our desired end; but
it encourages us in all the means, which are destinated to that end, and
generally in all our necessities, and in the miseries of this life. For by this
a man is helped in all his trouble; defended in dangers, he receives solace
in sorrows, aid in infirmities, sufficiency in all need: for by this we
obtain the favor and mercy of the Lord, which helps and aydeth us in all
affairs. Of all these we have most certain, and most evident pledges and
gages of holy Scriptures: but especially in David's Psalms. For there is
scarcely found any psalm, which does not commend unto us this virtue, and
which declares not unto us, the most noble fruits of it. For without all
doubt hope is a most rich treasury, and a very great consolation, which the
righteous have in this world. Therefore let no man think much, if we be more
long and prolixe in repeating the authorities of this place.

In the second book of the Chronicles, a certain Prophet says to King Asa;
2, Chro. 16.
The eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to strengthen them, that with a
perfect heart believe and hope in him. Jeremy speaks thus of this hope;
Lamen. 3,
O how good is the Lord, unto them that put their trust in him, and to the
soul that seeks after him. Esaias, 30,
And Esaias says, If ye return and be quiet, ye shall be safe, your strength
shall be in quietness and hope. By quietness in this place is understood, the
tranquillity and inward rest of the soul, in the midst of tribulations: which
is the effect of hope, which hurleth and casts forth all carfulness, and
inordinate anxietie, by that favor which it expects of the Divine mercy.
Not unlike to this, is that of Ecclesiasticus, Ye that fear the Lord, Ecclus.
2,
believe in him, and ye shall not be frustrated of your reward. Ye that fear
God, hope in him, and mercy shall come unto you for pleasure. Consider the old
generations of men, and mark them well, was there ever any one confounded that
put his trust in the Lord? And Solomon in his Proverbs says; Prou, 3,
Put thy trust in God with all thy heart, and lean not unto thine own wit. In
all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall order thy goings. Surely it is a
great furtherance unto hope, to have known the mercy of God, not only by
reading, but much more by experience. For a man hops through an assured
affiance, that he will profit him, who often has profited others. Psalm, 9,
Hence is that of the Psalm, They that know thy name will put their trust in
thee: for thou Lord, have never failed them that seek thee. Psalm, 31,
He says also in another psalm, My trust has been in the Lord: I will be
glad and rejoice in thy mercy. The effect of this hope, the same man
declares, when he says; Psalm, 32,
Who so puts his trust in the Lord, mercy embraces and compasses him on
every side. He says very well, embraces and compasses, that he might
signify, that it shall keep and guard him on every side, no otherwise then a
King is encompassed with his Guard, that he may be the more safe. In another
psalm he teaches the same thing more at large: Psalm, 40
I waited patiently, says he, for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my calling. He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the
mire and Clay: and set my feet upon the Rock, and ordered my goings. And
he has put a new song in my mouth: even a thanksgiving unto our GOD. Many
shall see it and fear: and shall put their trust in the the Lord. Blessed is
the man that has set his hope in the Lord, and turned not unto the proud,
and to such as go about with lies.

All these be the words of the Prophet, in which he also but also that there
is a new praise and a new thanksgiving put into our mouths, which the Prophet
insinuates, when he says; And he has put a new song in my mouth, etc. He
calls it a new song, which is sung for a new deliverance, with an unusual
and new affection of mirth. We shall not easily end this matter, if we should
allege all the verses, and sometimes whole Psalms, written of this matter.
For the ninety and one Psalm, and the hundredth and five and twenty are wholly
employed in commending this virtue unto us, and to describe the excellent
fruits of it, which they enjoy and joy in, who have their trust and confidence
in the Lord, and dwell under his protection. Saint Bernard writing upon the
ninth verse of the former Psalm: Bernard in his 9, Sermon upon the Psalm, Who
dwells.
Because thou o Lord art my hope: he says; Whatsoever therefore is to be done,
whatsoever is to be eschewed, whatsoever is to be borne, whatsoever is to be
wished, o Lord, thou art my hope. This is the only cause of all my promises,
this is the whole reason of mine expectation. Let one pretend merit, let him
boast that he has borne the heat of the day, let him say that he has fasted
twice a week, lastly let him brag that he is not like other men: but it is
good for me to cleave unto the Lord; and to put my trust in my Lord God. If
rewards be promised me, I will hope that I shall obtain them by thee; if wars
rise against me, if the world rages, if the wicked fret and sum, if the flesh
lust against the spirit, yet I will trust in thee. For to what end are we wise,
if we do not stick and cleave with all fervor and devotion of soul and
spirit to this solid, sound, perfect, and blessed hope, and cast away all
other miserable, vain, unprofitable, and seducing hopes? A little after the
same mellifluous Doctor by way of Dialogue, does thus reason: Faith says; In
his 20. Sermon upon the same Psalm.
Great and inestimable blessings are prepared of God, for those that serve him:
Hope says; those are kept for me: Charity says; I run unto them.

Behold my brother, thou do see how great be the fruits of this virtue, A
Catalogue of the effects of hope.
and profitable for what. Hope is as a safe Haven, to which the righteous
direct their course, so often as any storm of the world rages: it is as a
most strong shield, upon which all the darts of our enemies are received
without any wound: it is as a Storehouse for food, whether in the time of
famine, all the poor may come, and have bread. It is that tabernacle, cover,
and shadow, which the Lord does promise in Esaias, that he will be to his elect
a shadow to defend them from the heat of the day, and a defense from the
stormy tempest and from rain. That is, a safeguard from all the adversity and
prosperity of the world, To conclude, it is the medicine, and common remedy of
all our evils, and encumbrances. For it is certain, that whatsoever we hope
for of God justly, faithfully, and wisely, we shall obtain it, if it be
conducent and appertayning to our salvation. Cyprian in an Epistle to Don.
Therefore Cyprian calls the mercy of God, a fountain or well of all
blessings, that cannot be drawn dry, and our hope and trust a bucket or
vessel, in which those blessings are received: and he says that according to
the quantity of the vessel, so is the proportion of the remedy. For in respect
of the fountain, the water of mercy never fails. The Lord said to the
children of Israel, All the places that the soles of your feet shall tread
upon, Joshua, 1.
have I given you: So also all the mercy, upon which man shall set his foot,
shall be his. Like to this is that; He that takes his motion, or is moved of
the Lord, he will hope all things, neither shall he be frustrated of his hope.
Whereby it is manifest, that this hope is an imitation of the virtue and divine
power, Bernard in his 85. Sermon upon the Cant. Hope makes men omnipote^t.
redounding to the glory of the same God. Bernard was not ignorant of this,
when he said; Nothing does make the omnipotency of the word more clear, then
that it does make all them omnipotent, who hope in him. Will thou know that
this is true; did not he partake of the omnipotency of God, who being upon the
earth, commanded the Sun, that it should stand still in the midst of heaven,
and that it should not hasten to run his course, for the space of a day? And
an other, who gave a wish to King Ezechias, 4, Kings, 20.
whether he would that the shadow of the Sun should go forwards ten degrees,
or return back so many? This is that, that after a singular manner
illustrateth the glory of the Lord, when we see his servants so powerful. For
if that proud King of the Assirians glorified in that, Esaias, 10.
that Kings, as himself, served him: how much more shall the Lord our God
glory, that after a certain manner all they are Gods, that serve him; after
they have participated of his power?

Of the vain hope of the wicked.
THis then is the treasury of Hope, which the righteous possess in this life,
and to which there is no access for the wicked. For although they also have
hope, yet they have not a lively, but a dead hope. For sin takes away the
life, and therefore their hope works not in them those effects, which before
we have remembered. For as there is nothing to be found, which more reuiueth
hope, then a good conscience: so the chiefest cause which makes it to fail,
and kills this hope, is an evil conscience. For that always flies and
fears the light, and makes a man faint-harted and of feeble courage: for he
is not ignorant that the gate of the divine favor and grace is shut against
him. Hence it is, that as a shadow does always follow the body, so fear and
desperation in all places and at all times, do wait upon an ill conscience.
It appears then that such is the trust and hope of the wicked, as their
felicity and happiness is: for as their felicity is in the goods of this world,
so in them is their hope and trust; seeing that they glory in them, and in the
time of tribulation run unto them, as to a Sanctuary or a place of refuge. Of
this hope it is written in the book of Wisdom; The hope of the ungodly is
like a dry thistle flower, Wisdom. 5.
that is blown away with the wind: like a thin scum that is scattered
abroad with the storm: and like as the smoke which is dispersed here and
there with the wind. By which we may see, how vain the hope of the ungodly is.
Neither only is this hope vain, but it is very hurtful, deceitful, and
dangerous: as the Lord God admonishes by the mouth of the Prophet; Esaias, 30.
Alas for those disobedient children (that is, who have forsaken their father)
says the Lord, that they will take counsel, and not of me, that they will
take a secret advice, and not out of my spirit, and therefore add they sin
unto sin. Even they that walk to go down into Egypt, and have asked no
question at my mouth, but seek strength in the might of Pharao, and trust in
the shadow of Egypt. Therefore shall the strength of Pharao be your confusion,
and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your shame. They were ashamed of the
people that could do them no good, and that might not help them, nor show
them any profit, but were their confusion and rebuke. All these be the words of
Esaias. Neither content with these he proceeds in the next Chapter: Chapter, 31
Woe unto them that go down into Egypt for help, and trust in Horses, and
put their confidence in Charrets, because they be many: and in Horsemen,
because they be lusty and strong: but they regard not the holy one of Israel,
and they ask no question at the Lord. And he nevertheless is wise, and will
plague the wicked, and goes not from his word, he will arise against the
household of the froward, and against the help of evil doers. Now the Egiptians
are men, and not God, and their Horses flesh, and not spirit: and as soon as
the Lord stretches out his hand, then shall the helper fall, and he that
should have been helped, and they shall altogether be destroyed.

Thou seeft here, my brother, clearer then the noone light, the difference
between the hope of the righteous, and of the wicked. The hope of ye righteous
is spirit, but of the wicked flesh
For the hope of the wicked is flesh, but the hope of the righteous is spirit.
The one is no other thing, then that man is, the other is that which God is: so
that there is as great difference between the hope of the good, and of the
wicked, as is between God and man. Therefore worthily does the Prophet go
about to fear us from the one, and inuit us to the other, saying: Psalm. 146.
O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no help
in them. For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his
earth, and then all his thoughts perrish. Blessed is he that has the God of
Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made heaven
and earth, the Sea, and all that therein is. Behold here also a difference
between both hopes. The same difference the same Prophet declares also in
another Psalm, Psalm. 20.
saying; Some put their trust in Charrets, and some in Horses: but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen: but
we are risen and stand upright. Thou see here how well the fruits agree to
the root, foundation, or tree of hope: for the fruit of the one is a
downfall; A similitude. Math. 7,
but of the other exaltation and victory. Wherefore very fitly they that trust
in the vanities of this world, may be compared to that man in the Gospel, Who
built his house upon the sand: and the rayue descended, and the floods came,
and the winds blew, and bear upon that house, and it fell, and great was the
fall of it. But they that trust in the Lord, may be likened unto him, that
built his house upon a rock, which stood safe, strong, and firm against all
the tempests and storms of this life.

The same thing no less elegantly the Prophet Jeremy does teach by an
excellent comparison: Ierem, 17,
Cursed be the man, says he, that puts his trust in man, and that takes
flesh for his arm, and he whose heart departs from the Lord. He shall be
like the Heath that grows in the wilderness: as for the good thing that is
for to come, he shall not see it, but dwell in a dry place of the wilderness,
in a salt and unoccupied Land. But of the righteous, he speaks on a contrary
manner: O blessed is the man, says he, that puts his trust in the Lord, To
him that trusts in the Creator all things happen succesfully and
prosperously: but to him ye trusts in the creatures, al things fall out
vnluckilie.
and whose hope is in the Lord himself. For he shall be as a tree that is
planted by the waters side, which spreads out the root unto moistness, whom
the heat cannot harm when it comes, but his lease shall be green: and
though there grow but little fruit because of drouth, yet is he not
careful, neither ever leaves of to bring forth fruit. Hitherto be the words
of Jeremy.

Tell me now I pray thee, what other thing can be desired (if so be that men
have but a little spark of reason) to know the difference, which is between
the hope of the righteous, and the hope of the wicked; between the prosperity
of the one, and of the other? What greater commodity can arise from a tree,
then to be planted after that manner that the Prophet speaks? Believe me, such
is the condition and estate of the righteous, to whom all things fall out
prosperously, and with who^ all things go well: because they are planted by
the current of the River of Gods grace. But on the contrary part, there can be
no worser estate of a tree, then to be wild, then to be planted in a dry
ground, in the wilderness, and in a land of salt: it does not yield fruit in
due season: to be brief, it is far removed from the sight and tillage of
men. By this comparison, the wicked may easily understand, that they in this
life cannot have a more miserable estate, because they have eyes removed, yea
quite turned from God, who is the fountain of living water, and have their
eyes set and fixed, and their hope reposed upon frail and deceitful
creatures, which are understood by a dry land, desert, and unoccupied.

By this also it is manifest, in how excellent a place the world it self is
planted, Where the world is planted.
which certainly is planted in a dry and barraine ground, seeing it has the
footing of his hope placed on a foundation so weak: which is no hope, but
error, vanity, and confusion, as before we have showen. Tell me, I pray thee,
what misery can be greater then this? what poverty more naked the^ to live
without hope? Therefore, seeing that man is through sin left so poor and
naked, How unhappy the estate of the^ is, who have not their trust in god.
as before we have declared, and that the hope of the Divine mercy is so
necessary for him, what shall be left unto him, who has lost it, which might
have strengthened and confirmed him? We see that all living creatures in their
kind are brought forth perfect, that nothing is wanting unto them for the
preservation of their life. But man, through sin is so desolate, and so
bereft of all things, that he has nothing of those things, which are needful
and necessary for him, but he must live of alms, and be relieved from the
divine mercy. Then if this means be taken away, what shall be the life of man?
Surely lame, maimed, and full of a thousand defects. What other thing is it to
live without hope, then to live without God? What other thing is left unto man
of all his ancient patrimony to preserve his life, Only hope is left unto man.
besides this only support and help? What Nation was ever so barbarous, so
void of all religion, that had not some knowledge of God, or of some Dietie,
whom it did not worship with some certain honor and adoration? of whom also
it did not look for some benefit of the Divine providence?

In that short time that Moses was absent from the children of Israel, Man
cannot live without a God.
the people thought that they had been without a God, and as rude and
ignorant began to exclaim, and to speak to Aaron, Exodus, 32.
Arise, make us Gods to go before us: as if they durst not go any further
without some God. Whereby it is manifest, that man's nature, although it always
knows not the true God, yet it is necessary that it know some God. And
although man is ignorant of the cause of his own frailty, yet he
acknowledges his own frailty, and for this naturally seeks help of some
God. A similie.
Even as Iuie naturally seeks for some post or tree, which it may lean unto;
or some wall, by which it may be supported, and creep aloft, it being not
able to sustain and held up it self: A similie.
And as a woman naturally seeks for the supportation and shadow of man; for
she as an imperfect creature, knows that the aid and help of man is
necessary for her: so man's nature being needful, and wanting many things,
does seek for the shadow and refuge of God.

These things therefore being thus, we may easily conjecture, what is the
life of those men, who live in this wretched and miserable widowish estate,
forsaking God, and being forsaken of God. I would gladly know this one thing:
They that live after this manner, how do they comfort themselves in their
miseries? how do they defend themselves in dangers? who does cure their
infirmities? with whom do they confer of their business? of whom do they
ask counsel in doubtful matters? of whom do they seek for help in their
necessities? How necessary Hope is for man.
with whom do they traffic? with whom are they conversant? whom do they
stick to? to be brief, by whose help do they escape the snares of this life,
who have not any refuge? If the body cannot live without the soul, nor the
soul without God, surely God is no less necessary for the one life, then the
soul is for the other. And if (as we have said before) lively hope be the
anchor of our life, how dare any man undergo the dangers of this tempestuous
sea, his ship being destitute of this anchor of hope? If hope be the shield,
by which we defend our selves; how can men defend themselves in the midst of
their enemies being without this shield? If hope be the staff, by which man's
nature is supported in all her weakness and frailty; what shall weak and
feeble man do, without the staff of this hope?

Hitherto, as I think, we have sufficiently showed, what is the difference
between the hope of the righteous and of the wicked: and what is the nature
and condition of them both. That is, one of them has God for his defense and
bulwark; but the other, the broken staff of reed of Egypt, which he that
leans upon, Esaias, 36,
it goes into his hand, and shoots it through. For it is meet, that that
error which he commits, in hoping in things so uncertain and doubtful, and
relying altogether on them, that he should be corrected no otherwise, The
punishment of fruitless and vain hope. Ierem, 48,
then by having mischance and being deceived by them, as the Prophet Jeremy
plainly testifies: who when he would denounce the destruction and overthrow
of the kingdom of Moab, he says thus: For because thou have trusted in thine
own works and treasure, thou shall be taken: and Chamos (the God in whom
thou trustest) with his priests and Princes, shall go away into captivity.
Consider therefore what kind of aid that is, the trust of which, is the ruin
and overthrow of him that so trusts.

Therefore let these things suffice which have been spoken of the privilege
and prerogative of hope: which although it seem almost to be the same with the
special providence of God, The difference of the providence of God, and of
hope or trust.
of which we have spoken before, yet it is not the same: for they differ
between themselves, as the effect and cause of a thing. For although there be
many foundations of this hope, as the goodness of God, truth of the same God,
and the merrits of Christ: yet the principal ground is the fatherly providence
of God, from which arises this hope and confidence. For to know that God has
so great a care over him, and that he is defended and governed of him with so
respective a regard, does excite and stir up in man, a great hope, and an
assured confidence.

Of the seventh privilege of Virtue, that is, of the true liberty, which the
righteous have and rejoice in: and of the misery and unknown servitude and
bondage, in which sinners live. CHAP. XIX.
OF all the privileges and prerogatives hitherto spoken of, Whence this
liberty springs.
but especially of the second and fourth, that is, of the grace of the holy
Ghost, and of the Divine consolation, another pre-eminence does arise no less
admirable, which the righteous enjoy: and that is the true liberty of the
soul, which the Son of God brought into this world, of which privilege he
has obtained the name of the Redeemer of mankind. Because he has redeemed
man, and has freed him from that wretched and miserable servitude, in which he
lived; and brought him into true liberty. This is one of the especiallest
blessings, which Christ brought into this world; one of the most excellent
benefits of the Gospel; one of the most noble effects of the holy Ghost: For
where there is the Spirit of the Lord, 2, Cor, 3,
there is liberty, says the Apostle. To be brief, this is one of the richest
rewards, which in this world are promised to the worshippers of the true God.
This liberty the Lord promised to certain, that were willing to serve him:
John, ^.
If (says he) ye continue in my word, ye are verily my Disciples, and shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free: that is, it shall give unto
you true liberty. They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never
bound to any man: why say thou then, ye shall be made free? Jesus answered
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever commits sin, is the
servant of sin. And the servant abides not in the house for ever: but the
son abides for ever. If the son therefore shall make you free, One kind
of liberty true, an other false.
ye shall be free in deed. In which words the Lord plainly intimates unto
us that there are two kinds of liberty; one false and in a show, the other true
and real. False liberty is proper unto them, who have their bodies free, but
their souls captiuated, and subject to the tyranny of their own passions and
sins: as was the soul of great Alexander; who when he was the Lord of the
whole world, he was the servant of his own vices. But true liberty is proper
unto them, who have their souls free from all these tirannies, although their
bodies be sometimes free, and sometimes bond and captiuated: as was the soul of
the Apostle, who although he was captive, and holden in bonds, yet in spirit he
mounted up to heaven, and by the doctrine of his letters he freed the whole
world.

Why the liberty of the soul is the true liberty.
The reason why this liberty is called properly liberty, and not that other, is
this: because as among the two essential parts of man, the soul is much more
noble then the body, yea, it is as it were the whole man, the body is no other
thing, then a matter or subject, in which the soul is included: so he truly is
to be called free, who has his more principal part free: but he is falsely
called free, who has his soul captive and bond, although he carries about
his body freely whether so ever he pleases.

Of the servitude in which wicked men live.
IF any man shall ask me, whence is this bondage, of which we speak? I say
that it is a servitude and captivity under the most terrible, Sin a cruel
Tyrant.
most direful, and most cruel Tyrant of any, that may be named; that is,
under Sin. For amongst all the most abominable and dreadful things that be
in the world, the torment of hell is most dreadful and abominable: yet much
more dreadful and abominable is Sin, which is the cause of this torment,
and also of this servitude: by which sinners are made servants and bondslaues,
as you have understood by the words of our Lord before aleadged; Whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin.

What servitude then can be more miserable then this? Neither is he only a
servant of sin, who commits sin: but he is a slave unto the perswaders
and procurers of sin; as are the devil, the world, and his own flesh,
corrupted of the same sin, Whose servant a sinner is.
and he is a servant unto all other inordinate desires, which proceed of the
flesh. For he that is the servant of the son, is also a servant of the
father. And it is confessed of all, that these three are the fathers of sin;
and therefore they are called enemies to the soul, because they bring and
procure great mischief to the soul: as that is, that they make it a slave and
a Captive, and deliver it into the hands of this cruel Tyrant. And although
all these three do conspire to this end, yet they work by diverse means. For
the two first are served of the third, which is the flesh, as another Eve to
deceive Adam: or as an instrument very fit, The flesh is sin, and a nourisher
of sin.
to carry and draw us into all evil. For this cause the Apostle does more
manifestly call the flesh sin: putting the effect for the cause; for it is it
which pricketh forwards to all kind of sin. For the same cause the Divines call
it the tinder and touchwood of sin, that is, the meat and nourishment of
sin. By a common name it is called Sensuality, Fleshly desire or sensual
appetite is the cause of perturbations.
Flesh, or Concupiscence: which also is called by a name more known Fleshly,
or sensual desire, whence all the perturbations of the mind spring, in as
much as it is corrupt, and made disordered through sin: it is the motioner,
mouer, and picker forwards to all sin. Therefore also the two other enemies
take singular advantage of the flesh, and her appetites, that they may more
strongly assault and wrong us. Basil.
Hence it is that Saint Basil says, that the especial weapons with which the
devil fights against us, are our own desires. For the vehemence of our
affection seeks by right and wrong, to enjoy those things, that it lusts
after: neither makes any regard, although it be forbidden by the law of God,
and from such an affection sins do arise.

Such an appetite therefore, is one of the most cruel Tyrants, which man being
a sinner is subject unto: or, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.
under which he is sold. He calls him sold under sin, because his sensual
appetite is made so mighty, that it carries him as a bondslaue, whether so
ever it lists.

But what is more lamentable, then to see a man, who has a soul made to the
image and likeness of God, illuminated with heavenly light; and an understanding
by which he ascends above all things created, until it find out God
himself: and yet notwithstanding that he should contemn and despise all this
his nobility and excellency, and be subject and governed after a certain
furious and frantic manner, of his beastly appetite, and to be corrupted of
sin, and moreover to be led about, to be moved, and driven forwards and
backwards of the devil? What I pray thee at the length is to be expected of
this government, but ruin, downfall, destruction, and incomparable mischiefs?
But that thou may see more manifestly the filthiness of this servitude and
bondage, I will illustrate it by a certain example. Imagine that a man had
married a woman of so great beauty, A similitude.
nobility, and wisdom: as could possibly fall into any of this sex, and being
happy through this marriage, should have a Mayd-seruant a Witch, or an
Inchaunter, with whom he is besotted by some preposterous means, and so dotes
on this in chaunting drudge, that forsaking his own wife, he gives himself a
pray unto his servant, using her in steed of his wife, eating, sleeping, and
conferring with her, acting and executing all his business with her, and with
her prodigally consuming and spending all his riches in banquets, sports, and
surfeiting, and after such like manner: yea, not content with these, to come to
that dotage and folly, that he forces his own wife to wait on this drudge,
and to serve her in all things as a slave, which she shall command her. Who
would think that a man should ever come to this madness? And if he shall so
fall, how shall he be rayled upon, and condemned of those that be wise? How
great shall the hate and indignation of all be against this servant? And on the
contrary part, how great will the moan and commiseration be of all toward
that good and noble woman? With how many sighs will her kinsfolk deplore the
madness of her husband? This thing at the first view does seem very shameful:
yet much more shameful, and filthy is that, which here we speak of. For we
must know that these two women, that is, the spirit and the flesh are found in
our soul: which the Divines do call by another name, the superior part, The
superior part, and the inferior part of the soul.
and the inferior part of the soul. The superior part is that, wherein the
reason and the will are, which are natural lights, with which God in the
creation has marked that part, of which part there is so great beauty and
noblenes, that by reason of it man is said to have the image of God, to be
capable of God, and to be the brother of Angels. This is that noble woman,
which God has joined and coupled to man as his wife, with whom he should lead
his life, ordering all his affairs by her direction, that is, by the
instruction of her heavenly light. In the inferior part is the sensual
appetite, of which we have lately spoken; which is given unto man, to desire
all things necessary for his life, and for conservation of his kind. This
therefore, as a Steward receaueth al things by limitation and order appointed
of reason, and lays out, and disburseth the goods according to the will of
the master and Lord. The appetite ought to be governed, and not to govern.
This appetite is that Hand-mayde, of which we spoke a little before, which
because it has not the light of reason, it is not made that it should govern
or rule, but that it should be governed and ruled. These things being thus,
unhappy is that man, who comes to that madness, to be given as a pray to the
love, and lust of this naughty woman, which casting reason aside, by which she
ought to be governed, comes to that malapertnes and headstrongnes, that she
will rule and dominere over reason: doing all the mischief that this saucy
and perverse drudge will, following and prosecuting all her appetites, all her
desires, and lusts, as well carnal, as sensual. For we see many men so
carnal, unbridled, and subject to the lusts of their own heart, that in all
their actions like unto beasts, they obey this malapert and froward woman,
without respect either of law or reason. What other thing is this, then to give
the whole rule of the life, into the hands of an abject servant, which is the
flesh, by surfeiting in all the delights, sports, banquettings, and pleasures
of this world, and despising the counsels and aduices of Reason, being the
noble and lawful wife?

But that is worser, and less tolerable, that it suffices not to have
bestowed this rule and dominion upon the servant: but also this free and noble
Lady is compelled to serve her own servant, being most base, vile, and abject;
by consuming nights and days in her service, and in doing all that she
commands, and which her insatiable and inordinate appetite desires.
Wherefore when man is busied, What it is to obey the appetite.
and his reason, and all his understanding occupied about these inventions, as
are the ornaments of the body, the pride and statelines of buildings, the
curiosity of household stuff, the variety of meats, and the multitude of
dainty dishes: what other thing does he, then draw the soul from the
spiritual exercises of her nobility, and make it a servant, a cook, and a
slave unto her, that ought to be her servant in all obsequiousnes? A carnal
lover a servant.
A carnal man enamoured with the love of any woman, that he may overthrow her
chastity, when he has bestowed and employed all the strength and sinnowes of
his reason and understanding in writing Letters, in compozing Poems, in making
love Verses, in laying traps, and in other endeauours, which are required to
that Art; what other thing does he (if we confess the truth) then that he
forces the Lady to serve the Hand-mayde: whilst he spends that divine and
celestial light in inuenting and devising means, by which he may satisfy the
appetite of his vild flesh? 2, King, 11.
When as King David was wholly occupied in devising means to cover his fault
with Bersaba, in sending her husband to the Army, by inuiting him to supper, by
making him drunk, by giving him dangerous Letters written to this end, that he
innocent man should be slain; what other plotted this notable Stratageme, but
reason and understanding? And who pricked forward Reason to this complot, but
the peevish Flesh, that she might hasten the wickedness, whereby she might more
safely and more conveniently enjoy her pleasures? Seneca.
Seneca, although an Ethnic, did abhor such servitude. I am greater, says
he, and borne to higher matters, then that I should be a bondslaue to mine own
flesh. Go to, tell me, if he feared so to demean and debase himself, least
he should be termed a doater and a hopeless unthrift: how much more ought we
to fly such wickedness, by which so great blessings are lost, and such an heap
of mischiefs succeed in their place? Which thing, seeing that it is partly so
natural, and partly so usual, we tread on in this old path, having no regard
of so great misgouernment, Why vicious me^ are not avoided.
which now every where in the world is seen. Hence it is (as S. Bernard says)
that the abominable savor of vicious men is not smelt: because the multitude
of the^ is too great. For even as in a country where all are borne Ethiopians,
it is not an ugly thing to be black; and as where all are drunk, it is no
ignominy nor slander to be drunk: A similitude,
so this monstrous servitude, because it is so familiar to the world,
scarcely it is known or noted in any man. All these things do sufficiently
declare, how miserable this servitude is, and with what a horrible punishment
man is condemned for sin: seeing that for it, the noblest creature is
delivered into the hands of so barbarous and cruel a Tyrant. Ecclesiasticus
has expressed the nature of this beast, Ecclus, 23.
when he beseeched the Lord, that he would put from him all wicked and ungodly
desires: that he would take from him the greedines of the belly, and that the
lust of the flesh should not take hold of him, and that he might not be given
over to an impudent mind. As if he should say; that he desired, that he might
not be delivered into the hands of such a Tyrant or executioner. For he
supposed that such an appetite was worthy of such a name.

But if thou desire to know how great the force and power of this Tyrant is,
How great the force is, of perturbations and affections.
thou may easily gather of that, which he has done, and which he daily
does in this world. I will not send thee to the fables of Poets, which tell us
how that most famous Hercules, after he had conquered all the Monsters of the
world, at the length being captiuated with the love of a certain lascivious
woman, cast away his club, and sat amongst other women spynning, and drawing
out threads from his distaffe. For so the woman that he loved commanded him,
yea, if he did it not, she threatened him, and checked him. This those wise
Poets fained more ingeniously then truly, that they might show the cruel
tyrannic and power of that appetite. Neither will I bring out of the holy
Scriptures, that known example of Solomon; who being most holy, and most wise,
yet he was so besotted by his Concubines, that his true God being forsaken,
he adored Idols, and builded for them magnificent and stateli^ Temples: that
he might serve these impure harlots, and his own appetite; although this
example does no less argue the tyranny of this most pestilent passion, then
that before. For I had rather bring those, which daily are obuious to our eyes.

The servitude of impure and unchaste love.
Consider I pray thee, into what present danger an adulterous woman does cast
her self, that she may satisfy her inordinate lust: for it pleases us to
take an example from that perturbation: seeing that the knowledge of the rest
do depend of the knowledge of one. That woman knows if she be found of her
husband in an act so wicked and detestable, that she shall be slain without
any hope of pardon: she knows that she shall loose together at one and the
self same time, her soul, her life, her honor, her riches, and all other
blessings, which she might hope for either in this world, or in the world to
come, then which loss surely a greater nor a more universal cannot be
invented or thought of. She is not ignorant that she shall be a perpetual
reproach and scandale to her desamed children, to her father and mother also, to
her brethren and sisters, and to her whole family, and that she shall for ever
be a grief unto them. Nevertheless, so great is the violence of this
appetite, or (that I may speak better) the power of this Tyrant, that he
forces the woman to all these, and easily brings her to so great danger, and
she does willingly, what so ever he commands her. What Barbarian or Tyrant
was ever found in the world, who could ever force his servant to undergo so
great dangers, and so far to obey him?

What captivity can be found more hard or sharper? In this estate all sinners
live, as the Prophet witnesses, when he says. That they dwell in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, being bound in misery and iron. Psalm. 107.
That is, in iron chains. What darkness is this, except that blindness in which
the wicked are conversant (as we have showed before) seeing that they know
neither themselves, nor God, as they ought to know: neither for what cause
they live, neither for what end they are created; much less do they know the
vanity of the things they love, neither this servitude wherein they live? What
be these bonds, with which they are bound, unless the violence of their
affections, which holds their hearts tied with the most straight bonds of
those things, which they to inordinately do desire? And what is that hunger
and misery, which they suffer, but an insatiable appetite and desire, by which
they are tormented about infinite things, which they cannot have?

Consider now therefore, if any captivity harder or sorer can be sustained or
borne? But that thou may know this yet more plainly, 2, Kings, 13
I will illustrate it by another example. Behold Amnon King David's eldest
son, when as he laciuiously had beheld his sister Thamar, he was so blinded
with this darkness, and so miserably bound with these chains, and so vehemently
tormented with this hunger, that he could neither eat nor drink, nor sleep:
yea, he was so far enamoured of her, that he was sick for her love. Tell me
I pray thee, what ones were the chains of this perturbation or appetite, with
which his heart was bound; when it so changed his flesh, and so infected the
humors of his body, Luxury is not satisfied with the thing desired.
that a great infirmity followed upon it? But that thou may know, that the
remedy of this infirmity was not to have obtained, that he desired; mark how
the same Amnon was further out of square and more grievously afflicted, and
more vexed with a contrary affection, after he had satisfied his lust, then he
was before: for the Scripture says, And he hated her exceedingly, so that the
hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater then the love, wherewith he had
loved her. So that the rauishing of his sister did not free him from the
passion, but changed the one into another greater. Is there any Tyrant to be
found in the world, who so often does toss and turmoyle his Captives, that
does command them to do and undo; that forces them to go and return the
same way?

Certainly believe me my brother, they are all such, who are subject to the
like vices; who are scarce Lords over themselves. For they eat nothing, they
drink nothing, they think upon nothing, they speak nothing, they dream of
nothing, but of it. So that neither the fear of God, nor their conscience, nor
heaven, nor hell, nor death, nor judgment, nor oftentimes life it self, and
their proper honor, which they so ambitiously love and maintain, can bring
them from this way, or break these bonds. What shall I speak of their
jealousy? of their fear, of their suspicions, and of other external
accidents, in which they are plunged night and day, casting themselves headlong
into most certain danger of life, and honor for this ravening and tormenting
pleasure? Is there any Tyrant in the world, which after such a manner does
dominere and tyrannize over his servant, as vice rages and reigns over this
man's heart? For a servant is never so bound to his Lord, that night and day he
does wait upon him, that no time is left him to bestow on his own business, or
that he may not breathe from his duty: but this vice, as also others, is such
an one, that when it has once gotten rule and empire over the soul, it does
so devour and swallow it up, that scarcely there remains to man any force,
any commodity, any time, or memory, or any wisdom to follow other business.
Therefore not without cause long ago, Eccle. 19
said Ecclesiasticus, Wine and women lead wisemen out of the way. For man by
reason of this vice is so besides himself, and estranged from his right mind,
that although he be wise, yet he is made as unfit to manage and execute any
businesses, which belong and are proper unto man, as if he had drunk up a
whole Hogshead of wine. To show and demonstrate this, that most excellent Poet
feigned a fable of Queen Dido, who when she began to be blindfolded with the
love of Aeneas, she slacked and fore-flowed all the business of the common
wealth, saying: The works of Towers are left, no feats of arms the youth
applies,
Aeneid 4.
Nor Havens are wrought, nor for the wars the mighty butwarks rise.
All things vnpersit stand, the buildings great, and threanings hie
Of hugie walls, and engines for their height that match the sky.


For this Tyrant had so possessed all the senses of this Queen, that now she
was unfit for all things; only the thoughts and cogitations of her new love
being excepted. Which by how much more he ruled in her heart, by so much she was
less able to apply her self to those things that pertayned to the common
wealth, and less able to do things, which otherwise ought to have been
done. O pestilent vice: o destruction of commonwealths; the sword of all good
exercises, the death of virtues, the cloud of good wits, the peruerter of men,
the drunkenness of wisemen, the dotage of old men, the madness of young men, and
the common plague of mankind.

Neither must we think that only in this vice there is so great tyranny, The
servitude of ambition.
but also in all others. Behold and view, a little while an ambitious man, and
one that is swelled with vain glory, and choked with the smoke of honor: and
see how seruilely he lives subject under this desire; and how immoderately he
affects and thirsts after this vain worldly glory, how careful and
vigilant he is to attain unto it, directing all his actions and all his
endeavors to this end? To serve, to get acquaintance, to be clothed, to be
booted and spurd, his table, his bed, his house, his servants, the carriage of
his body, his gate, his speech, to be brief, what so ever is done of such like
men, and what so ever is in them, all that is formed, compozed, and applied to
this end. For they do adorn and fashion themselves only to this end, that
they may seem neat and cult, thereby to gain the praise and vain opinion
and applause of the people. Yea, if thou do well consider, thou shall see
that an ambitious man in all things that he does or speaks, has none other
respect, then that he may lay snares and nets to catch the popular applause of
the people. If we wonder at that Emperor, which passed over all the festiuals
in taking of flies; how much more is the madness of an ambitious man to be
wondered at, who does not only spend all the festiuals and holy days, but
also the whole course of his life, in catching only smoke, and wordly vanity?
This wretched man by reason of this ambition, does not what he would, neither
does he cloth himself according to his own estate, neither is he permitted to
go whether he would: for he goes but sildome to the Church, neither dare he
be conversant with good men; fearing least perhaps the world, to which he
lives subject, should see something in him, which might be reprehended. And
that which is more, that he might satisfy this his passion, he lauisheth out
greater store of riches, then either he is willing, or has, casting himself
headlong into a thousand needs and many debts, with which his soul is
afflicted; with the grief of his posterity, which he leaves to be heirs of
his debts and imitators of his folly. What punishment I pray thee deserves he,
if not that, which a certain King inflicted on an ambitious man, The
punishment of an ambitious man.
under whose nosestrils he commanded so gross and so thick a smoke to be
raised, that he was choked with it, saying: It is meet that he should die
with smoke, who had consumed his whole life in snuffing and sucking up the
smoke of vanity. Therefore what greater misery then this can be found?

What shall I speak of a covetous man, The servitude of covetousness.
who not only is a bondslaue, but also an Idolator of his riches and money? for
he adoreth and serves them, and whatsoever these command, he willingly
performs it. For them he fasteth, and withholds bread from his own
mouth; to be brief, he loves them more then he loves God himself, seeing
that for the love of them, he is not afraid oftentimes to offend GOD? In them
is his rest, his glory, his hope, and all his thoughts. With them he watches
and sleeps; and for them he consumes his whole life, and all his senses, in
trafficking and taking incessant pains for them, in the mean while utterly
forgetting himself, and all other business. A covetous man is the servant and
slave of his money.
Shall we say that such a man is the Lord of his riches, that he may determine
of them as he pleases? or rather shall we affirm, that he is the servant and
slave of his money? for the covetousness of his riches, as a most hard and
severe mistres, does compel him to obey them; but it suffers him not to
enjoy them, and it sharpeneth the desire, but takes away the pleasure. A
covetous man provides riches, as though he were a gallant and brave man, but
he uses them as a beast and a niggardly peasant. He takes pains but he
wants the fruit and pleasure of his travail, whilst he with-draweth and
holds his riches from his body and soul, yea, and from life it self, if so
his treasure and store may increase and augment.

Surely I know not what captivity can be more great or grievous: for if you
call him a captive and a prisoner, who is shut up in a turret, and there has
his hands and feet set in a pair of stocks, rather is he not worthy of
this name, whose soul is imprisoned and captiuated with the inordinate desire
of those things, which he loves? For when a man does gape after gain, and is
wholly occupied in seeking after pelse, he has no faculty or power of his
soul truly free: neither is he Lord of himself, but a servant of his own
riches. For where the love or desire is, there the heart lies bound and
fettered. Neither is the servitude of this captivity lesser, because it is
voluntary: for if it be captivity in deed, it is so much the more dangerous;
by how much it is more voluntary. A Similie.
For neither is the malignity and mischief of poison lesser, although it be
sweet, so that it be poison in deed. There cannot be a greater captivity,
then if thou do so blindfold thy self, that thou can not behold God,
truth, honestly, nor the law of righteousness. If thou do suffer thy self
to be tortured under the unreasonable rule of this empire, thou art no more
Lord of thy self, then a drunken man is of himself, over whom wine has the
sovereignty and upper hand. But if it be a torment and a torture, to be a
slave and a servant: what greater torment can there be, then that with which
covetous men are tormented? especially, seeing that they cannot many times
possess that, which they so greedily desire, neither can they choose but covet
that, neither know they means or way to obtain it. Therefore at the length
they come to this ambiguitie, that they say that, which a certain Poet said to
a melancholy and braine-sicke woman; I love thee, and I hate thee. And if thou
ask me the cause, I will tell thee; I abhor thy familiarity, and yet I
cannot live without thee.

If any one placed in this servitude and slavery shall assay to break these
chains, and to overcome and conquer this desire, he shall find the force of
this appetite so mighty in striving and wrestling against him, that oftentimes
he shall despair of the victory, and so he (wretched man) shall return
again, and put his hands and feet into his former gyues and chains.
Therefore, does not he say well, that calls this appetite a bondage and a
torment?

But if man were bound with one chain alone, A sinner is not bound with one
chain alone.
surely it were a lesser evil: for that man that only is shut up in one
prison, and has but one only enemy to buckle with, there is some hope, that
this man may come free: but what shall we say, of the bonds of so many other
affections, with which miserable man is bound? Seeing therefore that man's life
is subject to so many, and so diverse necessities, all these be chains and
motives of this insatiable covetousness: for they be snares, in which our
wretched heart is taken: although they take hold sooner and more grievously of
one then of another. For there are many men, by nature so apprehensiue, that
they cannot be brought from that, which once they have apprehended. There be
others that be weak, and as it were melancholy, who through the nature of
this humor, do most easily apprehend any thing, whose desires are very
vehement. Some others are faint-harted, and of feeble courage, to whom all
things seem great, hard and difficult, and worthy to be much esteemed: and
although they are very small, yet they are exceedingly desired. For to a base
and peasantlie mind, all things seem great, albeit they be small, as Seneca
says. Many also are naturally found very vehement in all things that they do
desire: Pub. Mimus.
of which number are women, of whom a certain wiseman speaks very well;
Either a woman loves or hates: there is no third thing.

All these therefore do suffer a hard and a sharp servitude, through the
violence of the passions which captiuate them. But if the misery be so great to
be bound with one only chain, and to be the bond-slaue of one only Lord,
what great misery shall it be, to be bound with so many chains, and to be a
servant of so many Lords, as a sinner is, who obeieth so many Lords, as he has
affections and vices, which he serves? What misery can be greater then this?
If all the dignity of man, in that he is man, consists in two things, that
is, in Reason and Will; what can be more contrary to the one, and to the other,
then passion and appetite, which blinds the Reason, and hinders the Will?
Hence it is manifest, how dangerous and deadly all affection is, for it
throws man out of the seat of his dignity, by obscuring his reason, and
perverting his will. Without these two, man is not man, but a beast. This
therefore my brother, is that miserable servitude, in which sinners live, as a
nation which is neither governed of God, nor of reason, but is haled and drawn
of the appetite, and of passion.

Of the liberty in which the righteous live.
THE son of God came to deliver us from this vild and miserable servitude (of
which we have hitherto spoken:) and this is that liberty and victory, which
the Prophet celebrateth, when he says; (...).
They shall rejoice before then, according to the joy in harvest, and as men
rejoice when they divide a spoil. For the yoke of their burden, and the staff
of their shoulder, and the rod of their oppressor have thou broken. All these
names, of the yoke, of the staff, and of the rod, do agree unto the
tyranny, and violence of our appetite: because the devil abuses it, as his
own instrument, as he who is the Prince of this world, and exercises his
tyranny in these names, to bring men under the yoke of sin.

From this violence and power, By ye grace of God, we are delivered from the
servitude of sin. Rom, 6.
the son of God has delivered us, and that by the fullness of his grace,
which he has brought unto us, through the sacrifice of his death. For which
cause the Apostle says; Our old man is crucified together with Christ. In the
which place, by the old man our inordinate appetite is vnderstoood, which is
corrupt and depraved by that first sin. For by this great and mighty
sacrifice and merit of his passion, Christ has obtained that grace and favor
for us, that we might bring under us this Tyrant, Men through grace, rule over
the devil.
and that we might tread him under our feet, and that we might inflict upon
him due punishment, by crucifying him, who before crucified us, and by bringing
him into bondage, who first held us captive. Wherefore, Esaias, 14.
that saying of Esaias is fulfilled; And they shall take them prisoners, whose
captives they were, and have rule over their oppressors. For before grace, the
sensual appetite did hold under the spirit, and exercised tyranny over him:
constraining him to serve evil lusts, as before we have spoken. But after
grace was given to the spirit, the spirit was so helped of it, that it
prevailed and overthrew this tyrant, subjected him unto him, and made him to
obey reason.

This is most excellently prefigured in the death of Adonibezech King of
Jerusalem, Judges, 1.
who was slain of the children of the children of Israel, first the thumbes
of his hands and feet being cut off. Who seeing himself brought to that
misery, and being mindful of his own cruelty and tyranny, which he before
had used to others, he said; Seauenty Kings having the thumbes of their hands
and of their feet cut off, gathered fragments of meat under my table: as I
have done, so God has rewarded me. The Scripture adds, that they brought
him to Jerusalem, and there he died.

This cruel Tyrant is a figure of the Prince of this world, who before the
coming of the son of GOD, cut off the hands and feet of men; making the^
unfit to perform the worship of God: cutting off their hands, that they
should do no good, and their feet, least they should come unto him by their
endeavors and desires. He made men also to gather the fragments of meat under
his table, that is, the pleasures of this world, with which this Prince and
Tyrant does nourish his servants. And rightly they are called the fragments of
meat, and not parts or pieces: The devil is covetous toward his
for the niggardlines, which the devil uses in dividing his goods among his,
is so great, that he never gives them so much, as will satisfy their
gurmandizing paunches. But after our Savior came into the world, he turned the
same punishment upon the Tyrant, by which he before afflicted and pnn^shed
others, cutting off his hands and his feet; that is, destroying all his
works, and enfeebling all his strength. Who properly died in Jerusalem: for
the Savior of the world there dying, he slew the Prince of the world: and
where he was crucified, there was crucified also the Prince of the world, and
being bound hand and foot, all his power was taken from him. And so presently
after that most holy and sacred passion of our Savior, men began to triumph
over this Tyrant, and with great power to reign over the devil, the world,
and all vices; so that all the torments of the world, shall not be able to
drive and force men to ruinate their souls.

Causes from which this liberty arises.
The causes whence liberty arises.
PErhaps thou will ask me, whence this so admirable victory and liberty came? I
answer that this after God first proceeded from the Divine grace, as we have
before said. Which by the mediation of virtue coming from it, does moderate
and temper the fury of our appetites, 1.
that they cannot prevail against reason. A similitude.
Wherefore even as Sorcerers know by certain verses how to inchaunt Serpents,
that they cannot hurt men: so that they yet living are not poisonous, and
having poison, they cannot spit nor cast it upon others: so also the Divine
grace does after that manner enchaunt the venomous Serpents of our affections,
that they living and being whole in our natural essence, cannot hurt us:
neither can they poison or intoxicate our life, as before they were wont. This,
as being taught from heaven, Esaias, 11,
Esaias shows very excellently, in these words; And the sucking child shall
play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weined child shall put his hand upon
the Cockatrice hole. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of
mine holiness: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters that cover the Sea* It is certain, that the speech of the Prophet is
not here of material Serpents, but of spiritual; which are our appetites,
and evil inclinations: for these when they are free and not hindered, infect
the world with their poison: neither does he speak of corporal children, but
of spiritual: amongst whom he is said, to be a sucking child, who first
begins to serve God, who as yet has need of milk, until he be further
grown: and he is called the weined child, who has somewhat profited, and
goes on his feet, and now is fed with more solid meat, as bread, and other
food fit for men. Therefore the Prophet, speaking as well of the one as of the
other, says at the first, that they shall play and be delighted; because they
see themselves live in the midds of spiritual Serpents, and yet by the virtue
of the Divine grace, they do not receive of them any mortal hurt by
consenting to sin. Others after they are weined, and have profited in the way
of the Lord, he says, that they shall put their hands upon the holes of
Cockatrices: as if he should say, that God does keep them in the midst of
the greatest dangers. For in them is fulfilled that of the Psalmographer;
Psalm, 91,
Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe: the young Lion and the Dragon, shall
thou tread under feet. These are they that put their hands upon the holes of
Cockatrices, neither feel any hurt. For the plenty of grace, which God
pours upon the earth, does enchaunt these Serpents after that manner, that
they cannot hurt the sons of GOD.

This thing the Apostle declares more perspicuously, and without a metaphore,
when (after he had spoken copiously of the tyranny of our appetites and of our
flesh) at the length cries out; Rom, 7.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
presently he aunswering himself, says, The grace of God, which is given by
Jesus Christ our Lord. In which place, by the body of death, the Apostle
understands not a body subject to natural death, which we all look for: but
that, which in another place is called the body of sin: which is an
inordinate appetite, ready and apt to all evil. From which, as from a body,
the members of all passions and inordinate desires, do arise and grow, which
draw us to all kind of sin. From this body, as from a cruel Tyrant, the
grace of God has delivered and freed us, which is given through Jesus Christ,
as the Apostle says.

The second cause, the sweetness of spiritual co^solations.
After this there is another cause not of the least value, that is, the
greatness of the joy and spiritual consolations, which the righteous enjoy in
this world; as we have said before. For this does so quench the thirst of all
concupiscences, that a man may easily overcome, and cast from him all other
affections. The Fountain of all good things being found, foorth-with that
troublesome and disquiet taste of all other delights perrisheth, as our Savior
testifies in the Gospel, having conference with the woman of Samaria; John, 4,
Whosoever drinks (says he) of the water that I shall give him, (which is
the grace of God) he shall ueuer be more a thirst. in his tenth homily upon
Ezechiell, and in the 8. book of his Morrals, cap. 21
The same thing also S. Gregory testifies in a certain homily. But if any
man, says he, has tasted with the mouth of his heart, what is the sweetness of
heavenly rewards, what be the musical assembles of Angels, and what is the
incomprehensible vision and sight of the holy Trinity: to this man by how
much that is more sweet, which inwardly he feels and sees, by so much that
is more bitter, which outwardly he pertaketh. Now he aymeth to go beyond all
those things that come into his consideration, now his mind is suspended from
exterior delights, and he does search out, what the invisible blessings be, he
is fed with the taste of that incircumscriptible light: and being carried
beyond and above himself, he does disdain again to be dejected and cast
down to himself.

When as now the vessel of our heart is full after this manner of that
heavenly liquor, now the thirst of our soul is quenched, now remains no
further any reason or cause to desire or seek after the frail goods and
abject things of this life. Therefore our soul is free, neither is it bound
any longer with the chains of evil appetites: for where there is no desire or
concupiscence, there are no chains, no captivity. Insomuch that the heart,
because it has found the Lord of all, therefore, it after a certain manner is
made Lord of all: for in this chief good, it finds and possesses all good.

To these two divine benefits, The third cause, daily use, and continual
diligence.
by help of which men come to true liberty, the care also and diligence of
man is to be joined: by which he strives and contendeth to subject the flesh
to the spirit, and the affections to reason. By which study, men by little and
little are mortified, and are made fit and able to all good, their manners are
bettered, and their fury and former boldness, is restrained and bridled. Hence
it is that S. Chrysostom says; If wild beasts, that are nourished among men,
by degrees put off their natural fierceness, and become tame, and are
peaceably conversant among men, as the Poet says very well: Lions that be
fierce, barbarous, and wild,
In time are tamed to play with a child.
What great thing is it, if our natural affections, when they have accustomed
themselves by little and little to obey reason, if by degrees they wax gentle
and mild; that is, if by little and little, they participate something of the
nature of the spirit and reason, and rejoice in the works of the spirit? If
custom and good use has so great force and efficacy, what shall not grace
do, working together with this use? Hence it is that the servants of God, are
often more sensibly merry and delighted (for so it pleases me to speak) in
celestial rauishments, in silence, in reading, in prayer, in meditation, and in
such like exercises; then they would be in feasting, in sports, in hunting, and
in other pleasures and delights of this world. For now they hate all those, and
it is a torment unto them to remember them: insomuch that now the very flesh
does abhor that, which before it loved, and finds taste and delight in that
thing, which before it loathed. Which is so true, as a certain learned and
holy man says, that oftentimes the inferior part of our soul, is so
delighted in prayer, and inwardly has such sweet conference with God, that it
feels a great torment, when it is withheld by any manner from these
exercises, or hindered in them.

This is that which the Prophet says, Psalm, 16,
I will praise the Lord, who has given me counsel: my reins also chasten me
in the nights: or as another translation has, Jerome.
they teach me. This surely is an excellent work of the Divine grace. For
those that comment upon this place, understand by the reins, the affections
and inward motions of man, which are wont, as we have said, to be prouokers
and procurers of sins. The affections are taught of the Lord, and do work
good unto man.
Which notwithstanding oftentimes through the virtue of grace, not only do
not incite and stir up to evil, as they were wont, but sometimes they help
unto good: and not only they do not serve the devil, on whose side they were
wont to war, but they go on Christ's side and turn their weapons upon his
enemies. Which although it be seen in many spiritual exercises, yet
especially it appears in the affection of contrition, and in the grief for
sin: in which the inferior part of the soul plays her part, in afflicting
it self, and in plentiful pouring out of tears for sins. Therefore the
Prophet says, that in the night, when the day being past the righteous are
wont to examine their consciences, this same his reins did in chastising him:
for from that anguish and bitterness, which he felt in that part of his soul,
because therein he had offended GOD, he was always afflicted; and he was
always careful, that he might not commit that again, for which he was
sorrowful. Therefore not without cause he gave thanks unto the Lord: for not
only the superior part of his soul, in which his understanding was, invited
him to good: but also the inferior part, which always for the most part, is
wont to drive and prick man to evil.

A Caution.
But although this be both truth, and also great glory of the Redemption
purchased by Christ for us, (who as he is a most perfect and absolute
Redeemer, so he has most perfectly and absolutely redeemed us) yet no man
must be too bold to trust to his own flesh, yea although it be mortified, so
long as he continues in this mortal life.

These therefore be the chiefest causes of this admirable and wonderful
liberty, after which follows a new knowledge of GOD, and a sound and solid
confirmation of our faith, and of our Religion, which we profess, as the Lord
himself testifies by the Prophet Ezechiell, Izech, 34,
saying; And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have broken the cords
of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hands of those that served
themselves of them. The yoke of sinners.
We say that this yoke is sensuality, or an inordinate desire to sin, which
cleaves to our flesh, and which oppresses us, and subdueth us to sin. The
cords of this yoke are evil inclinations, with which the devil apprehends
and catches man, and draws him unto him: which inclinations are so much the
stronger, by how much they have been longer confirmed through an evil
custom. Which thing Saint Augustine confesses of himself in these words;
Augustine in his eight book of his confessions, the 5- chapter.
I was bound not with iron, but with mine iron will: my will the enemy kept,
and of my self made a chain for my self, and bound me with it. Because of my
corrupt will came lust, and whilst I did not resist lust, custom followed, with
which as with a chain, I was bound and imprisoned in sin.

Therefore, if at any time a man shall see himself bound after this manner,
that this holy man confesses himself to have been bound, and is willing and
desirous to be unloosed, and to get out of this captivity, he shall find as
great difficulties to escape out, as he found: but if at the length he being
converted unto GOD, do see these chains broken in pieces, these affections
tamed and brought under, and these evil inclinations mortified: and if he see
himself free, and the Lord of his own appetites: to conclude, if he see the
yoke, that lay upon his shoulders, now lie under his feet; what other thing
ought he to do, then assuredly and undoubtedly to believe, that it is GOD, who
has broken these chains, and has taken this grievous and burthenous yoke
from his shoulders? Therefore let him praise God, and say with the Prophet:
Thou have broken my bonds: Psalm, 116,
I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise, and will call upon the Name of the
Lord.

Of the eight privilege of Virtue, that is, of the blessed peace, and inward
quietness, which the righteous enjoy: and of the wretched war, and
continual trouble and terror, with which the wicked are shaken and smitten in
their souls. CHAP. XX.
AFter the privilege of the liberty of the sons of God follows another, no
less then it: that is, the prerogative of the peace and inward quietness, in
which the virtuous and good do live. But that this may be understood the
better, we must know that there are three kinds of peace: one is with God,
another with our neighbor, and the third with our selves. Peace with our
neighbors is to love all men, Peace with men.
and to be loved of all, and to have friendship with all: to wish evil to no
body, to hate no body. This had David when he said, I was peaceable with them
that hated peace: Psalm. 119.
and when I spoke unto them thereof, they set themselves of purpose against me.
This peace the Apostle commends, admonishing us, that as much as we may, we
should have peace with all men.

Peace with God.
The other peace which is with God, consists in this, that we have friendship
and favor with God, and it is got by the means of justification, which
reconcileth man to God, and makes man to love him, as he again is loved of
him: so that there is no war, no contention between them. Of this peace the
Apostle speaks: Romans 5.
Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God.

Peace with our selves.
The third peace is that, which man has with himself. Let no man marvel at
this: for it is known, that in one and the self same man are found two men,
and one contrary to the other, as be the inward and the outward man: or the
spirit and the flesh, the appetite and the reason. Which contrariety does not
only stir up cruel war against the soul, but also does trouble the whole
man with furious passions, with burning desires, and most turbulent
concupiscences. And hence the inward peace, which is the rest and tranquillity
of our spirit, is troubled and disturbed.

Of the continual war, and inward trouble of wicked men.
THis then is the war, this is the contention, and this is the continual
trouble and perturbation, in which all men commonly live, who follow the flesh.
For when as on the one side they are deprived of grace, which is as a bridle
restrayning the passions, and mortifying them: and on the other side they have
so unbridled and inordinate appetites, and such dissolute affections, that they
scarcely know what it is to resist any vice: it follows that they live in
infinite lusts and desires of diverse things; some gape after honors, some
after dignities, some after riches, some after the lusts of the flesh, and
others are moved with other pleasures and concupiscences. For our appetite is
an insatiable sire, The two daughters of our appetite. Prou. 30.
which never faith it is sufficient; or as a greedy and devouring beast, which
never can be satisfied; or as an Horseleach, who has two daughters crying;
Bring, Bring: Give, Give. This Horsleach is the inexpleble and insatiable
appetite of our heart; and the two daughters be, Necessity and Greedines, or
Ravening: one of which is as it were true thirst, the other as a false and
feigned thirst: neither does the one less afflict then the other, albeit the
one be true necessity, the other feigned.

Hence it is, that neither poor men, nor rich men (if they be evil) have any
true quietness or peace: for coueteousnes and wretched desires torment these,
and necessity does always gnaw upon the heart of the other, saying; Give, Give.
What tranquillity then, what quietness, what peace can that man have, these two
troubling and interrupting him, and craving infinite things, which are not in
his power? A similie.
What rest can that mother have, who has ten or a dozen hunger-starued
children hanging on her, crying out through hunger and famine, and begging
bread, neither has she whereof to give them? This is one of the chiefest
miseries of wicked men, who hunger and thirst, and whose soul (as the Psalmist
says) faynteth in them. Psalm. 107.
For when as their own love has so great rule and dominion over them, (from
whence all these desires flow) and they have placed all their felicity in
visible things, hence that thirst and dogs famine arises, which they have of
those things, in which they suppose their felicity to be placed: when as
oftentimes they cannot have those things that they desire, (for others more
greedy and stronger do many times prevent them) forthwith they are troubled
and afflicted, A similie.
as a child that has been brought up in a thousand delicacies and cockerings,
who when those things are denied him, that he desires, he weepeth, and
cries out with such a clamor, that his parents are afraid, least he should
burst in sunder: for even as the satisfying of the desire, as the vvise-man
says, is a tree of life: so there is not a greater grief or discruciatement,
then to desire, and not to have that is desired. For that is to dye through
hunger, neither to have that thou may eat. But that is the greater, that by
how much the longer that it is denied which is desired, so much more the desire
does increase: and by how much the desire not satisfied is increased, by so
much the more the torment is increased: therefore they are in continual
tribulation. This is that most miserable estate, which our Savior so copiously
shows in that parable of the prodigal son, Luke, 15.
in which it is said, that there arose a great dearth throughout that Land, and
he began to be in necessity: And through hunger he was constrained to feed
Swine, although he was the son of a great noble man. But this is more
miserable, that he would have filled his belly with the husks, that the Swine
eat: but no man gave them him. With what greater Art I pray thee, could the
whole discourse, and all the miseries of the life of the wicked be more lively
depaynted? Who is that prodigal son, who left his fathers house, and wandered
abroad into a far Country; unless a miserable sinner, who forsaking God,
enters into the way of vices, and abuses all the benefits of God? What
Country is that, in which that famine arose, unless this wretched world,
where the hunger of worldlings is so insatiable, that they can never be
satisfied with those things, that he present: but always walk about like
hungry Wolfes; always ravening, and still seeking further. But if thou shall
consider what is their exercise and practice in this life, thou shall find it
be none other then to feed Swine; and to fill the bellies of their filthy
appetites and desires. If thou do not believe me, observe each one of their
paces, and each one of the actions which a carnal man does from the morning
till the evening; and thou shall see that all his study is nothing else, but to
seek to seed Swine, and to satiate and fill some one of these bestiall
senses, whether it be the sight, or the hearing, or the touching, or the
tasting, or some other, not as the Disciple of Christ, but as a very Epicure:
as if he had none other thing but a body common with beasts: as if he believed
that he had no other end, nor was made for any other use, then to attend upon
the pleasures and delights of his senses: thinking upon none other thing, then
to go hither to day, and to morrow thither to huntings, to banquets, to
feasts, to bridals, to plays, to merriments, to dancing, and to such other
solaces, that he may delight some one of his senses. What other thing be their
sweet odours? what their merriments? what their feastings? so great delicates?
their decked chambers? their consorts of music? their meetings? their
receipts and expenses? What other thing I say be these, then to seek for
husks, and feeding for this heard of Swine? Give it what name thou will, call
it pure nobility, magnificence, or if thou will courtly splendor and glory;
yet in Gods Dictionary it has not this name, but is called the feeding of
Swine. A simily.
For even as Swine are a certain Heard of beasts, that delight in mire and
dirt, and are nourished with the basest and most unclean meats: so the souls
of these men (if so be that they are to be called men) are delighted with no
other thing, except with the most filthy dirt of carnal pleasures. This also
is greater then all misery, that a son sprung from so noble a Father, who was
created to feed at the table of the Lord, and to be nourished with the bread
of Angels, cannot be satisfied with food so mean, because there is so great
famine in that Land. For there be so many Merchants for these merchandises,
that one hinders another, and all remain hungry. That is, when as two do
covet and desire one, and the self same thing, they do sildome well agree
between themselves. But neither is it possible, that Swine should not grunt
under an Oak, or should not bite one another, whilst every one desires the
Acornes. This is that miserable estate, and that dearth and famine which the
Prophet describes, when he says; They w^^ndered in the barren desert, Psalm.
107.
and in the wilderness out of the way, and found no City to dwell in, both
hungry and thirsty, their soul faynted in them. What hunger and what thirst is
this, but a burning desire, which the wicked have for the things of this world;
which the more it is restrained, the more it burns; the more it drinks, the
more it thirsts; and the more wood is cast on, The thirst of the wicked.
the more fiercely it burns. O miserable and wretched estate and condition;
whence is this burning thirst bred, but of that, because ye have forsaken the
fountain of living waters, and drunk of Cesternes, which cannot hold water?
The River of true felicity is dried up unto you, and therefore you are
dispersed in the wilderness, and you seek to quench your thirst out of the
foul ditches of corruptible and momentany things. Judith, 7.
This was the ingenious Stratageme of cruel Holophernes, who when he had
besieged Bethulia, he took from them all their fountains of water: and so the
miserable distressed Citizens had no store of water, unless there was some
Wels near unto their walls, out of which privily they drew water rather to
moysten their lips, then to drink. What other thing do you, o ye lovers of
worldly pleasures? Because ye have lost the vein of living water, and ye
come to drink by stealth out of the fountains and Cesternes of creatures,
wheresoever ye find them, which are rather to refresh and wash the mouth, and
so rather to procure, then quench thirst. O unhappy creature, says the
Prophet, what have thou to do with the way of Egypt, that thou should
drink pudle water? etc. What water can be more filthy, then sensual delight?
For no man can drink it without a noisome and pestilent smell, and a hurtful
savor: The companion of carnal pleasure.
which is the biting of conscience, proceeding from it, which, as the
Philosopher says, is the companion of carnal pleasure.

It happens also many times, that the appetite is blind, and cannot see
between that it cannot obtain, and between that it may: and through the
violence of affection it makes that seem easy, which is most hard and
difficult: Hence it is that man desires many things, which he cannot have. For
not any thing is found worthy to be desired, which has not many competitors,
who seek and search for it, and many litigious lovers, The impatience of the
appetite
who are hinderers and forbidders, to gainsay and withstand us, that we may
not obtain it. But when as the appetite wishes and cannot have; desires and
cannot obtain; is hungry, and cannot have to eat, oftentimes he spreads his
arms in the wind, and oftentimes is much troubled about that, which he cannot
compass. Oftentimes he is at the top of the ladder, and suddenly is cast
down to the earth, and it is snatched out of his hands, which he thought that
he had been sure of. Hence it is that he thinks that he dies, that he
bursteth, that he is afflicted, and that he is troubled, when as he is so far
from that he so earnestly desired.

For when as these two faculties of the soul, that is, the faculty
concupiscible and irascible, are disposed after this manner, that the one
serves the others turn; it is certain, that if the faculty concupiscible
obtayneth not that it would, then the faculty irascible is troubled and
disturbed, by lamenting, by craving, by sending, Whence ye unquietness of the
mind arises.
by casting it self into all dangers, that she may satisfy her sister, when
she sees her heavy, sad, or discontented. Therefore of this, confusion of
desires, and inward disquietnes arises, of which we now speak: which S. James
calls a war, From whence, James. 4,
says he, are wars and contentions among you? are they not hence, even of
your lusts, that fight in your members? For ye lust, and have not, etc.
Therefore truly calls he it a war, for the natural contradiction which is
between the spirit and the flesh, and between these desires and those.

There comes also to these another evil, much more lamentable, and that is
this. Oftentimes men accomplish their wishes and desires, and they think that
they have sufficient, and are satisfied, and their estate is at that pass,
that if they will, they can live to their hearts content. But forthwith another
mind possesses them, and they persuade themselves that such honors, titles,
dignities, places and preheminences, are necessary for them. Now if perhaps
they seek after these, and labor to obtain them, and if they be denied them,
and are not able to compass them, then they be strooken to the heart, and feel
greater torment, then if all those things were wanting unto them, which before
they thought were sufficient to live well: and thus they live with this sting,
or that I may speak better, with this continual scourge, as long as they are
in this world, which disturbeth all their prosperity. And this I may compare
to a gun, which has a pin or wedge knocked into the tuch-hole, which makes
the gunne or engine to be profitable for nothing, although it be still whole,
and keeps the same bigness and proportion, and has still his charge and full
shot, for that small let being driven into that narrow hole, by which it
should take fire, hinders all his strength and force. The same Art GOD uses
against the wicked, that they may plainly know (so that they will open their
eyes) that felicity, and the content of man's heart, is the gift of God, which
he gives when, and to whom it pleases him, without any of their labor or
industry, and takes it away again according to his pleasure, by putting a
peg or pin into the tuch-hole of the gunne: that is, by sending some of these
perturbations into their felicity.

For this cause, although they be mighty and rich, as outwardly appears, yet
by reason of this hidden and secret defect, they are so desolate, and live in
so great perturbation and trouble, that thou would think that they had
nothing, and that they possessed nothing. This is that which Esaias speaks in
the person of the Lord, against the power of the King of Assiria, Therefore,
Esaias, 10,
says he, shall the Lord God of hosts send among his fat men, leanenesse,
and under his glory he shall kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire. That
it may appear thereby, how the Lord knows to find out a rock, against
which the ship sailing prosperously, may be dashed in sunder, and to send
weakness in the midst of strength, and misery in the midst of prosperity.

The same thing is also showed in the book of Job, where it is said, Job, 25,
that the Giants do mourn under the waters, that we may know that God has
deep places, and myseries for them also, as he has for them that be base and
small, who otherwise seem more subject to the calamities of this world.
Solomon shows this more plainly, when amongst other miseries of this world,
Eccles, 6,
he reckons up this as one of the greatest, saying; There is also another
evil which I saw under the sun, and it is much among men: A man to whom God
has given riches, and treasures, and honor, and he wants nothing for his
soul of all that it desires: but God gives him not power to eat thereof, but
a strange man shall eat it up. What is this, that GOD has not given him power
to eat thereof, but to spend his goods, and not to have that content by them
and that rest of mind, which he might have of them. For by that small
perturbation and trouble of which we speak, God disposes, that all his
felicities is changed; that thereby he may understand, that as the dead letter
gives not true wisdom, but it is God that gives it: so neither the riches
and goods of this world do give true peace and content, but it is God that
gives it.

Therefore, that we may return from whence we have digressed: If they, who
have all things that they desire, and have not God, do live in sorrows, and
are exceedingly discontented; what shall they do, to whom all these things are
wanting? Because every defect of them, is as a famine and as a thirst, which
pincheth and afflicts them, and as a thorn, which pricketh through their
heart. What peace, what tranquillity, can there be in that soul, in which there
is such sedition, so great war, and such trouble and hurly burley of
appetites and cogitations? Of such men it is very well spoken of the Prophet;
Esaias, 57. A similitude.
The wicked are like the raging Sea, that cannot rest. For what sea, what
waters, or what winds can be more tempestuous and unquiet, then are the
passions and appetites of the wicked, which are wont to subvert Mountains and
seas? Also, sometimes it comes to pass, that in this sea contrary winds do
rage one against another, which is a token and a cause of a greater storm. For
oftentimes the same appetites do strive one against another, Appetites fight
one against another.
after the manner of contrary winds. For oftentimes that the flesh wills,
that the honor nilleth; and that the honor desires, that the riches refuse:
and so desiring and covering all things, they know not what they would desire;
yea, they understand not themselves, and they know not what to choose, nor what
to reject: for the appetites are contrary one to another, as the humors in a
surfitting infirmity, in which the Physician doubts what is to be done,
least perchance that which is convenient for one humor, be hurtful for
another. This is the confusion of languages in the Tower of Babel, and that
strife, for which the Prophet desires the Lord, Psalm, 55.
Destroy, o Lord, and divide their tongues, for I have seen cruelty and
strife in the City. What cruelty, what division, what strife is this, but of
wordly men's hearts, and the diversity of their appetites, when they are
contrary amongst themselves, lusting after, and coveting contrary things,
whilst one refuses that the other desires?

Of the peace and inward rest in which the righteous live.
THis, which we have remembered, is the condition of the wicked: on the
contrary part, the righteous having the government and moderation of all their
desires and appetites, having also their passions tamed and temperate, and
placing their felicity not in these false and transitory things, but in GOD
alone, who is the center of their happiness, and in those true and eternal
blessings, which no man can take or steal from them, and persecuting also with
extreme hatred, (more then that which persecuted Vatinius,) the love of the
flesh, and the whole host of their appetites and concupiscences; and to be
brief, committing their whole will into the hands of GOD, they are disturbed
with no such trouble, that they should lose their inward peace. This is one
reward amongst many others, which the Lord promises to the lovers of Virtue:
as the holy scripture witnesses in many places. Psalm, 119,
The kingly Prophet says; They shall have much peace that love thy law, and
they shall have none hurt. And Esaias says; Esaias, 48,
O that thou had harkened to my commandments, then had thy peace been as
the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea.

The Prophet in this place, does call this peace a flood, for the virtue that
it has to quench the flame of our appetites, to temper the heat of our
desires, and to water the barren and dry vein of our heart, and to refresh our
soul. The same thing also Solomon affirms, Prou, 16,
saying; When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make also his
enemies at peace with him. What be these enemies, that make war with man,
but his own passions, and the evil inclinations of the flesh, which always
make sad the spirit? These therefore do live in peace, when as by virtue of
grace, and good custom, they are accustomed to the works of the spirit, and
fully rest, neither do they move such cruel war, as before they were wont.
Although at the beginning virtue feel great turmoile with the passions, yet
when it comes to perfection, it works with greater sweetness and facility,
neither is there any more so great strife. To be brief, this is that peace
which the Prophet David calls by another name an enlargement or dilatation:
Psalm, 1^,
Thou have enlarged, says he, my steps under me, and mine heels have not
slidde. By which words the Prophet would declare the difference, which is
between the way of the righteous, A similie.
and the wicked: for these, by reason of their troubled hearts through fear,
and the variable cogitations in which they live, do go, no otherwise then a
traveler, who walks among rocks, and declining headlong places, fearing as
often as he moves his foot, least he should fall: but the way of the
righteous is large and safe, and they go by a way plain and even, The change
of the inward man.
where there is no fear of falling. The righteous understand these things
better by practice, then by theorie: for all they do know, how far their
heart differs now, when they serve God, from that, which they carried about,
when as they as yet sloted in the world. For then in all danger of tribulation
they foorth-with were afraid, quiuered, and trembled in heart and body. But
afterward they left the way of the world, and translated their heart to the
love of eternal things, and placed all their felicity and hope in God; they
passed through all things whatsoever came, with an heart so merry and peaceable,
and so subject to the will of God, that they themselves do often marvel at so
great a transformation. They seem not to be the same they were, or at the
least a new heart is given them for their old; they feel so great alteration
in themselves. And that we may confess the truth, they are and they are not
the same: for they are the same according to nature, and not according to
grace: for this alteration proceeds from grace.

This is that which the Lord promises by Esaias, Esaias, 43,
saying: When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through
the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou walk through the very
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. What
be these waters, but the lakes of the tribulations of this life, and the flood
of infinite miseries, which stream continually in it? And what is that fire,
but the heat of our flesh, which is the furnace of Babylon, which the servants
of Nabuchodonozer did heat; that is, the devils, from the which furnace the
flames of our concupiscences arise and ascend? He therefore that in the midst
of these waters, and in the midst of this fire, in which all the world is
hazared and endangered, does walk safely, neither feels any hurt by the
water or heat, can it be, The presece of the holy Ghost is known and
discerned by the peace and tranquillity of the mind.
that he by that should not know and acknowledge the presence of the holy
Ghost, and the virtue of the Divine grace? This is that peace, which the holy
Apostle says exceeds all understanding, that is, it is so high, excellent,
and such a supernatural gift, that the understanding of man cannot understand
it of it self, how the fleshly heart should be so quiet, peaceable, and so at
rest, in the midst of the misfortunes and stormy tempests of this world. He
that understands this, acknowledges and prayseth the worker of so great
miracles, and says with the Prophet; Psalm. 46.
Come and behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the
earth. He makes wars to cease unto the ends of the world: he breaks the
bow and cutteth the spear, and burns the chariots with fire. Be still and
know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen: and I will be exalted
in the earth.

Seeing that these things are thus, what is richer, what is sweeter, what is
more to be wished then this tranquillity, then this enlargement, then this
greatness and blessed peace of the heart? But if thou will proceed further, and
wilt find out from what fountains this heavenly gift does flow, The first
cause of this peace.
I say, that it does flow from ^ll these privileges and prerogatives of
Virtue, which have ^eene hitherto remembered of us. For as in the chain of
vices one is linked and knit to another, so also in the ladder of virtues, one
depends of another, after that manner, that which is the higher, as it
brings forth more fruits, so it has more roots from whence it springs.
Blessed therefore is this peace, which being one of the eleven fruits of the
holy Ghost, is engendered and begotten of other fruits and privileges, as we
have spoken: yet especially it proceeds from Virtue herself, whose
vndiuidable companion Peace is. Wherefore even as honor and outward reverence
is naturally due unto Virtue; so also the inward peace is due, which in like
manner is both a fruit and a reward of her. The inward war proceeds from
pride, and the unquietness of the passions: but when they are tamed and bridled
by virtues, whose duty and function it is so to work, then all the cause of
the sedition and tumult cease. This is one of those things, in which the
felicity of the heavenly kingdom consists upon earth, of which the Apostle
speaks; The kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, Romans 14.
but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Where, by righteousness
according to the Hebrew phrase, Virtue herself and holiness is understood, of
which we speak in this place: in which together with these two admirable
fruits, that is, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, consists the felicity and
happiness begun and inchoate, which the righteous enjoy in this world. That this
peace is an effect of Virtue herself, the Lord most plainly tells in Esaias;
Esaias, 32.
And the work of justice, says he, shall be peace, even the work of justice
and quietness, and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in the
tabernacle of peace, and in sure dwellings, and in safe resting places. We
must know that in this place, by quietness is understood the inward peace,
which is the tranquillity and quietness of the passions, which trouble the quiet
and peace of the soul with importunate clamours, and disordered and graceles
appetites.

Secondly, The second cause.
this peace arises from the liberty and rule of the subdued passions, of which
we have more largely spoken in the former Chapter. For even as when a City is
taken, and the Citizens subdued, straightwayes there arises peace and
tranquillity in it, so that every one sits under his own roof without
fear, and without suspicion of any hostility: so (...) after the affections of
our soul are subdued and brought under, which are the causes of all troubles,
on a sudden there follows in it an inward quietness, and a wonderful peace,
in which the soul lives quiet and free altogether from war, and from that
importunate altercation and hurley burley of these perturbations. And so it
comes to pass, that as they, when they had rule over him, and exercised their
authority, turmoyled him, and tossed him hither and thither; so when man is free
from their tyranny, and does hold them captive, there is not any thing left,
which may breed sorrow and trouble unto him.

Thirdly, The third cause.
the same peace arises of the greatness of spyrituall consolations, of which we
have also spoken before: by which the desires and affections of our appetite
are brought into such order, that they are stilled, quieted, and content with
that part and portion that happens unto them, according to the disposition of
the upper portion of the soul. For there the part concupiscible thinks her
self satisfied, when she sees her sister contented: and so the whole man
rests and is quieted, by reason of the participation and taste of the chiefest
good.

The fourth cause.
Fourthly, this peace proceeds from the testimony and inward joy of a good
conscience, which brings great quietness and tranquillity to the souls of the
righteous, although it does not make them utterly secure; for they do not
remain without the care and dread of holy fear.

The fifth cause.
Lastly, this fear is engendered of hope, which the righteous have in the
Lord, for that makes them quiet after a singular manner, and comfort men,
in the midst of the tribulations and torments of this life, because they are
strengthened with the anchor of holy hope; that is, they hope that they have
God their father, their tutor, their defender and buckler, under whose shadow
and shield they not without good cause live securely, singing with the Prophet:
Psalm. 4.
I will lay me down, and also sleep in peace: for thou, Lord, only make me
dwell in safety. For hence springs and arises the peace of the righteous,
and a remedy in all their troubles, neither have they any cause to fear or
lament, who have such an helper.

Of the ninth privilege of Virtue: that God hears the prayers of the
righteous, and rejects the prayers of the wicked. CHAP. XXI.
THey that embrace and seek after Virtue, have yet another privilege, besides
those, which hitherto we have spoken of, that is, that their prayers are heard
of God: and this unto them is a notable and an excellent comfort, and a
singular help in all their necessities, A double deluge.
and miseries of this life. For the understanding of this privilege we must
know, that there have been two universal deluges and drownings of this world;
the one material, the other spiritual; and they both had one cause, that is,
Genesis 7.
sin. The material deluge, that was in the time of Noah, left nothing alive in
the world, but those that were in the Arc: for the waters covered all things,
so that the Sea devoured the earth with all the labors and riches of men. But
there was another flood before that, much greater then this: for it did not
only hurt and endamage the men of that age, but it brought deadly destruction
to all the men of the ages past, present, and to come: neither did it only
hurt their bodies, but also their souls; for it spoiled them of all the riches
of grace, which the world had received, by the means of him that was first
formed. And in this miserable estate all things as yet continue, as we may see
in every creature, which newly comes into this world, being naked and
disfurnished of all the goods as well of the soul, as of the body.

From this first deluge all those miseries, beggeries, and calamities are
derived, to which man's life is subject, which are so many and so great, that
learned Writers, and grave Doctors of the Church, have written large and
copious volumes of this matter: Philosophers also very learned, on the one part
considering the dignity of man above all other living creatures, and on the
other unto what great miseries and vices he was subject, they could not wonder
sufficiently at it, seeing so great disorder and misgouernment in the world:
for they understood not the cause, which was sin. For they did note and
mark, that only man, amongst so many living creatures enjoying so many
thousand kinds of pleasures, and desires of the flesh, was vexed with
covetousness, ambition, and insatiable desire to live, neither with these bonds
his misery to be limited, but that he must think of his death and burial,
and what shall become of him after death. Man is more miserable then any living
creature.
There is not any living creature that has a nature more frail, or inflamed
with greater gurmandize or covetousness, neither that fears more vainly, or
more rages through anger. They did also see that other living creatures did
pass the greater part of their life, without sicknesses and infirmity, without
the help of Physicians; and that all necessaries were provided for them,
without their labor or industry. But on the contrary part, they did see that
miserable man was exposed and laid open to a thousand infirmities, mischaunces,
necessities, and greefes, as well of soul as of body, both for himself, and
for his friends. That which is past, greeueth him; that which is present,
afflicts him; that which is to come, terrifieth him; and that oftentimes he
labors and takes pains all his life long, for a morsel of bread, and a
mouth full of water, to sustain himself with all. Neither can I so soon make
an end to speak of these miseries of man's life, of which blessed Job says:
Job, 7.
The life of man is a warfare upon earth, and his days as the days of an
hireling.

This same thing with so great tediousnes afflicted those ancient wise men,
that there be some found amongst them, who feared not to say, that they
doubted, whether Nature was a mother unto us, or not much rather a stepdame,
which has exposed us to so great miseries. A saying of Silenus taken captive
of Mydas. Ovid in the 11, book of his Me^a.
Another said: That it is the best for man never to have been borne, and the
next, soon after to dye. Neither erred he, that said; That many would not have
desired life, if they had made trial of it before. If therefore our life be
thus deformed through sin, and our chiefest renown and principal good lost
through this deluge, what remedy has he left for man, who so grievously has
punished mankind? Tell me, A simily.
what remedy has a lame and a weak sickly man, who sailing upon the Sea,
loses at one mischance all his riches? I know what thou will say unto me, If
he have not whereon to live, say thou, neither has ability to traffic by
reason of his infirmity, it follows of necessity that he must beg. Go to
then, Prayer the only remedy of man.
if man in that universal deluge, lost what so ever he had, and scarcely
escaped the danger poor and naked; what other remedy is left unto him, then
that like a most needy beggar, he call and cry at the gates of the Lord? This
King Iehosophat teaches plainly, 2, Chro. 20.
when he says: Lord, when we are ignorant what we ought to do, we have only
this remedy, that we may lift up our eyes toward thee. ^ say, 38.
To this agrees King Hezechias. From day to night, says he, will thou make an
end of me? Like a young Swallow so did I chatter, I did mourn as a Dove. As
if he should have said: I am so poor, and I do so depend of thy mercy and
providence, that not one day I am assured of my life: Therefore all my exercise
shall be, always to mourn, groan, and pour out my sighs before thee as a
Dove, and I will call and cry out unto thee, as a young Swallow does unto her
Dam. So this holy man spoke, although he was a most mighty King. Also his
Father David being much greater then be, nevertheless in all his need he
ran to this sanctuary, and with the same spirit, and same intent, Psalm, 142,
says; I cried unto the Lord with my voice: with my voice I prayed unto the
Lord, I poured out my meditation before him, and declared mine affliction in
his presence. That is, when I cast mine eyes about looking here and there, I
see all passages stopped, and the gates of hope shut against me; therefore,
when as man's help does fail me, by prayer I desire heavenly aid, which God
has left unto me, as the only refuge and stay in all my troubles and dangers.

Perhaps thou will ask me, whether this remedy be safe, and universal for all
the necessities of our life. How sure a remedy our prayer is.
Unto this (seeing that it depends of the Divine will only) none else can
answer but those, whom God in this matter has chosen to be his Secretaries, as
are the Apostles and Prophets, amongst whom one says: There is no other Nation
so great, Deuteronomy, 4,
unto whom the Gods come so near unto them, as the Lord our God is near unto
us, in all that we call unto him for. These be the words of God himself,
although they be uttered by the mouth of a man, which ought to have greater
credit with us, and to make us in this matter more secure, then all the
testimonies of the world: that is, when we pray, although we see no body, who
answers us, yet we speak not to the walls, neither do we scatter our words
in the wind, but God himself is present, who hears and helps us praying,
pitying our need and preparing remedy for us, if so that remedy be
con^enient and necessary. What therefore can be a greater comfort to one
praying, then to have an earnest and a pledge so certain of the Divine
assistance? But if this be sufficient to comfort and to confirm us in prayer,
how much more shall those things confirm us, which Christ himself speaks,
and that pledge which we have of our labor, as he himself says in the
Gospel: Math, 7,
Ask and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find: knock and it
shall be opened unto you. What pawn can we have more precious, or more
certain then this? Who can call these words into doubt or question? who by
this comfort will not be refreshed and encouraged in all his prayers? whom
will not this royal charter content and satisfy? This is one of the greatest
and chiefest privileges, which attend upon the lovers of virtue in this, that
is, to know that these great and assured promises are especially made for
them. For it is one of the excellentest graces, that our Lord bestows upon
them for the payment of their obedience, that he always is present with them
praying, and that he hears all their prayers. David assures this unto us,
Psalm, 34,
when he says; The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
are open unto their cry. And the Lord promises the same thing by Esaias; Esaias,
58,
Then shall thou call, says he, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here I am. Not only when they cry, but before they shall
cry, the holy Prophet promises, that the Lord shall hear them. This promise
moreover has great force to obtain other promises, as Christ himself says
in John: If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, John, 15,
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. But because the greatness of
this promise did seem to exceed all humane credit, he repeateth the same
thing the second time, and that with greater asseueration, John, 16,
saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask ^ the Father
in my Name, he will give it you. What greater grace or favor can be showed?
What greater riches given? or what greater domination? Ask what you will, says
he, and it shall be given unto you. O word worthy of such a promiser: who could
promise this that is not God? What power could extend it self to things so
hard and magnificent, but the power of God alone?

How far prayer extends it self.
This after some manner, makes man the Lord of all, this delivers unto him
the key of the Divine treasuries. All other gifts, and Divine graces have the^
lymits, in which they are circumscribed. But this amongst the rest, as a royal
gift of the infinite Lord, has the nature of his infinitenes, that it is
neither determined with these, or those limits: but it is said, all whatsoever
ye will, so that it be conducent to your salvation. And if men were just prisers
and esteemers of things, how greatly were they to esteem this promise? Of what
great worth would a man make it, if he had found this favor with some King,
who would give unto him, whatsoever he should ask? If an earthly King would be
in such price with thee, shall not this heavenly King be in greater? But if
thou shall esteem these to be naked words, and that the effect and fruit
does not follow the promise, look into the lives of the Saints, and consider
what they have done only by prayer. How great things did Moses in Egypt, and
in all that journey through the wilderness, What great things the Saints have
done by prayer.
only by prayer? What great things did Elias and Elizeus effect and bring to
pass, only by prayer? What great miracles did the Apostles by prayer only?
With this Armor did the Saints fight: with this they have overthrown the
power of devils; by this they have triumphed over the world: by this they have
exceeded nature: by this they have mittigated and quenched the heat of fire: to
conclude, by this they have pacified the wrath of the Lord, and have obtained
whatsoever they would.

This therefore is the reward promised to the obedience of the righteous, that
seeing they are so faithful and obedient to the voice of the Lord, he
semblably deals with them; and because they answer unto his voice, when he
calls and cries unto the^, it is meet that he should remunerate them after
the same manner. Hence it is that Solomon says, That an obedient man does
speak of victory; Prou, 12,
for it is meet, that God should do the will of man, when man does the will
of God.

Hitherto of the prayer of the righteous. But contrarily speaks the Lord of
the prayer of the wicked; Esaias, 1,
When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: and
though you make many prayers, Ierem, 2,
I will not hear. And by Jeremy the Lord does threaten them, saying: And in
the time of their trouble, they will say: Arise and help us. But where are
thy gods that thou have made thee? Let them arise, if they can help thee in
the time of thy trouble. Job, 27,
In the book of Job also it is written; For what hope has the hypocrite, when
he has heaped up riches, if God take away his soul? Will God hear his cry
when trouble comes upon him? And also Saint John in his Canonical Epistle
does subscribe unto this; Beloved, 1, John, 3,
says he, if our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God. And
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. Not unlike to this, is that
of the Psalmographer, If I regard wickedness in mine heart, Psalm, 66,
the Lord will not hear me. But God has heard me, and considered the voice
of my prayer: because I have not dealt wickedly.

A thousand such like authorities may be brought out of the holy Scriptures, of
which may be easily gathered the difference, which is between the prayers of
the righteous, and of the wicked, and by consequent, how far the one part
excels the other, when as the one is heard, and dealt with all as sons,
the other rejected as enemies. For when they do not join good works to their
prayers, neither that devotion and fervor of spirit, neither that charity and
humility, which is required: it is no marvel, if they be not heard. For the
petition, as Ciprian says, is not forcible, when the prayer is barren.

Of the tenth privilege of Virtue: which is the help and favor of God, which
the righteous feel and taste of in their tribulations: and of the impatience
and torment of the wicked in carrying theirs. CHAP. XXII.
Virtue also has another privilege no less admirable: that is, that strength
and fortitude is given to the lovers of Virtue, that they may bear their
tribulations with joy, which in this life shall never be wanting unto them. For
we know, that there is not any sea so stormy and rempestuous in this world, Our
life is a Sea.
as our life is: for in it there is not found any felicity so safe and secure,
which is not subject to a thousand kinds of casualties, which at all times
hang over our heads. Surely it is a thing worthy of consideration, to see with
what great difference good and evil men do pass through this miserable
world: for the good, knowing that they have GOD to be their Father, and that it
is he, that bids them drink of this cup, like unto a medicine prescribed of a
most wise and skillful Physician; and that tribulation is as a file, the which
the sharper it is it so much the more makes the soul purer, brighter, and
more shining, and does scour of all the rust: and considering in like manner,
that it is it, which makes men humbler in their thoughts; more fervent in
their prayers, and more pure in their consciences: I say that the righteous
knowing and considering of these things and the like, cast down their heads,
and are humbled as little ones, in the time of tribulation: and also they pour
in water into the cup of affliction, or (that I may speak better) God himself
pours it in: Psalm 80.
who, as the Prophet says, Gives us tears to drink in measure. God does
temper and prop^rtionate tribulations according to the strength and ability of
men.
There is no Physician, that with so great care and diligence does measure and
proportionate the quantity of his physic, which he gives to his diseased
patient, according to the quallity of his complexion: as our heavenly Physician
does proportionate the medicine of tribulation, which he deuideth to the
righteous, according to the quality of their strength, by which they may be
able to bear it.

But if at any time the labor and pain increases, the help and aid also
increases, least man should faint: and he is made so much the richer, by how
much his tribulation is mightier: that he may not fly from it, Tribulation
profitable.
as from a dangerous and hurtful thing; but that he may desire it, as a
merchandise of great gain. For these causes the righteous oftentimes do bear
calamities and miseries, not only with patience, but also with joy. For they
do not look upon the labor, but upon the reward: not upon the pain, but
upon the crown: not upon the bitterness of the medicine, but upon the health
which it brings: not upon the grief of the chasticement, but upon the love
of the chasticer, who himself says, that he chasticeth every one whom he
loves. The aid of the Divine grace, does join it self to this
consideration, as already we have said; which never forsakes the righteous in
the ^me of tribulation.

For seeing that God is so true and faithful a friend unto his, God is present
with the righteous in tribulation.
he is never nearer unto them, then in their tribulation and trouble: although
the contrary seems to be true. Run throughout all the holy Scripture, and
thou shall scarcely find any thing, which is so often repeated and promised,
as this which we here speak of. Is it not written of him, that he is a helper
in need and tribulation? Is it not he, that inuiteth us, to call upon him at
that time? Psalm. 50.
Call upon me, says he, in the day of trouble: so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. Does not the Prophet testify this, as having had
experience of it himself? When I called, Psalm. 4.
says he, the God of my righteousness heard me, thou o God have set me at
liberty, when I was in distress. Is not he that Lord, Psalm. 55.
in whom the same Prophet trusting said; I will wait for the Lord, who has
delivered me from faynting, and from the stormy wind and tempest. Which
tempest is not of this Sea, but that, which afflicts and excruciateth the
heart of him that faynteth and, is weak, when it is troubled; which tempest, by
so much is the greater, by how much the heart is weaker and seebler. This truth
the same Prophet confirms in many places, either with the same words, or with
words more effectual: both that we might be confirmed in the faith of this
truth: and also that we might be strengthened and comforted in our weakness.
Psalm. 35.
For the salvation, says he, of the righteous is of the Lord, and he is their
protector in the time of tribulation: and the Lord shall help them and
deliver them, and shall take them from among sinners. and shall save them,
because they trusted in him. And in another place yet more plainly. Psalm. 31.
How great is thy goodness o Lord, which thou have laid up for them, that fear
thee, and done to thew^ that trust in thee, even before the sons of men. Thou
do hide them privily in thy presence from the pride of men: thou keep
them secretly in thy Tabernacle from the strife of tongues. Blessed be the
Lord: for he has showed his marvelous kindness toward me in a strong City.
Though I said in mine have, I am cast out of thy sight, yet thou heardest the
voice of my prayer, when I cried unto thee. Thou see here how manifestly the
Prophet demonstrateth the favor and aid, which the righteous have of God in
their greatest and sorest troubles. But it is to be noted, that he says; Thou
do hide them privily in thy presence, A simily.
signifying (as a certain interpreter says) that as a King when he would
keep any man safe from danger; places him in his Palace, that not only the
walls of the King, but also the eyes of the King may defend him from his
enemies: then the which guard none can be safer: so the heavenly King by the
same providence does defend his. Hence it is that we see and read, that the
Saints oftentimes being compassed with many dangers and temptations have
endured them, and borne them with a mind quiet and untroubled, and with ^
countenance and iesture cheerful, pleasant, and merry. For they are assured
that they have that faithful guard present, which will never forsake them: and
then chiefly and especially to be present, Dan. 3.
when the dangers come to the highest. Those three young men felt this, whom
Nabuchodonozer commanded at Babylon to be cast into the fiery furnace: among
whom the Angel of the Lord walked in the midst of the fire, and cast out the
flame of the fire out of the furnace, and made the midst of the furnace like a
cool and refreshing wind, and the fire touched them not, neither troubled
them, nor brought any greeuance unto them. And the King was astonished, and
said; Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? And behold,
I see four men loosed, and walking in the midst of the fire. And the fourth is
beautiful as the son of God. Thou see then how the presence of our Lord is
at hand in troubles. That argument of this matter is not less, which the Lord
performed for that holy young man Joseph, after he was sold of his brethren.
Wised. 10.
For hedeliuered him from sin (as it is in the book of Wisdom) he went
down with him into the dungeon, and failed him not in the bands: till he had
brought him the seepter of the realm, and power against those that oppressed
him, and them that had accused him, he declared to be liars, and gave him
perpetual glory.

These examples confirm that Divine promise, which is in David: I am with him,
says the Lord, in trouble; I will deliver him, and I will honor him. O happy
trouble, which deserves to have such a companion. Which seeing that it is so,
let us all lift up our voices with Saint Bernard, and say: O Lord send me
trouble, All virtues help the afflicted.
that thou may always be with me. With this the aid and supply of all
virtues do join themselves, which concur at this time, that they may
strengthen, corroborate, and raise up the distressed mind. For even as when
the heart is distressed and afflicted, A simily.
all the blood from every part runs thither, that it may relieve and comfort
it, that it faint not: so the soul when it is oppressed with grief and
anguish, forthwith all the virtues run unto it, and relieve it, now after
this manner, now after that. But after a more especial manner Faith is present,
bringing a clear and plain knowledge both of the good things, and of the
evil in the life to come: in comparison of which, all the calamities and
miseries of this world are of no moment. Hope comes, which makes men patient
in all their troubles and afflictions, in looking for a reward. The love of God
comes, with which love they being inflamed, desire with great feruentnes to
bear all kind of sorrows and afflictions in this life. Obedience and the
conforming of our wills with the Divine will runs and hastes hither; at
whose hands they receive with joy, and without murmuring, whatsoever is given
unto them. Patience joins herself unto these, whose property is to
strengthen the shoulders, that men may be able to bear all those burdens,
which are laid upon them. Humility has also here her function and work,
which bends the heart as a young twig, shaken and tossed to and fro of the
stormy wind of tribulation, and makes man to be humbled under the mighty hand
of the Lord; whilst he acknowledges, that those things which he suffers are
much lesser, then his sins (...). To conclude, the consideration of the
labors and ^orrowes of Christ crucified, and the afflictions of all the holy
Saints do exceedingly help, in comparison of whom all our tribulations are as
though they were not.

Mimesis, called the figure of imitation, or counterfetting of words and
iestures. Romans 8.
After this manner therefore the virtues help them, who are in affliction and
calamity; every one with their proper and peculier functions; neither only
with their functions, but also (if I may say so) with their words and
exhortations. First of all (...): The afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us. Charity says, that it is
meet and reason, that we should suffer and bear all things for his love, who
so dearly and tenderly has loved us. Gratitude says with blessed Job; Job, 2.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Repentance
says, it is meet, that he should suffer something against his will, who so
often has wrought wickedness against the Divine will. Faythfulnes adds, that
it is right and reason, that he should be once found faithful and grateful in
his life, who has received so great gifts, and so many graces of God through
the whole course of his life. Patience admonishes, that tribulations are the
matter of patience, Or do bring forth patience: Romans 5.
and patience brings forth experience, and experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed. Obedience says, that there is not a greater sacrifice, or more
acceptable to God, then in all trouble to conform ourselves to the good
pleasure of Gods will. But amongst all the virtues, lively Hope helps man in
that time, after a singular and an especial manner, and it wonderfully
strengthens our heart in the midst of tribulations. The Apostle declares
this, who when he had said; Rejoicing in hope, Rom, 12,
he further adds, and patient in tribulation: not being ignorant that one
follows another: that is, of the joy of Hope, follows the fortitude of
Patience. For which cause the Apostle not vnelegantly calls Hope an anchor:
Hope is an Anchor. Hebr, 6,
for even as when it is fastened into the earth, it keeps the ship safe,
which stays in the midst of the waves, and makes it, that it fears not the
billows of the raging sea: so lively Hope, being firmly fixed upon the
heavenly promises, preserves the mind of the righteous unremoved in the midst
of the waves of this world, and makes it, that it contemns and despises all
the storm and tempest of the winds. So it is reported that a certain holy man
did in times past, who seeing himself enclosed on every side with
tribulations, said: That good that I look for is so great, that all punishment
and all torment is a pleasure unto me.

Therefore thou understand, my brother, how all virtues concur to
strengthen the minds of the righteous, when they see them in a straight. And
although a man be weak and fearful, yet forthwith he returns to himself,
and to his right mind, and with greater affection and zeal, says: If thou
shall fail in the time of trial, when God has determined to try and prove
thee, where is thy lively Faith, by which thou beleeuest in him? where is thy
charity? where is thy fortitude? where is thy obedience? where is thy patience?
where is thy faithfulness? and where is thy strength of hope? Is this the end
of all thy labors? is this thy good purpose? is this that thou so often
desiredst, and prayedst to God for? Remember, that Christianity consists not
only in this, Wherein true Christianity consists.
to fast, to pray, to hear service and sermons, but it is necessary, that God
find thee faithful, as another Job, or Abraham, in the time of trouble. A
righteous man being helped after this manner by his good meditations and
contemplations, by his own virtue, and by the favor of the Divine grace,
which never forsakes him, at length comes to that pass, that he bears the
burden of his troubles not only with patience, but also with thanksgiving,
and with great joy. A proof of this, is the example of the holy man Tobias the
elder, of whom it is written, that after many calamities, with which he was
proved; yea by Gods sufferance he lost his sight in his old age, that an
example of patience might be given unto men: he was neither consumed through
grief of mind, neither lost he that says and obedience, which before he had.
Wherefore the Scripture says; Tob, 2.
But God therefore suffered this temptation to happen unto him, that an example
of his patience might remain unto posterity: like as of holy Job. For when as
he had always feared God, even from his infancy, and had kept his
commandments, he did not murmur against God, that this plague of blindness
fell upon him: but he remained immovable in the fear of GOD, giving thanks
to God all the days of his life.

Thou see therefore, that the holy Ghost does add patience in troubles,
unto virtue and unto the fear of the Lord, which this holy man had, according
to that, which before has been said. There might also in this place be
remembered certain excellent and famous examples of our time: in which certain
men and maids, the servants of GOD, have borne very great troubles and
afflictions with great joy: who in bitterness have found sweetness, in tempest
a calm, and in the midst of the Babylonian furnace have found a most wholesome
and comfortable refreshing.

Of the impatience and fury of the wicked in tribulations.
THere is lesser cause to praise the Lord, when we see the righteous constant
in tribulation; then there is to lament and grieve, when we see the wicked
compassed and enclosed with troubles. The wicked are unfit to bear
tribulations.
For these have neither charity, nor fortitude, nor hope, nor any virtues like
unto those: and so tribulations find them unarmed and unprepared: neither have
they light, by benefit of which they might see that, which the righteous do
see through faith: neither do they embrace that by a lively hope, neither by
experience have they tried that singular goodness, and fatherly providence of
God, by which he watches over his. It is a thing worthy of exceeding sorrow,
to see them swallowed up in this sea, neither to find any footing, nor any
body to reach the hand unto them to stay and support them. For whilst they have
not this help, and sail without this Pilot and Governor, and fight without
this Armor, what is to be hoped for of the^, but that they must be drowned and
make shypwracke in that storm and tempest: or that they must be slain in this
war? What is to be hoped for of them, but that they must be tossed with the
storms of winds, and with the floods of tribulations: and that they must
split their ship against the rocks of wrath, faint-hartednes, impatience,
blasphemy, and desperation?

There are many also found, The force of impatience.
who furthermore have lost their understanding, their health, their life, or
else their sight, through continual mourning and tears. So that one part of
men, as most pure gold, tried in the fire of affliction, remains firm and
unconquerable: and another part, as lead or tin, foorth-with is melted
through the heat of the fire. Therefore, whilst one sorroweth, another sings;
and where one is drowned and choked, another swimmeth and walks dry foot:
therefore in the Tabernacles of the righteous, always the voice of praise and
mirth does sound; but in the houses of sinners, lamentations are always
heard, and voices full of misery and confusion. But if thou will more plainly
understand that which I say, consider the sighs and sorrows, and the extreme
lamentations of certain great noble women, after that by death they had lost a
son or a husband; and thou shall find, that some of the^ have closely shut
up themselves in obscure and dark places, where they might neither see the
Sun, nor the Moon: others, like beasts, shut themselves up in Caves and
Dens of the earth; others, have cast themselves into the fire: others, to
whom life was a pain, and death a desire, have dashed out their own brains
against a wall. To be brief, others after easier manners through impatience,
and vehemency of sorrow, have ended their lives, and overthrown their
families. But this is more, that not only they have been cruel and inhumane
unto themselves, but they have maliciously spurned against God, blaspheming his
Name, and reuiling and reproching his providence, cursing his justice, banning
his mercy, and opening their sacriligious mouths against heaven, and against
the high and sovereign majesty of God. Hence it is that calamities and
miseries at the length do rain and shoure upon their houses, and their
miseries are doubled, Miseries are doubled upon the impatient.
which the Lord sends unto them for so great blasphemies. For this reward
deserves he, who spetteth in the face of God, and willingly kicketh against
the prick. Yea, oftentimes this work of the hand of GOD, is wont to be most
just, that he suffers man from one calamity and tribulation, to fall into
greater. Wherefore, these unhappy and miserable wretches, the guidance of
Virtue leaving them, do all things after a contrary and preposterous manner,
and do pervert all order in the time of tribulation: they blaspheme, where
they ought to bless; they are proud, when humility is required; augmenting
their own woe and misfortune with that punishment they bring upon themselves;
and making their case more desperate, with that medicine, which they thought to
apply vntothemselues: which is as the beginning of one hell, and going to
another, which is prepared. For if hell be a place of punishments and sins,
what hinders, but that we may say, that there is a certain resemblance of
hell, where so many punishments, and so many sins, are found.

Mourning does nothing profit the impatient.
But besides all these, what grief is it to see, howsoever it be done, yet that
there is no remedy but that tribulation must be suffered: but to take them
upon us, and to bear them with patience, does make the burden lighter, and is
well pleasing unto God: but how miserable is that man, which loses the fruit
of his patience, for bear he must, and increases by impatience the bitterness
of his condition, which sorer afflicts then the misfortune. It is a miserable
thing to labor, and to have no fruit of the labor, neither to profit any
thing by it. But much more greater is it, to lose that is gotten by labor: and
when thou have an ill night, to lose also a good day. All these things do
manifestly teach, with what great difference good and evil men do bear
tribulations: how great peace, joy, and strength the good do feel, when as
the wicked do suffer so great afflictions and perturbations of the mind.

This was in times past excellently shadowed, in that great clamor and
lamentation, which was heard throughout the whole land of Egypt, Exodus 12,
when the Lord had smitten all their first borne, neither was there an house,
in which there was not a cry: but in the land of Goshen, where the children of
Israel dwelt, there was quiet rest, so that a dog did not bark against any
one. But what shall I besides this peace speak of the profit, One and the
self some tribulation, does profit the righteous, and hurt the wicked.
which the righteous draw out of tribulations, by which the wicked do reap so
great losses and hurts. For, as Chrysostom says, from one and the self same
fire, both the gold is made bright and shyning, and the wood is burnt and
consumed: so by the fire of affliction, the righteous is made more beautiful,
as gold; but the unrighteous, as dry and unfruitful wood, is turned into coals
and ashes. Augustine in his first book of City of God, cap. 8
Not unlike to this is the sentence of Augustine. Under the same flayle, says
he, the husks are diminished and broken, but the grane purged and purified:
neither therefore is the mother or lees confounded with the oil, because they
are pressed and trodden under the same press or plancke: so one and the self
same weight pressing the good and the badde, does try, purify, and purge the
good; but does damnifie, consume, and wast the bad. Whereupon, in the same
affliction the wicked do detest and blaspheme God: but the righteous do pray
unto him, and praise him. So much it behooves, not what is suffered, but who
suffers it. For by the same motion in sifting a thing the refusse is tossed
forth, and the spyce does smell fragrantly. This says he. Exodus, 14,
The same thing also is prefigured by the Red Sea, which not only did not
swallow up the children of Israel, but it was a wall unto them on their right
hand and on their left. But on the contrary part, those waters returning to
their course, overwhelmed the Charrets and the horsemen of all the Army of
Pharao, and drowned them in the midst of the sea. The waters therefore of
tribulation are for the greater protection and safeguard of the good, and also
for the preservation and exercise of their humility and patience. But unto the
wicked, they are as dangerous and deadly waters, which swalloweth them into the
pit of impatience, blasphemy, and desperation.

Thou have therefore, my brother, another prerogative, by which virtue
excels vice, for which the Philosophers loved, and so greatly esteemed
phylosophie, supposing, that it belonged only to philosophy, to make men
constant in affliction. But they were deceived in this, as also in many other
things: for as neither true Virtue, Constancy in affliction is not to be sought
in Philosophy.
so neither true constancy, is to be found amongst Philosophers, but in the
school of that Lord, who being nailed upon the Cross, does comfort his by his
own example, and reigning in heaven does strengthen them by his spirit, and
promising them eternal glory, by a lively hope does raise up their minds:
which comforts are not to be found in humane Philosophy.

Of the eleventh privilege of Virtue, that is, that the Lord does provide
temporal blessings for the lovers of Virtue. CHAP. XXIII.
Whatsoever hitherto has been spoken, pertayneth to the spiritual blessings
and riches, which the Lord God in this life, besides the eternal glory of the
life to come, bestows upon the lovers of Virtue. But these blessings are
promised to the world, at the coming of Christ, as the Oracles of the Prophets
have foretold. Therefore rightly he is called the Savior of the world, seeing
that by him true salvation is given: as grace, wisdom, peace, victory, and
conquest over our passions and affections: the comfort also of the holy Ghost,
the riches of hope, and to conclude, all other blessings, which are required to
the attaynement of this salvation; of which the Prophet said; Israel shall be
saved in the Lord, Esaias. 45.
with an everlasting salvation. But if any man be found so carnal, who more
respects temporal blessings, or the welfare of the flesh, rather then
spiritual blessings, or the welfare of the spirit, as the Jews did; let him
proceed, I will not that therefore there should be varience and contention
between us: yea, we will give him longer space to deliberate of this matter,
then he himself would desire. Tell me, what means that of the vvise-man,
when directing his speech to speak of true wisdom, in which the perfection
of Virtue consists, Prou. 3.
he says; Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches
and glory? So that she has in her hands two kind of blessings, to which she
inuiteth men: in one she has eternal blessings, and in the other temporal.
Do not think that God does forsake his, so that they perish through hunger:
neither is he so improvident or so negligent, that seeing he gives meat in
due season to Ants and Worms of the earth: God does not suffer his to be
hungerstarned. Math. 6.
that he will suffer men to famish, who night and day serve in his house. But
if thou will not believe me, read^ if it please thee the sixth Chapter of Matthew
through, and thou shall see and find the certainty and assured pledge of this
promise. Behold, says the Lord, the fowls of the heaven: for they sow not,
neither reap, nor carry into the barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds
them. Are ye not much better then they? And concluding this matter, he adds;
Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink?
or wherewith shall we be clothed? For after all these things seek the
Gentiles. For your heavenly father knows, that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be ministered unto you. For this cause the kingly Prophet
inuiteth us to serve the Lord, Psalm. 34.
saying; O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him lack
nothing. The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord,
shall want no manner of thing that is good. And this is so certain, that the
same Prophet says in another place. Psalm 37.
I have been young and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging their bread. But if thou desire a longer tractate of
this matter, that thou may see what the righteous are to look for; hear
what great things God in Deuteronomy promises to the obseruers of his law; If,
says he, thou shall harken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
Deuteronomy. 28.
and observe and do all his commandments, which I command thee this day:
the Lord will set thee on high above all nations of the earth. And all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shall harken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed in
the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Blessed shall
thou be when thou come in, and blessed when thou go out. The Lord shall
give over thine enemies that rise against thee, that they may fall before thy
face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven
ways. The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and
in all that thou set thine hand unto, and will bless thee in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee. The Lord shall make thee on holy people
unto himself, as he has sworn unto thee: if thou shall keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways. And all nations of
the earth shall see, that the name of the Lord is called upon over thee, and
they shall be afraid of thee. And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods,
in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of
thy ground, in the land which the Lord swear unto thy fathers to give thee. The
Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give rain unto thy
Land in due season, and to bless all the labors of thy hand.

The temporal promises of the old Testament after some manner do also
pertayne unto the righteous of the new Testament.
Tell me, what riches, what treasures may be compared to these blessings? But
if thou shall say, that these promises are rather made unto the Jews, then
unto Christians: (for unto these according to Ezechiel those more excellent
blessings, as are the blessings of grace, and of glory, are promised) yet as in
that carnal law, God did not deny to the righteous Jews spyrituall
blessings, so in the spiritual law he does not withdraw temporal prosperity
from good Christians: yea, he does give unto them temporal blessings, and
that with a double commodity; neither of which the wicked have. The first is,
because as a skillful Physician, he bestows these blessings upon them after
that measure, which their need requires: that by this way they may be
relieved, and not wax proud, neither being fatted and crammed kick and
spurn. This commodity the wicked have not; for they scrape together as much as
they are able, never regarding their salvation. When as notwithstanding the
superfluity of temporal goods is not less hurtful to the soul, then that
meat is to the body, which cannot be by any means digested. A similitude.
For although it is necessary and needful to eat for the relief and
sustentation of the body: yet superfluity of meat does very much hurt. So
although the life of man consists in the blood, yet too much abundance of
blood, is the cause of death, and oftentimes kills men. The second commodity
is, because lesser pelse, and a measurable and an indifferent possession of
riches does bring greater quietness and tranquillity unto the soul: which is
the end, why men with such greedines desire temporal goods. For whatsoever God
can do by second causes, he can do it, yea more perfectly, by himself,
without those means. So has he done in all his Saints; in whose name the
Apostle says: 2, Cor. 8.
Having nothing, and possessing all things: For so little does suffice us, that
we having very little, and being therewith content, we seem unto our selves to
be the Lords of the whole world. A similitude.
A trauailer for his provision in his voyage carries his money in gold: for so
he is the richer, and he is troubled with less weight: after the same manner
also our Lord does lighten his, laying upon them but easy burdens, but yet
sufficient, and that which may content them. After this manner the righteous
do go naked, yet they are content: they are poor, and yet they are rich. But
the rich when they are full of wealth, yet dye for hunger; and when as they sit
even up to the lips in water, yet they are slain with thirst, as the Poets in
times past fabled of Tantalus. For this and such like causes, that great
Prophet long ago did praise the observance of the Divine law, willing that in
it all our meditation should be. For he knew very well, that in this all things
were fulfilled. These be his words. Deuteronomy. 6.
Seat all these words in your hearts and in your souls, and bind them for a
sign upon your hands, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes. And
ye shall teach and rehearse them continually unto your children, and shall
talk of them when ye tarry in your houses, and when ye walk by the way, and
when ye lie down, and when ye rise up. Also thou shall write them upon the
posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: that thy days, and the days of thy
children may be multiplied in the Land, which the Lord swear unto your fathers,
In the keeping of the law al good things are found.
to give ye for eue^r. O holy Prophet, what I pray thee have thou found worthy
of so great commendation in the keeping of the law? It is not to be doubted,
but thou, who wast so great a Prophet, and a Secretary of the Divine counsel,
did understand the inestimable greatness of this good; and knew that in it
were to be found all kind of blessings, present, and to come; temporal, and
eternal; corporal, and spiritual; and he that has satisfied the law, has
fulfilled all things. Thou knew very well, To him that keeps the law of
the Lord all
that a man did not loose his time, when he was occupied in doing Gods will:
yea, then to labor in his own Vineyard: then to water his gardens; to till
his fields; and to dispatch all his business better, things succeed and prosper
well.
then if he had labored with his own hands: for he satisfying Gods will,
casts all his care upon God, who finisheth all the rest. For this is the law
of the league and federacie, which God made with man; that man should keep his
commandments, and God would provide all necessary things for him, and do his
business. Neither shall this league and covenant be ever violated of God. For if
man be a faithful servant unto God, God will be a faithful Lord and patron
unto man. Luke, 10.
This is that one thing which the Lord said was necessary: that is, to know, to
love, and to serve God; for this one thing being kept and observed, all the
rest are well and in safety. 1, Tim. 4.
Godliness, says Paul, is profitable unto all things, which has the promise
of the life present, and of that, that is to come. See, I pray thee, how
plainly here the Apostle promises unto godliness, (which is the worship and
service of God) not only the blessings of eternal life, but also of this
life: as much as are conducent to obtain the other. But we must note here,
that labor is not excluded: for man must also labor and do that lies in
him, according to the quality of his estate and condition.

Of the scarsitie and poverty of the wicked.
But if any man on the contrary part would know, how great the adversities,
calamities, and pouerties of the wicked be, let him read the eight and twenty
Chapter of Deuteronomie, and there he shall find those things, that both will
make him wonder and tremble. Amongst many other things thus speaks the
Scripture: Deuteronomy. 28.
But if thou will not harken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and
to do all his commandments, and his ordinances, which I command thee this
day, all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall
thou be in the City, and cursed in the field. Cursed shall be thy basket and
thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy Land,
and the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shall thou
be when thou go in, and cursed when thou go out. The Lord shall send upon
thee cursing, destruction, and rebuke, in all that thou set thine hand to,
and that thou do, until he destroy thee, and bring thee to naught quickly,
because of the wickedness of thine inventions, and because thou have forsaken
me. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have
consumed thee from of the Land whether thou go to enjoy it. The Lord shall
smite thee with swelling, with feauers, heat, burning, and with the sword,
with blasting and mildeaw: and they shall follow thee until thou perrish. And
the heaven that is over thy head, shall be brass, and the earth that is under
thee shall be iron. The Lord shall turn the rain of the Land into powder and
dust, from heaven shall they come down upon thee, until thou be brought to
naught. And the Lord shall cause thee to fall before thine enemies: thou shall
come out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them, and shall be
scattered among all the kingdoms of the earth. And thy carcass shall be meat
unto all manner of fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no
man shall fray them away. The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and
the Emerods, scab, and itch, that thou may not be healed thereof. And the
Lord shall smite thee with madness and blindness, and dazing of heart. Thou shall
grope at noone days, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and shall not prosper in
thy ways: Thou shall be oppressed with wrong, and be polled evermore, and no
man shall succor thee. Thou shall be betrothed unto a wife, and another man
shall lie with her: thou shall build an house, and not dwell therein: thou
shall also plant a vineyard, and shall not gather the grapes. Thine Ox shall be
slain before thine eyes, and thou shall not eat thereof: thine Ass shall be
violently taken away before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee again:
thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and no man shall rescue them. Thy
sons and thy daughters, shall be given unto another Nation, and thine eyes
shall see it, and daze upon the^ all the day long: and there shall be no might
in thine hand. The fruit of thy Land, and all thy labors, shall a Nation
which thou know not, eat up: and thou shall continually suffer violence,
and be oppressed always: so that thou shall be clean beside thy self, for the
sight of thine eyes which thou shall see. The Lord shall smite thee in the
knees and legs with a mischievous botch, that cannot be healed, from the sole
of thy foot unto the top of thy head. The Lord shall bring thee and thy
King, which thou shall set over thee, unto a Nation, which neither thou, nor
thy Fathers have known, that there thou may serve strange Gods, wood and
stone. And thou shall be wondered at, spoken of, and iested at, among all
Nations whether the Lord shall carry thee. At the length, after many and
horrible curses, he adds, saying: And all these curses shall come upon thee,
and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed: because thou harkenedst not unto the
voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments, and his ordinances
which he commanded thee. And they shall be upon thee for signs and wonders,
and upon thy seed for ever: because thou ser^edst not the Lord thy God with
ioyfulnesse, and with a good heart, when thou had abundance of all things.
Therefore shall thou serve thine enemy, which the Lord shall send upon thee, in
hunger and thirst, in nakedness, and in need of all things: and he shall put a
yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have brought thee to naught. And the Lord
shall bring a Nations upon thee from far, and from the end of the world, as
swift as an Eagle flies, a Nation whose tongue thou shall not understand: A
nation of a shameless and cruel countenance, which shall not regard the
person of the old, nor have compassion on the young. The same shall eat the
fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until he have destroyed
thee: and shall leave thee neither Corn, Wine, nor Oil, neither the increase
of thy Kine, nor the flocks of thy sheep, until he have brought thee to
naught. And he shall keep thee in, in all thy Cities, until he have cast down
thy hie walls, and strong holds wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
^and: and he shall besiege thee in all thy Cities throughout all thy ^and
which the Lord thy God has given thee. And thou shall eat the fruit of thine
own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God
has given thee, in that straightnes and siege wherewith thine enemies shall
enclose thee.

All these be the words of the holy Scripture; but there are many more in the
same Chapter, which we do now leave of to remember. Which if they be read with
attention and diligence, they will make a man, whatsoever he be, to be amazed,
and to faint and die in courage, for the horror of so dreadful and fearful
things. And he that shall read, peradventure shall open his eyes, and shall
begin somewhat to understand the rigor of the Divine justice, and the cruel
maliciousnes of sinners, and of the great hate that the Lord bears toward
sin, seeing that he does punish it in this world with such horrible
punishments; whence we may easily conjecture, what is to be looked for in the
world to come.

Furthermore, it may irke the wicked of their insensablenesse and calamity,
because they live as though they were blind, neither do they see, what is
referued for the^, or what punishments are prepared. The foresaid curses are
proved by examples.
Neither think that these threatenings are in vain, only words and speeches
invented to terrify men: for as they are threatenings, so are they true
prophecies of the calamities, into which the people should fall. For in the
time of Achab king of Israel, when Samaria was besieged by the Army of the
king of Syria, we read that men did eat the dunge of Doves, and that this
kind of meat was sold for a great price. But this was not so much, at the
length it came to that pass, that mothers did kill and eat the children of
their own womb. Josephus also writes, that the same happened at the siege of
Jerusalem. But the slaughters and captiuities of this people, together with the
utter overthrow of the Commonwealth and the kingdom of the Jews, are so well
known to all, that here they need not to be rehearsed. An eleven of their
Tribes were made perpetual servants to the Kings of Assyria: that one Trybe
which remained, a long time after being vanquished, was brought into servitude
under the Romans: in which destruction, exceeding great was the number of the
captives, but greater was the number of those that were slain, as the same
Historiographer copiously describes.

Neither let any one deceive himself, saying: that this calamity pertains
only to the Jewish nation: Those curses pertain also to christians. Amos, 9,
seeing that it generally appertains to all men, who have knowledge of the
Divine law, and do despise it, neither will obey it, as the Lord himself
testifies by his Prophet; Have not I brought up Israel out of the Land of
Egypt, and the Philistines from Cappadocia, and the Syrians from Cyrene?
Behold, the eyes of the Lord God, are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will
destroy it clean out of the earth. Signifying, that all these changes of
kingdoms, whereby this kingdom is overthrown, and that planted and raised up,
does come through sin. And if any one will see that this is true, let him
read over the histories of times past, and he shall understand, how God does
chastise the froward and perverse; but especially those, that have the true
law, and do not keep it. He shall see, how great a part of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, which in times past were full of Churches, and of Christian people,
now are possessed of Infidels: and he shall know also what great massacres,
ruins, and destructions, the Goths, Hunnes, and Vandales have made upon the
Churches; who in the time of Saint Augustine, See Jerome in his Epitaph upon
Fabiol. c. 3.
destroyed and wasted the Provinces of Africa, and that without any mercy or
compassion; they sparing neither men nor women; neither old nor young; neither
Virgins nor married. At the same time also, and after the same manner, the
kingdom of Dalmatia was wasted, with the bordering Countries, as Saint Jerome
shows, Jerome upon the 4. chap. of Osea.
who was borne in that Country: insomuch, that he that should have passed
through and traveled those Countries, should have seen nothing but heaven and
earth; all things were so ruinated and overthrown. Yea, if we will look into
our own times, we shall see, what slaughters, and effusion of Christian blood,
what desolations and euersions of Cities, sin has caused in France,
Belgia, and many other Countries? What mighty massacres, and lamentable
diuastations has sin brought upon the world by the sword of the Turks,
those professed enemies of Christianity, who still brandish their swords
against Christendom, for the sins of Christians? These sufficient plainly
do declare, how that true virtue, and sincere religion, are not only
profitable to the obtaining of eternal blessings, but also to get and keep
temporal blessings: that the consideration of all these may inflame our minds
with the love of Virtue, which preserves us from so many mischiefs, and
brings with it so many good things.

Of the twelfth privilege of Virtue: that is, of the quiet, peaceable, and
joyful death of the righteous: and contrarily, of the wretched, miserable,
painful, disquiet, and grievous death of sinners. CHAP. XXIIII.
THE last privilege and prerogative, at the length is joined to the precedent;
that is, the death, and the glorious end of the righteous, when they depart out
of the prison of this body: unto the which end all the rest of the privileges
are destinated and ordained. Because in the end (as we are wont to say) the
praise is proclaimed. Tell me, what is more glorious, or what more delightsome
then the end of the just and righteous? And contrarily, what is more wretched
or unhappy, then the death of sinners? Psalm, 116.
Right dear and precious, says the Psalmogapher, in the sight of the Lord, is
the death of his Saints, but the death of sinners is vilde, and exceeding
evil. What means this word, Exceeding evil, uttered in the Superlatiue
degree? Because this is the last and greatest of all evils, as well for the
soul as for the body. Bernard in Epist.
After this manner S. Bernard does expound this of the Psalmist, The death of
sinners is exceeding evil. Because it is evil in losing the world, worser in
the separation of the flesh, but exceeding evil in that double calamity of
the worm, and of the fire. It is grievous to leave the world, more grievous
that the soul is separated from the body, but exceeding grievous, and in no
wise to be compared unto the other, to be tortured with the torments of hell.

Both these, and many more miseries, shall vex and turmoile the wicked in this
hour. The accidents of death.
For then, before and above all things, the accidents of this infirmity shall
surmount, the griefs of the body, the terrors of the soul, and the
afflictions of external things: the thoughts of things to come, the
remembrance of sins past, the fear to give an account, the dreadful
sentence, the horror of the grave, the separation and departure from every
thing, that was too dear, and embraced with an inordinate love: that is, from
riches, friends, wife, children; from this light, from the air wherein we
breathe, and from life it self. All and every one of these so much the more
do afflict a man, by how much they are loved. August in Enchir. Adylon.
For as Augustine says; They are not lost without grief, which are possessed
with love. Therefore it was very well said of a Philosopher; He that in his
life knows of fewest delights, least of all other fears death. But most of
all in that hour the burned and feared conscience, and the consideration of
that which is prepared for them, does excruciate and vex the wicked. For
then, man being raised as it were out of a deep sleep by the presence of
Death, opens his eyes, and begins to behold and see that, which he never
saw before.

Eusebius Emisse^^s, Eusu. Emiss. in his 1. Homily to those that lead solitary
and monastical lives.
gives a reason of this; At what pass will man be then at, says he, when
bidding his last farewell to all worldly matters, having death before him, and
leaving life behind him, he shall be drawn into that horrible and fearful
gulf? For there shall be no preparation for victuals, or care for clothing:
no business for Laborers, Soldiers, or Traffickers: no ambition for wealth or
honor: but there, an intolerable terror of giving an account shall fill and
possess the mind, being free from all other cares: and the heavy and
unsupportable weight of judgment shall dreadfully hang over the captive senses.
Then man forgets all things present, which he must forsake, and begins
to think upon future things, which he must expect. Behold, shall he say, all
delights and pleasures have passed away as a shadow, but reproaches and faults
remain still. The same Doctor also in another homily prosecuting this matter,
says: Let us consider what a lamentable estate a dissolute soul shall be in,
departing from this body; what streights shall it be brought into? what horror
and darkness will there be? when as the conscience all about beset with faults
and sins, shall appear first of all the number of our adversaries. For it,
all other proofs and witnesses set apart, shall bring that to light and to our
eyes, that the proof of it shall convince us, and the knowledge of it shall
confound us. Neither may any one cover or keep secret any thing, or deny any
thing, when as the accuser or witness is not to be produced from far, or from
another place, but is to be fetched from within us. Hitherto he.

A wonderful and excellent saying of Petrus Damianus of the oureof death.
Another learned and holy man does handle this same matter more largely and
more mistically, when he says: Let us consider with special attention, when
the soul of a sinner is departing out of the prison of the flesh, with what
terrible fear it is shaken and smitten, and with how many pricks of a pearcing
conscience it is goared and thrust through. It remembers sins past, which it
has committed: it sees the Divine commandments, which it has contemned: it
greeueth that the time of repentance has been so ill and lewdly ouerpast: it
is afflicted, because it sees the inevitable hour approach of rendering an
account, and of the Divine vengeance: it would tarry still, but it is
constrained to depart: it would recover that is past, but time is not granted.
If it look behind, it sees the course and race of the whole life led, as a
moment of time. If it look before, it beholds the infinite space of
eternity, which expects it. It sorroweth and sobbeth, because it has lost
the joy of everlasting eternity, which it might have obtained in so short a
time: it tormenteth it self, because it has lost the ineffable sweetness of
perpetual delight, for one sensual, carnal, and momentany pleasure. It
blusheth, considering that for that substance, which is worms meat, it has
despised that, which Angels price so highly. And weighing the glory of those
immortal riches, it is confounded, that it has changed them for the baseness
and vildnes of temporal things. But when it casts the eyes upon things
below, and sees the dark and obscure valley of this world, and beholds
above it the shyning brightness of eternal light, then it confesses that all
that it loved in this world was black night, and ugly darkness. O then if such a
soul could obtain a space of repentance, and a time to recall it self, how
austere and severe a life would it embrace? What difficult and great matters
would it promise? unto what great vows, prayers, and other exercises would it
bind it self? But whilst it meditateth and consulteth of these things with it
self, the forerunners and harbengers of death begin to approach: that is, the
eyes wax dim, the breast swells and pants, the voice sayleth and foltreth,
the members grow cold, the teeth wax black, the mouth is filled with humors,
and the countenance waxes pale and wan. In the mean time come the Officers
and Sargiants, which attend upon Death now at hand: and they present unto the
wretched soul, all the works, speeches, and cogitations of the life past,
bearing bad and dangerous witness against their mistres, and although she would
not see them, yet she is compelled to see them. By and by comes an horrible
flock of yelling devils, and there also a sacred company of holy Angels do
present themseules. And there they begin to dispute between themselves, to
whether part this miserable pray must happen. For if faith in Christ, virtues,
and works of piety and godliness be found in her, straightwayes she is comforted
with the sweet speeches and consolations of Angels. But if the enormity of
sins, and a life wickedly led do require another thing; alas, suddenly she
trembles, and is terrified with an intolerable dread, and fear, and
trembling, do terribly assault her. Forthwith the devils assail her and take
her, and violently pluck her from the miserable flesh, and cast her headlong
into torments, never to be ended, but to continue for ever and ever. All these
be the words of this holy and learned man.

Tell me, if thou will confess this to be true, and that each thing proceeds
after this order, what other thing is required (if so any spark of wisdom or
understanding be left in us) that we may know, how detestable and wretched the
condition of sinners is, seeing that the end prepared for them is so grievous
and unhappy, and which never shall have end? And if the delights and pleasures
of this life at that time could bring any help or comfort, as they were wont to
do, this mischief were more tolerable: but honors will not there help,
neither riches defend: friends here cannot prevail, nor servants give their
attendance, neither can families, nor the noblenes of descent profit any thing:
Nothing avails in death but virtue. Prou. 11.
in riches there is no hope, all the help for one that lies a dying is in
Christ, in Virtue, and in innocence of life. For the vvise-man testifies,
that Riches help not in the day of vengeance: but righteousness, that is,
Virtue, delivers from death. Seeing therefore that a sinner is found so
naked, poor, and destitute of all help and aid: how can he not but fear and
be afflicted, when as he sees himself left alone, forsaken, and desolate;
neither having any hope or confidence in that Divine judgment.

Of the death of the righteous.
But the death of the righteous is far off from these miseries and
calamities. For even as at that time the wicked receive the punishment of their
iniquity: so the righteous receive the wages of their vprightnes, according to
that of Ecclesiasticus, Who so fears the Lord, Ecclesiast. 1.
it shall go well with him at the last, and in the day of his death he shall
be blessed. That is, he shall be enriched, and shall receive the reward of his
labors. Saint John in his Revelation, does insinuate the same thing more
manifestly, when he says, that he heard a voice from heaven, saying unto him;
Write: The words which he was commanded to write were, Apoc. 14.
Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord. Even so says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labor: and their works follow them. How can he be
discouraged in that hour: that hears this of the Lord, when he now sees
himself hasten thither, where he shall receive that, which he desired all the
time of his life? Therefore of the righteous it is read in the book of Job;
And thine age shall appear more clear then the noone day: thou shall shine
and be as the morning. Job. 11.
Which words Saint Gregory expounding, In the 10. book of his Morals. Cap. 21.
says: The age of the righteous shall appear more clear then the noone day:
because he knows how great clearenes and brightness remains for him, when
now he begins to go out of this world. And so at that time, when the wicked
are heavy and faint, the righteous rejoice, and have confidence in the Lord.
This Solomon testifies in his Proverbs; The wicked, Prou. 14.
says he, shall be cast away for his malice: but the righteous has hope in
his death. Tell me, I pray thee, what greater hope, or confidence can be
wished for then that, which a certain holy man did joy in at the hour of his
death? Death drawing on, and he seeing the enemy of mankind, said, Thou cruel
beast, why stand thou there? thou shall find nothing deadly in me: for the
bosom of Abraham shall receive me in peace. How can he fear, or be
disquieted, who at the very point of death, had so great hope of the heavenly
glory? Therefore the righteous do not fear death: yea, they rejoice and praise
God, when they dye; and do render unto him great thanks for their end: for by
the benefit of death they are delivered from all their labors, and enter into
their happiness. Saint Augustine writing upon the Epistle of Saint John, says:
He that desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, dies not patiently,
but lives patiently, and dies delightsomly. Therefore the righteous has no
cause to sorrow, neither to fear death: yea, rather ^^ is to be said of him,
that like unto a Swan he dies singing, yielding the glory to God, who calls
him. He fears not death, The righteous fears not in the hour of death.
because he feared God: and he that fears him, need not fear any other. He
fears not death, because he feared life: but fears of death are the effects
of an evil life. He fears not death, because throughout all his life he
learned to dye, and prepared himself to dye: but a man prepared and provident
fears not his enemy. He fears not death, because so long as he lived, he
sought for those things that might help him, that is, for virtues and good
works. He fears not death, because he has the Judge favorable and friendly
unto him, and this was the comfort of Saint Ambrose, when he was departing this
life. Paulinus in the life of Ambrose.
I have not so lived, says he, among you, that I am ashamed to live any
longer: neither do I fear to dye, because we have a good and a gracious Lord.
To be brief, he fears not death, because to a righteous man death is not
death, but a sleep: it is not death, but an end of all labors: it is not
death, but the way unto life, and a ladder unto Paradise. For he knows very
well that death has lost all the bitterness of death, after that it has passed
through the veins of life, and that it has received the sweetness of life. He
is not discouraged for any other accidents, which oftentimes happen unto him at
this last cast: for he knows that those sorrows are the sorrows of the
birth, by which he is borne unto eternity: for the love of which he has
always desired death, and led his life in patience. He is not terrified
through the memory of his sins, because he has Christ his Redeemer: whom
always he did strive to please. He fears not the Divine judgment, because
he has Christ his Advocate: he sereth not the presence of devils, because he
has Jesus his defender and Captain: he fears not the horror of the grave,
because he knows that his body is sown a corruptible body, but shall rise
again an incorruptible body. And after this manner praise is sung in the end.
The last day judges all the praecedent, as Seneca says, and gives sentence
of the life past; for this is it, which either justifies, or condemns: but
seeing that the end of the righteous is so quiet and peaceable, and the death
of the wicked so troublesome and dangerous, what is further required to make us
fly an evil life, and to embrace a good, besides this difference? What do
all pleasures, In death prosperity does nothing profit, nor adversity hurt.
riches, and savors of this world profit? and what avails prosperity, if I
am at the last to be cast into hell fire? And what have all the miseries and
calamities of this life hurt me, if I shall sleep and rest in peace and
tranquillity, and if I shall pass hence having a pledge and pawn of eternal
life? Albeit a sinner be wise in the business of this life, what profit reapeth
he by this wisdom, unless he heap and scrape together those things, whereby
he becomes prouder, vainer, more delicate, and of greater power to work
mischief, but more unfit and unapt to any good work? Hence death is so much
the more bitter unto him, by how much life was sweeter. There is no wisdom,
nor prudence more excellent in this life, then so to dispose of all affairs,
that the end may be joyful and happy. For it is the property of a wise man,
conveniently and fitly to direct the means to the end. A similitude.
Wherefore, if he be called a skillful Physician who can so temper his
medicine, that it brings health, which is the end of his medicine: so he
shall be termed truly wise, who has so learned to lead his life, that a good
death may follow: that is, that he be prepared to give an account, which in
that day shall be exacted, unto which all the life is to be disposed, aimed,
and leuelled at.

The Conclusion of those things which have been spoken of in this second part.
THou have heard therefore, my brother, what and how great be these twelve
privileges and prerogatives, which are granted unto Virtue in this life: which
are as the twelve most notable and excellent fruits, Apoc, 22,
of that most noble tree, which S. John saw in his Revelation: which was
planted by the side of a River, bearing twelve manner of fruits, and yielding
fruit every month. For what other thing can this tree be, (after the Son of
GOD,) then Virtue herself, which yields fruits of holiness and of life? And
what other fruits more precious then these can be desired, which throughout
this whole part we have remembered? For what fruit is more pleasant to the
sight, then that fatherly providence, by which God preserves his? What fruit
is sweeter then the Divine grace, the light of wisdom, the consolations of
the holy Ghost, the joy and peace of a good conscience, the good event of hope,
the true liberty of the soul, the inward peace of the heart, to be heard in
prayers, to be helped in tribulations, to be provided for temporal
necessities, and to conclude, to be aided and to taste of heavenly comforts in
death? Surely, each one of these privileges, is so great and so excellent of
it self, that if it were thoroughly known, each I say, were sufficient to move a
man to embrace Virtue, and to alter and change his life; and it would make a
man truly to understand, how well it was said of our Savior; That whosoever
shall forsake the world for his sake, Math, 19,
shall receive an hundredth fold here, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Behold therefore, my brother, what an excellent good it is, that hitherto I
have showed thee, behold to what I inuit thee: consider whether any will say
that thou art deceived, if for the love of it thou shall forsake the world, and
all things which are therein. Only one inconvenience this good has (if so
that it may be called an inconvenience) why it is not esteemed amongst wicked
men: Virtue has one inconvenience. Math, 13,
that is, because it is not known unto them. For this cause our Savior said,
That the kingdom of heaven was like unto a treasure hid: for this good is
indeed a treasure, but hid: not to these that possess it, but to others. That
Prophet very well knew of the price of this treasure, Esaias, 14,
who said; My secret to my self, my secret to my self. He regarded not
whether others knew of his treasure or no; for this good is not of the nature
of other goods, which are not good unless they be known of others; wherefore,
they are not good of themselves, but only in the estimation of the world; and
therefore it is necessary, that they be known unto him, of whom they are so
called. But this good makes his possesser good and happy, and does noe less
warm and heat his heart, when he knows of it alone, then when the whole
world knows it. But my tongue is not the key of the Casket of this secret;
and much less of all those things, which hitherto have been spoken: for
whatsoever man's tongue can utter, is much less the^ the truth of the thing it
self. The Divine light, experience and use is the key of virtues. I would that
thou should desire this key of GOD, that thou may find this treasure, yea
God himself, in who^ thou shall find all things, and thou shall see with what
great reason the Prophet said; Psalm, 144.
Blessed is the people whose GOD the Lord is. For what can be wanting unto
him, who possesses this good?

It is written in the books of the Kings, that Elcana the Father of Samuel,
said to his wife, (sorrowing because she was barren, ^, Kings, 1.
and had no children;) Anna, why weepest thou? and why catest thou not? and why
is thine heart troubled? Am not I better to thee then ten sons? If a good
husband, who is to day, and to morrow is not, be better to his wife then ten
sons, what think thou of God, what will he be to that soul that
possesses him? O men what do ye? whether look ye? what do ye regard? why
do ye leave the fountain of Paradise, and drink of the muddy Cesterns of
this world? Why do ye not follow the good counsel of the Prophet, Psalm, 34,
who says; O taste and see, how gracious and sweet the Lord is. Why do we not
once assay this Fourd? why do we not once taste of these bankets? Have trust
to the words of the Lord, and begin: and he shall deliver thee from all danger.

Terrible and fearful seemed that Serpent a far off, into which Moses rod
was turned: but when it was handled, it returned to the old form again. Not
without cause said Solomon; It is naught, Prou, 20,
it is naught, (says he that buy^th) but when he comes to his own house,
then he boasts of his pennyworth. This happens daily to men in this
business. For not knowing at the beginning the value of this merchandise
(because they themselves are not spiritual, neither know they, of what esteem
it is) and understanding what is requested for it, because they are carnal,
they think it is too dear, and not worth the price. But when they once
begin to taste how sweet the Lord is, forthwith they boast of their
merchandise; and they confess that no price is too high, or too much to be
given for this incomparable good. Consider how the Merchant in the Gospel
cheerfully sold all that he had, that he might buy the field, in which the
treasure was hid. Therefore for what cause does not a Christian man, this name
being heard, contend to know what it is? Certainly it is a matter of wonder: if
any tatler or talebearer, should tell thee that in thy house there is treasure
hid: thou would not rest to dig and delue, and to seek and try, whether
it were true or no, that he had said. But when the Lord himself affirms,
that within thee in thy soul, thou have an inestimable treasure hid, can
thou not be brought to seek for it? O how soon should thou sinde this
treasure, if thou only knew how nigh the Lord is unto them that call upon
him in truth? How many men have their been in this world, who considering of
their sins, and perseuering in prayer, and desiring remission of them, have
in less time then a week opened the earth, or (that I may speak better) have
found a new heaven and a new earth; and have begun to feel in them the
kingdom of God? How great is it which that Lord does, who says; Cant, 8,
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, I will put them
out of my remembrance. How great was that which that good Father did, who,
scarcely that short prayer of the Prodigal being ended, could no longer
contain himself, but he must needs embrace him: and receive him into his
house with great mirth and feasting?

Return therefore, my brother, to this gracious and favorable Father; and
whilst it is time lift up thy heart unto him, and cease not for some few days,
incessantly to call and knock at the gates of his mercy; and assuredly believe
me, if thou shall persevere with humility, at the length the Lord shall make
answer unto thee, and shall show thee the hid treasure of his love, which
when thou shall have tasted and assaied, thou will say with the Spouse in the
Canticles; If a man would give all the good of his house for love, he should
count it nothing.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART OF THE SINNERS GVIDE:
In which answer is made to all those excuses, by which those men are wont to
excuse and defend themselves, who will not embrace Virtue.

Against the first excuse of those, who defer and put off from day to day the
amendment of their life's, and the embracing of Virtue. CHAP. XXV.
I Think that no man can deny, but that those things are sufficient, which
hitherto have been spoken of us, yea, and that they sufficiently and
plentifully do approve our principal purpose and intent, which we promised
at the beginning to discourse and dispute of. That is, that we might move the
hearts of men (Gods grace being first presupposed) to the love and study of
Virtue. But although we may be thought to have satisfied and performed our
promise, yet the malitiousnes of men have excuses, which have a show of truth,
by which they defend their lingering and loytering negligence, and still
comfort and please themselves in their wickedness, as Ecclesiasticus intimates
and insinuates, Ecclesi. 32.
saying; An ungodly man will not be reformed, but can help himself with the
example of others in his purpose: That is, with apparent excuses. The same
thing also Solomon seems to tell us of, Prou. 18.
when he says, He that would depart from his friend seeks occasions. So he
that would depart from God, as sinners do, seek, and at length find out some
of these excuses; Diverse refuges of sinners.
some defer and procrastinate their repentance, putting it off from day to
day; others reserve it to the end of their life; many say that they absent
themselves from godly and virtuous living, because it is painful and
laborious; some cheer up themselves through the hope of the Divine mercy,
supposing that they shall be saved by a naked and fruitless faith, and a dead
hope without charity: to be brief, others being inamoured of this world, will
not change the felicity, which they think they possess in it, with the
promises of Gods word. These in a manner be the frauds and errors, the snares
and nets, with which the enemy of mankind ensnareth and entangleth the
understanding of men, that he may detayne them all their life long prisoners
and flaues under sin, that at the length death may set upon them suddenly,
and oppress them at unawares. To all these cauelations, and frivolous excuses,
we will answer in this last part of this book. But first of all we will
dissolve and answer their objection, who put off the amendment of their life's
unto the time to come, which excuse is more usual and more general then the
rest.

Againt the^ that defer their repentance.
There are many that confess, that all things are true, which hitherto have
been spoken, and that there is not any estate or condition more secure and
safe then theirs, that embrace and follow after Virtue: yea, and that they
themselves will hereafter enter into a virtuous and a godly kind of life; but
they cannot yet; but the time will come when they shall do it with greater
conueniencie, and perform it with more perfection. So Saint Augustine says of
himself; August. in the 8 book of his confessions, the 5. chap.
O Lord, I had not wherewith to answer thee, when thou saydst unto me; Awake
thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall illuminate and
enlighten thee: and thou demonstrating in every point those things to be true,
which thou spakest unto me, I being convinced with the truth, had not any
answer at all, but only the words and speeches of a loytering sluggard, and
of a drouzie sleeper; By and by, and behold anon: and let me alone a little:
But by and by, and behold anon, had neither measure nor moderation, and let me
alone a little, held on a long time. So also the wicked at this day deal with
God: still procrastinating and putting off the time, and never coming unto
true conversion. It is no hard thing to show that this was the deceit of that
old Serpent (to whom it is no new or unusual thing to lie, and to deceive
miserable men:) and if I shall convince this, I think that I shall take away
this controversy, and dissolve this objection. For we all know that nothing
ought more to be wished of Christian men, then the health of their souls: and
for this respect the amendment of their life's is necessarily required; for
without this it is most certain that no man can be saved. So that here,
nothing comes into question, but the time, in which the life ought to be
amended: In the rest there is no descent. The st^te of the question.
Thou say that thy conversion is to be deferred till the time to come; my
assertion is that it ought to be done presently. Therefore let us see whether
opinion is more probable, and more conformable unto the truth.

But before we speak of the easines and facility of conversion, tell me, I
pray thee, who has promised thee this time to come? How many men have there
been, whom this vain hope has miserably deceived? Gregory in an homily.
Although God, says Gregory, has promised pardon to the penitent, yet he has
not promised tomorrow to a sinner. Not unlike to this, is that of another
learned Writer: Some man will say; when I come unto old age, then I will run
unto the remedy of repentance. Why dare man's frailty presume thus much of
himself, seeing he has not one day of all his life in his own power? Verily
I suppose that innumerable souls have perished through this vain persuasion.
After this manner that rich man in the Gospel perished, of whom Saint Luke
writes, that when his field had brought forth plentiful fruits, he
thought within himself, saying. What shall I do, Luke, 12.
because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I
do, I will pull down my barnes, and build greater, and therein will I gather
all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul: Soul, thou have much
goods laid up in store for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. But whilst this miserable man thought thus with himself, a voice was
heard, saying unto him; Thou fool, this night do they require thy soul
again from thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?
Therefore, what greater foolishnes can there be, then that a man by his own
authority should presume to dispose of that, that is to come, no otherwise then
if he had been set and appointed to govern times and seasons, which the
eternal Father has put in his own power. Apoc. ^.
And if Saint John say, that the son only has the keys of life and death,
that he may shut and open, to whom he pleases, and when he pleases: how dare
a vild and an object worm attribute unto himself and usurp this authority?
The just judgment of God.
Only this impudent boldness is worthy of notorious punishment, that is, that
he should find no place of repentance in the time to come, who vainly and
fruitlesly passes over that time, which God has granted unto him. That so
this punishment may give understanding, and that a fool thereby may become the
wiser. But seeing that the number of them, that are thus chasticed, is very
great, men shall do very advisedly, if by other men's harm they become more
wary, and out of other men's danger they learn to be more circumspect;
following that good counsel of Ecclesiasticus, saying; Make no tarrying to
turn unto the Lord, Ecclesi. 5.
and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the
time of vengeance he shall destroy thee.

But let us grant that thy life shall be as long and lasting, as thou
perswadest and promisest unto thy self: tell me, I pray thee, whether will be
more easy now to amend it, or hereafter when thou have procrastinated and
deferred thy conversion? But that thou may understand that better, which we
say, we will by the way rehearse the chiefest causes, from whence this
difficulty arises. Causes from whence the difficulty of conversion arises.
It arises not from those impediments and lets, which they imagine: but from
an evil habit, and from the corruption of a naughty custom of a life wickedly
and ungraciously led, which to change is a death, as we are wont to say. The
overmuch Jerome unto Celantia. Chap. 4. Bernard.
and to expel it, is as it were to overcome Nature herself, then the which
there cannot be a greater victory. Hence it is that Saint Bernard says; After
that any one vice has been confirmed and rooted in us by the custom of many
years, we have need of the special and miraculous help of the Divine grace,
to overcome and root it up. And therefore a Christian ought to be very wary
and circumspect, that he does not fall into the custom of any vice: for when
as anything comes unto an habit, it is very hardly thrust forth and expelled:
so also vice being confirmed by daily use and custom, cannot be eschewed and
forsaken without the especial grace of GOD, as says Bernard.

Also, this difficulty proceeds from the power of the devil, Luke, 11,
For he is that strong man armed, of whom the Gospel speaks, who keeps his
palace with a vigilant and a most especial care.

Moreover, it proceeds from that, that God is far of from Esaias, 62,
that the Lord set over the walls of Jerusalem: which is so much the further
of from a sinner, by how much a sinner is heauilier laden and burdened with
sins. From this absence great and mighty miseries are derived, as the Lord
himself says by his Prophet; Osea, 7, and the 9. Apoc, 11,
Woe unto them who have forsaken me. And, Woe unto them when I shall forsake
them. This is according and correspondent to that Woe, of which John makes
mention in his Revelation.

To conclude, this difficulty arriseth from the corruption of A similitude.
For even as Wine is marred by vinegar, and fruits are spoiled of worms; and
every contrary is corrupted of his contrary: so also all the powers of our
soul are disturbed and infected through sin: which is an especial enemy,
and most contrary to our souls. Wherefore by sin the understanding is
obscured, the will is weakened, and the affections removed out of order; and
it makes that man is neither Lord of himself, nor of his actions; yea
although his Faith, and the liberty of himself be never lost. For these powers
and faculties be as instruments, by which the soul works that which is good:
A similitude.
and as wheels of the clock of a life well ordered; which when they wander out
of order, what other thing is to be hoped of them, but misgouernment, and the
confusion of all the Clock?

These be the chief and especial causes of that difficulty, Whether now^ or
hereafter it is more easy to turn unto God.
which take their original from sin, and daily increase through use, and the
corruption of evil custom. These things being thus, who will be so mad, to
believe that his conversion, and the amendment of his life, shall be more
easy after certain years, when his sins shall be more in number, and the
causes of this difficulty shall be multiplied? It is certain that the^ thou
by so much shall be more unapt and unfit, and that the devil shall have so
much the more power over thee, and that GOD shall be so much the more further
of from thee, by how much thy sins shall be multiplied and increased.
Moreover, after certain years, thy soul will be more disordered, and all the
powers and faculties of it more disturbed, as before we have said.

If therefore these be the causes of this difficulty, who is of so corrupt a
judgment amongst us, that he should suppose that his conversion should
hereafter be easier, the causes of the difficulties increasing on every side?
For when as sins are daily heaped unto sins, there is no doubt, but that
the knots, with which the soul is tied, are multiplied, and the chains,
with which it is bound, are made the stronger and the more insoluble. The
understanding for the time to come, through the use of sinning, will be more
dark and obscure; the will will be weaker to work well; the appetite will be
more ready and prone to all evil, and all the faculties of the soul will be
so weakened, that they shall not be able to defend themselves from the violence
of sin. Which seeing that it is so, how can it be, that thou should believe
that thy conversion in the time to come, shall be more easy, and that thou
caust perform it with greater conuenience? If thou shall say, A similitude.
that in the morning thou can not pass over the Fourd, when as yet the water
is low; how shall thou be able to pass over it at night, when the banks are
full, and the River swells like the floods and tides of the sea? If it
seems an hard thing unto thee, to pull up the root of vices newly and lately
planted; what will thou do when they have taken deep and profound rooting,
and they cleave and stick much faster in the earth then they did before?

Let us put the case: That now thou must fight with an hundredth sins, but
hereafter the time shall be that thou must fight with a thousand: that now thou
art to fight with the corrupt and depraved custom of one or two years, but
perhaps hereafter with the naughty inueterate custom of ten years. Who then
will say unto thee, that hereafter thou shall be more able to carry that
burden, when now thou art in no wise able to support it, when as the burden
nevertheless is daily augmented and increased? Do thou not perceive that
these are the cauillations and impostures of evil paying debtors? who because
they cannot repay that money that was credited unto them, do delay and put off
from day to day their payment? Who knovveth not that these are the deceits and
frauds of that old Serpent, who by the same craft and subtlety that he
deceived our first Parents, does continually go about to circumuent their
children? Surely I do marvel, and exceedingly wonder, that the difficulty
daily and on every side increasing, that thou should think, that that then
should be possible and easy, which now seems unto thee to be difficult and
impossible. Who will be induced to believe (except he be mad) that the offense
increasing, yet the pardon to be the easierly obtained: and the disease and
infirmity growing greater, yet the medicine should speedilier profit the
diseased? Art thou ignorant of that of Ecclesiasticus; An inueterate and old
disease, Ecclus, 10,
troubles the Physician: but an infirmity lately grown, he easily takes
away.

There is a pretty Story in the lives of the Fathers, wherein an Angel
excellently shows this guile and legerdemaine, to a certain holy Father
living in the Wilderness. For the Angel taking this Anchorite, carried him
abroad into the fields, and there showed him a man cutting down of vvood.
When he had gathered together a great bundle of the vvood, he assayed, whether
lie would lift it up, and lay it on his shoulders, and go away with it: but
when he found himself unable to do it, he returned again, and cut down more
vvood, and a great deal more increased his burden. When he was now lesseable
to support his burden, (for now his bundle was far greater, then it was
before) he again augmented it; and this he did often with a firm and a
resolute purpose. The Anchorite meruailing at the great madness of the man,
demanded, what was the meaning of it. The Angel answered, that such was the
madness and dotage of men, who when they cannot bear the burden of sins by
reason of the intolerable heaviness of the weight, yet they daily add new to
old, and almost every moment increase the burden, heaping sins upon sins,
and burden upon burden, thinking that they can bear many, when as they are
not able to bear a few. But what shall I speak among many other things of
naughty and corrupt custom, The force of euillcustome.
and of the violent tyranny thereof, which so surely detayneth men grown old
in wickedness? It is familiar and known unto every body, that he that drives a
nail into a post, that he fasteneth it at the first stroke that he gives with
his malet, A similitude.
but more firmly at the second stroke, but so fast at the third, that it can
hardly be pulled out again, and the oftener that he knocks it, the faster it
sticks, and is pulled out again with the greater difficulty: so in every one
of our wicked actions which we do, vice is driven deepelier into our souls,
as if it were with a great mallet, and there it sticks so fast, that scarcely
any thing may be found, by which it may be haled and pulled out.

Hence it is, that not seldom we see, that the old age of the^, who have
trifled and spent all their time in vices and wickedness, waxes childish again
through the dissolutenes of their forepassed life, although that age does
refuse that inordinatenesse, and nature herself abhor that former lewdnes.
And when as their nature is tired, and barren through vices, yet Custom, which
as yet rides on horseback, posteth about, seeing for impossible pleasures:
so great is the impatient tyranny of evil Custom. Hence it is said in the
book of Job, His bones shall be f^^^ed with the vices of his youth: and they
shall he down in the dust with him. Insomuch that these vices have no limit or
end, besides that, which is common to all other things, that is, death, the
last date and term of all things. Hence is that of Aristotle; That as for the
biting of an Aspe there is no remedy, unless the parts infected be cut away;
so certain vices are healed only by death. Then by death these vices are
ended, although (if we will confess the truth) neither by death they take
their final farewell: for they endure always; wherefore Job says; And they
shall lie down in the dust with him. The reason of this is, because through
the diuturnitie of inueterate custom (which now is turned into nature) the
appetites and lusts of vices are now rooted in the very bones and marrow of the
soul, no otherwise, then the plague, or a consumption, which sticks in the
bowels of a man, careless of any cure, neither admitting any medicine. This
same thing our Savior showed in the raising of Lazarus being four days dead,
The Allegory of Lazarus four days dead.
whom he called forth of his grave with such clamor and gro^ing of spirit:
when as notwithstanding he had raised others being dead, with far easier
tokens of difficulty: that the Lord might signify unto us, how great a
miracle it is, that God should raise one four days dead and stinking: that
is, to convert one buried in the custom of sinning. The first of these four
days, as says Augustine, is the delight of the pleasure in the heart: the
second is the consent: the third the deed: the fourth custom: and he that has
come to this fourth day, as Lazarus, is not raised up, unless it be with the
loud voice and tears of our Savior. All these things do most evidently
declare the exceeding great difficulty, which procrastination of repentance and
conversion brings with it: and by how much the longer repentance is deferred,
by so much it becomes more difficult. Also consequently it is gathered of
these, how manifest their error is, who say, that the amendment of their
life, will hereafter be the easier, and done with greater conuenience.

But let us yield (which yet we do not grant) that all things should succeed
according to thy dreams, The loss of time.
and that thy vain hope should not delude thee; what will thou say of the
time, which in the mean time thou wretchedly loosest, and slyppeth away from
thee without any fruit? especially, seeing that in this time thou might
have gained unto thee an incomparable treasure? A similitude.
What madness will it be thought (that we may speak according to the judgment
of the world) if at that time, when a most fair and rich City by force is
sacked, whilst other soldiers with great fury and violence carry out of it
gold, silver, and every precious thing, some should sit by playing at Dice
with scullions and slaves? It is certain that they should make no gain by it.
Therefore, how far greater madness is it, that thou, whilst all other good
men are painful and careful to gain heaven, that thou, I say, sit idely
playing and sporting with children, and only delighting in the vain toys of
this world, when as in the mean season thou might have gained that that
they enjoy?

Furthermore, what will thou answer me, not only for those good things, which
thou loosest; but also for those evils, which in the mean while thou
committest? For according to the opinion of Saint Augustine, See August. his
ten strings.
not one sin is to be committed for the gold of the whole world. With what
forehead dare thou then in this time commit so many deadly sins, one of
which is not to be committed for a thousand worlds. How dare thou in the
mean while offend him, and provoke him unto anger, through whose gates thou
must enter? before whose feet thou must lie prostrate upon the earth, and
thou shall be compelled so to do, will thou nill thou? of whose hands the
estate of thine eternity depends? whose mercy thou must implore and sue for
with tears and sighs? Why then blushest thou not to anger and provoke him, of
whose help thou have need every moment? And whom thou shall find so much the
less favorable unto thee, by how much the more thou have provoked him unto
wrath?

Very well does Saint Bearnard reason against such men, saying: Thou who
take so prepostorous a course, perseuering in thy wicked and ungodly life,
tell me; Beleeuest thou that the Lord GOD will forgive thee thy sins, or
beleeuest thou not? If thou beleeuest not that thou shall find pardon with
God, what greater foolishness can there be, then to sin without hope of
forgiveness? But if thou beleeuest that thou shall find him good, gracious,
favorable, and merciful unto thee, who albeit thou offendest him often, yet
he is ready to forgive thee thy sins; tell me, I pray thee, what greater
frowardness, or peevishness can there be, then to take further occasion to
offend him, where there is greater cause that thou should love him? What can
be answered to this argument?

What will thou say unto me as concerning those reares, which hereafter thou
must plentifully shed for the sins, The sins which we now commit, we
hereafter shall deplore and lament in vain.
which now thou committest? For if God call thee out of this life, or visit
thee, every morsel that thou now eatest, shall then be more bitter unto thee
then gall: and remember that then thou shall always lament and deplore that,
which but once thou did commit. That day at length will come, make no doubt
of it, when thou shall wish to have suffered a thousand kind of punishments,
then once to have offended God. The time that David enjoyed his pleasures was
very short: but the time that he lived in sorrow and dolor for them, was
exceeding long: as he testifies of himself, saying: Psalm. 6.
I am weary of my grouing, every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with
my tears. So abundant were his tears, that the translation of Jerome has,
for I wash my bed, I make my bed to swim: signifying the great showers, and
floods of waters, flowing out of those eyes, which had violated the law of God.

Why then do thou unprofitably consume the time in sowing that, of which
thou shall gather no other fruit but tears? Besides this, thou ought also
to consider, that thou do not only sow tears, whence thou reapest only
sorrow, but also the difficulty and hardness for ever entering into a better
state of life, A similitude.
by reason of the long and evil custom. For even as he that is endangered
with a long and a pernicious disease, sildome so comes to his former health,
that not some relics of the disease remain in his body: The relics of
sin remain after the sin.
so the greatness and diuturnity of sin, is sildome healed and cured without
some relics remaining. A man always is weaker in that part, with which he
offended: and the tyranny of the devil rages more violently in it. The
children of Israel worshipped a Calfe, of the ashes of which being burned,
Moses made a decoction and caused them to drink it. For this is the
punishment, with which God is wont to punish certain sins, that by his just
judgment some relics may remain in our bones, and so that may be a
punishment, and a torment, which a little before was our Idol.

Will thou that I shall tell thee, How absurd a thing it is to reserve thy
repentance for old age. A similitude.
how ^nequall the comparison is to reserve old age for repentance, and filthily
to spend the flower of youth in iniquities? What great madness I pray thee would
it be thought, if a man had many and weighty burdens to be carried to some
certain place, and he had many Horses sufficient to carry them, yet he should
lay all the burdens upon one of the weakest and worst Horses, the other being
sent away empty? like, or rather greater is their madness, who do impose the
burden of repentance to be carried of old age; sparing youth, and manly age,
and letting them go empty, which are much stronger, and far more fit to
carry then old age: seeing that old age is scarce able to support her own
infirmities. It is excellently said of Seneca that great Philosopher; He that
deferreth to old age his goodness, Seneca in his book of the shortness of life.
and means only then to be good, he plainly shows, that he is unwilling to
give any thing unto Virtue, but that time that is unfit for all other things.
And in another place; Thou shall hear many saying; when I am fifty years old,
I will take my self to mine ease: but when I am sixty, that will free me from
all duties and offices. And what surety do thou take for a longer life? Who
will suffer these things so to pass, as thou have disposed them? Does it not
shame thee, to reserve thy self to the relics and dregs of thy life; and
only to destinate that time to a good and virtuous mind, which is fit for
nothing? How late is it then to begin to live, when thou must leave to live?
What a foolish forgetfulness of mortality is it, to defer thy peace and quiet,
and thy wholsomest counsels to the fiftith or sixtith year of thy life; and
then to purpose to begin a new and a better life, when as very few reach to
those years?

The greatness of the satisfaction.
But what will thou do, if thou considerest the greatness of the satisfaction;
which the infinite majesty of God will require of thee, before thou be
disburthened of so great offenses? For that is so great, as a learned man
says; That man is not able to satisfy God for the sins of one day, and
disburthen himself of that day. Why then do thou gather the debts of thy
whole life, as it were into one gross sum, and deserrest the payment and
satisfying for them until thine old age, which not with all the pains that it
can take can satisfy for it self? Deferring of repentance a certain
infidelity. Greg. in his Morals. Repentance is not to be deferred, in regard of
benefits received at Gods hand.
This iniquity is so great, that S. Gregory calls it the greatest infidelity,
as he shows it in these words; He is far enough off from says, who for his
repentance expects old age. For it is to be feared, least while he hops for
mercy, he find judgment. But let us grant, that all, that we have said, are
of no moment, nor any thing worth: nor that any of these things shall come to
pass. Tell me, ought not the greatness and multitude of benefits received, and
the glory promised, be only sufficient to persuade and move thee (so that
there be any law, reason, or justice remaining in the world) that thou
should not be so negligent and idle in the time of thy service, and so
niggardly toward him, who is so liberal in heaping graces and benefits upon
thee? O how worthily is it spoken of Ecclesiasticus; Be not slow to pay thy vow
in good time, Ecclesi. 18.
and tarry not to be justified unto thy death, because the reward of God
endures for ever. Go to then, tell me I pray thee, if the reward shall endure
so long, why will thou that thy service should be so short and momentany? If
the reward shall not be ended, while God shall reign in heaven, that is, it
shall never perish: why will thou not, that thy service at the least should
endure so long as thou live in this life?

Furthermore, Not to be deferred in regard of predestination.
if thou hopest to be saved, it follows of necessity, that thou must
presuppose that he has predestined thee from all eternity to this salvation.
Tell me then, if the Lord was so mindful of thee, that he loved thee from
everlasting; and after that thou wast made a Christian, adopted thee to be his
own son, and made thee an heir of his kingdom; why do thou draw back
to love so gracious a Father? And why do thou not blush to defer to the
end of thy life, to embrace so good and so bountiful a Lord? How is it
possible, that thou should persuade thy self, that thou can satisfy him
with so short a worship, who is determined to bestow upon thee everlasting
benefits? For it is requisite and meet, that seeing the rewards are eternal,
that the worship should also be eternal, if it possibly might be. Which seeing
that it cannot be, yea, seeing that thy worship and service is no longer then
the life of one man; We offer the best part to ye world, and the worst to God.
why then will thou take from the Divine worship the greater part of this short
space; and leave unto him the lesser and worser part? For even as out of a
vessel, says Seneca, first that comes forth which is the purest, Seneca in
his 109. Epi.
but that which is muddy and troubled sinketh to the bottom: so in the age of
our life, that which is the best, is the first. Therefore let us not reserve
the dregs for God, but let us offer him the first and purest. See I pray thee,
what part is that, that thou reseruest for the Lord God. Mal. 1.
Cursed be the deceitful, says the Prophet, which has in his flock a male,
and voweth, and sacrifices a corrupt thing to the Lord: because I am a great
King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is fearful among the Heathen. As
if he should say, to so great a Lord as I am, great services and worships are
due. For it is mighty injury, to offer to so excellent a Majesty, those things
which are the worst, and basest. Why therefore do thou reserve the greater
and better part of thy life for the service of devils, and sacrificest that
part to God, which the world resuseth? Hear what the Lord says; Deuteronomy. 25.
Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of waights, a great and a small:
neither shall thou have in thine house diverse measures, a great and a small.
But thou shall have a right and just weight, and a perfect and a just measure
shall thou have: And dare thou against this law have two unequal measures,
one so great for the devil, as if he were thy friend; and the other so small
for God, as if he were thine enemy?

What we owe unto God in respect of our redemtion.
Besides all these, if all these benefits seem base and vild unto thee, yet I
desire thee, that at least-wife thou would remember that inestimable
benefit, by which God the father gave unto thee his only begotten son: for
he gave that life for the price of thy soul, which was more precious then all
the life's of men and Angels. Wherefore although thou had the life's of all men,
and also infinite others; that in thee were all that lives, or could live; all
that thou owe to the giver of that life. Neither was this sufficient.
Therefore with what forehead with what impudency, with what ingratitude do
thou deny to give this sole life, which thou have; being so short, so weak,
and so miserable to that Lord, who for thee has given a life so noble and so
excellent? It were somewhat tolerable, if thou would but give that: but
certainly to take away the better part of this miserable life, and to give
only the dregs to him, is intolerable and extreme impudency. Therefore let
that of Solomon in his Preacher be the conclusion of this Chapter. Eccles. 12.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, or ever the days of
adversity come, and or the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them. Before the sun, the light, the moon, and stars be
darkened, An excellent exposition of this place of Eccles.
and or the clouds turn again after the rain. When the keepers of the house
shall tremble (that is thy hands) and when the strong men shall bow themselves,
(that is, thy thighs, which support the whole mass of thy body) when the
milners stand still because they be so few, (that is, thy teeth, or jaws) and
when the sight of the windows shall wax dim (that is, thy sight shall fail)
when the doors in the streets shall be shut (for then also the instruments of
other senses shall decay) and when the voice of the milner shall be laid
down: when men shall rise up at the voice of the bird (that is, at the crowing
of a Cock, by reason of lack of sleep, which happens in that age) and when
all the daughters of Music shall be brought low. (That is, thine ears,
because all the arteryes are shut, so that no sound can enter, by which the
hearing is made.) When men shall fear in high places, and be afraid in the
streets: (for old men can hardly walk up ascending, cliffie and rockie
ways.) When the Almond tree shall flourish, (for thy head shall be full of
white hairs) and be laden with the Grasshopper, and when all lust shall pass:
for which some have translated, that thy back shall be laden, that is, shall
be bowed and crooked, and thy concupiscence shall be lost; for daily more and
more the strength of our heart fails us, in which is the seat of our
appetites. Because man goes to his long home: which is his grave; and the
Mourners go about the streets: that is, his friends and kinsfolks. When the
dust shall be turned again unto earth from whence it came, and the spirit
shall return unto God, who gave it. Hitherto are the words of Solomon.

Remember therefore, The conclusion of the first objection.
my brother, thy Creator in the days of thy youth, according to this
description, and do not defer thy repentance over to years so troublesome
and unpleasant, in which nature fails, and the strength of all thy senses: in
which man has more need of all the cherishing that may be, and to supply that
by industry, which is wanting to natural strength: then to embrace the
labors and troubles of repentance. When as virtue shall rather seem a
necessity then a will. When as vices shall be honested by us, for they forsake
us, before we forsake them; although for the most part, such is the old age, as
the fore-passed youth was, according to that of Ecclesiasticus: If thou have
gathered nothing in thy youth, Ecclus, 25,
what will thou find in thine age? Therefore it is very wholesome counsel,
that in another place the same Ecclesiasticus gives, Ecclus, 17.
saying; Abide not thou in the error of the ungodly, but give thanks before
death. As for the dead, thankefulnes perrisheth from him as nothing: give thou
thanks in thy life, yea while thou art living and whole shall thou give thanks,
and praise God, and rejoice in his mercy.

Surely, great in times past was that mystery, that amongst the diseased he
was healed, who first stepped into the Poole, after the water had been troubled
of the Angel: John, 5.
that thou thereby may understand, how that all our safety consists in
that, if we forthwith without any lingering obey the heavenly and divine
inspirations and motions. Come therefore, my brother, and make have, Psalm, 95,
To day, says the Prophet, if thou will hear his voice, harden not thy heart:
that thou may make answer to him to morrow, yea begin presently to lay to
thine hand: which the sooner that thou shall do, it shall be the more easier
unto thee.

Against them that defer their repentance to the hour of death. CHAP. XXVI.
IVstly and rightly ought those things which we have spoken to be sufficient,
to confound them, who defer and put off their repentance to the hour of
death. For if it be so dangerous to prorogue and defer it to certain years;
what will it be I pray thee, to drive it of, and reserve it for that most
perrilous time? But because this error is too familiar and usual in the
world; and seeing that very many souls do perrish, being miserably deceived
by this error, I thought it very necessary to speak somewhat of this vain
opinion of men. It is dangerous to dispute of final repentance.
And although it is very dangerous to speak of this matter (for it may
minister occasion to weak and fearful consciences to distrust and despair)
yet greater shall the danger be, that men know not, into what hazard they cast
themselves, when they defer their repentance to that time. So that weighing
both dangers in an equal balance, we may manifestly see, that this is greater
then that by many degrees. For experience teaches us, that more souls do
perrish through too much confidence, then by too much fear or faint-hartednes.
For we are appointed Watchmen, as Ezechiell says, Ezech. 35,
that when we see the sword coming, we should tell the people of it; least
those that should be admonished of us, be deceived: and their blood should be
required at our hands.

But because in this life we have no other light, nor no other truth, besides
the holy Scripture, and the monuments of holy Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, who before us have copiouslie and sufficiently handled this matter; let
us see what they say of it. For I hope that no man will be so rash, that will
prefer his own opinion before their judgments. In speaking of which we will
observe this order, that first we remember what the Fathers have spoken of this
matter; and then what the Scripture teaches us.

Authorities of certain Fathers, concerning final repentance.
BEfore we enter into this disputation, let us presuppose that, which Saint
Augustine, and all the Doctors of the Church do say; that we must necessarily
know, that as true repentance is properly the work of God, so he can give it
to whom he will, and when he pleases. Therefore, according to this sentence,
repentance shall be true, and sufficient to salvation at what time soever it
be; yea in the hour of death. But how sildome this happens, I would not that
thou should believe me or thy self, but the Saints, by whose mouth the holy
Ghost has spoken. Therefore it is meet and requis^^e, that we rely upon their
judgments. Augustine of true and false repentance, ca, 17
Hear therefore what Saint Augustine does speak of this matter, in his book of
true and false repentance: He that first is forsaken of his sins, before he
forsake the^, he freely and willingly does not forsake them, but of necessity
and constraint. But God requires the liberty of thy will. Wherefore, they
that will not be converted unto the Lord, so long as they can sin; In the
same place.
and afterward come unto conversion when they can sin no longer: they shall
not so easily obtain that they desire. And then a little after, Augustine
declaring how that conversion is wrought, To be converted what it is.
says thus: He is converted, that is, he is wholly and altogether changed,
who now not only fears punishment, but hastes to return to a good and
gracious God. Which conversion albeit it happens to any one at the end of his
life, we are not to despair of the remission of his sins. But because so
faithful and absolute a conversion sildome or never happens, so late
repentance is suspicious, and to be feared. For whom the disease constrains,
and the pain terrifieth, he shall scarcely ever come to true conversion;
especially when his children are present, whom he has too much doted on, and
his wife and the world do call him unto them. For this late repentance is wont
to deceive many. But because God is always almighty, he can always help in
death, whom he pleases. But because there be many things that do hinder, and
do draw away the languishing and fainting spirit, it is most dangerous, and
next to destruction to put of repentance until death. But it is a very great
thing that God should then inspire thee, and deal so favorably with thee. If
therefore there be any one, who then does seek for true repentance, let him
expect the friendly clemency of God, well understanding and feeling, that the
goodness of God is greater then his wickedness. He that thus escapes, let him
live and not die. Hitherto Saint Augustine, by whose words it is manifest, into
how great dangers they do cast themselves headlong, who of purpose leave of
their repentance to the hour of death.

Saint Ambrose also, in his books of repentance, does largely dispute of this
matter; In his exhortation to repentance, which forthwith follows in his
second book of repentance.
although there be some that attribute this discourse of his to Augustine,
where amongst many other things he faith; He that r^penteth, and reconcileth
himself at the last cast, and passes hence, that is, departs out of his
body: I confess unto you, that we deny not unto him, that which he desires:
but I dare not presume to say, that he went well hence. I do not presume, I
do not promise, I do not say, I deceive ye not, I do not beguile you, I make
no promise unto you. A faithful man living well, does safely depart hence. He
that repents, and is reconciled, whilst he is in health, if after he live
well, is safe.

Repeating the same thing a little after, he says; But he that repents at
the last, and shall pass hence, whether he safely passes or no, I am not
certain: I can assure him of repenpentance, but of further security I cannot
assure him. Mark what I say; I will lay down this more plainly, least any one
should miss my meaning: Do I say that he shall be damned? I do not say so.
Neither do I say that he shall be saved. O holy Bishop, what other thing
do thou say unto me? Certainly I know not what I shall say unto thee. I
have said, I presume not, I promise not, I know not Gods determination. Will thou my brother be delivered from all doubt, will thou escape this ambiguous
incertaintie? Repent whilst thou art strong and in health. For if thou truly
repentest, whilst thou art in health, and so the last day find thee, thou art
safe. Therefore run, that thou may be reconciled. If thou do so, thou
art safe. Why safe? Will thou that I shall tell thee? Because thou repentedst at
that time, when thou might have sinned. Behold, I have told thee, why thou
art safe. But if then thou will repent when thou can sin no longer, thy
sins have dismissed thee, and not thou them.

Saint Isidore does consent unto this. The judgment of Isidore.
He that would, says he, be certain of the remission of his sins in the hour
of death, let him repent whilst he is in health, and then let him lament and
deplore his iniquity and wickedness. But he that has lived wickedly, and
repents at the hour of his death; it is most certain that he is in very
great ieopardy. For even as his damnation is uncertain, so also his salvation
is doubtful. Surely these words are very dreadful: but those more fearful,
which Eusebius the Scholar of Saint Jerome writes, and which his glorious and
holy Master spoke being at the point of death, stretching him self upon the
earth, arrayed in rugged and course Sackcloth: but because I dare not relate
them, with that rigor that they are written, least I should minister occasion
of distrust and despair to those that be weak and faint-harted, let him that
pleases read them: In the ninth tome of Plantynes edition, a little before
the end.
he shall find them in the fourth tome of saint Ieromes works, in a certain
Epistle of Eusebius, to Bishop Damasus as touching the death of Saint Jerome,
whose beginning is, To the most reverent Father etc. Where amongst other things
he says; But some man will say; That man that has done wickedly all the time
that he lived, and repenting at the hour of his death, he shall obtain pardon
of God. Alas, how vain a supposall, and how false a meditation. Scarcely of an
hundred thousand men, whose life's have always been wickedly led, scarcely I
say one deserves favor at Gods hands. A man altogether borne and brought up
in sin, who has neither seen, nor acknowledged GOD, neither is willing to
hear of him, neither knows when he sins, nor what repentance is, unless
perhaps he sometimes dream of it: and altogether entangled in worldly business,
whom the love of his children who^ he must forsake, oppresses, whom infirmity
amateth, whom the loss and grief of riches and temporal blessings shakes
and excruciateth, because he sees that he can no longer enjoy them, what
repentance can he bring forth acceptable to God? which he at all would not
bring forth, nor once meddle with, if he had any hope of recovery. Certainly I
will conclude as I think; he that whilst he is young and strong fears not to
offend God, in death he deserves not to find any favor of God. What
repentance is that, my beloved children, which a man only makes for this
respect, because he sees that he can live no longer? Who if he should recover
of his sickness, would become worser then he was before? I have known many
peny-fathers and helhound usurers, who may rightly be termed the devils
Alcumists, or the devils Mint-maisters, that have been sorry and penitent,
when they have thought that there was no way with them but death, but after
that they have been recovered, their life's have been a great deal more
wicked and detestable then it was before. This I hold, this I think to be
true: this I have learned by long experience, that his end is not good, whose
life was always evil: who feared not to sin, but always lived in the
vanities of the world.

Hitherto Eusebius: by whose words it is manifest, how suspected that
repentance was to this holy Doctor Jerome, which was made at the hour of death
of him, who had continued in sin all the time of his life. Greg, in his 18,
book of his Morals chap. 5. Job. 27.
Neither here the judgment of S. Gregory is to be kept close as concerning
this matter; who upon these words of Job, For what hope has the hypocrite,
though he be n^uer so covetous, if God take away his soul? Will God hear his
cry, when trouble comes upon him? says; God hears not his cry in the time
of trouble, who in the time of peace and prosperity, has not heard the Lord
crying unto him in his commandments. Prou. 28.
For it is written; He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, his
prayer shall be abominable. Therefore the holy man beholding how those that
contemn the law and all right paths, do at the last cast conform themselves
unto prayer, says, Will God hear his cry? Those words do iumpe with those of
our Savior, who says; Afterward came also the foolish Virgins, Math. 25.
saying: Lord, Lord, open to us. And it shall be answered unto them; Verily I
say unto you, I know you not. Because then so much the more severity shall be
used, by how much the more mercy has now been extended: and then judgment
shall be severely and strictly executed upon them, whom now persisting in sin
mercy patiently waited upon. These be S. Gregory's words. Another Doctor of
the Church says; It is a hard thing, that then (that is at the point of death)
true repentance should be, when it comes so late. When as anguish and pain
tormenteth the body, and grief oppresses the senses, scarcely can a man
think of any other thing. Greatly suspicious ought that repentance to be,
which seems constrained. The conjecture is easy, that a man should think
that himself is unwilling to do that, which he has no ability to do.
Possibility does very well prove the willingness. If thou do not whilst thou
may, thou manifestly show that thou art unwilling to do. Another Doctor
of the Church does also subscribe to all this. Seeing therefore, says he, that
a fruitful repentance is not the work of a man, but of God: by his mercy he
can inspire it, whenever he will: and reward those by his mercy, whom he
could condemn by his justice. But because there are many things that hinder,
and hold back the sick party, and him that languisheth and faynteth through
sickness, it is dangerous, and near unto destruction, to protract and defer
repentance till death. But a marvelous great thing is it, if God at that time
inspire any man with true repentance. Consider I pray thee how fearful and
dreadful these words be? Who then is so bold and audacious, that dare expose
this great treasure to so great hazard? Is there any thing more precious in
this world then salvation? Who therefore is so inconsiderate and vnaduized, that
dares presume to say, that he does not passing ill, that commits so great
treasure to such danger?

These be the judgments of the holy Doctors, by whom we may evidently gather,
how great their folly and madness is, without an especial care to sail over
this so dangerous a Sea, of which the most expert and experienced Mariners have
spoken so doubtfully, and with so great fear. To dye well is an Art, which
ought to be learned all (...) life long. For in the hour of death so many and
so great are the discruciatements that cause death, that scarce remains any
time to learn to dye well.

The authority of School Doctors concerning this matter.
IT remains now for the greater confirmation of this matter, that we see what
the School Doctors think of it. Among others there is one that excellently
handles this matter, agreeing in all things unto us, putting and inferring
this conclusion: Repentance, which is made at the point of death, The
conclusion of the School man.
and in extremity, is sildome true, by reason of the great difficulty that
happens at this time. He proves this conclusion by four reasons or
arguments.

The first reason of the School man.
The first is, by reason of the great perturbations, which arise out of the
greatness of griefs, sickness, and the presence of Death, through which the heart
is less able to lift up it self to God, and rightly to busy it self in the
exercises of true repentance. For the better understanding of this argument we
must know, that all the perturbations of our heart have great force to disturb
and hinder our will and senses: and according to the rule of Philosophy, in
this effect and event the affections or passions are much more powerful, which
cause sorrow and sadness, then those that procure mirth and joy. Hence it is
that the perturbations or affections of one dying are exceeding strong, and of
all other most powerful. For (as Aristotle says) death is the most dreadful
of all terrible things: there being so many dolours and discruciatements in the
body, so many afflictions and anguishes in the soul, so great sorrow and care
for children, wife, and the world, all which are to be forsaken. Amongst so
many and so tempestuous winds of the passions, where shall the senses be, and
where the cogitations, but where these dolours and perturbations do carry and
whirle them? Daily experience teaches us, that if any one be tormented with
the toothache, or by any other sharp pain, although he be a very godly and a
religious man, yet scarcely then can he steadfastly lift up his heart to God, nay
all the senses and thoughts have recourse thither, where the grief is. If this
happens to the righteous, what will he do, who never accustomed himself to
think of God, and who so much is readier to endanger his greater friend then
his lesser, by how much he is apter and proner to love his body better then his
soul? The evil disposition and temperature of the body is an impediment of
co^templation.
Amongst the four impediments of contemplation, which S. Bernard does reckon
up, one is the evil disposition and temperature of the body. For then the
soul is so urged and occupied with the dolours of the flesh, that scarce it
permits a man to think upon any other thing, besides that, which then
greeueth and excruciateth him. Which if it be true, what greater dotage or
madness can there be, then to expect, tarry, and wait for the worst disposition
and temperature of the body, and in it to handle and deal with the greatest
businesses of the soul? I knew a certain man, who being at the point of
death, when he was willed and admonished to prepare himself for his end, for
the glass of his life was now runned out, he was so affrighted and overwhelmed
with the presence of death, that he thought upon nothing else, then how he might
escape the danger of death, as if the date of his life had been put in his
own hands, and he had the ordering and determining of it. All his care was,
how he might remedy and avoid this danger, if possibly it might be. But when
the Minister saw him so little careful and troubled with those things which
were necessary for that time, he admonished him, that he should let pass such
thoughts, and begin earnestly to call upon God. The sick man hardly taking
this a^^onition, began to talk a far off from the purpose, and so yeeleded
up the ghost. Notwithstanding, this man had been a lover of Virtue: whereby
thou may see, how the presence of Death does disturb and disquiet them, who
are in love with their life's, seeing that it so greatly troubled him, who at
other times had despised it. I knew also another man, who when he had fallen
into a most dangerous and grievous sickness, and saw Death now at hand, he
earnestly desired to confer a little with God, and to prevent the Judge by a
devout prayer, before he should depart out of this life: but sorrows and the
continual accidents of his infirmity would let him have no rest. If therefore
only preparation to repentance, b^so hard at that time, who will be so fond
and mad to defer and prorogue the remedy and repentance of his whole life to
that moment?

The second reason of the Shoole-man is, The 2, reason of the Schole-man.
that true repentance ought to be voluntary, that is, it ought to be done
willingly, and not of constraint, or compelled by necessity. This is that
which Saint Augustine says; Aug. in his book of true and false repentance,
chap, 17.
Let no man tarry so long as he can sin. For God requires the liberty of the
will, that thy faults may be wiped away; he requires not necessity, but
charity: not only fear; because man lives not only in fear. Therefore, it
behooves him that lately repents, not only to fear the Judge, but to love
him: because without charity no man can be saved. Wherefore, that man that
never truly repents himself in his life time, but prorogeth it to the hour
of death, he seems not to bring forth repentance of will, but of compulsion:
^^d if of constraint or necessity, then it is not merely voluntary.

2, Kings, 16,
Such was the repentance of Shimei, for that offense which he had committed
against David, when he fled from the face of his son Absolon. Which Shimei,
when he saw that the victory did incline to David, and considering of the
mischief that hung over his head, he descended with the men of Judah to meet
King David and with the thousand men of Benjamin, and prostrating himself
before the King, he craved pardon for his fault. 2, Kings, 19,
Which when Abishai heard, he said; Shall not Shimei die for this, because he
cursed the Lords anointed? But holy king David, not ignor^^^ of what small
desert this repentance was, for the time wisely dissembled the deed, yet he
would not that it should utterly pass unrevenged: but when he was at deaths
door, not for any desire of revenge, but in the zeal of justice, he
commanded his son, that he should not suffer it to go unrevenged; 3,
Kings, 2.
who afterward commanded him to be slain. Of this kind and nature, seems
the repentance of many wicked Christians to be, who when they have perscuered
all their life through in sin, offending God, when the hour of rendering an
account shall draw near, when they see death approaching, and the grave open,
and the Judge present; when they shall understand that no strength or power,
can be found against that infinite power and omnipotency; and that that shall
be determined in that moment which is for ever irreuocable, then they turn
themselves unto the Judge with prayers and protestations: which if they be
true, certainly they are profitable. But the common event teaches, what manner
of prayers and protestations they were, and are: for we have learned by
experience, that many of them having escaped this danger, forthwith have forgot
all that they promised; and as Swine have returned to their wallowing in the
mire, yea they have reuersed and recalled that good, which then they purposed;
and have again embraced those things, which then they estimated prejudicial
to their souls, as if they were the men that had not done, that they did for
the love of God, but only for fear of the extreamitie, in which at that time
they were: which ceasing, also the effect cease, A similitude.
which thereupon followed. Whereby it most manifestly appears, that this
repentance is like unto that which Sailors make: who when they are in
extremity and danger of shypwrack, they promise to change their life's, to
embrace virtue, and I know not what protestations they make: but when the
storm is appeased and ouer-past, and a wished calm comes, and they are
without ieopardy, byand by they return to their former vomit: they laugh, they
trifle, they blaspheme, carouse and swear, and become worser then they were
before, making no account of their vows and protestations, yea, reputing them
as dreams and toys.

The third reason is, The third reason of the Schole-man.
because the custom of sin, in which the sinner has hitherto lived, will
almost never forsake a man, but even till death waits upon him: and follows
him no otherwise then the shadow does the body. For custom is another nature,
which is not overcome without very great difficulty. And so we see by
experience, that many at the hour of their deaths, are so little careful for
the salvation of their souls, are so covetous, so drowned in carnal and
wordly things, such lovers of this life, that they would still enjoy it, if at
any price they might buy it; so captiuated in the love of this world, and so
enamoured with all those things that they loved in it, as if they were not at
all at this pass, or in this danger.

Have you not oftentimes seen old men so greedy and so covetous, that they
have never intermitted one hour, nor slacked any time, to hourd up the pelf
of this world; who notwithstanding are unmerciful, and have their hands shut
when they should do any good: and whose affections and appetites are very
fresh and lively in prosecuting the business of this world, and heaping up
riches without end or mean, which they must leave in the world, GOD knows to
whom, but to any good work reprobate and dull? This is a punishment not the
least, by which God punishes sin; permitting it to attend upon the offender
to the grave; according to that of S. Gregory, God chastises a sinner with
this kind of punishment, that he permits him to forget and be unmindful of
himself in the hour of death, because he remembered not God in his life. And
so one negligence or oblivion is punished by another: the forgetfulness of the
fault, is punished with that oblivion which is both a punishment and a fault:
which we see and hear verified by daily experience: for how often do we
hear, that many have wished to die, and have died in the arms of their
harlots, whom they tenderly loved, that as in their life time they would not
expel them out of their houses, so in death they would not forsake them,
because by the just judgment of God, they are become utterly unmindful and
obliuious, both of themselves, and of their souls.

The fourth reason of the Schoole-man is founded in the quality of the valor
of the works, The fourth reason of the School-man.
which are commonly done at that hour: for every one, who has but a spark of
Divine light, sees plainly, how far different the works that then are done,
are from the works, which are done of a man sound and in health: he
acknowledges I say, that those much less please God then these. That gift
cannot be very acceptable to God, (as says a certain holy woman) which
therefore is offered, because the last day so enioynes it, for it is not of the
right nature of a gift. What I pray thee is it to pardon an injury at that
hour, when not to pardon it is a great reproach? Do thou think it praise
worthy, that then thou leauest thy Concubine, when thou must leave her whether
thou will or no, neither may she stay any longer in thine house?

By these reasons this subtle Doctor concludes, that a man with great
difficulty in that hour truly repents. Yea he says that a Christian, who
of a set purpose deferreth his repentance to the hour of death, does very
highly sin, by reason of the great injury that he offers to his own soul:
and by reason of the great danger, unto which he exposes his salvation. Now I
leave the Reader to his own conscience and consideration, that he may see
whether there is any thing more to be feared then this.

Certain authorities of the holy Scripture, confirming the precedent sentences
of the Doctors.
But because the strength and bulwark of all this disputation consists in
the word of God (for against this there is neither appeal nor answer) hear
what it teaches us concerning this matter. Solomon in the first chapter of his
Proverbs, after he had related the words, by which the eternal Wisdom
calls man to repentance, he in like manner adioyneth those words, which
she will speak to those that do not obey her call: Prou, ^.
Because, says she, I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded. But all my counsels have ye despised, and set my
correction at naught. Therefore will I also laugh at your destruction, and
mock you, when the thing that ye fear comes upon you. Even when the thing
that ye be afraid of falls in suddenly like a storm, and your misery like
a tempest, yea when trouble and heaviness comes upon you. Then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me: And that because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord.

Hitherto be the words of Solomon, or that I may speak better, of God
himself. Which Saint Gregory in his Morrall books does expound to be spoken
of this repentance, which here we handle. What can be answered unto this? Are
not these threatenings sufficient, being from God himself, to make thee to
fear, and to admonish thee, that betimes thou prepare thy self for that
hour? But hear also another testimony not less plain then this. The Lord
reasoning in the Gospel of his coming to judgment, he advises and
counsaileth his Disciples with great instancie, that they prepare themselves
against that day, having used many parables and similitudes to that end, that
by them they might understand, of what great weight that matter was. Math, 24,
His words be these: Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes,
shall find watching. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart: My Lord
will be long a coming: and so begin to finite his fellows, yea, and to care
and drink with the drunken. The same servants Lord shall come in a day when he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and shall hew him
in pieces, and give him his portion with the Hipocrites. It is plain and
evident by this, that the Lord very well knew of the counsels, inventions,
and excuses of the wicked, which they find out to excuse and bolster out their
bad matters: and therefore he does prevent them, and shut the way before them,
and admonishes them how their wickedness shall prosper with them, and what
event their hope shall have.

What do these things differ from the^, which here we handle? What other things
do we speak here, but those that the Lord himself speaks? Thou art that
evil servant, who meditatest in thine heart such like things, as he did; thou
delayest thy repentance, and think that there is time enough left for thee,
thou eatest, drinkest, and perseuerest in thy sins. Do thou not fear
these threatenings, which he threatens, who is no less able to effect them,
then to speak them? Who is of might to execute all things that he speaks,
sooner and more readily then to speak them? He himself speaks unto thee, he
reasons the matter with thee, he calls thee, he has business with thee, he
says unto thee: Watch miserable man, and whilst thou have time prepare thy
self, least thou miserably perishest in that hour of Gods just judgment.

But I seem to bestow too much time and labor upon a matter so manifest. But
what shall I do, when I see the greater part of the world cover their sin
and error under this cloak? But that thou may more manifestly know the
greatness of this danger, Math. 25.
hear another testimony of the same Lord? Then shall the kingdom of heaven be
likened unto ten Virgins. etc. Then; when shall that then be? When the Judge
shall come, when the hour of judgment shall approach, as well general for all
men, August in an Epistle to Dios.
as particular for every one. For in this every one shall find his last day,
in this the last day of the world shall overtake every one; because as every one
dies, so he shall be judged in this day, as says Augustine. At that time
therefore, says our Savior, it shall happen unto us, as unto the ten
Virgins, five of which were fools, and five wise, which taking their Lamps
went out to meet the Bridegroom: The wise whilst they had time, took oil in
their vessels: But the foolish, as it oftentimes happens, had no care nor
regard of any oil. At midnight, when men sleep soundly, or when they are
most negligent and void of care, and least think of the day of judgment, a
cry was made. Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him. Then all
those Virgins arose, and prepared their Lamps: And those that were ready went
in with the Bridegroom to the marriage, and the door was shut up. But those that
were not ready at that time, began to provide and prepare themselves, and at
length came, saying; Lord, Lord, open to us. But he aunswering said: Verily I
say unto you, I know you not. And the Lord concluding this parable, says:
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour. As if he should
say; Ye have seen how happy the event was of these wise Virgins, who were
ready, and how unhappy the foolish Virgins were, who wanted oil. Seeing that
therefore ye know not the day nor the hour of the coming of the Bridegroom,
and seeing the business of your salvation depends only of this preparation,
watch and be ye ready at all times, least that day find you unprepared, as it
found these five Virgins, and the door be shut against you, and ye be excluded
from the marriage, as they were excluded. This is the litterall sense of this
parable, as a learned man does expound this place, saying: Let us take heed to
our selves, if it were but only for this respect, that the repentance, which
is deferred unto death, when that voice is heard which says; Behold the
Bridegroom comes: is not safe, yea, as it is described in this ^arable, it is
as though it were not true. At the length he speaking of the end of this
similitude, says: The conclusion of this doctrine is, that we may understand
how these five Virgins were reprobated and refused, because they were not ready
at the coming of the Bridegroom. But the other five were admitted and let in,
because they had provided. Therefore it is necessary that we be always
prouid^d, because we know not at what hour the Bridegroom will come.

Tell me I pray thee, what could be spoken more manifestly for the illustration
of our purpose? Therefore I do greatly wonder, that after so clear a
testimony men dare yet trust to a hope so weak and uncertain. For before this
testimony was brought forth, I did not so much marvel, if they did persuade
themselves the contrary, or if they desired willingly to deceive themselves.
But after that this heavenly Doctor and Teacher has determined this question,
when as the Judge himself has manifested unto us the order and manner of his
judgment by so many examples, who is so extremely impudent or shameless,
without wit or reason, that will think that it shall happen otherwise, then
he has foretold, who himself shall pronounce the sentence?

Aunswers to certain objections
But because thou may object against these things, which we have spoken:
How? was not the these yielding up the ghost saved by one only word? Many
miraculous and wonderful things reserved to the coming of Christ.
We answer unto this, that this work was no less miraculous, then the
other miracles of Christ, which work and miracle was reserved to the coming
of our Savior, being the son of God into this world, and for a testimony of
his glory: And therefore it was necessary, that in that very hour, when the
Lord suffered, that both things celestial and terrestrial should be
disturbed; that light should be mingled with night; and that the very elements
should be shaken; That the earth shaken in her very foundations, Eusebius. Emiss.
of the good thief.
which could scarcely support and uphold God on the Cross, should tremble and
quake; That the day, the light being fled, should assume a lamentable robe, and
after the manner of bewayling mourners, should be clothed with the sable habit
of black heaviness; That the graves of the dead should be opened; and that the
dead should arise: For all these miraculous wonderments, were reserved as
testimonies of the glory of his Person, among the number of which was the
salvation of this thief. In which work his confession was no less admirable
and miraculous, then his salvation: for his Novel and Puny new sprung faith,
acknowledged that which his Disciples gayne-sayed. At that time the guilty
thief believed that, which the elect denied. The impiety of the persecutours
raged, the wickedness of the blasphemers exceeded, the stripes and wounds showed
Christ only to be but a man, and the Apostles despayring after so many Divine
miracles, only this thief rests not, nor stayed in the scandale of his
cross and death; only he is the witness of his Majesty, who was a companion of
his distres and heaviness. Seeing that therefore these wonderful and miraculous
things belong to the dignity of this Lord, and to the mystery of that time, it
will be counted a ridiculous thing to think, that these are matters for all
times and places, which were only proper for that time.

We see also in all well ordered common wealths, A similitude.
that some things be done ordinarily, and always after the same manner, and
some things that are used extraordinarily. Ordinary things are common to all,
but the extraordinary are proper to some certain. The same thing also comes
in use in the common wealth of God, which is his Church. And so that of the
Apostle is regular and ordinary; 2, Cor. 11.
Whose end shall be according to their works: signifying that after the common
manner of speaking, an evil death follows an evil life, and a good death a
good life. And it is an ordinary thing that those that embrace Virtue, and
lead a godly life, do enter into an eternal life; and those that live
viciously and wickedly, to be cast into hell fire. This sentence is common and
true, which the holy Scripture does beat upon in many places. This the Psalms
do sing of, this the Prophets do celebrate, this the Apostles do preach of,
this the Evangelists have noted. The kingly Prophet has comprehended this in
few words, Psalm. 62.
when he said: God spoke once and twice: I have also heard the same, that power
belongs unto God: And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every
man according to his work. This is the sum of all Christian Philosophy.
Therefore according to this speech of David, we say that it is an ordinary
thing, that as well the righteous as the sinner, should receive a reward at the
end of their life's, according to the works, The judgments of God.
which they have done. Yet besides this universal law, God can by his
especial grace and favor bestow mercy upon some, that they should dye the
death of the righteous, who have lived the life of sinners: as also it may come
to pass, that he that has lived like a righteous man in this world, by the
secret judgment of God, A similitude.
may dye as a sinner. As it happens unto them, who have sailed very
fortunately in a long voyage, and at the very mouth of the Haven suffer
shipwreck. Hence it is that Solomon says: Eccles. 3.
Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the breath of the beast
that goes down to the earth? For although it be always in a manner true,
that their souls, who live like beasts, descend to hell; and that theirs, that
live like men, ascend to heaven; yet in the secret and particular judgment of
God, this order may be sometimes inuerted. Yet it is safe and general doctrine,
that a good liver shall have a blessed death. Therefore no man ought for the
praecedent causes to lean to their examples, who have been saved by especial
and particular grace and savor: for they make no general rule, nor extend
themselves to all men, but only to few, and those unknown: Neither can thou
know whether thou art contained in that number.

An objection of the repentance of the Ninevites.
But if thou obiectest unto me the repentance of the Ninevites, which proceeded
from fear, least they should all have been destroyed within forty days;
consider thou not only their sharp and severe repentance, which they made,
but also their change of life. Change thou also thy life after the same manner,
and the same mercy shall not forsake thee. But I perceive that thou art
scarcely recovered of thine infirmity, and scarcely risen out of bed, seeing
that thou straightwayes runnest to the first kind of life, and recallest all
that, which thou did purpose, when thou wast weak. Wherefore I leave thee to
consider, what I may think of thy repentance.

The conclusion of the former disputation.
Whatsoever has hitherto been spoken, has not been spoken to that end, that
it should shut the gate of salvation or of hope against any man: for neither
has any of the Saints shut it, neither ought any man to shut it: but to this
end, that the wicked may be recalled and turned from that refuge and fortress,
in which they lurk, and are made mightier to persevere in their iniquities.
But, tell me I pray thee my brother, if all the voices and judgments of
Doctors and holy men, if all reasons, if the holy and sacred Scripture
pronounce so dangerous and perilous things of it, how dare thou hope for
salvation in so great danger and hazard? In whom do thou trust, that will
help thee in this ieopardy? Perhaps thou placest thy hope in thy preparations,
in thine alms, and in thy prayers. Thou vnderstoodest a little before, how the
five foolish virgins with great care would have prepared and made ready
themselves, after that they had heard the voice telling them, that the
Bridegroom came: thou have learned also, with what great instancie they knocked
and cried at the door; yet it profited none of them: for it proceeded not of
true love, or of true repentance. Perhaps thou trustest to thy tears, which
thou will pour forth at that time; surely, unfeigned tears at all times are
auailable, and happy is that man that from his very heart can pour the^ forth:
but remember I pray thee, Heb, 12,
what tears Esau shed, Who, as the Apostle says, found no place of
repentance, though he sought it with tears. For he did not weep for the love
of GOD, but for his own commodity.

Or, do thou put thy hope in thy good purposes, which thou then set
before thine eyes? These are of force when they are true and sincere; but
remember the purposes of King Antiochus, who when he was in this danger,
promised such great and magnificent things, that it would make a man amazed
that reads them. 2, Macha, 9,
This wicked man, says that book, prayed unto the Lord, of whom he obtained
no mercy. The reason was, for all things that he purposed, proceeded not of the
spirit of love, but of seruill fear, which is not acceptable. For to fear
hell, may proceed of the mere natural love which man bears to himself.
But that man loves himself, is no reason that the kingdom of heaven should
be given unto him. Insomuch, that as no man entered into the palace of King
Assuerus clothed in Sackcloth, Hester, 4,
so it is lawful for no man to enter into the palace of God with a seruill
garment: but all that will enter must be clothed with wedding garments, that
is, adorned and beautified with true love and charity.

Wherefore my brother, I pray and entreat thee, that thou would read and
consider of these things, with great attention, that thou after a very short
time (without all doubt) shall come to this hour, and to this ieopardy. For
thou see with what great swiftnes heaven is turned about, and with what
velocitie time slippeth and posteth away, and how soon the thread of thy life
shall be cut off. The day of destruction is at hand, says the Prophet, Deuteronomy,
32,
and the times that shall come, make have. Therefore, a little space of time
being ouer-past, this prophecy shall be fulfilled. Then thou shall perceive and
know, that I have been a true Prophet in these things, which I have admonished
thee of. Then thou shall see thy self compassed about with dolours, laden
with those things that are yrkesome unto thee, and miserably afflicted with
the presence of death, waiting for the condition, which straightwayes shall be
awarded, either that thou shall be for ever happy, or for ever unhappy.

O perrilous estate, o hard and dangerous way; o sentence, after which
everlasting death, or everlasting life is to be expected; o who can alter this
Decree at that hour? o who shall be able to hear that sentence? My brother,
now thou have advantage, do not neglect it: now thou have time, make the Judge
thy friend, that he may be sauourable unto thee. Hear therefore, and follow
the counsel of the Prophet, Esaias, 55,
who says; Seek ye the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he
is at hand. For now the Lord is at hand to hear us, albeit we see him not.
In the hour of judgment we shall see him, but he will not hear us, unless
we be such as are to be heard now.

Against them, that through the hope of the Divine mercy, do continue and
persevere in their sins. CHAP. XXVII.
SOme men there are, that persisting and continuing in their wicked life, do
cheer up and comfort themselves in hope of Gods mercy, and the merrits of
Christ's passion: and to these as to the other, their error is to be showen.
Thou say that the mercy of God is unmeasurable and infinite, for he
willingly would be crucified as a malefactor for sinners. I confess indeed
that his mercy is exceeding great; for it suffers thee to utter so lauishlie
such cursed blasphemy; as that thou would his goodness and bounfulnes,
should be a fautour and a favorer of thy wickedness: and that his Cross,
which he apprehended as a mean to destroy the kingdom of sin, should be
made of thee a mean to strengthen and defense sin: and whereas thou
should offer a thousand life's unto him, if thou had so many, because he
has sacrificed his life for thee, there thou take an occasion to deny that
one unto him which thou have, yea which thou have received of him. This
grieueth thy Savior more, then the death did, which he suffered for thee: for
he who neither lamented nor deplored his own death, most grievously lamenteth
and bewaileth thy sins in the Prophet, Psalm, 129,
saying; The plowers plowed upon my back, and made long furrows. Tell me I
pray thee, who has taught thee thus to argue, that because God is good and
gracious, thou should conclude, that it is lawful for thee to sin, and to
follow wickedness? The holy Ghost seems unto me to conclude after another
manner; that because God is good and gracious, he gathers that he is worthy
to be worshipped, obeyed, and to be loved above all things. And because God is
good, it is meet that I be good also; and that I should trust in him: who
although I be a most grievous sinner, yet is ready to receive me into favor,
if I with all my heart will be converted unto him. Because God is good and so
good, it is double wickedness to offend so great and magnificent a goodness.
Therefore, by how much the more thou do exemplify the goodness of GOD, by so
much the more thou do aggrauate thy sin, which thou committest against
him. And it is meet and equal that so great a sin should be punished: for it
is the nature and duty of the Divine justice, (which also thou esteemest not
to be contrary, but the sister and the auenger of the Divine goodness) that it
should not leave so enormous an injury unpunished.

This kind of excuse is not new, or sprung up of late, but very old, and
usual in the world. This in times past was the difference between the true
and the false Prophets, The difference between the true Prophets and the false.
because the true did denounce the threatenings of God against the people, and
did exaggerate and aggrauate his justice: but the false, on their own heads
did promise false peace and mercy. But when the punishments of GOD did approve
the verity of the one part, and the falsehood of the other, the true Prophets
said: Where are now your Prophets, Ierem, 37,
which prophesied unto you, saying: The King of Babell shall not come against
you, nor against this Land^ Thou say, that the mercy of God is great. Thou
which say so, credit me, GOD has not opened thine eyes, that thou might
see the greatness of his justice. For if thou had thine eyes open to
behold it, thou would say with the Prophet; Who knows the power of thy
wrath? Psalm, 90,
for according to thy fear is thine anger. But that thou may be freed from
this dangerous and perrilour error, I pray thee let us dispute of the matter a
little, and be ruled by reason.

Neither thou, nor I do see the Divine justice, as it is in it self; Whence
the Divine justice is known.
that we may come to the knowledge of the measure of it. Neither do we know
God himself in this world, but by his works. Therefore let us enter into the
spiritual world of the holy Scripture, and then let us go out into this
corporal world, wherein we live, and let us out of them both reason, what the
Divine justice is, that by this means we may know it. Certainly this
consideration will be most profitable; For besides this end which now we
propose unto our selves, we shall reap also out of it another fruit: for it
will a fresh stir up in our hearts the fear of the Lord, which as the Doctors
say, is the treasure, the keeper, A similitude.
and burden of our souls. For even as a ship is not safe without balas or
lastage; (for it is easily tossed with every wind, now no this side, and now
on that to the great danger of the ship) so is the soul endangered, which
lacks the ballas and burden of the divine fear. This fear poyzeth the
soul, that the winds of worldly favor, or of divine graces, do not toss
and pusse it up, and so overthrow it. Although it be defenced, yet if it has
not his balas, it is in ieopardy. Neither only the Punyes and Incipients, but
also those that are grown and old, must necessarily live in fear in Gods
house. Not only the sinners and guilty must fear, who have great cause so to
do: All men ought to fear.
but the righteous also are not to be freed, who have no such great cause to
fear. Sinners must fear, because they have offended; and also the righteous,
least they should offend: their faults and misdemeanors past, ought to strike
fear into them, but the dangers to come, ought to terrify these. But if thou
desire to know, how this holy fear is engendered and wrought in thee, Whence
fear is in-gendered.
I say that it is wrought when it is infused by grace, and it is preserved, and
increases by the consideration of the works of the Divine justice, of which we
begin now to speak. Consider of them often, and reuolue them in thy mind, and
by little and little, thou shall feel this fear wrought in thee.

Of the works of the Divine justice, whereof mention is made in the holy
Scripture.
THE first work of the Divine justice, which the holy Scripture remembers,
The beginning of the ways of the Lord.
is the damnation of Angels. The beginning of the ways of the Lord was that
terrible and bloody beast, the Prince of devils, as it is written in the book
of Job. For seeing that all the ways of the Lord are mercy and justice, until
this first sin, the justice of GOD was not yet revealed, which was hid in the
bosom of the Lord, as a sword in a scabberd.

This first sin was the cause, why this sword was unsheathed. The fall of
devils.
Consider now how grievous and terrible this first plague and punishment was:
lift up thine eyes, and thou shall behold wonderful things; thou shall see I
say, the most precious jewel of the house of God, thou shall see the chiefest
beauty of heaven, thou shall see that Image in which the Divine beauty shyned
so clearly; this I say thou shall see, falling from heaven like an arrow, and
that for the only thought of pride. The Prince of all the Angels, is made the
Prince of devils, of most beautiful, he is made most horrible and deformed, of
most glorious, he is made most vilde and disgracious, of one most acceptable
and gracious of all those creatures which God had made, or ever would make, he
is made the greatest and the most malicious enemy. What astonishment think
thou, and what admiration was this to the heavenly Spirits, who know from
whence and whether this so noble a creature fell? With what fear did they all
pronounce that of Esaias; Esaias, 14,
How art thou fallen from heaven, o Lucifer, son of the Morning?

Descend afterward a little lower to the earthly Paradise, and there thou shall
see a case no less fearful, unless there had been a remedy used for this
mischief. For that the Angels should fall, The fall of Adam.
it was needful that they all should actually offend. But what has the
creature which is borne, actually offended in, why he should be borne the child
of wrath? It is not needful that he should have actual sin, it suffices
only that he be borne of that man, that had offended, and by offending had
corrupted the common root of all mankind, which was in him: this I say is
sufficient, why he is borne in sin.

The glory and Majesty of God is so great, that when as one only creature had
offended him, the whole kind deserved so severely to be punished. For if it
was not sufficient to Haman that great friend of King Assuerus, that he might
revenge himself of Mardocheus, of whom he supposed that he had received an
injury, not only to punish Mardocheus, but for the greatness of his honor to
cut off the whole nation of the Jews, for the denial (as he judged) of a
small reverence; why do thou marvel if the glory and majesty of God, which
is infinite, requires like punishment? Behold therefore the first man is
banished out of Paradise for a bit of an apple, for which even to this day the
whole world is punished. And after so many thousand years the son that is
borne, brings with him out of his mothers womb the stain and blemish of his
father, and not when he can offend himself by reason of age, but in his very
nativity he is borne the child of wrath, and that, as I have said, after so
many thousand years. After so long time this injury could not be buried in
oblivion, being divided among so many thousand thousands of men, and punished
with so many scourges. Yea, all the torments, which men have suffered from the
beginning of the world to this day, all the deaths which they have undergone,
and all the souls which burn and shall burn in hell everlastingly, are
sparks, which have originally proceeded from that first sin; all which are
arguments and testimonies of the Divine justice. And all these things are also
done and brought upon us, after the redemption of mankind wrought, and made by
the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ: Which remedy if it had not been
wrought, there had been no difference between men and devils: for of
themselves there had been as little remedy and hope of salvation to the one as
to the other. What do thou think of this punishment? I think that it is a
reasonable sound argument of the Divine justice.

But because this heavy and grievous yoke is not taken away from the sons of
Adam, new and more kinds of punishments have sprung from it, for other sins,
which have been derived from that first. Genesis 7.
All the world was drowned with the waters of the deluge: Genesis 19.
The Lord rayned from heaven fire and brimstone, upon those five polluted and
sinful Cities: Numb. 16.
The earth swallowed up Dathan and Abiron alive, for a certain contention,
that was between them and Moses: Leuit. 10,
A fire went out from the Lord, and devoured the two sons of Aaron, Nadab,
and Abihu, because they had not observed the right and due ceremonies in the
sacrifice; neither did the dignity of their priesthood profit them any thing,
nor the holiness of their father, nor that familiarity which their. Uncle Moses
had with the Lord. Ananias and Saphira in the new Testament, Acts, 5.
because they lied unto S. Peter (which seemed to be but a small matter) fell
down dead, and suddenly yielded up the ghost.

But what shall we say of the hidden and secret judgments of God? The hidden
and secret judgments of God.
Solomon, who was the wisest of all men, and whom God so tenderly loved, that
he was said to be the Lords beloved, by the hidden and secret judgment of God,
came to that extreme abomination, and that most abominable sin, that he
fell into Idolatry. What is more fearful then this? But if thou should
know of more judgments of this kind, which daily happen in the Church, perhaps
thou would no less fear these, then thou dreadest that: Because thou
should see many stars falling from heaven to the earth; thou should see
many, who did eat the bread of Angels upon the Lords table, to fall and slip
into such calamities, that they rather desire to fill their bellies with the
drasse and swash of Swine; thou should see many, whose chastity was purer
and more beautiful then a Porphirite, to be blacker then a cole. The causes of
whose lapse were their sins.

But what greater sign of the Divine justice can thou desire, the^ that God
for the injury done unto him would not be satisfied, but with the death of his
only begotten son, before he would receive the world to his favor? What
manner of words I pray thee were they, which the Lord spoke to the women, which
followed him lamenting and bewayling? Luke, 23.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children. For behold, the days will come, when men shall say: Blessed are
the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck.
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us: and to the hills,
cover us. For if they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to
the dry? As if the Lord would have said; if this tree of life and innocence,
in which there is neither worm found, nor any corruption of sin, so burn
with the flames of the Divine justice for the sins of others; how think
thou will a dry and barren tree burn, which not charity, but the own proper
malignity condemns to the fire? And if in this work of mercy, thou do see
so great rigor of justice, what will it be in other matters, in which so great
mercy is not seen? But if thou be so dunsicall and blockish, that thou
can not conceive of the force of this argument, at the least look upon the
pains of hell, and see what an exceeding huge punishment that is, with which
the Divine justice punishes one sin: how I say that sin that is done in a
moment, is punished with everlasting torment. Behold how this dreadful and
terrible Justice joins her self to this Divine mercy, which thou so greatly
extollest. What can be thought of more horrible and fearful, then to see how
that high and supreme Lord of Lords, from the throne of his glory will behold
a soul, which shall be tortured and tormented so many thousand thousands of
years with the intolerable punishments of hell, yea, he shall rejoice that it
is thus plagued, and it shall be pleasurable unto him to have the punishment
without end, without term or limit, and utterly without any future hope of
remedy. O the altitude of the Divine justice, and worthy of all admiration, o
secret, o the Abyss of this most deep profundity. What man will be so mad,
who will be so berest of all reason and judgment, that if he consider these
things, will not tremble, will not stand astonished, and utterly amazed at such
great and dreadful punishments?

Of the works of the Divine justice, which are seen in this world.
But leaving the books of the holy Bible a little, let us go out and view
this visible world: for in it we shall find great arguments of the Divine
justice. I assuredly affirm unto thee, that they that have their minds
illuminated, but with the least beam of the Divine light and knowledge, do
live in this world in great fear, and exceedingly do dread the works of the
Divine judgments: because seeking an issue and passage out of them, and how to
be freed from them, they find none other, but only a simple and humble
confession of the faith, they have in Christ. The great infidelity of men.
Who does not tremble to see the universal face of the earth covered with
infidelity? to see how fruitful the harvest of the devils is, that fill the
lakes of hell with the wretched souls of men? to see the greater part of the
world, (yea, after the redemption of mankind) drowned in the former darkness?
How small I pray thee is the region of the Christians, if it be compared with
the Kingdoms and Empires of the Infidels? It is but a small corner of the
world, if thou exceptest the new and late discovered regions of India, which
are daily more and more discovered, and do come to the faith. All besides, the
devils do oppress with their tyranny, and they mourn under the powerful and
tirannicall empire and dominion of the King of darkness: where neither the Sun
of righteousness shines, where the light of truth rises not, where neither the
water rayneth, nor the dew of the Divine grace descends, as neither in the
mountains of Gelboe, 2, Kings, 2.
where the devils make such hauock of souls, which they gather and cast into
eternal and inextinguible fire. For it is without all controversy, that as
without the Arc of Noah, in the time of the deluge none was saved, nor any in
the City of Jericho without the house of Rahab; so none shall be saved, that
is found without the house of GOD, which is his Church.

But look upon that part, which Christians inhabit, and look upon the doings
and affairs of Christians, how they are ordered and managed in this most
corrupt and deprauate age of the world, and thou shall confess that in this
mystical body, from the sole of the foot to the top of the head, there is
scarce any one sound member to be found. Look into which so ever you please of
the most famous Cities of the world, in which at the least there is any
footsteps of learning and doctrine yet extant: afterward run through the
lesser Towns, Villages Streets, and Castles, and thou shall find those
people, of whom that of Jeremy may be rightly and truly affirmed: Ierem, 5,
Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now, and know, and
enquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be any
that executes judgment, and seeks the truth: that is, that is righteous in
deed, and I will spare it. Furthermore, I say not run through warehouses,
shops, tauerns, and public places of meetings, (for those places are for the
most part dedicated to tryflings, toys, lyings, and deceits) but also the
houses of neighbors, attend and harken, Chap, 8,
as Jeremy, and thou shall understand that there is no body, that speaks
that that is good, neither shall thou hear any thing besides murmurings, lies,
cursings, oaths, and blasphemies: here strifes and contentions do resound,
there threatenings and flaunderous reproaches are heard: In the foresaid chap.
No man repents him of his wickedness saying: What have I done? To be brief,
in very deed thou shall see and understand, that the hearts and tongues of men
are busied about no other matters, but their earthly and own commodities,
neither shall thou hear GOD to be named after any other manner, but in oaths
and execrable cursings, whereby his name is blasphemed: which remembrance of
his name the Lord complains of in the same Prophet, saying; They remember
me, but not as they ought, swearing falsely by my Name. So that by the
exterior marks, a man can scarcely know whether the people be Christian or
Heathen: unless by that manner that we know bells, which are seen a far of,
but are known by the sound: so thou may know them by their oaths and
blasphemies, which are heard when thou art near the^; otherwise they could not
be known or discerned what they are. But I pray thee how can these be numbered
with those, Esaias, 61,
of whom Esaias speaks; All that see the^ shall know them, that they are the
seed which the Lord has blessed. But if the life of Ghristians ought to be
such, that they that see them a far of, may discern and judge them to be the
sons of GOD; what account are they to be made of, who rather seem scoffers,
mockers, and despisers of Christ, then true Christians?

Wherefore, seeing that the sins and enormities of the world are so many and
so great, how can it be that thou manifestly do not see and acknowledge the
effects of the Divine justice? For as no man can deny, but that it is a great
blessing of GOD to preserve a man from sin, so it is a great punishment, and
a notable token of wrath, when God permits, that a man falls into sin.
2, Reg, 24,
So we read in the second book of the Kings, that the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against Israel, and therefore he moved or permitted David to fall into
the sin of pride, when he commanded Israel to be numbered. Ecclus, 23,
In Ecclesiasticus also, when as many sins had been remembered, he adds; A
merciful man shall be delivered from them all, and he shall not wallow in
them. For even as one the one part the increase of virtue is a reward of
virtue; so not sildome it is a punishment of sin, that God punishes sin with
sin, or that God suffers other sins to be done and committed. So we see
that that great punishment was no other, which was inflicted for the greatest
wickedness in the world (that is, for the death of our Savior,) then that which
the Prophet denounces against the workers of it, Psalm, 69,
saying: Lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and let not them come into thy
righteousness: that is, to the keeping of thy commandments. And what
follows? The same Prophet straightwayes after tells, and expounds
himself; Let them be put, says he, out of the book of life, neither let them
be written with the righteous.

If therefore the punishment be so great, and the tokens of Gods wrath so
notorious, that he punishes sins with sins, how is it that thou see not
so great arguments of the Divine justice amongst so many kind of sins, with
which this world now in this age does flow and swell? If so it pleases thee,
cast thine eyes about after the manner of them who are in the midst of the
maine Ocea, to whom nothing is seen but the sea and heaven, as the Poet says,
and scarcely thou shall see any other thing besides sins: and thou seeing so
many sins, will thou not see the Divine justice? Do thou not see water,
being in the midst of the Sea? Yes certainly. And if all the world be a Sea
of sins, what else shall it be but a sea of the Divine justice? It is not
needful that I should descend into hell, and there see, how the Divine justice
rages: it suffiseth that I only behold it in this world. But if thou will be
blind and see nothing that is without thee, at least look into thy self: For
if thou be endangered with sin, thou art within the reach of the Divine
justice: and as long as thou live secure under it, so long art thou
endangered, and so much the more perrillous is thy danger, by how much longer
thou have been endangered with it. So Saint Augustine lived sometimes in this
most wretched estate, as he testifies of himself, Saint Augustine.
saying: I was drowned in the Sea of my sins, and thy wrath had prevailed
against me, and I knew not. I was made deaf with the noise of the chains of
my mortality, and of thy wrath, and the ignorance of my fault was the
punishment of my pride. Wherefore, if God punish thee with this kind of
punishment, permitting thee to lie drowned in the deep sea of sins, and so
to blindfolde thee in the midst of thine iniquities, what do thou speak of
a thing so contrary to thy self? Let him speak and make his boast of the
mercy of God, who is worthy of mercy: and let him that is punished with the
justice of the Lord, speak of justice. Does the mercy of God so patiently
permit thee to live in thy sins, and will it not permit thee, that at length
thou fall into hell? O that thou would be wise, and know how short the way
is, that leads from the fault to the punishment, and from grace to glory.
What great thing is it for a man in the state of grace to ascend into heaven:
and what marvel is it, if a sinner descend into hell? Grace is the beginning
of glory, and sin of hell; and hell is the reward of it.

Furthermore, what is more horrible and fearful, then when as the pains of
hell are so intolerable, as before we have said, yet nevertheless, God
permits the number of the damned to be so great, and the number of the elect
so few? How small the number of these is, (least thou should suppose that it
is a devise of mine own) he himself tells us, who numbereth the multitude
of the stars, Psalm, 147,
and calls them all by their names. Who trembles and quaketh not at those
words, which are known to all, but either ill understood, or sildome called to
remembrance? For when as certain had asked Christ, and said; Lord, Luke, 13,
are there but few that shall be saved? he answered; Enter in at the strait
gate: for it is the wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction: Math,
7,
and many there be which go in thereat. Because the gate is strait and the way
narrow that leads unto life, few there be that find it. Who would have
understood this in these words, that our Savior understood, if simply he had
spoken it, and not with an exclamation and an emphasis; O how strait is the
gate and narrow the way? The whole world perished in the waters of the deluge,
only eight persons were saved: which, as Saint Peter testifies in his
Canonical Epistle, 1, Pet, 3.
was a sign, by which is signified how small the number is, that is saved, if
they be compared with the number of those that are damned. Six hundred
thousand men the Lord brought out of Egypt into the wilderdernes, that he might
bring them into the promised Land, besides women and children, who were not
numbered; and in this journey they were many thousand ways helped of the Lord,
notwithstanding, by their sins they lost this Land, which the Lord of his
grace and favor had promised them; and so of so many hundred thousand men,
only two entered into that promised Land. Which almost all the Doctors do thus
interpret, that by it the multitude of the damned is insinuated, and the
paucity of those that are to be saved, that is, That many are called, and few
chosen.

For this cause, not sildome in the sacred Scripture the righteous are called
Iemmes or precious stones, that thereby might be signified, that their rarenes
is as great in the world, as precious stones be; and by as great a quantity as
other stones exceed precious stones, by as great the number of the wicked
exceeds the number of the righteous: which Solomon closely insinuates, when
he says: Eccles, 1,
That the number of fools is infinite. Tell me then, if the number of the
righteous be so small, which both the figure and the truth testify to be
true; when thou see by the just judgment of GOD, that so many are deprived
of that felicity, to which they were created, why do thou not fear that
common danger, and that universal deluge? If the number were alike, yet there
were great cause of fear. Why do I say alike? Yea such and so great are the
everlasting torments of hell, that if only one man of all mankind were to be
banished thither, yet we all should tremble and fear. When our Savior did
eat his last Supper with his Disciples, and said; One of you shall betray me;
Math, 26,
they were all exceeding sorrowful, and began to fear, although their
conscience witnessed their innocence. For when as an imminent mischief is
grievous and heavy, although there be but few to whom it is threatened, yet all
and every one fears, least it should happen to him. If there were a great
Army of men in a field, A similitude.
and it should be revealed from heaven to them all, that a little after an
Arrow should fall from heaven, and should kill one of them, neither was it
known, whom it should be, there is no doubt, but that every one would fear
himself least it should fall upon him. But what would they do, if the greater
part of them should be in danger and ieopardy? How much greater would this
fear be? Tell me o man, thou that art so cunning in fleshly wisdom, and so
unskillful in the business of thy salvation, did God ever reveal unto thee that
there should be so many, whom the thunder or sword of the Divine justice should
smite? If thou know not this, certainly I much less believe that thou
know how many, and which ^e they that shall escape that plague, and on which
side thou shall stand, and yet do thou not fear? Or does hell seem more
tolerable unto thee then the wound of an arrow? Or has God secured thee? or
have thou letters of thy security? or is an infallible charter of thy
salvation granted unto thee? or a privilege of immunity and freedom? Hitherto
there is nothing that promises any such like thing unto thee, moreover, thy
works condemn thee, and according to the present justice (unless thou turn
over a new lease) thou art reprobated, and do thou not yet fear? or will thou say, that the Divine mercy does comfort thee? Surely that does not
dissolve the works of justice, neither is contrary to them; yea if it suffer so
many to be damned, will it not also suffer thee to be one of them, if thou
together sinnest with them? Do thou not see that this unhappy love of thy
self, does blind thee, and miserably deceive thee, whilst it makes thee to
presume other things, then are seen in the whole world? What privilege I pray
thee, is given unto thee beyond the other sons of Adam, that thou should
not be banished thither, whither they are gone, whose works t^o^ do follow?

But if God be to be known by his works, I know what I will say. For although
there be many comparisons, by which the mercy of God, and his justice may be
compared between themselves, in which the works of mercy do prevail, yet at
the length we find, that in the posterity of Adam, of whose seed thou also
art borne, that there are found many more vessels of wrath, then of mercy,
seeing that there are so many that are damned, and so few that are saved. The
cause of which is, not because the grace and help of God forsakes them, or is
wanting unto them, 1, Tim. 2.
( For God, as the Apostle says, would have all to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of his truth) but because the wicked are wanting to themselves,
and the grace of God is of none effect in them.

All these things are remembered more largely and prolixely of me, that thou
may understand, that notwithstanding the mercy of God, which thou
pretendest, God suffers so many to be Infidels, and in the Church so many
evil Christians, and so many Infidels, and so many evil Christians to perish,
so also he will permit thee to perish with them, if thou imitatest their life.
Or when thou wast borne did the heavens rejoice, or shall the judgments and
decrees of God be changed, that the world may be peculier to thee, and another
to others? If therefore notwithstanding the mercy of God hell be so enlarged,
and so many thousand souls be daily swallowed up of it, shall not thy soul
also come thither, if thou continuest in thy sins? But that thou may not
say that God in times past was severe and sharp, but now gentle and mild:
consider that also with this gentleness and clemency he suffers all that thou
have heard, neither shall thou be free and exempted from it, but also thy
punishment remains for thee, yea, although thou be called a Christian, if
thou be found a sinner. Or therefore shall God lose his glory if he shall
condemn thee? Have thou I pray thee any singular thing in thee, for which God
above others ought to spare thee? Or have thou any privilege, which others
have not, for which he should not destroy thee with others, if thou be not
less evil then others be? Consider I pray thee the sons of David, for their
fathers sake many privileges were promised unto them, but neither for that
cause would the Lord suffer their wickedness unpunished: wherefore many of them
had but sorrowful ends. Where then is thy vain trust? Why do thou vainly
hope, they perishing, that thou shall not perish, seeing thou art pertaker of
their wickedness? Thou errest my brother, thou errest, if thou think that
this is to hope in God. What it is to trust in God.
This is not hope, but presumption. For hope is to trust, that God will forgive
thee thy sins, if thou be repentant and sorrowful for them, and turnest from
thy wickedness, and that then he will receive thee into favor. But it is
exceeding great presumption to believe that thou shall be saved, and happy
perseuering and continuing in thy sins. Do not think that this is a small
sin; for it is numbered amongst those, which are committed against the holy
Ghost: for he that presumes after this manner, he offers no small ignominy and
reproach to the Divine goodness, which especially is attributed to the holy
Ghost. Such sins, as our Savior testifies, are not forgiven in this world,
nor in that to come, insinuating that they are remitted with great difficulty;
for as much as they shut against them the gate of grace, and offend a
Physician, who can give life, and apply the medicine to the wound.

The conclusion of all those things, which have been spoken in this Chapter.
LEt us at the length conclude this matter with that excellent sentence of
Ecclesiasticus: Ecclesi. 5.
Because thy sin is forgiven, be not without fear, to heap sin upon
sin. And say not, The mercy of God is great: he will forgive my manifold
sins: for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes down
upon sinners. Tell me I pray thee, if of a sin forgiven we ought to fear,
how can it possibly be that thou should be secure, by daily adding sins to
sins? Mark diligently what he says: His indignation comes down upon
sinners. For of this sentence the whole matter depends. The promises of God
belong to ye righteous, and ye thretnings to the unrighteous
For we must know, that although the Divine mercy extends to the just, and
unjust, calling these, and expecting their repentance, and preserving the
other: nevertheless, the great graces, and the notable benefits, which God
promises to men in the Scriptures, especially belong to the righteous, who as
they faithfully observe the law and commandments of God, so faithfully God
keeps them: he keeps his promises with them, and he is a true father unto
them, as they are his morigerous and obedient sons. On the contrary part
whatsoever threatenings, curses, and severity of Divine justice the holy books
of the Bible contain, all that properly pertayneth to thee, and to such like
unto thee. How great therefore is thy blindness, and blockishnes, who fear not
so great cominations purposely intended against thee; and comfortest thy self
with promises not made for thee? O miserable man, have an eye to those things,
that are spoken of thee, and give to the just that is theirs. Wrath belongs
to thee, therefore fear: but love to the righteous, let them therefore rejoice
and be glad. Will thou that I shall prove this to be true? hear what David
says: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, Psalm. 11.
and his ears open to their prayers. But the face of the Lord is against them
that work evil, to root their memory from off the face of the earth. Such a
like speech is found in Esdras: Esd. 8.
The hand of our God, says Esdras, that is, the Divine providence, is over all
that seek him in truth: and his wrath, strength, and fury over them, who
forsake him. Which seeing that it is so, why o wretched man do thou continue
in thy sin? why do thou deceive thy self? why art thou so dull? why
errest thou thus? These testimonies of Scripture are not for thee, so long as
thou remaynest in the state of damnation, the sweetness of the Divine favor and
love speaks not to thee. This is the portion of Jacob, it belongs not to
Esau. This is the lot of the righteous; thou who art wicked, what right have
thou here? Leave of to be wicked, and it shall be thine; forsake thine ungodly
life, and the love of God, and his fatherly providence shall protect thee, and
cherrish thee. Which if thou do not, thou art a tyrant, and do usurp the
rights of other men. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 4.
Hope in the Lord, says David, and do good. And in another place: Offer the
sacrifices of righteousness, and trust in the Lord. This is the best manner of
hoping: do not further abuse the mercy of God in perseuering in thy sins,
and in hoping that thou shall come to heaven. It is the best hope, to fly
sin, and to call upon God: but if thou continuest in thy sins, this is not
to hope, but to presume; this is not to hope for mercy, but it is to do an
evil deed, and to offend that mercy. For even as the Church does profit them
nothing, who depart from it, that they may do wickedly: so also it is meet,
that the mercy of God should not profit them, who continue in their sins.
This before all things the dispencers and Preachers of Gods word ought to
consider, who oftentimes not marking before whom they make their Sermons,
minister occasion to the wicked, to continue and persevere in their sins.
They should respect, that even as a sick and a diseased body, the more it
eats, the greater harm it takes; so also a soul hardened in sin, the
more that it deceaueth it self with this kind of trust, the more it is
hardened, and moved to persevere in sin. August. in his 11. homily among his
50.
In stead of a conclusion, that excellent sentence of S. Augustine shall be: By
hoping and despairing, men perish. By hoping naughtily in their life's, but by
despairing worser in their deaths. Therefore cease my brother, and forsake this
presumptuous hope: remember that as the Lord is merciful, so also he i^ just.
Therefore as thou castest one eye upon mercy, that thou may hope: so cast the
other upon justice, that thou may fear. Bernard in his 56. Sermon amongst
his small ones.
For as S. Bernard says, God has two feet, mercy, and judgment: we ought to
apprehend neither of them alone or severally: for justice without mercy, does
not so make to fear, as mercy without justice does make men continue and
persevere in a wicked life.

Against them that excuse themselves, saying, that the way of Virtue is rough,
sharp, and difficult. CHAP XXVIII.
WOrldly and carnal men are wont also to bring another excuse, that they may
seem not without cause to have left and eschewd Virtue and Religion, saying,
that it is rough and difficult: albeit they are not ignorant that this
difficulty arises not from virtue her self, Virtue a friend unto reason.
(for she is a friend unto reason, and very well agrees with the nature of a
reasonable creature) but from the evil inclination of our flesh, and our
wicked appetities: which takes the original from sin. Gal 5.
Hence it is that the Apostle says; that the flesh lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh, and that these two do strive between
themselves. Rom 7.
And in another place, he says: I delight in the law of God, concerning the
inner man: But I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. By
which words the Apostle means; that the law of God and Virtue do very well
agree with the superior part of our soul, which altogether is spiritual, in
which the understanding and the will is: but her watch and warines is hindered
by the law of the members: and this happens of the evil inclination and
corruption of our appetites, and the passions arising from them, which are
adversaries to the superior part of the soul, and to God himself; which
discord and contrariety is the cause of all this difficulty.

For this cause many alienate themselves from Virtue, albeit otherwise they
highly account of it, as also sick men do, who although they desire health,
yet they abstain from and abhor medicines, because they suppose them to be
bitter and of evil taste. Wherefore if we take this error and opinion from
men, I take it that we shall perform a thing not to be repented of: for this
is the only stay and let that hinders them from Virtue: besides this
difficulty there is nothing in Virtue, which is not greatly and especially to
be desired and affected.

How the grace given us by Christ, does make the way of Virtue easy and
pleasant.
FIrst of all, in this place we must know that the chiefest cause of this
error is, that men only look upon this small difficulty, which is found in
Virtue, and lift not up their eyes to those Divine helps, 4, Kings, 6.
which God sends to overcome it. The error of the servant of Elizeus was of
this kind, who seeing the army of the Syrians compassing the City, and Horses
and Charets begirding the house of the Prophet, saw not the army of the Lord
prepared for his defense, until his eyes were opened by the prayer of the
Prophet of God; and then he saw that there were more defenders then offenders.
Of the same kind and semblance is the error of them of whom we now speak,
for when as they perceive and feel in themselves the difficulty of Virtue, and
not having felt the graces and helps, that God fendeth for the attainement of
Virtue and piety, they pull back their foot, and shrink away from Virtue.

Tell me if the way of Virtue be so difficult, why does the Prophet say: Psalm.
119.
I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all riches.
And in another place; The judgments of the Lord are truth, Psalm, 19,
they are righteous altogether: and more to be desired then gold, yea, then
much fine gold: sweeter also then bonny, and the honny-combe: So that the
Prophet not only grants that, that all we yield unto Virtue, that is,
admirable excellency and dignity, but also that which the world denies, that
is, sweetness, pleasantnes, and delectation. For this cause not without good
reason thou may persuade thy self that those, who do so aggrauate and
exaggerate this burden, and do imagine to themselves that it is so heavy and
so unsupportable, (although they be Christians, and live under the covenant of
grace) yet they have not tasted of this mystery.

O thou wretched man, thou that say thou art a Christian, tell me why Christ
came into the world? Why he shed his blood? why he ordained his Sacraments?
why he sent his holy Spirit into the world? what is meant by the word Gospel?
what by the word Grace? and what is the meaning of this most famous and
excellent name JESUS? If thou know not, enquire of the Evangelist, Math, 1,
and he will tell thee: Thou shall call his Name JESUS, for he shall save his
people from their sins. What other thing means the name of Savior and
Deliverer? What other thing to be saved and delivered from sins, then to
obtain pardon for us for our sins past, and grace to eschew those to come?
For what other cause came the Savior into the world, but that he might help
thee, and further thy salvation? Why would he dye upon the Cross, but that he
might kill sin? Why would he rise from the dead, but that he might raise
thee, and might make thee to walk in newness of life? Why did he shed his
blood, but that he might make a medicine or a plaster, to heal and cure thy
wounds? For what other cause did he institute and ordain Sacraments in his
Church, but to strengthen thee in the progress of righteousness? What other
is the fruit of his most bitter passion, and coming into this world, but that
he might make the way to heaven plain and smooth, which before was sharp and
rough with thorns, and that he might make it passable and easy to be
iourneyed? This is that which Esaias foretold should come, that in the days of
the Messiah, Esaias, 40,
Every valley should be exalted, and every mountain and hill should be made
low, and the crooked should be strait, and the rough places plain. To be
brief, besides all these, why was the holy Ghost sent from heaven, but that
thy flesh might be turned into spirit? And why did he send him in the form of
fire, but that he might inflame thee as fire, and illuminate thee, and
transform thee into himself, and lift thee on high, from whence he himself
first came? To what end profits grace, and all the virtues which proceed
from it, but that they may make easy and light the yoke of the Lord? that they
might make his service tolerable? that they might make men courageous in
tribulations? to hope in perrils, and overcome in temptations? This is the
beginning, this the middle, and this the end of the Gospel.

It is necessary also to know, that as Adam an earthly man and a sinner, made
all men earthly and sinners; so Christ a heavenly man and a righteous, made all
men heavenly and righteous. What other thing have the Evangelists written? What
other thing be the promises sent unto us from the Prophets? and what other
thing have the Apostles preached? This is the sum of all Christian Divinity,
this is that abreuiated word, which the Lord made upon the earth. This is that
consummation and abreuiation, Esaias, 10,
which Esaias says he heard of the Lord, upon which followed so great riches of
righteousness and virtues in the world.

But let us declare a little more plainly those things which we have spoken.
From whence the difficulty of virtue arises.
I demand of thee, from whence think thou that this difficulty arises,
which is found in Virtue? Thou will say, from the wicked inclination of the
heart, and from our flesh conceived in sin: for the flesh gainesayeth the
spirit, and the spirit resists the flesh, as two contraries between
themselves. Let us imagine that God calls thee, and says unto thee; Man come
hither; I will take from thee that heart thou have, and will give thee a new
one, I will give thee strength also, by which thou shall be able to repress
and hold under thy appetites and evil concupiscences. If God promise this unto
thee, shall the way of Virtue yet seem difficult unto thee? It is certain
that it shall not. I pray thee what other thing is it, that God so often has
promised unto thee? that he has so often auerred in the holy Scriptures? Hear
what the Lord spoke in times past by his Prophet Ezechiell, speaking especially
to them, who live under the covenant of grace. And I will give them, sath he,
a new heart, Ezech, 11.
and I will put a new spirit within their bowels: and I will take the stony
heart out of their bodies, and will give them a heart of flesh, that they may
walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and execute them: and they shall
be my people, and I will be their GOD. Hitherto the Prophet. Why then do
thou doubt o man? Is not God sufficient to perform his promise? And if he
shall perform his promise, and keep his credit with thee, shall thou not be
able with his help and aid, to walk in his statutes? If thou shall deny the
first, thou will make God a rash and false promiser, and that is exceeding
great blasphemy: but if thou shall say, that thou are not yet with all his
help able to walk in his statutes and observe his judgments, thou make GOD
an impotent prouider and fore-seer, whilst he would have man to swear to that
he is not able to do, by giving him a remedy insufficient, which in like
manner is false. What other doubt then is there? Why should not Virtue have
force to mortify these evil inclinations, which fight with thee, and which
make the way of Virtue seem difficult?

This is one of the chiefest fruits of the tree of Life, which the Lord has
sanctified by his blood. The Apostle confirms this, Rom, 4.
when he says; Our old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. The Apostle in
this place, by the old man and the body of sin, understands our sensual
appetite, with all the evil inclinations that proceed from it. He says,
that this together with Christ is crucified-vppon the Cross: for by this most
noble and excellent sacrifice, we have obtained grace and strength to weaken
and debilitate this Tyrant, so that we are free from the servitude of sin,
as before I have showed. This is that great victory, and that great benefit,
which the Lord promises by Esaias, saying: Fear thou not, for I am with thee:
be not afraid, Esaias, 41,
for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, and help thee (...) I will sustain
thee with the right hand of my justice. Behold, all they that provoke thee,
shall be ashamed, and confounded: they shall be as nothing, and they that
strive with thee shall perrish. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find
them: to wit, the men of thy strife, for they shall be as nothing, and the men
that war against thee, as a thing of naught. For I the Lord thy God will hold
thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee. This says
Esaias. Tell me, who shall fail having such an helper? Who will be faint-harted
and discouraged, who will fear, or dread his own wicked passions, seeing that
grace does thus vanquish and overcome them?

An answer to certain objections.
IF thou shall say unto me, that always some relics remain in a man, which
accuse him, and do bear witness against the righteous, For what end the
relics of sins and evil appetites remain in us.
as we read in the book of Job. The same Prophet answers unto this, saying:
They shall be as though they were not. For although they remain, they remain
only for our exercise, and not to our ruin: they remain that they may stir
us up, and not entangle us in the snares of sins; they remain that they may
yield us occasion to attain a crown, and not to overthrow us, and cast us
down: they remain for our triumph, and not for their conquest: to be brief,
they remain so to profit us, that they are for our trial and humiliation,
that we may know our selves, and our own weakness, that thereby we may
acknowledge the glory and grace of God; so that this remainder does redound to
our commodity. Whereupon, even as wild beasts according to their nature are
hurtful unto men, and yet when they are tamed, do them good service; so when
as the purturbations of our soul are governed and moderated, they help us in
many exercises of virtue.

Go to then, tell me: If God does thus strengthen and defend thee, who upon
the earth shall be able to hurt thee? if God be for thee, Psalm, 27,
who is against thee? The Lord is my light, since the Prophet, and my salvation,
whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up
my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an host pitched against me, mine heart
should not be afraid: though war be raised against me, I will trust in this.
Truly my brother, if thou be not moved by this promise to serve God, thou
art very slothful and vild, I will not say unclean and corrupt? And if these
words are not of credit with thee, thou art a very Infidel. It is God, who
says unto thee, that he will give thee a new essence, and will make thy stony
heart fleshy, and will mortify thine affections; and that he will so change
thine estate, that thou shall not know thy self: when thou seek for thine
affections and passions thou shall not find them, he shall make them so weak
and infirm. What could he promise more, what can thou further expect and
hope for? what is wanting unto thee but a lively Faith, and aliuely Hope, that
thou may trust in God, and shroud thy self under his almighty arm?

Another objection with the answer.
Surely, I think that thou can answer nothing at all unto these things,
except perhaps thou will say, that thy sins are many and great, and therefore
this grace is denied unto thee. Unto this I answer, that thou can not offer
greater injury unto God, then to say so, seeing that by these words thou do
signify that there is something for which God either will not or cannot help
his creature, when as he is converted unto him, and desires mercy and pardon
at his hands. I would not that thou should credit me, credit that holy
Prophet, who then seemed mindful of thee, and was willing to help thee, and
meet with thine infirmities, when he writ these things, saying: Now when all
these things shall come upon thee, Deuteronomy. 30.
either the blessing or the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shall
turn into thine heart, among all the nations whether the Lord thy God has
driven thee, and shall return unto the Lord thy God, and obey his voice in all
that I command thee this day: thou and thy children with all thine heart and
with all thy soul: then the Lord thy God will cause thy captives to return,
and have compassion upon thee, and will return, to gather thee out of all the
people, where the Lord thy God had scattered thee, and will bring thee into the
land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shall possess it. And a little
after: The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed,
that thou ^ayst love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live. O that the Lord would now circumcise thine eyes,
and take thee out of this darkness, that thou might clearly see this manner
of circumcision. Be not so ignorant and rude, Spiritual circumcision.
that thou should deem this circumcision to be corporal: for of such a
circumcision our heart is not capable. What circumcision then is this, which the
Lord here promises? Surely it is the superfluity of our affections, and of our
evil appetites, which springs from our heart, and brings great hinderance
to our Divine love. He promises therefore that he will circumcise, and lop off
all the barren and hurtful branches with the knife of his grace: that our heart
being so pruned and circumcised, may employ and bestow all his strength upon
the branch of the Divine love. Then thou shall be a true Israelite, then thou
shall be circumcised of the Lord, when he shall take away, and cut out from
thy soul the love of this world, and shall let nothing remain in it, besides
the entire love of God.

I would have thee diligently to mark, that that which God in this place
promises to do, that he does command thee to do in another place, that when
thou art converted unto him, thou should do it thy self, Deuteronomy. 10.
saying: Circumcise the foreskinne of your heart. etc. And how Lord? that which
thou promisest to do thy self, now thou commaundest that I should do it my
self? if I must do it, how do thou promise that thou thy self wilt
perform it? This question is aunswerrd by the words of Augustine, Augustine.
who says: Lord give that thou commaundest, and command what thou will. So
that he be the same, who commands me what I ought to do, and he, that
gives me grace to do it. Therefore in one and the self same thing, both the
commandment and the promise are found: and God and man do one and the self
same thing, he as the principal and chiefest cause, A similitude.
but man as a cause less principal. So that God in this business carries
himself to man as a Paynter, who guides the pencill in the hand of his
Scholar, and so makes a perfect picture: two perfect this work, but more
honor belongs to the one then to the other. So also God works with us in
this business, after an absolute manner, man has not wherein to glory, Esaias, 26.
but to glory with the Prophet, and say: Lord, thou workest all our works in us.

Therefore be thou mindful of these words; for by them thou may interpret
all the commandments of God. For all that he commands thee to do, he
promises also that he will do it with thee. The commandments of God are not
impossible.
When as therefore he commands thee, to circumcise thine heart, he says also
that he will circumcise it: so when he commands thee, that thou should
love him above all things, he bestows grace upon thee, that thou may be
able so to love him. Hence it is that the yoke of the Lord is said to be
sweet. For there be two that draw it, God and man; and so that which seemed
and was difficult unto nature, the Divine grace does make it light and sweet.
Wherefore the Prophet after the fore-sayd words, does proceed further, and
say: This commandment which I command thee this day, Deuteronomy. 30.
is not hid from thee, neither is it far of: It is not in heaven, that thou
should say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it us, and cause us
to hear it, that we may do it? Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou
should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us
to hear it, that we may do it? But the word is very near unto thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thine heart for to do it. In which words the holy Prophet
would altogether take away that difficulty, which carnal men imagine to be in
the precepts of the Lord: for they only looking to the law of the Lord without
the Gospel, that is, to those things that are commanded, and not to the
grace, which is given to obey and walk in those commandments: they accuse the
law of difficulty, saying that it is grievous, heavy, and difficult, not
considering that they expressly contradict Saint John, 2, John, 5.
who says: For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous: for all that is borne of God, overcomes
the world: That is, all they that have conceived the spyrit of God in their
souls, by means of whom they are regenerated, and made his sons, whose
spirit they have received, all these have God in them, who dwells in them by
grace: and they can do more then all that that is not God, and so neither the
world, nor the devil, nor all the power of hell can hurt them. And here-vpon
it follows, that although the yoke of Gods commandments be heavy and
burthenous, yet that new strength and fortitude, which is given by grace, does
make it light and tolerable.

How Charity also makes the way easy and pleasant, which leads unto heaven.
WHat will thou think, if to all these precedent another help be joined, which
is derived in us from Charity? For it is certain that it is one of the most
principal conditions of Charity, to make the yoke of the Divine law most
sweet. August. of holy widdowhood.
Wherefore, as Saint Augustine says: by no manner of means the labors of
lovers are burthenous or combersome, but are delightful and pleasurable, as
the labors of Hunters, Fowlers, and Fishers. For in that which is loved,
either there is no labor, or the labor is loved. In the 13. book of his
co^fessions.
And in another place: He that loves, says he, labors not.: For all labor
is contrary unto them that do not love. It is only love, that blusheth at the
name of difficulty. What is it that makes, that a mother does not feel the
continual labors and troubles, which she has in bringing up her children,
but only love? What is it that makes an honest and a good wife, to attend
night and day upon her weak and sickly husband, but only love? What does move
beasts also, that they are so careful to bring up and foster their young ones,
and to give them meat from their own mouths, that their young may have to
eat; what does move them I say so to trouble and torment themselves, that they
may live safely, and what does move them so strongly to defend them endangering
their own life's, but true love? What is the cause why Saint Paul said with so
magnanimous a spirit: Romans 8.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written,
For thy sake are we killed all day long: we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Nevertheless, in all these things we are more then conquerers through
him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. What is the cause, why the holy
Martyrs of Christ, so fervently desired martyrdom, as the heart desires the
water brooks, but true love? What is the cause, why Saint Lawrence lying upon
the Gridiron, in the midst of his torments said cheerfully, that the flames
did comfort and refresh his limbs, but that great desire, Petrus Rauennas upon
that, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc.
by which he longed for martirdom, which was kindled with the flames of this
love? For true love thinks nothing hard, nothing bitter, nothing grievous,
nothing deadly: as Petrus Rauennas says. What sword, what wounds, what pains,
what death can prevail against perfect and true love? Love is an impenetrable
coat offense, it resists darts, it beats back the sword, it tryumpheth
over dangers, it scorneth death; if it be love, it overcomes all things.
Therefore o man love God, love him wholly, that thou may overcome and subdue
all sins without labor. The war is pleasant, and the combat delicate only
by love to carry the victory over all crimes and vices. This says he. Neither
is true love content, if it conquer all labors and troubles, but the very
nature of love, desires to sustain more labors and troubles for his sake,
whom it affects. Hence arises that ardent desire of martyrdom, which
righteous and truly religious men have, that is, to shed and pour forth their
blood for him, who first shed his for them: and when they cannot come unto that
they desire, they rage against themselves, beco^ming their own tormenters; for
they do torment their bodies by hunger and thirst, by cold and heat, and by
many other afflictions, and by such works after some manner they satisfy their
desire. This Idiome and propriety the lovers of this world understand not,
neither can they imagine, how he can be loved so ardently whom they so abhor,
and on the contrary part, that they are so abhorred for that, which they so
tenderly love: and yet this is the truth of the thing. Those things which are
unclean to the world, are clean to the righteous. Exodus 8.
We read in the Scriptures, that the Egyptians had for their Gods
unreasonable creatures, and that they did worship them. But the Israelites
called them an abomination, and that which they called their God, the
Israelites killed, and sacrificed to their true God. After the same manner also
the righteous, as the Israelites, call the Gods of this world an abomination,
as are honors, pleasures, and riches, which notwithstanding the the world
adoreth; these false Gods the righteous as abominations do sacrifice to the
glory of their true God. So he that would offer an acceptable sacrifice to God,
let him have an eye to that, which the world adoreth, and let him offer that;
and let him embrace that, which the world abhors. Do not they seem unto
thee to have so done, who after that they had received the first fruits of the
holy Spirit, departed from the Council, rejoicing, Acts, 5,
that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus? What
say thou unto these things? that which can make bonds, whyps, fire, and
other torments sweet, shall it not make the observation and keeping of the
commandments of God sweet? Thou errest my brother, thou errest, not knowing
the nature of Virtue, and the force of charity and the Divine grace.

Of other things, which make the way of salvation easy and sweet.
THis that we have hitherto said, is sufficient to take away that common
impediment, which many allege. But let us put the case that this is not, which
we have spoken of, and therefore this way is hard and difficult: I pray thee
tell me, why should it be troublesome and grievous unto thee, to do that for
thy soul, which thou refusest not to do for thy body? Shall it seem a great
thing unto thee, to suffer a little trouble here, that hereafter thou may
escape eternal torment? What would not the rich covetous man buried in hell
willingly do, if he might have license to come into the world again, that he
might amend his errors? It is not meet, that thou should do less now,
then he would do, seeing that, if thou do persevere in thy wicked
maliciousness, the same torments remain for thee, and therefore thou ought
to have the same desire.

Furthermore, if thou would diligently perpend and consider, the manifold
and great things, that GOD has done for thee, and greater, which he has
promised thee; and also thy heinous sins, by which thou have offended him;
moreover, the great torments which the Saints have suffered, but most of all,
those exceeding great ones, which the Holy of Holies himself has borne,
without doubt it would shame thee to be unwilling to abide so little for the
love of God; yea to be unwilling to fly that which delights thee. Bernard in
his small Sermons, chap. 30.
Therefore Saint Bernard says: The afflictions of this world are not worthy of
the fault past, which is pardoned, nor of the present grace of consolation,
which is given, nor of the future glory, which is promised unto thee. Every one
of these considerations ought worthily to move us to enter into this way,
although it be very laborious. But, that we may confess the truth, although
our life in every part, and in every proceeding, is grievous, and full of
tribulations, yet without comparison, greater is the grief and trouble, that
is found in the life of wicked men, then that which is found in the life of
good men. A similitude.
For although to go or walk in the way be laborious, for which way soever
thou walk, at the length thou shall be weary, yet much greater is the
trouble of him, who walks blindly and often dasheth his feet against the
stones, then of him, who goes with open eyes, and sees where and how he
passes. Seeing therefore that our life is a way, it cannot be, but man must be
wearied, until he come to the place of re^^. But a sinner who uses not the
light of reason, but his own affections, and is governed by the perturbations
of his mind, it is certain that he walks blindfold: for there is not any
thing found in the world more blind then the perturbations of the mind. But
good men who are governed of reason, when they meet with rockie and
breake-necke downfalls, they shun them, and so they walk with lesser labor,
and with greater security.

That great wise man long ago understood this, and therefore said: Prou, 4,
The way of the righteous shines as the light, that shines more and more unto
the perfect day: But the way of the wicked is as the darkness, they know not
wherein they shall fall. Neither is the way of the wicked only obscure and
dark, The way of the wicked, hard and difficult.
as Solomon says here, but also difficult, slipperie, and full of Caves and
Dens, as David says: that thou may thereby learn, how often they flyp and
slide, that tread in that path. Besides, in this short and small trouble, which
meets with the godly, a thousand kind of helps are given, which do lighten
and diminish this trouble. For principally, the presence and fatherly
providence of God does help, which guides them: and the grace of the holy
Ghost, which encourages them; and the Sacraments which strengthen them, and
the Divine consolations, which cheer them, and the examples of good men, which
comfort them, and the holy Scriptures which teach them, and the peace of a good
conscience, which does joy them, and lastly the hope of glory, which makes
them constant and immovable, with a thousand other graces and benefits of God,
which makes this way so easy and pleasant to the walkers in it, Psalm, 119,
that they say with the Prophet; How sweet are thy promises unto my mouth: yea,
more then Honny unto my mouth. Let it be whosoever it will that considers of
this thing diligently, he shall find very many authorities of scripture
concerning this matter; notwithstanding some of them make this way hard and
sharp, others make it easy, light, and pleasant. Psalm, 17,
For the same Prophet in another place says: For the words of thy lips, I
have kept straight and difficult ways. Psalm, 119,
And in another place: I have had as great delight in the way of thy
testimonies, as in all riches. For this way has two things, Difficulty and
Suauitie: the one by reason of nature, the other by reason of grace: and so
that which is difficult by reason of the and, is made sweet and pleasant by
reason of the other. As well the one as the other, Math, 11,
the Lord shows when he says, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light.
For when he calls it his yoke, he signifies the heaviness, which is in the
way of the Lord, but when he calls it easy, he intimates facility, which
is in respect of the grace that is given.

But if thou shall demand of me, how both it can be a yoke, and easy and
light, seeing that it is of the nature of a yoke to be heavy? I answer, that
the reason of it is this; because the Lord makes it easy and light, Osea, 11,
as he promises by his Prophet: And I will be to them, as he that takes of
the yoke from their jaws. What marvel is it then, if the yoke be light,
seeing the Lord supporteth, eases, and as it were carries it himself? If the
bush burned and was not consumed, Exodus, 3,
because the Lord was in it, what marvel is it, that it is a burden, and also
light; if the same Lord be in it, who helps us to carry it? Will thou that I
shall show thee as well the one as the other, in one and the self same person?
hear what the Apostle says: 2, Cor, 4,
We are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress: in poverty, but
not overcome of poverty. We are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but
we perrish not. Behold, here on the one side trouble and distress, and on the
other side comfort and consolation, which the Lord gives in them. The same
thing also the Prophet Esaias, insinuates, when he says; Esaias, 40,
They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength: they shall lift up
the wings as the Eagles: they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall
walk and not faint. Do thou not see, that the yoke is here made light
through grace? Do thou not see here, that the strength of the flesh is
changed into the strength of the spirit? Or that I may speak better, the
strength of man, into the strength of God? Do thou not see how the holy
Prophet does not conceal either the trouble or the ease? Therefore, thou have
not my brother any cause, for which thou should shrink from this way,
albeit it be rough and difficult, seeing that there be so many and so great
means, which make it plain and easy.

All the precedent matters are proved by examples to be true.
BUT if all those things, which hitherto we have spoken, can not conquer and
break open thy hard and obdu^^^ heart; and thine incredulity be like that of
Saint Thomas, who would not believe, unless he first saw, and touched: yet I
will undergo this labor, that at the length I may satisfy thee. For I will
not grutch to take any pains, so that I may defend a cause so honest,
profitable, and just. Therefore let us take a man, that has tried both
estates: that is, who has sometimes served the world, and has carnally lived
under the slavery of sin; who afterward by the mercy of God is changed, and
becomes altogether another man, quite altered from the former. Such a man
shall be the best judge for us in this cause: for he shall not judge by
hearsay, but by sight and certainty, seeing that he has tried and learned
both conditions by experience. Ask this man, whether of these estates is
easier, sweeter, and more pleasant. Of men of this sort they know how to yield
the best testimony, to whom the oversight of the Church is committed, who see
into the courses of men, and watch their paths and proceedings. For these be
they that descend into the Sea in shyps, and see the works of God in many
waters: which are the works of the Divine grace, and the great changes and
alterations, which by the means of it are daily wrought in men: which
certainly are worthy of all admiration. For in very deed, there is nothing
found in the world worthy of greater astonishment, and which is daily more
renewed and recreated (if any one consider well of it) then those things, The
great changes and ^lterations which the hand of the highest works.
which are wrought in the souls of the righteous by the Divine grace; how it
trans-formeth a man, raises him up, strengthens, and comfort him, and
beautifieth him both within and without; how it changes the manners of the old
man; how it alters al his affections; how it makes a man to hate that, which
before he loved; and to love that, which he hated: and makes him to find
sweetness in that, which before he despised: what strength it gives, that it
may work constancy in the soul; what joy, what light, what peace it
effects to attain the knowledge of Gods will, to know the vanity of the
world, and the dignity of spiritual things, which before he contemned and set
at naught. But that is most of all to be wondered at, that we see all these
things to be done in a very short time: so that it is not needful by many
years to frequent the schools of Philosophers, The disciples of Christ were
on a sudden made learned.
and to expect gray hayres, that time and age may help the understanding, and
mortify the affections: but in the midst of the heat of youth, and in the
space of a few days, a man is so changed, that he seems utterly to be made
another, and not the same man that he was before.

Wherefore, Saint Cyprian says, that this change is sooner felt then learned;
neither is it attained by the study of many years, but by grace, and that in a
very short time. Which grace we may worthily call a spiritual enchauntment, by
which God after an admirable manner, does so change the heart of man, that with
a most ardent longing he does love that, which before with the greatest hate he
abhorred, I mean the exercise of Virtue; and he does execrate and detest that
with an hate more then that which followed Vatinius, which before he most
tenderly loved, that is, the pleasure of vices.

But for the greater confirmation, and more evidence of these things that have
been spoken, I will remember in this place the examples of two famous Doctors
of the church, who almost at one and the self same time lived in this error:
but afterward when it pleased the Divine mercy, that they saw how they were
deceived, they were converted; and have left in writing both their error and
their conversion, to the edifying of all posterity. One of them is S. Cyprian,
who writing to his friend Donatus, and relating the beginning and progress of
his conversion, says: Cyprian in his 2, book, and 2, Epist.
When I lay in darkness and in the blacknes of the night, and when I nodding and
reeling floted upon the Sea of this billowy and tempestuous world, and walked
staggering by blind and erroneous ways, I being ignorant of mine own life,
and an alien and stranger unto the truth, and unto the light; I being at that
pass thought that altogether difficult and hard, which the Divine favor and
mercy promised for my salvation, that is, that any one should be borne again,
and made a new living soul by the bath of that wholesome water; and should put
off that he had on before, and although the same lineaments and joints of the
body remained, yet he should change his mind and disposition. I said, how may
such a conversion be possible, that that should speedily and on a sudden be
put off, which either being bred in the bone, is soundly confirmed by reason of
the solidity of natural matter, or being accustomed, is so deeply rooted by
the customary frequentation of continual practice? These are firmly and
profoundly fixed, and have taken fast rooting. When shall he learn thriftines
and frugality, who has continually, accustomed himself to delicates, feasts,
and large banquets? Or how shall he fit himself to homely and simple attire,
who has usually been invested with glorious garments, and shined in gold and
purple? He being delighted and setting his pleasure upon honors and dignities,
cannot abide to be private or inglorious. He being waited upon with multitudes
of men, and honored with a company of officious servants, thinks it a
punishment and a plague when he is alone. He that continually entangleth
himself with the fast-hold enticements of pleasures and vices, it becomes a
necessity unto him, still to frequent them: his drunkenness inuiteth him, his
pride puffs him up, his wrath inflameth him, his rapes disquiet him, his
cruelty provoke him, his ambition allureth him, and his lust carries and
drives him headlong, whether it list. I often considered of these things with
my self: for as I my self was wrapped in very many errors of my former life,
which I thought impossible to be shut of; so also I was obsequious unto the
vices that did stick and cleave unto me, and despayring of a better estate I
abounded with mine own evils, as though they were proper and natural unto me.
But afterward the blemish of my former life was washed away, by the help of
that begetting water, and the heavenly light poured it self into my purged and
cleansed breast, and afterward the second birth had made me a new man, by the
operation of the heavenly spirit; after a wonderful and strange manner, by and
by doubtful matters were confirmed unto me, secret matters laid open, and
matters altogether obscure and dark did appear; and that before seemed
difficult, now began to be easy; and that seemed possible, which before was
thought impossible: as it was to acknowledge; that to have been earthly, which
before had lived carnally, was borne in sin, and endangered with vices; and
this to be of God, which now the holy Ghost has quickened. Thou assuredly
know, and in like manner thou can recognize with me, what this death of
vices has hindered us of, and what this life of virtues has bestowed upon us.
Thou thy self know, neither need I publish it: because oftentation of
selfeprayse is odious: albeit this cannot be taken as a boast or brag, but
acceptably, for it is not ascribed to the virtue of man, but divulged to be the
gift of God; that now not to sin, began to be of faith; which before to
sin, was of humane error. Hitherto be the words of Cyprian; by which both
thine, and the error of many others is laid open, who measure the difficulty
of Virtue by their own strength; and therefore they deem it a thing difficult
and impossible to attain unto; not considering, that if they run to Gods
arms, and firmly purpose to avoid sin, that the grace of God will embrace
them: which makes this way plain and easy: as here it is manifest by this
example remembered: seeing that it is most certain, that here no lies are
told: neither shall that grace fail thee, which failed not this holy man, if
thou will be converted unto God, as he was converted.

I will remember here another example no less admirable then the former.
Augustine in the 8, book of his Confessions. Chap. 11.
Augustine, that famous and excellent Doctor of the Church, writes of
himself, that when as he now purposed in his heart to leave the world, a mighty
difficulty represented it self unto him in that change. Trifles of trifles,
says he, toys of toys, and vanities of vanities, my old and ancient
friends and lovers held me back, and pulled and shaked my fleshly vesture, and
whispered unto me, saying: Do thou dismiss us? and from this moment shall
we never any more be with thee? and from this moment shall it never any more
be lawful for thee to do this and that? And what they suggested in this, that
I call this and that; for this o my God take not away thy mercy from the soul
of thy servant: what uncleanness o my God, and what dishonesty did they suggest?
And I heard them now not half so much as before, not so freely, nor so stoutly
gayne-standing me in my way, but as muttering behind my back, and privily
pulling me going on, that I might look back: yet they hindered me, I lingering
to escape and rid my self from them, and to pass whether I was called, when
as violent custom said unto me: Think thou that thou shall be able to pass
without these? But this was spoken somewhat coldly. On the other side, he said,
that Virtue appeared unto him: The chaste dignity of Continency appeared (says
he) on that side toward which my face was, and whether I was afraid to go, of
a cheerful, peaceable, and quiet countenance, not garishly merry; honestly,
and virtuously enticing me, that I should not doubt, but come unto her,
stretching out her religious and devout hands to take and embrace me having in
them an army and a huge band of good examples. There were many young men and
maids, there was much youth, and men of all ages, also matronely widows, and
grave virgins, and in them all Continency her self was not barren, but a
fruitful mother of joyful children, thou o Lord being her husband. And she
derided me with an exhortatory irrision, as if she would have said: Can not
thou do that which these and these can do? Or do these and these it of
themselves, or not rather in the Lord their God? The Lord their God has given
me unto them. Why do thou stand in thy self, and not stand? Cast thy self
upon him, fear not, he will not withdraw himself from thee that thou
should fall. Cast thy self securely upon him, he will receive thee, and
will heal thee. In the midst of this combat, this holy man says, Chap. 11.
that he began wonderfully to weep, I, says he, cast my self prostrate under
a certain fig tree, I know not how, and I gave my tears their fill, and
floods gushed from mine eyes, thine acceptable sacrifice. And I said unto thee
many things not in these words, but to this purpose: And how long o Lord? How
long o Lord? vvilt thou be angry without end? Be not mindful o Lord of our
old iniquities. For I perceived that I was held back of them, and therefore I
cast out miserable and woeful plaints and bewaylings: How long, how long, to
morrow, to morrow? Why not now, why not at this hour is an end of mine
uncleanness? I said these things, and I did weep in the very bitterness of my
heart. These and other things being past and finished, which he remembers,
forthwith the light of security being infused into his heart, the darkness of al
doubt fled away. The Lord so changed his mind, that afterward he neither
desired any carnal vices, nor any other vanity in this world. In the 9, book
of his Confessions. chap. 1.
And being losed from these chains, he begins at the entrance of the book
following to give thanks to God his deliverer, saying: Lord, I am thy servant,
I am thy servant, and the son of thine Hand-mayde: Thou have broken my bonds,
I will sacrifice unto thee the sacrifice of praise. My heart and my tongue do
praise thee, and all my bones do say: Lord, who is like unto thee? Let them
say so, and Lord answer me, and say to my soul, I am thy salvation. Who then
am I, and what an one? What evil am I not? Or was it my deeds; or if not my
deeds, was it my words, or if not my words, was it my will? But thou Lord art
good and merciful, and thy right hand respected the profundity of my death,
and thou drewest the depth of corruption from the bottom of my heart. And this
was wholly that unwillingness, which thou willedst, and that willingness which
thou would not. But where was all this long time my will to do well, and from
what bottom and deep Abyss did thou in a moment call it forth, whereby I
might submit my neck under thine easy yoke, and my shoulders under thy light
burden, o Christ Jesus, my helper, and only redeemer? How sweet on a sudden
was it for me to want the sweetness of trifles, and which I was afraid to lose,
now it was a joy unto me to lose them. For thou being the true and chiefest
sweetness did cast them from me, thou did cast them away, and for them
entredst in thy self, being sweeter then any pleasure, but not to flesh and
blood: and brighter then any light, but to the inward secret man, and higher
then all honor, but not to those that are high in themselves. Hitherto are the
words of Saint Augustine. Tell me now, if the matter stands thus, if the
virtue and efficacy of the Divine grace be so powerful, what is it that
holds thee captive, whereby thou can not do that, which they have done?
If thou beleeuest that these things are true, and that the grace of God is
effectual, to work so admirable a change, if it be denied to no man that with
all his heart desires it, (because now also he is the same God, which he was
then, without respect of persons) what does hinder thee, why thou go not
out of this wretched servitude, and embracest that chiefest good, which freely
is offered thee? Why had thou rather with one hell to gain another, then
with one Paradise to gain another Paradise? Be not negligent, or without
hope. Assay once his business, and trust in God: which when thou shall
scarcely begin to do, behold he will come to meet thee, as the father met
his prodigal child with open arms. Certainly it is a matter of wonder and
astonishment; That if some cosener should promise thee the Art of Alcumy,
whereby thou might extract gold out of brass, thou would not cease
(although it were very chargeable unto thee) until thou had tried and
experimented it: and here the word of the Lord teaches thee to make heaven
of earth, spirit of flesh, and an Angel of a man, and vvilt thou not assay and
make trial? And when as in the end, either later, or sooner, either in this
life, or in that to come, at the length thou shall know the truth of this
matter, I desire thee, that with attention thou would consider, how thou
shall find thy self deceived in the day of rendering an account, when thou
shall see thy self damned, because thou did forsake the way of Virtue,
because thou imaginedst to thy self that it was hard and difficult. And there
thou shall know most manifestly, that this way is much more sweet and pleasant,
then the way of vices and pleasures; which lead thee only to earthly
delights, of which then there shall not be any footsteps or relics left.

Against them that fear to enter into the way of Virtue for the love of this
world. CHAP. XXIX.
IF we should feel the pulse and life vain of all them, who fear to enter
into the way of virtue, perhaps we should find many so slothful and
sluggish, because the love of this world has infatuated them, and made them
fools; I say, that it has infatuated them: for this love is a false glass,
and an appearance of good things, which in truth are not good: which false
glass, makes all worldly things to be in so great price amongst the ignorant.
Whereupon beasts, which fear shadows, fly all shadowie things, as hurtful
and dangerous, when in deed they are not: So these men, on the contrary part,
do love and embrace the things of this world, supposing and estimating them to
be lovely and delectable, when in deed they are not. Therefore as they that
would bring beasts from their shadowie and idle imagination, do often lead
them through those places which they fear: that they may see that that is but
a vain shadow which they feared: So now it is necessary, that we lead these
men through the shadows of earthly things, who so ordinarily do love them,
that we may make them to behold them with other eyes, that they may plainly
see, how great a vanity and a shadow all that is, which they so greatly admire
and love: and that as those dangers are not worthy that they should be feared,
so also these good things are not worthy, that they should be desired or loved.
He therefore, that shall diligently and seriously consider of the world, with
all the felicities in it, shall find six evils and mischiefs in it, What
evils are in the world.
which no man can deny, as are; shortness; misery; dangers; blindness;
sins; and deceipts; with which the felicity of the world is always
mingled: by which it may plainly be seen, who, and what it is. Every one of
these we will handle in that which follows; yet briefly and in order.

How short the felicity of this world is.
Go to, thou can not deny to me beginning to dispute of this worldly
felicity, but that all the felicity and sweetness of this world (or by what
name so ever else thou will call it), is short, and of small continuance. No
felicity of ye world lasting.
For this felicity cannot endure beyond a man's life. But how long the life of
man is, we have before declared; seeing that it reacheath scarcely to an
hundred years. But how many be there that come to an hundred years? I have
seen diverse Bishops and Cardinals, who have scarcely lived two months in
their dignity; others elected Popes, who have scarce sit one month. I have
seen others that have married wives, loving, beautiful, rich, and virtuous,
so that nothing seemed to be wanting in them, who have not enjoyed them one
week. Very many such examples are remembered unto us in the histories of
ancient time, which thing to be true, daily experience also teaches.

But let us grant that thy life is longer then other men's: let us give thee an
hundred years (as says Chrysostom) which is almost the longest time that man
lives: nay let us add another hundred years: yea, further let us join to
thee other two hundred years, what are so many years, if they be compared
with eternity? Eccles, 11,
Though a man live many years, says Solomon, and be glad in them all, let
him remember the days of darkness, which shall be many, and that follows:
All things shall be but vanity. For all felicity in the view of eternity,
although it be great and lasting, yet it shall seem to be, and is indeed a
vanity, and nothing. This the wicked themselves confess and acknowledge in
the book of Wisdom, Wisdom, 5,
where they say; And as soon as we were borne, we began immediately to draw
to our end. Consider therefore how short all the time of this life shall then
seem to the wicked: for there in very deed they shall think, that they have
scarcely lived here one day, and that presently from their mothers womb they
were carried to their graves. By this it plentifully appears, that all the
delights, and all the felicity of the world, is unto them as shadows of
pleasures, which they have seen only in a dream, neither to have been so
indeed. This Esaias teaches excellently, Esaias, 29,
when he says; And even as when an hungry man dreameth that he is eating, and
when he awaketh his soul is empty: or as when as thirsty man dreameth, that
he is drinking, when he awaketh he is yet faint, and his soul has appetite:
even so shall the multitude of all nations be that fights against mount Sion.
All the prosperity of whom shall be so short, that after they shall have opened
their eyes, and shall have seen that short time, they shall acknowledge all
their felicity to have been nothing but a dream. Tell me I pray thee, what
greater glory can there be in this world, then that of Princes and Emperors,
who bear rule and exercise dominion over this world? Where are the Princes of
the Heathen become, (says the Prophet Baruch) and such as ruled the beasts
upon the earth: Baruch, 3,
they that had their pastime with the fowls of the air, they that hoorded up
silver and gold wherein men trust so much, and made no end of their gathering?
What is become of them that coined silver, and were so careful, and could not
bring their works to pass? They be rooted out and gone to hell, and other men
are come up in their steads. Where is the wise? where is the studious? and
where the diligent searcher of Natures secrets? Where is the glory of Solomon?
the power of Alexander? and the magnifience of Assuerus? where be those famous
and illustrious Roman Caesar's? what is become of other Princes and Kings of
the earth? What has all their vain glory, their multitudes of servants, and
their huge and puissant Armies profited them? What is become of that mirth and
laughter which heir Iesters, scoffers, and fools procured them? Where is the
guard of their pernicious flatterers, which were wont to encircle them? All
these are past away as shadows: all vaded as dreams, and all their felicity
vanished as a smoke. Behold therefore my brother, how short the felicity of
this world is.

Of the great miseries that are mingled with worldly felicities.
THE felicity of this world, has furthermore another evil and mischief
mingled with it (besides that it is short) which is a thousand kind of
miseries, that as attendants at an inche wait upon it; which in this life, (or
that I may speak better) in this valley of tears, in this wretched
banishment, in this troublesome and turbulent sea cannot be avoided. For there
are more miseries then man has days, or hours of life: for every day has his
evil, and every hour has his misery. But what tongue shall be able
sufficiently to express all these miseries? Who can reckon up all the
infirmities of our body? all the passions of our mind? or recount all the
injuries of man, or adversities of his life. One wrangleth with thee for thy
riches, another lies in wait for thy life, a third slaundereth thee; some
persecute thee with hatred and envy; some, thirsting for revenge, set upon
thee by suborned and false witness; and this way not prevailing, assail thee by
force and Arms; to be brief, some make war against thee with the tongue,
which is worser and more dangerous then any weapon. Besides these calamities,
there be infinite other, which have no certain names; for they are mischaunces
unlooked for, and misfortunes unexpected. One loses an eye, another has his
arm cut off in fight, a third falls from his horse, a fourth out of a
window; some are drowned in the water, and others by other mischaunces and
misfortunes. If thou desire to be acquainted with more mischiefs and evils,
ask the men of this world, and they will give thee many instances, out of the
parcel of their pleasures, and out of the bundle of their miseries (the
greater part of which they are) which they have tried and experimented in this
world. For if all joys and sorrows, all mirth and heaviness should be weighed
and poyzed in equal balance, thou should evidently see, that these are more
then those; and thou should understand, that for one hour of pleasure, thou
have an hundred of misery. Wherefore if all thy life be so short, and the
greater part of it mingled with so many miseries, I pray thee how much is in
thy life, that may challenge true felicity?

But these miseries are common as well to the good as to the wicked; Some
miseries are common, both to the good and evil, some proper only to the
wicked. Wisdom, 5,
for they both sail in one and the self same sea, and are subject to the same
storms and tempests. But there are other calamities to be found, which are
proper to the wicked, (for they be the daughters of iniquities) the knowledge
of which more belongs to our purpose; for they make their life's more
abominable, who are within the compass of such great miseries. What they be,
and how many, the sinners themselves confess in the book of Wisdom; We
have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, and we have
gone through dangerous ways: but we have not known the way of the Lord.
Therefore, as the righteous in this life have a Paradise, and in another life
hope for another, so the wicked in this life have hell, and another attends
them in the life to come: because, out of the hell of an evil conscience, they
go into the hell of everlasting torment. Such evils rise out of many causes.
Some are of GOD, Evils of GOD.
who, as a just Judge, suffers not the evil of the fault, to pass without
the evil of punishment; which although it be generally reserved until the
other life, yet oftentimes it begins in this. For it is most certain, that
God, as he governs the world by his general providence, so also he swayeth
and rules every one by his special providence: and as we daily see, that the
greater the store of sinners is, the greater is the abundance of punishments,
as are famine, war, pestilence, heresies, and such like calamities; so also
oftentimes, according to the number of the sins of men, so is the number of
the punishments.

Therefore God said to Caine; Gene, 4,
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well,
sin lies at thy door: that is, the plag^e and punishment of sin. In
Deuteronomie also, Moses says unto the people; Deuteronomy, 7.
And thou shall know, that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God which
keeps covenant and mercy unto them that love him, and keep his
commandments, even to a thousand generations: And rewards them to their
face that hate him, to bring them to destruction: he will not defer to reward
him that hates him, to his face. Mark here how often this Prophet repeateth
the word to his face, or such like signification, that thou may understand,
that besides the punishments which are reserved for the life to come, that the
wicked are oftentimes also punished in this life: seeing that the Scripture so
often remembers here that their punishments shall not be deferred. Whence many
calamities proceed, and many scourges of sinners: for without intermission
they, as a wheel are rouled from one trouble and sorrance into another; from
one necessity, anxietie, and tribulation, into another: which although they
very well feel, yet they know not whence and from whom they are sent: and
therefore they ascribe them rather to the condition of nature, then to their
sins. For even as they do not account the blessings of nature, to be the
gifts of God, neither do they give thanks to God for them: so neither do they
acknowledge the scourges of his wrath to be for the punishment of their sins,
neither do they amend themselves. Punishments inflicted upon the wicked, by
the Ministers of God.
Some punishments also are brought upon them by Gods Ministers and Iusticers,
who are the executioners of the Divine justice, who oftentimes meet with
malefactors, and do persecute and afflict them, with imprisonments,
banishments, penalties, persecutions, and with many other kind of punishments,
by which is brought to pass, that the insatiable appetites of sinners seems
bitter unto them: and do afflict the^ also in this life. The evils that
passions bring.
There be also other afflictions, which flow out of their own affections, and
the perturbations of their souls, and from the inordinate appetites of their
hearts. For what good I pray thee, may be hoped for of a superfluous and an
excessive affection? of vain fear? of a distrustful hope? and of an
inordinate desire? nothing but offenses, irksomnes, and troubles, which
disturb the peace and liberty of the heart, of which we have spoken before,
they make the life unquiet, they allure and entice to sin, they hinder the
prayers, take away sleep, and do comber all the days of the life with
loathing and tediousnes. All these miseries are ingendered of man himself,
that is, of his inordinate appetites: and of these thou see, what is to be
looked for of other, seeing that man has these of himself: and consider what
peace he can have with others, who has so great war with himself.

Of the multitude of the snares and dangers of this world.
IF in the world besides the punishments and afflictions of the body, no other
evil were to be found, the fear were so much the lesser: bu^ ^n it there are
not only the evils of the body but also the greatest dangers of the soul, of
which greater regard is to be had; because they concern the better and more
principal part of man, and do more hurt it. And they be so many, that the
Prophet says; Psalm. 11.
God shall rain snares upon sinners. How great I pray thee is the number of
the snares in the world, which are resembled to the drops of water, which fall
from heaven? and he says specially and perticulerly, Upon sinners: For they
having so little care of their heart and senses, and lesser to fly the occasions
of sin, and so little regard of spiritual remedies; and besides all this,
seeing that they walk through the heat of this world, how can it be, but that
they must walk amidst a thousand dangers? He says that it shall rain snares
upon sinners: snares in their youth, snares in their old age, snares in riches,
in poverty, in honor, in reproaches, in friendship, snares when they company
with men, and when they are alone, snares in prosperity and in adversity, to be
brief, snares in all the senses of man, which are so many, that the Prophet
cries out: Snares upon the inhabitants of the earth. And surely, if the Lord
would open thine eyes a little, Athanasius in the life of Saint Anthony.
as he in times past opened the eyes of Saint Anthony, thou should see the
whole world full of snares touching one another; and thou would cry out with
him, saying: O Lord, who shall escape all these snares? Hence it is that so
many souls perish daily, that Saint Bernard fears not to say, that of ten
ships which are in the Sea, scarcely one perishes; and of ten souls, which
floate upon the Sea of this world, scarce one is saved. Tell me then I pray
thee, how is it that thou fear not the world being so dangerous? that thou
studiest not to escape so many snares? who amongst so many Serpents dare walk
barefooted? or march unarmed among so many enemies? or live securely and
inconsideratly amongst so many occasions of sins? and converse amongst so
many deadly and mortal diseases without medicines? Who would not labor to
depart out of this Egypt? who would not fly out of this Babylon? who would
not desire to be delivered from the fire of Sodom and Gomorrha? Seeing
therefore that the world is beset with so many snares, and so many downfals and
breakenecks are in the way; and the flame of vices do so burn us, who at any
time shall be secure and safe? Well therefore said the vvise-man: Prou. 6.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Or can a man
go upon coals, and his feet not be burnt? Ecclesi. 13.
He that touches pitch, says another, shall be defiled with it: and he that
is familiar with the proud, shall be like unto him.

Of the blindness and darkness of this world.
ANother misery joins it self unto these multitudes of snares and dangers,
which makes them to be far more, and much greater; that is, the blindness and
wordly darkness, which most fitly is shadowed by that darkness of Egypt, which
was so gross and thick, that it might be felt with hands; and the whole three
days that it lasted, no man removed himself out of his place, neither saw his
neighbor, that stood by him. Such in deed, or rather greater is the darkness,
in which the world now sits, and which now has possessed the world. But if
thou do not believe me, look a little into the worlds darkness and blind
guidance, and thou shall soon discern it. Tell me I pray thee, what is more
blind, then that men should believe as they believe, and live, as they live?
What greater blindness, then so to reverence and dread men, and so wickedly to
contemn and despise God? So carefully to seek and study for the commodities
of the body, which is nothing else but a brutish creature, and to have no care
for the soul, which is the image of the Divine maiefty, what greater blindness
can there be? The blindness of men.
What greater blindness, then when we assuredly know, that we shall dye,
neither do we know in that hour whether our felicity or misery shall be
determined, which for ever shall stand ratified, yet we live so negligently and
securely, as if we should always live? For sinners live no otherwise to day,
then if they meant to live always, and that death would never come. What
greater blindness can be thought upon then this, that men for the satisfying of
one desire, should lose willingly their whole inheritance of heaven? So greatly
to esteem of riches, and so finally to set by their conscience. To have so
diligent a regard that all external blessings should be safe, and ordered, and
not to care whether the life be ordered and sound?

Such plenty of blindness and palpable darkness is found in the world, that a man
has good cause to conjecture, that men are inchaunted and bewitched, who
having eyes, see not, and ears, yet hear not; who when they are clear and
bright sighted to behold earthly things, yet are more blind then Moles, in
viewing celestial things. That happens to them that in times past happened
to Saint Paul, persecuting the Church of God, who falling upon the earth, when
he opened his eyes, he saw no light; so also these miserable and wretched
men, who when they have eyes broad open in earthly matters, do see nothing in
Divine matters, as though their eyes were shut.

Of the multitude of sins, that are in this world.
IF there be so many snares in the world, and so great darkness, what is to be
hoped thereof, but stumblings, slydings, and sins? But sin is the greatest
of all the evils of this world, and ought to be the most effectual motive to
move us to forsake the world. See Cyprian in his 2, book and 2, Epistle.
By this only consideration that glorious Martyr Cyprian, endeavored to
persuade a friend of his to despise and contemn this world, imagining him to
be set on the top of a very high mountain, whence he might view all things
lying beneath him; his eyes being cast on every side, the holy Martyr shows
unto him all Seas, Lands, Palaces, and judgment seats, to be filled and
replished with a thousand kind of sins and injuries, which were committed in
every place; and when he had seen so many and great evils, which were daily
perpetrated in the world, he very well knew, with what great circumspection
and care he ought to beware of the world, and how great a debtor he was to God,
who had vouchsafed him such a caveat, whereby he might detest and abhor the
world.

Ascend thou therefore my brother to the top of this mountain, and cast thine
eyes into every corner of the world, and behold the stormy vvhirle-winds of
this boisterous Sea. Look into the Palaces of Princes, the Courts and
public meetings of this world; and there thou shall see so many kind of
sins, so many lies, so many cauilations, deceits, injuries, thefts, enuyings,
flatteries, vanities, and that which is greater, so great forgetfulness of God,
and so little care of salvation, that thou can not but greatly vvonder, and
stand amazed in beholding so many and so great evils. Thou shall see the
greater part of men to live after the manner of beasts, ruled and swayed by the
violence of their affections, having no respect either of justice, or of the
Divine law, or of nature or reason: living more filthily then the Heathen, who
have no knowledge of the true God, neither do they think that any thing
further remains then to be borne and to die. Thou shall see Innocents
wrongfully punished, and malefactors escape without danger: thou shall see
good men despised, and wicked men honored; thou shall see poor men afflicted
and humbled, and in all things favor to be preferred before equity and virtue.
Thou shall see the law sold, no respect being had unto the truth, thou shall
see unlawful Arts maintained, offices perverted and depraved, and all estates
of men corrupted and turned vpside down. Thou shall see many dishonest and
vild men worthy to be severely punished, who by theft and frandulent means
have purchased store of wealth, to be praised and feared of all men. To be
brief, thou shall see the world more devoutly worshipping and adoring a
penny then God himself. And when thou have beheld and ouer-looked all things,
thou shall confess that it is most truly and justly spoken of the Psalmist:
Psalm. 14.
The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that would understand, and seek God. All are gone out of the way:
they are all corrupt: there is none that does good, no not one. Hosea does no
less deplore the estate of men: Hosea, 4.
The Lord, says he, has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. By
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whooring they break out,
and blood touches blood.

But that thou may more plainly discern the condition and estate of this
world, take a view of the head, that governs it, and beholding the
Governor, thou shall easily understand, the condition of that thing that is
governed. For if it be true that the Prince of this world, that is of sinners,
be the devil, (which Christ himself also affirms) what is to be looked
for of that body, which has such an head, and of that common wealth, which
has such a Ruler? This one thing is sufficient to let us understand, what is
to be expected of the lovers of this world. What need we many words? tell me
what other thing is the world, then a den of thieves, an army of robbers,
astie of Swine, a galley full of Pirates, and a lake of Serpents, Cockatrices,
and Basiliskes? If the world be thus, and of this kind, why do I not leave a
place so filthy and impure, (says a certain Philosopher) a place so full of
traditions and deceits, wherein scarcely any piety, faithfulness, or justice
may be found? Wherein all vices reign, where one brother lies in wait for
another, where the son wishes the death of his father, where the wife
desires the death of her husband, and the husband of his wife; to be brief,
where nothing bears rule but gluttony; envy, wrath, luxury, ambition, and
all other evils and enormities? Who would not wish to be delivered from such a
world? it is not to be doubted but that Prophet wished it, who said; Ierem, 9,
O that I had in the wilderness a cottage of wayfaring men, that I might leave
my people, and go from them: for they be all adulterers, and an assembly of
rebels.

Whatsoever has hitherto been spoken, generally appertains to wicked men:
although it cannot be denied, but that in all estates of the world there are
many good men, for whose sakes GOD spares to destroy the world. Therefore,
when thou shall see all these things, consider with thy self how just a cause
thou have, to forsake and avoid a thing so wicked, corrupt, and abominable,
in which, if GOD would fully open thine eyes, thou should see more devils,
and more sins, then there be moates in the Sunne-beames. This consideration
will work in thee, (at least in thy spirit) a desire to leave this world, so
that thou will take up that of the Prophet, Psalm, 55,
and say; O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I fly away, and be at
rest.

How deceaueable the felicity of the world is.
THese and infinite other, are the attributes of worldly felicity, and as it
were the counterpoizes, with which it is weighed and peised, and the
inseperable companions, which wait upon it: that thou may see, that there is
more gall then honny in it, and more Wormwood then Sugar. I omit very many
other evils and mischiefs, which it hides from her lovers: For besides that
this miserable felicity is short, it is also impure and unclean: for it
makes a man carnal and filthy; it is also beastly; for it makes a man like
unto a beast. And mad; for it takes away his judgment. To conclude, it is
deceitful and faithless; because it fails and forsakes a man in his
chiefest hight, and in the flourish of his best time.

Neither will I here be unwilling to take further pains in manifesting this
latter evil, which perhaps is the worst of all, that is, that it is deceitful
and fraudulent. For it seems to be that it not, it promises that it
performs not, and yet these not hindering, it draws unto it the greater
part of people. For even as there is found both true gold and counterfeit gold;
so there are found true good things, and counterfeite good things: true
felicity, and false, which appears to be such, but is not: of this sort is
this worldly felicity, which deceives us by a vain disguised apparition, and
painted masking face. For as Aristotle says, many lies meet with us, which
although they be lies, yet they have greater show and appearance of truth, then
the truth it self. So certainly (and it is matter worthy of observation)
certain evils and enormities are found, which albeit they be evils indeed, yet
they have greater semblance and appearance of good things, then the good things
themselves. And of this number is the felicity of this world: and by reason of
this appearance, the ignorant are deceived by the show of it, no otherwise then
byrds and fishes by a false bait. For it is the nature and condition of
corporal and worldly things, that on a sudden they offer themselves with a
flattering countenance, and do fawn and sm^^e upon men, promising unto them
joy and felicity, but afterward, the very experience of the things
themselves, discovers their error and falsehood. For after the pleasures
follow calamities, diseases and griefs, by the abseuce of the thing loved, by
jealousy, by strifes, and contentions, by the loss of things, by diseases, by
the perturbations of the affections, and by very many other sorrows; and last
of all death also follows. What greater deceit can there be, and what
hypocrisy more intolerable? So a virgin merrily and rejoicing goes to the
house of her Bridegroom; for the has not eyes to see any other thing, but that
which outwardly appears, and presently shows it self: but if she could see
that seed-plot and seminary of miseries, which are sown upon this day for her
to reap, surely she should have greater cause to weep, then to rejoice.

Rebecca desired to bring forth children, but when she was great with child,
etc. the children strove together in her womb, she said; Gene, 25,
If it must be thus with me, what need had I to conceive? O how often does
such like guile and fraud make heavy the heart of man, after it has got that
it desired; when as those things offer themselves in the progress, which were
not promised in the beginning.

But what shall I say of offices, dignities and honors? with what a smiling
countenance, and fair aspect do they first show themselves? but afterward,
to how many passions, care, enuies and labors do they expose their
possessors? But of those that are entangled with dishonest loves, we may justly
say, that at the beginning they find a pleasant entrance into that dark and
denious Laborinth, but when they have passed in, alack, how many labors and
troubles do they bear? how many nights do they pass over without sleep?
how many and how great dangers are they compelled to undergo? For the fury of
that venomous dragon (which is the sword of that cruel parent, and of that
jealous husband) does always keep the fruit of that forbidden tree, and it
often comes to pass, that such men in one moment, do lose together their
life's, riches, honors, and souls.

After the same manner it were no hard matter to examine the life's of covetous
men, serving the world, and catching at by all means by force and favor, the
vainglory of it, in whose tragedies we might behold a merry protasis, but a
lamentable and mournful epitasis: for this is the nature of that Babylonian
cup, which without is gold, but within full of poyfon. These things being thus,
what I pray thee (in thy judgment) is the glory of this world, but the singing
of Sirens? sweet, but a deadly potion? a Viper, artificially painted without,
but within full of venomous poison? If the world fawn upon thee, it does it,
that it may deceitie thee; if it exalt thee, it does it, that thy fall may be
the greater; if it make thee merry, it does it, that it afterward with
sorrow may break thy heart. It gives all her goods with the mixture of
incomparable heaviness and grief, and that with the greatest usury. If a son
be borne unto thee, and soon after die, thy sorrow will be seauen-fold greater
then thy joy was. The thing lost, more afflicts us, then found ioyeth us:
sickness more excruciateth us, then health gladdeth us: injury more tormenteth
us, then honor contenteth us: insomuch that I am altogether ignorant, why it
is so effected by nature, that evils do more afflict us, then good things do
rejoice us. All these things being well considered of, they do show unto us
clearer then the noone day, how vain, deceitful, and fraudulent the felicity
of this world is.

The conclusion of all this aforesaid.
THou have here seen my brother, the true figure of this world, although with
another face, then it outwardly carries. Behold therefore now, what the
felicity of the World is; how short, What the world is.
miserable, dangerous, blind, sinful, and deceivable; and according to these;
what other thing is the world, but (as a certain Philosopher was wont so say)
a Casket of sorrows and grieuances, a School of vanity, a Laborinth of
errors, a dungeon of darkness, a market place of cousenages, a way beset with
thieves, a ditch full of mud, and a sea continually tossed and troubled with
storms and tempests? What other thing is the world, but a barren Land, a
field full of thistles and weeds, a vvood full of thorns, a flourishing
garden, but bringing forth no fruit? What is the world, but a river of
tears, a fountain of cares, a sweet poison, a tragedy pleasantly framed, and
a delightful frenzy? What good things I pray thee are found in the world,
which are not counterfeit? and what evils which are not so in deed?

The worlds rest has labor, the security of it is without ground, the fear
of it is without cause, the labors of it without fruit, the tears without
purpose, and the purposes without success, the hope of it is vain, the joy
fained, and the sorrow true. By all which it is no difficult matter to see, how
great the kindred is between the world and hell: for hell is no other thing but
a place of punishments and sins, and what other thing else is seen in this
world? The Prophet testifies this when he says; Psalm, 55.
Day and night iniquity goes about it upon the walls thereof: both wickedness
and mischief are in the midst of it. These be the fruits of the world, these
the merchandise, this is the traffic of it, which at all times and in every
place is exercised: so that thou see that the world may justly be termed
hell. In this account Saint Bernard had this world, S. Bernard.
when he said; But for that hope which we have of the life to come; The world a
hell.
this world did not much differ from hell.

That true rest and tranquillity is found in God alone.
NOW we have declared and showen how miserable and deceitful the felicity of
this world is, it remains now that we prove that true felicity and
tranquillity, as it is not to be found in the world, so it is only to be found
in GOD alone: which demonstration, if it were rightly understood of the men of
this world, they would not be so careful for it, nor so tied and fettered
ynto it, as they are. And therefore I think that it will be worth the labor,
if I shall add this manifest truth unto the precedent, and establish it not so
much by the authority and testimonies of faith, as by reasons. Therefore first
we must know, that no creature can perfectly rest and be at quiet, so long as
he comes not to his last end, which is his last perfection agreeable unto his
nature. For so long as he comes not thither, he must of necessity be unquiet,
as that creature, that suffers violence by reason of some defect.

Do thou then demand what and who is the last end of man? Obiectiue
beatitude.
in whose hand his felicity is placed? what is that, that the Divines call the
obiectiue beatitude? I cannot deny, but that it is God, who as he is the first
beginning of man, so is he also his last end. And as it cannot be, that there
should be two first beginnings, so it is imposibble, that there should be two
last ends. For this were to make two Gods. Furthermore, if God be the last end
of man, he is also his last beatitude and felicity; but it is impossible that
there should be two last ends, or two felicities. Therefore it cannot be, that
without God there should any felicity be found. A similitude.
For even as a Glove is made for the use of the hand, and a scaberd, that a
sword may be sheathed in it: So also the heart of man is created for the use of
God, neither without him can any rest be found. The reason is, because seeing
that the principal subject of felicity is in the understanding and will of
man, so long as these two faculties are not quiet, so long cannot man be quiet.
But because it is without controversy, that these two faculties cannot be
quiet, but only in God, therefore these two faculties are never at quiet,
until they find out some universal object, wherein are all good things.
Which when it is once known and loved, then there is nothing further, that the
understanding desires to know, Only God can satisfy the heart of man.
or the will to love. Hence it is, that nothing created, although it be the
empire and rule of the universal world, can satisfy the heart of man, he
only being excepted, for whom it was created, that is God alone. Plutarch
reports of a certain Soldier, who through many degrees of dignity, at the
length came to be made Emperor. Now when he had attained so great honor, and
found not that quiet and peace in it, which before he promised to himself to
be in this estate, he said: I have runned through all the degrees of all
dignities, but I have not found quietness and tranquillity in any of them.
Neither is it any marvel, because that which is created for God, without him
cannot find any quiet or rest.

But that thou may understand this the better and more manifestly, behold the
Sea-mans needle, and it will teach thee this so necessary Philosophy. The
nature of the Seamans needle.
It is the nature of that Iron, that in what part it has touched the
lodestone, that that part always looks toward the North. For God, who has
created this stone, has bestowed upon it this natural inclination. Thou
see, the experience of the thing teaching thee, how that needle runs, and
turns to and fro, and with great unquietness moves to every corner, until it
has found that poole, and then it rests and stands immovable, no
otherwise, then if it was fastened down with a nail. So has God created man,
and has infused into him a certain natural inclination and readiness, that he
should always look to his maker as to the poole and his last end. Therefore
so long as he is without him, like that needle he is unquiet, yea, if he was
the Lord of the whole world: But turning and directing his heart to God,
forthwith he rests, and as that needle stands immovable; for in him he
finds rest. Of this is follows, that he is only happy, who possesses God,
and that he comes the nearer unto happiness, who goes the lesser way from
God. But because the righteous in this life are the nearer unto God, therefore
they are the more happy, albeit the world knows not their felicity. The
reason is, because this felicity consists not in a sensible and corporal
pleasure, as the Epicures said, and after them the Moors of Mahometistes, and
after them the wicked and ungodly Christians, who with their mouths deny the
law of Mahomet, but in their life's follow it, and diligently observe it,
neither seek for any other Paradise in this life, then that of the Saracens.
Therefore true felicity consists not either in the body, or in external
things, but in the Spirit, and in spiritual blessings, and invisible, as both
the Philosophers of sounder judgment, and also good Christians (although after
a diverse manner) do avouch and affirm. The Prophet would signify the same
thing, Psalm. 45.
when he said: The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of
broydered gold. In which she has so great peace and quite, as all the Kings of
the earth never had nor shall have the like: unless we will say that the
Princes of this world, have greater peace and quiet, then the friends of God:
which besides that it is false, many Princes themselves have also denied, who
tasting of the sweetness of God, have forsaken their dignities and riches;
amongst whom S. Gregory was one, who tried both estates and fortunes: S.
Gregory deplored the loss of his quiet and sweet solitary life.
when he was promoted to high dignity, and to be a Bishop, he was wont much to
deplore his estate, and to wish for his former peaceable, quiet, and sweet
life, no otherwise then he is wont to do, who languisheth for the desire of
his Country and liberty, being in servitude and slavery.

Those things which have been spoken are proved by examples.
But seeing that this error and deceit is so great and universal, I will
adioyne another reason no less effectual then the former; by which the lovers
of this world may easily understand, how impossible a thing it is to find that
felicity in it, which they desire. Thou must therefore presuppose that many more
things are required, that a thing should be perfect, then that it should be
imperfect. For that any thing should be perfect, two perfections are required
together: but that it should be imperfect, one only imperfection is
sufficient. These things being presupposed, proceed after this manner; That any
man should have perfect felicity it is required, that he should have all things
according to his hearts desire: and if one only thing be mixed with the rest,
which pleases not, that will be sufficient, th^^ (...) both is, and may be
called miserable, albeit all other things (...) make him happy and blessed.

I have seen many men of high degree, whose Lands have yielded them large and
rich revenues, who notwithstanding have always lived in heaviness: for that
discruciatement was much greater, which they had conceived by the frustration
of that they desired, then the joy which they reaped of all other things. For
it not to be doubted, but all that they possessed, did not so much glad them,
as that only appetite afflicted them, which had the denial, because to
possess many things, makes not a man quiet, but to have satisfied and
contended his will. Which thing amongst others, Saint Augustine does
excellently declare in a book of the manners of the Church, Aug. of the
manners of the Church, 1. book and 3. chap.
in these words: In my judgment, he is neither said to be happy, who has not
that he loves, whatsoever it be: neither he that has that he loves, if it be
hurtful: neither he that loves not that he has, although it be the best
thing. For he that desires that he cannot obtain, is vexed: and he that has
obtained what was not to be wished, is deceived: and he that desires not, that
which is to be obtained, he is not of a well disposed mind. Whereupon it is
inferred, that our felicity consists in the possession and love of the
chiefest good, neither any other to be true without it. So that these three
things, possession, love, and the chiefest good, make a man blessed and happy.
Without which, no man at any time shall be blessed and happy, whatsoever he be.

Although I could allege very many examples for the confirmation of this
conclusion, yet we will content ourselves, with that one of Haman so well
beloved of King Assuerus: for when as he was happy in all things in the
judgment and sight of the world, he thought great injury was offered unto him,
because Mardocheus did not rise up unto him when he pas^ed by. Wherefore,
calling together his friends and his wife, he laid open before them the
greatness of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and what great glory
and honor the King had bestowed on him, above all other Princes and servants,
how he had exalted him, and set him above them all. Yea Hector the Queen,
said he, has called no man in with the King to the banquet, that she has
prepared, save me: and to morrow am I bidden unto her also with the King. But
all this does nothing avail me, as long as I see Mardocheus the Jew sitting
at the Kings gate, not yielding me that reverence I desire. Mark then this
place, and thou shall see, No man happy in this world.
that this one small thing, more disturbed and troubled his heart, then all his
other prosperities could make it happy. Consider also, how far a man is of in
this life, from that peace and manquilitie of mind, and how near unto
disturbance and perturbation. Who then in this world is found, who can effect
this, that he should not be miserable? What Kings or Emperors are found, to
whom all things succeed according to their desire, and to whom some thing
happens not, which disturbeth and disquieteth their minds? For although in
this respect that a man is a man, no adversity does touch or come near unto
him, yet who can escape all the mischaunces of fortune, who can avoid the
infirmities of the body, or eschew all the fears, fantasies, and vain
imaginations of the soul, which a man fears without reason of fear, and so
is many times afflicted without cause.

If all these fore-sayd reasons being so evident cannot convince thee, and
thou requirest more reasons rather from experience, then reason, go to wise
Solomon, and he, as one that has long sailed in this Sea, with greater
prosperity then any other, trying and experimenting all kinds of the
delicacies and pleasures of this world: he, I say, will saythfully instruct
thee in this matter, what he has seen, and what he has tried; he will tell
thee, if perhaps he has other where found, that which satisfied his appetite,
if thou shall demand of him what it was, he will answer thee, saying: Eccle,
1,
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
Believe him, thou shall not be deceived: we may safely trust a man so well
experimented. For he does not speak unto thee of his theory and speculation,
but of his experience and practice; he does not tell thee of those things he
heard, but which he saw and proved. Do not think, that thou thy self, or any
other, can discover more novelties, and heretofore unheard of, then he heath
discovered and tried. For what Prince ever lived in the world, that was wiser,
or richer, or more glorious, or famouser then Solomon? Who ever tried more
kinds of delights, of sports, of huntings, of singing, of women, of ornaments,
of ridings, and of all other things, then he did? And when he had tried them
all, he reaped no other fruit by them, then that thou have heard. Why will thou now experiment that, which has been already experimented? persuade not
thy self that thou can find that, which he found not. For thou have none
other world to search for it, then that that he had. And if all pleasures could
not quench the thyrst of this King in so plentiful a vintage, do not think
that thou can quench it after him, in this lean and barren gleaning time of
Grapes. He bestowed his time to this only study, and perhaps for this he fell
into Idolary: as says Saint Jerome, writing to Eustochium. Why then will thou
make such hauock of precious time, without expectation of any profit? Yea
because men rather credit experience then reason, peradventure God permitted,
that this King should make trial of all pleasures, delights, and recreations,
and of whatsoever the world loves, that after he had tried them all, he might
give that testimony and verdit of them, which even now thou have heard: and
that this one labor should be instead of all other labors, and this one man's
error, should remedy the error of many, that they might bestow their time, and
cost more profitably.

Which things seeing they are so, not without cause we may cry out with the
Prophet; Psalm, 4.
O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame, loving
vanity, and seeking lies? With good reason he names vanity and lies. For if
in the business and assayres of this world, there were no other thing but
vanity, it were a small evil: but there is another greater evil in it, that
is, lies, and the false and counterfeit appearance of things, by which they
persuade men that they are something, when they are nothing. Wherefore, the
same Solomon says; Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity. Psalm, 31.
It were somewhat tolerable, if it were but vain, but it is also deceitful.
For vanity being known, cannot much hurt: but that which is vain, and
appears not to be so, The world an hypocrite.
that is especially evil and dangerous. By this it appears, how great an
hypocrite this world is: for even as hypocrites are studious to cover and
palliate their defects: so rich men do labor, that they may dissemble and
hide their myseries, by which they are excruciated. They would be accounted
Saints, when they are sinners; and these happy when they are wretched.

Come nearer, and if you please open and search the vain, put thine hand into
their bosom, and thou shall see how those things strive and fight, which
outwardly seem so, with those things, which in verity lurk within. Certain
herbs and plants grow in the fields, which a far of seem very beautiful:
but when thou come nearer them, and gatherest of them, they are either
altogether leaves, or send forth a stinking and pestilent savor, which a man
forthwith casting away, corrects the error of his eyes by the touch of his
hands. Such certainly are they, that seem to be the rich and great men of this
world: for if thou beholdest their magnificencie, pomp, and the height of
their dignity, the statelines of their houses, their servant, and flatterers,
thou will think them the only happy men; but if thou shall come a little
nearer unto them, and shall narrowly pry into the secrets of their houses, and
into the corners of their souls and consciences, thou shall see that there is
great difference between these things, and the external appearance and outward
show. Whereupon many, who have thirstingly desired their estate and condition,
viewing it a far of, but a little after more nearly looking into it, have
rejected and refused it, as we read in many histories of the Heathen. In the
life's also of the Emperors, it is reported, that there have been some of
them, who when they were elected to that high estate of dignity of their whole
Army, for a time have resisted that election, neither would accept of that
sovereignty offered unto them, because they very well knew, what pricking
thorns lay hyd under that Rose so fair and beautiful to the sight.
Therefore, o ye sons of men, created according to the Image and similitude
of GOD, redeemed by the blood of Christ, adopted that ye may be fellow
citizens with Angels, how long will ye love vanity? and seek after lies?
Do ye look for peace and rest in these false and counterfeite apparitions,
which they never gave, nor will give? To what end do ye forsake the table of
Angels, and seek to fill your bellies with the swash of Swine? To what end do
we leave the sweetness and odoriferous fragrancie of Paradise, for the
bitterness and stinch of this world? Why are not the calamities and miseries
which yoe suffer daily, sufficient to warn you to fly the outragiousnesse of
this cruel Tyrant?

Pardon me (gentle Reader), we seem in this respect not to be much unlike a
harlot, who has prostituted herself unto an Apple-squire or a Pandar, he
eats, drinks, and sporteth with her, until all be consumed that she has;
after that he does floute and beat her, neither vouchsafes he her a fair
word: the nevertheless doting on this knave, the more he beats her, the more
she loves him. Therefore, recapitulating all that has been spoken, if it
has been proved manifestly by so many reasons, examples, and experiences,
that that peace and felicity which we seek for, cannot be found but only in
God, and not in the world; why do we seek for it without GOD, and not rather
in him? S. Augustine
This is that which Saint Augustine puts us in mind of, when he says; Run
through the sea, the land, and all things; search the world throughout, every
where thou shall be miserable, unless thou runnest to GOD, and he by thy
refuge.

The Conclusion of all this first Book.
THerefore, of all those things, which have been handled at large throughout
this whole first book, this at length is gathered; That all the kinds of
goods and blessings, which man's heart can obtain in this life, are found in
Virtue: whereupon it is further collected, that Virtue is a good so universal
and so great, that neither in Heaven nor in Earth any thing can be found, which
may be compared with her, but only God alone. For even as God is a goodness so
universal, that in him alone are found all the perfections of all good: so
after a certain manner the same are found in Virtue. For we see in things
created, that some are hon^st, some beautiful, some profitable, some
acceptable, or having some other certain perfection: amongst which, that is
wont to be so much the more perfecter, and worthier of love, by how much it
more participateth of these perfections. Which thing if it be so, In virtue all
perfections are found.
how great love is Virtue worthy of, in which alone all these perfections are
found? For if we speak of honesty, what is more honest then Virtue, which is
the fountain and root of all honesty? if of honor, to what is more honor and
reverence due then to Virtue? If we seek for beauty, what is more beautiful
the^ the image of Virtue? If her beauty might be seen with corporal eyes,
Plato.
said Plato, she would alure the whole world unto her. If we respect profit,
what thing is more profitable and supported with greater hope then Virtue? for
by Virtue we obtain the chiefest good. Prou 3.
Length of days, and gifts of eternity are in her right hand, and in her left
hand riches and honor. If thou art delighted with pleasantnes, what greater
delight can thou wish for, then a peaceable and a good conscience, the
sweetness of charity, of peace, and of the liberty of the children of God, that
in the mean time I may say nothing of the consolation of the holy Ghost, which
is most sweet and pleasant.

If thou desire a perdurant and lasting name; Psalm. 112.
The righteous shall live, and shall be had in everlasting remembrance. But the
memorial of the wicked shall perish with them. Psalm. 9.
If thou be desirous of wisdom, that thou may find the way that leads
to heaven, and the means that direct to this end; there is no mean more
certain then Virtue, which leads unto God. If thou desire to be gracious,
and acceptable among all men, there is not any thing more gracious or more
conducent to it then Virtue. Cicero in Loeli.
For, as Cicero says, nothing is more amiable then Virtue, nothing that more
allureth men unto love; seeing that for virtue and honesty we love them, whom
we never saw. Such force it has (which is more) that we love it in an enemy.
Even as of the conueniency and proportion of the members and lyneaments, A
similitude.
and of the humors of the natural body a certain beauty arises, which is
acceptable to the eyes of men: so of the order and virtuous frame of the life,
laudably led and formed, so great a beauty proceeds, that not only it is
most acceptable to the eyes of God and Angels, Virtue is loved in an enemy.
but it is also amiable and beloved of perverse men, and enemies. That is truly
and simply good, which is good in every respect, neither has any evil in it.
Therefore God not without cause sends this honorable embasie to a righteous
man, which we have set in the forefront of this book, and now again repeat
in the end. Say ye, surely it shall be well with the just. Say ye so, because
he is borne under an happy star, and that he shall die in a good hour;
because his life and death is blessed, and whatsoever after death shall beside
him. Say ye so unto him, because all things shall go well with him, as well
prosperous as aduerfe; as well things pleasant, Romans 8.
as heavy; both in quietness and in labor. For all things work together for
the best unto them that love God. Say ye unto him, although the world be
turned topsey turuey, and the elements confounded, if heaven be ruinated and
disturbed, let not him fear: yea, then let him lift up his head, because the
day of his redemption is at hand. Say ye, surely it shall be well with the
just. Because a blessing is prepared for him, which in excellency exccedeth
all blessings, that is God himself: and that he is free from all evil, and
from the tyranny of the devil, which is the worst of all evils. Say ye,
surely it shall be well with the just. For his name is written in the book of
life; and God the father has adopted him for his son, and the holy Ghost to
be a lively temple unto him. Say ye, surely it shall be well with the just.
For that estate which he has gotten, is happy and blessed in every respect.
And if at any time in any temporal matter it seems less happy, if this be
patiently borne, it is turned unto him for a greater good: for that which
seemed a loose, unto him that is patient, is made a gain unto him; and his
labor becomes a reward, and his war victory, Genesis 31.
and a perpetual crown. As often as Laban changed the wages of Jacob his
son in law, he thought that it was profitable unto him, and hurtful to his
son in law; but it fell out clean contrary, for it was unprofitable unto
him, and profitable to his son in law. Will thou then, my brother, be so
cruel to thy self, and such an enemy, that thou should linger to embrace
so great a blessing, which promises on every side so great good unto thee?
What counsel is more wholesome? what more profitable condition or estate of
life can thou follow? Blessed are those that are upright in their way, Psalm.
119.
and walk in the law of the Lord, says the Prophet: a thousand times blessed
are they, and blessed again, that keep his testimonies, and seek him with
their whole heart. If a good thing, as the Philosophers say, be the object of
our will, and by how much the more any thing is good, by so much the more it
deserves to be loved and desired: What I pray thee does make thy will so
sottish and insencible, that it tastes not, nor embraces this so universal a
good? O how much better did that King, who said: I have chosen: the way of thy
truth, In the same Psalm.
and thy judgments have I laid before me. I have cleaued to thy testimonies o
Lord. And in another place: O Lord, I have laid up thy commandments in mine
whole heart: He says not in a corner, not in his hand, but in the midst or in
his whole heart, which is the beginning of life; the chiefest and the best place
of all others: as if he had said, This is my best part, in which I contriue and
determine of all my business, and all my cogitations are in it. The men of this
world do contrarily; for vanity possesses the chiefest room of their hearts,
and Gods law lies obscured and hid in some corner. But this holy man, albeit
he was a King, and troubled with many businesses of his kingdom; yet he put
them all under his feet; but placed the law of his Lord in the midst of his
heart. What hinders then, why thou do not imitate this good example, and
embrace so great a good. For if thou respectest the bond of the obligation,
what greater obligation can there be, then that which is between God and man,
or only for that cause, that he is, what he is? All the obligations of this
world are not worthy of this name, if they be compared with this, as we have
said in the beginning of this book. If thou look unto the benefits, what
benefits can be greater or more excellent then those, that we receive from the
hand of the Lord? For besides that he has created us, and redeemed us with his
blood, we have received from him all that we possess both within and without,
our body, our soul, life, health, riches, grace, (if so we have it) the
continuance of our life, our purposes, the desires of our hearts, and all that
which has the name of essence, or of goodness, we receive it I say originally
from him, who is the fountain of all essences and of all goodness. Words are
wanting unto me, by which I might set out her profit; let Angels utter it, and
not men. For what greater profit can there be then to enjoy eternal glory, and
to be freed from everlasting pain, which is the reward of Virtue? If the
temporal commodities of this world do rather move us, what commodities can be
more excellent, or of greater valuation, then those twelve privileges and
prerogatives, which Virtue and the virtuous do solace and delight themselves,
the least of which is of more force and validity to quiet a disturbed mind,
then all the dignities and treasuries of this world. I kow not truly, what more
may be put into the balance, to weigh and peise those things, which are
promised to Virtue, and to her lovers.

The excuses also and cauillations, which the men of this world are wont to
bring for their defense, are so overthrown and spoiled of us, that I do not
see where such may find a small hole or crany to escape through, unless
perhaps of set purpose and pretenced malice they shut their eyes and ears;
that they might not see nor hear this manifest and evident truth. What
remains, but that the perfection and beauty of Virtue being seen and known;
thou say with Solomon, speaking of Wisdom, the companion and sister of
Virtue: Wisdom. 8.
I have loved her, and sought her from my youth: I desired to marry her, such
love had I unto her beauty. In that she is conversant with God, it commends
her nobility: yea, the Lord of all things loves her. For she is the
Schoolemistresse of the knowledge of GOD, and the chooser out of his works. If
riches be a possession to be desired in this life, what is richer then
wisdom, that works all things? For if prudence works, what is it among
all things, that works better then she? If a man love righteousness, her
labors are virtuous: for she teaches sobernes and prudence, righteousness,
and strength, which are the most profitable things that men can have in this
life. If a man desire great experience, she can tell the things that are past,
and discern things to come: she knows the subtisties of words, and the
solutions of dark sentences: she fore-seeth the signs and wonders, or ever
they come to pass, and the success of seasons and times. Therefore I purposed
to take her unto my company, knowing that she would counsel me good things,
and comfort me in cares and greefes. Hitherto the Wiseman.

Therefore nothing remains, but that we conclude this matter with the words
of Saint Cyprian, Cyprian in his 2, book, and 2, Epist.
taken out of an Epistle to a friend of his, written of the contempt of this
world; Therefore, says he, there is one peaceable and faithful tranquillity;
one solid, firm, and perpetual security, that if any one be taken out of the
whirle-winds of this turbulent world, and be founded and anchored in the haven
of safety, he lifts up his eyes from the earth to heaven, and being admitted
to the Lords fellowship, and now being near unto his God in his mind,
whatsoever amongst humane things seems great and lofty unto others, he
glories that it lies within the circumference of his conscience. Now he can
desire, nor covet nothing of the world, who is greater then the world. How
stable and vnfoyled a defense is it, how celestial a guard abounding with
perpetual good things, to be delivered from the snares of this entrapping and
enthralling world, and to be purged from these earthly dregs and incorporated
into the light of eternal immortality? Let him consider of this, and view it
well, over whom the deceitful dangerousnes of this pernicious enemy before
raged and tirannized; we are compelled more to love, when we know and condemn
what we were, and see what we now are and shall be. Neither is this work
brought to pass by rewards, bribes, and the power of man, but it is the free
gift of God, and easily obtained. As the sun shines of his own accord, the
day is enlightened, a fountain streameth, and a shower falls; so the heavenly
spirit infuseth it self. Afterward the soul beholding heaven, and knowing
her Maker, she being higher then the earth, and more noble then any earthly
power, begins to be that, which she believes her self to be. Only thou
whom the heavenly warfare has appointed a Soldier in these spiritual wars,
hold and keep thy standing incorrupt, and fenced with religious virtues, use
continually either praying or reading: Sometimes talk thou with God, and
sometimes God with thee: let him instruct thee with his precepts, let him have
the guiding and ordering of thee: who^ he makes rich, no man shall make poor.
There can be no penury, where the heavenly bounty has filled and blessed. Now
coffers stuffed with crowns, now stately Palaces, and gay buildings will seem
base and vild unto thee; when as thou know that thou thy self are more
beautified and adorned, being a house in which the Lord sits as in his
temple, and where the holy Ghost dwells. Let us trim up this house with the
ornaments of innocence, let us enlighten it with the sunshine of righteousness.
This house shall never decay through age, neither shall the deckings of it wax
old. Whatsoever things are counterfeit, are not lasting, neither do they yield
any stability to the po^^^ssors, which have not the truth of possession. This
perpertually continues with a color vndecayed, with honor vntaynted, and
with splendor vnobscured; it cannot be abolished nor extinguished, it may be
only converted, into further perfection, the body being glorified. Hitherto
Cyprian. Whosoever therefore is moved with the reasons and arguments, which
copiously we have handled in this book (the grace of God and Divine
inspiration assisting, without which all is done in vain) and desires to
embrace so great a blessing of Virtue; let him read the book following, which
delivers and handles the method and order how to come unto Virtue.

The end of the first book of the Sinners Guide.
the Sinners Guide.

Written in the Spanish tongue, by the learned and reverend Divine, F. Jews of
Granada.

Since translated into Latin, Italian, and French,

And now perused, and digested into English, by Francis Meres, Master of Arts,
and student in Divinity.

Romans 12. verse, 2. Fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye
changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will
of GOD, and acceptable, and perfect.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for John Flasket and Paul Linley. Anno Dom. 1598.

THE PROLOGVE of the second Book.
IT suffices not to have persuaded man to embrace Virtue, unless also we
teach him the manner and way how to come to Virtues palace. Therefore after we
have in the former Book delivered many reasons, and those very forcible and
perswasible to move the hearts of men to the love of Virtue: now it is meet
that we come to the practice and use of it, and that we set down many
counsels and sundry documents, which are profitable, and which as with a hand
may lead men unto Virtue. It is the first step unto Virtue (as a certain
Wise man says) to fly vice; after which a man may speedily and without
cumbrance, prepare himself to the exercise of Virtue. Therefore we will divide
this doctrine into two parts: In the first part we will entreat of the
commoner vices, and will set down remedies convenient for the same. In the
second, we will speak of Virtues. But before we enter the liftes of this
tractate, we will send before, two conducent aduices, and needful
institutions, which are most necessary for that man, who has purposed and
determined with himself to enter into this way.

THE SECOND BOOK of the Sinners Guide. In which, doctrine appertaining unto
Virtue is handled, and diverse instructions are set down, which teach how a man
at the length may come unto Virtue.
The first advice and instruction: which is very necessary for that man that
desires to serve GOD. CHAP. I.
THat man that now purposes to consecrate him self to Gods service, and
determines to lead a new life, before all things he must resolutely persuade
himself, that this endeavor is acceptable above all others, and he must so
esteem of this resolution, as it deserves. I say, that he must firmly and
confidently believe, that this purpose is of greater moment, and a treasure
more rich, and a work more wisely taken in hand then any other, which in this
world mortal men admire and love. Yea, he must think with himself, that
besides this there is none other wisdom, none other treasure, nor any other
necessary business in this world. Learn o* Israel, says the Prophet, where
is wis^^^^, Baruch, 3,
where is strength, where is understanding, that tho^ m^ist know also from
whence comes long continuance of life, and where the light of the eyes, and
peace is. Not without cause therefore, the Lord says by Jeremy; Let not the
wise man glory in his wisdom, Ierem, 9,
nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his
riches. But let him that glories, glory in this, that be understands, and
knows me. For this is the whole sum of Christian Phylosophie.

Although a man be wise, yet if his wisdom be not joined with virtue, he has
not wherein to boast or glory. To the embracement of this virtue, all the holy
Scriptures inuit us, which so often, and by so many ways and means, do
commend unto us this exercise, as especially profitable and necessary. To this
exercise the holy Scriptures do chiefly inuit us, which by so diverse ways
and sundry means do commend Virtue unto us. To this all the creatures, as well
heavenly as earthly do exhort us. To this the voices and clamours of the
Church do provoke us: to this, all laws humane and divine do direct us; to
this infinite examples of the Saints do lead us, who being full of heavenly
light, have despised the world, and with the entirest devotion of their hearts
have embraced Virtue, insomuch that many of them have merrily and joyfully
suffered martyrdom; some of them being cut in pieces, some roasted upon
Gridirons, and some burned to ashes, who would have suffered a thousand kind
of other torments, rather then they would have offended the Divine Majesty in
the least thing, or have lived a moment out of the favor of GOD. To be brief,
all those things do allure us, or rather bind us to this exercise, which more
copiously we have discoursed in the former Book. For all these things do
increase and stir up a courage in us to strive for this maistry; because they
declare unto us the greatness and price of Virtue.

Every one of these severally, being diligently marked, and attentively
considered of, is sufficient to demonstrate the greatness and waightines of this
business, but much more they altogether can do it; that by this, man may
understand to what purpose it is, and of what great consequence to follow and
embrace Virtue; how necessary and glorious a work it is, to yield himself
wholly to Virtues jurisdiction, and how meet and just a thing it is, at the
length to aspyre and attain unto her, as has already been said, and hereafter
shall be showen. And this is the first document and instruction, which
appertains unto this business.

Of the second instruction and advice, which that man must follow, who will
come to the service of God. CHAP. II.
THE second instruction and document is (seeing that the business is of so great
dignity and worth) that a man offer and yield himself with a merry and
cheerful heart, to bear all the blows and strokes of adversity and
tribulation, which customarily are wont to happen to the^, who love God; so
that he account all things base and vild, and willingly contem^e them for the
love of God, that he may victoriously return from this glorious combat;
setting this before his eyes that nature has brought forth nothing into the
world, excellent, and precious, which has not some difficulty.

Because in that moment, wherein man purposes to relinquish and forsake his
vices, and to follow and embrace virtues, the powers of hell are troubled, the
Prince of darkness mustereth his forces, and armeth his Catchpoles, fiends, and
all his damned crew against this fresh water Soldier of Christ. Forthwith the
flesh a lover of all filthy and obscene pleasures, inclined to evil from the
very birth, after it was infected with the deadly poison of that infe^^all
Serpent, with great importunity solliciteth him, assaying by all possibilities
to bring him back to his accustomed delights. The custom also of corrupt
manners, which can do as much, Evil cu^to^e
as Nature herself, does hardly brook this alteration, and shows that it
will be most difficult to bring it to pass. For even as it is very hard to
withdraw a great river from his natural course, A similitude.
which by many years it has been accustomed to, to another current; so also
it is very hand ^^a^a man should change his life, which many years he has
led, and should assume another. The world.
The world also, which is more cruel and fierce then the most furious and
tyrannous beast, and which is armed with very many most pestilent and
pernicious examples, which are in it, will come tempting this new Soldier of
Christ with her pomps and vanities, and soliciting him with her evil and lewd
examples of sinners, or terrifying him with her persecutions, which are
procured of evil men and wicked tyrants. And as though this were not
sufficient, The devil.
not any whit behind these, that most subtle, mighty, and ancient deceauer
the devil will hasten, who will impugn thee no less perniciously then the
rest, and he will do according to his wont, that is, he will with all might
and mean persecute and set upon these, which are of late become his enemies,
and casting off his yoke have newly begun to rebel.

On every side therefore difficulties and wars will grow and arise, all which
temptations it is requisite that he expect as presupposed and foreseen, that
if at any time they invade and impugn him, they may not seem unto new or
unthought of, and that he remember that most prudent counsel of the Wiseman:
My son, Ecclesiast. 2,
, if thou will come into the service of God, stand fast in righteousness and
fear, and prepare thy soul to temptation. For this ought to be most assured
unto him, that coming to the service of God, he comes not to plays and
pageants, not to banquets or feasts; but he must take up his shield and spear,
being harnessed with his coat offense for the battle. For albeit that it is
true, that we have many helps and supportations in this life, as we have said
before, nevertheless it cannot be denied, but that many difficulties do offer
themselves in the beginning, which the young Soldier of Christ ought to have
premeditated, least they come as at unawares and discourage him: and let him
always have in mind the reward and price, for which he fights, that it is of
so great value, that it deserves this, and much more.

But least this fear inflicted of his adversaries should discourage him, More
for us then against us.
or dash him out of countenance, let him think that they are much more, and
more powerful that are for him, then they that are against him. For although on
that side that sin stands there area great multitude of co^spiratours, yet on
Virtues side the favorers and defenders are stronger and more powerful. For,
as we have said, the Divine grace is opposed to our corrupt nature; God to the
devil; good custom to evil; an army of Angels to the multitude of evil
spirits; good examples and the fellowship of the Saints, to evil examples and
persecutions; and the consolations and comforts of the holy Ghost, to the
delights and pleasures of the world. Neither is it to be doubted, but that
every one of these is stronger and mightier then his contrary. Because grace is
stronger then nature, God then the devil, good Angels then evil, and
spiritual delights and pleasures are much more forcible and effectual then
carnal.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SINNERS GVIDE. Which entreats of
vices, and their remedies.
Of the firm and resolute purpose, which a Christian ought to have, that he
may not do any thing hereafter, which is sin. CHAP. III.
THE two former instructions being set down as the principal foundations of
this whole building, the first and chiefest thing that a man must do, that he
may be disposed and fit to offer and consecrate himself to the Divine worship,
A firm resolution is to be planted in the soul.
and to the exercise of Virtue, is to plant in his soul a firm and resolute
purpose, that he will never hereafter fall into sin, by which he might lose
the favor of his Savior, and the enjoying of his blessings. This is the
chiefest foundation of a spiritual life; this is that by which the friendship
and favor of God is kept, and the hope of the kingdom of heaven. In this
Charity consists, and the spiritual life of the soul. This is that that
makes the sons of men the sons of God, temples of the holy Ghost, lively
members of Christ, and makes them pertakers of all the spiritual blessings of
the Church. So long as the soul perseuereth in this determination, it abides
in Charity, and in the state of salvation; but so soon as it steppeth back
from it, it is blotted out of the book of life, and is registered in the volume
of perdition, and is transported to the kingdom of darkness. So that this
business being well considered of, it seems, that as in all things as well
natural as artificial there is a substance and an accident, between which
there is this difference, that the accidents being changed the substance still
remains; even as the pictures of an house being defaced, A similitude.
and the furniture spoiled, the house notwithstanding stands firm on the
foundations, albeit not with the same perfection; but if the house fall, which
is the substance, then nothing remains: after the same manner, as long as
this holy and sanctified purpose stands firm and fast in the soul, the
substance of Virtue stands immovable; but if that fail, forthwith all
things fall. The reason of this is, because the whole foundation of a godly
life consists in Charity, which is to love God above al things: but he loves
God above all things, who above all things hates sin: for only through sin
this charity and love of God perishes. For even as adultery is the most
contrary thing to marriage; so that which is most contrary to a godly and
virtuous life is sin: for this kills Charity, in which this life
consists. For this cause the Martyrs have suffered so grievous and horrible
torments, not refusing to be roasted, to be fleane, and to be cut in pieces, to
be bowelled, to be racked, to be torn in pieces of wild beasts, rather then
they would sin, by which they might lose the favor of God, yea, although it
was but for a moment; not being ignorant in the mean time, but that they might
repent after the offense done, and might be again entertained into favor: as
Saint Peter was, after that he had thrice denied Christ. Nevertheless, they
had rather suffer all the torments of the world, then for so short a time to
want the Divine favor. Of this every where we have many examples, but amongst
others of three women; one of the old Testament, the mother of the seven
sons in the Machabees, and two under the new Testament, one of which is
called Felicitas, the other Symphorosa, each of them in like manner the mother
of seven Sons. All these three were present, at the tortures and martyrdom
of their sons, and seeing them to be rent and torn, and the flesh with the
skin to be pulld from the bones, until their bowels and intrals gushed out,
they did not only not faint, beholding so sorrowful a spectacle, but they
comforted their sons, and encouraged them, admonishing them to fight manfully
for the faith and obedience of God. At length they also with their sons for
the same cause most constantly yielded up their life's.

But after these famous and illustrious examples, I will here set down
another, which is rehearsed of S. Jerome, in the life of Paul the first
inhabiter of the Wilderness. Iorome in the life of Paul the Hermit.
The Tyrant, says he, commanded another in the flourish of his young years to
be brought into a most pleasant Garden, and there amongst the white Lillies and
the red Roses, where a bright River made a delectable noise, and the wind
made a pleasant ruffling among the leaves of trees, he commanded a soft bed of
Down to be made, and that he might not roll himself off from it, he caused
him to be left lying upon it, fettered with bonds of silk: to whom, when all
the rest were departed, came a very beautiful harlot, who began to coll and
kiss him, and use al daliance to ripen lust, and that which is a shame to be
spoken, she dallied with his priuities, that his body being thus provoked to
lust, she might get the maistry over him. What this soldier of Christ might
do, and whether he might turn, he knew not: whom torments had not conquered,
now pleasure overcame. At length, being inspired from above, he bit off his
tongue, and spet it in the face of the harlot kissing him, and so he quenched
the heat of his lust by the greatness of his pain. Surely a deed maruailous
heroic, and such an one as hitherto has not been found either in the
histories of the Greeks or Latins.

Let these suffice to show, with how cheerful and manly a courage these
Saints resisted sin. I could also allege other examples of them, who had
rather be tumbled naked upon thorns, and in the deep of Winter be rouled
upon snow and Ice, then they would satisfy the lust of their flesh, which
burned in them, the devil blowing the coals. Wherefore, that man that
determines to enter into this way, ought firmly to fasten this purpose in his
mind, more to esteem the favor of God, (as a just Judge of things) then all
the treasures of this world, and always to renounce the lesser, that the
greater may be kept, when he is in the like need. In this he ought to ground
his life; this ought to be his object in all his actions; let him earnestly
crave this of God in all his prayers; to this end he receives the Sacraments
of the Church. Let him gather this out of Sermons, and out of the reading of
godly Books: let him take this out of the creation of the world, and the
forming of all creatures: let him reap this fruit especially out of the
passion of Christ, and out of the rest of the Divine blessings; for the fruit
of these is not to offend him, to whom so great things are due: and according
to the soundnes of this holy fear and determination, let him measure the
quantity of his profit, equalizing the strength and firmnes of his purpose
according to the greatness of the profit, so that by how much that is greater or
lesser, by so much his resolution may be greater or lesser. Furthermore, even
as he that would fasten a nail into a wall, A similitude.
is not content to have given one, two or three strokes with a mallet, but he
so long smites it and forces it forwards, until it stick fast: so this
purpose and resolution, ought not to be sufficient for a man, there to stay,
let it be what it will, but he must daily labor and endeavor, that of all
things that he sees, hears, reads, or meditateth upon, he take an
occasion, whereby the love of God may more and more increase in him, that he
may hate and abhor sin more and more. For by how much the hatred of sin
shall more and more increase in him, by so much shall he perceive himself to
have profited and fructified in the Divine love, and consequently in all virtue.

But that he may more firmly persist and continue in this resolution, let him
persuade himself, and assuredly believe, that if all the evils, pains, and
sorrows of the world, from that time it first began, to this present hour,
were put in one balance, together with all the punishments, which all the
damned suffer in hell; and in the other balance one only sin were put, it
is certain that he should rather prefer the escape from this sin, before all
the rest, and fly from it more speedily then from all those tribulations and
punishments; albeit the blindness of this Egypt, or of this world is so great,
that men think far otherwise. Neither is it marvel, that the men of this
world being blind, do not see this so great an evil, or that they being dead,
do not feel a wound so hideously gaping: for it is not given to blind men to
see any thing, although it be very great, neither to the dead to feel a wound,
albeit it be deadly.

Therefore, I being about to handle in this second Book the doctrine of
Virtue which has sin for her contrary, in the first part I will entreat of
the irreconcilable hatred of sins, and specially of the remedies of them: for
the roots of sins being plucked out of the soul, the plants of virtues may
be more easily ingrafted, of which we will speak in the second part. The
proposition of this Book.
Neither only will we speak here of those sins, which are accounted
horrible and abominable amongst men, but also of those, which the world
reckons not of, and which they make no scruple to commit. We will begin with
those seven mortal and deadly sins which are called capital, because they
are the heads and roots of all other. This doctrine will be profitable, that a
man, when he is mightily assaulted and tempted, may have refuge and recourse to
this doctrine, as to a spiritual defense, and that out of many remedies, which
are set down in this part, he may select and choose those for himself,
which are more convenient for his purpose. It is true that many of these
remedies are common for all kind of vices, yet some are particular, set
down for certain vices, as when I say against Pride, against Covetousness, and
so in the rest. Of these in this part we will speak, setting down special
remedies for every sin, that the provision and furniture of spiritual Armor
may be in a readiness always for us to use at all needs.

We must consider and note in this place, that we have no need of Hercules his
strength to fight in this spiritual combat, neither of winged feet to fly
away, but of clear and bright eyes to see; for eyes are the chiefest weapons
and instruments of this war; for we are not to fight against flesh and
blood, but against most peevish and perverse devils, who are spiritual
creatures. The reason is; because the first root of all sins, is the error
of the understanding, which is the counsailour of the will. For this cause our
adversaries do especially labor this, that they may corrupt our
understanding; for the understanding being corrupted, the will also is
corrupted, which is governed and guyded of it; therefore they endeavor to
color evil with good, and to (...) vice under the show and semblance of
virtue, and so to hide the temptation, that it seems not temptation, but
reason. For if they assault any man by ambition, by covetousness, by wrath, or
desire of revenge, they persuade him, that it is altogether agreeable unto
reason to desire this, that this or that affection desires; and that it is
against reason not to lust after that, that it lusts after. After this manner
they pretend reason, that they may so much the more easily deceive them, who
are ruled by reason. Wherefore, it is very necessary that we should have
sharpe-sighted eyes, that we may see the hook lurking within the bait, least
we be deceived with the shadow and likelihood of goodness. Eyes also are
necessary unto us, that we may see the malignity, filthiness, dangers and
losses, which vices bring with them, that our desires may be restrained by this
bridle, and may fear to taste that, which being tasted brings death. Hence it
is that those beasts in Ezechiell, Ezech, ^.
which are the figures of holy men, were full of eyes round about, that thereby
might be signified, how necessary these spiritual eyes are for the servants
of GOD, that they may defend themselves from vices. Therefore of this remedy we
will in this tractate especially entreat, to which we will also adioyne all
others, which seem to bring any profit, as shall be more plainly seen in the
discourse following.

Of the remedies against Pride. CHAP. IIII.
WE handling in this former part sins, and the remedies of them, will take
our beginning from those seven, which are called capital, as it were the
heads and fountains of all other. For even as the roots of trees being cut
up, A similitude.
the boughs and branches, which receive life from the roots, do foorth-with
wither and perish* so those seven general and universal roots of all other
vices being hewn in sunder, and utterly eradicated, suddenly also the vices
will dye, which are derived from them. For this cause Cassianus with great
diligence writ eight books against these vices: in which kind of study, many
other learned and grave men have imitated him (...) they did see that these
enemies being overthrown, others could not lift up their heads. The reason of
this is, because all sins do originally flow from self-love: because every
one of them is committed through the love and desire of some particular good,
to desire which, this self-love pricketh us forwards. From this love those
three branches do spring, of which S. John speaks in his Canonical Epistle:
1, John, 2,
which are; The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.
Which (that I may express them by more known names) are the love of carnal
delights and pleasures, and the love of riches and honors. These three loves
are derived from that first. For from the love of pleasure three sins are
engendered, Luxury, Gluttony, and Idleness. From the love of riches,
Cou^tousnes arises, and from the love of honor, Pride. The other two, Wrath
and Envy, serve each one of these perverse and corrupt loves. For Wrath
proceeds thence, that a man cannot obtain that he desires; and Envy
thence, that any one is preferred before us, or that any one has obtained that
we desired.

Seeing therefore that these three are as the universal roots of all evils,
from which all these seven sins proceed, these seven being destroyed, the
whole Army of other vices shall be overthrown. Therefore all our study ought
to be to this end, that we fight valiantly against these Giants, if we will
triumph over all other enemies, who possess the Land of Promise. Among these
vices Pride is the most powerful, which is an inordinate appetite of our own
excellency. The Saints do call this the Mother and Queen of all other vices.
Wherefore, not without cause amongst many other instructions, holy Toby said to
his son: Tob, 4.
Suffer not pride to reign in thine heart, or in thy mouth: for in pride
destruction took her beginning. Therefore, when as this pestilent beast does
assault thy heart, thou may defend thy self with the weapons following.

Consider first that horrible punishment, with which Lucifer and his Angels are
punished, because they were proud: for in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, he with his Angels was cast from the highest heaven, down to the deepest
hell. See (...) dark and blind this vice made him, who was more cle^^ ^n the
stars: who not only was an Angel, but the Prince of Angels; but now is made
not only a devil, but the wickedst and the filthiest of all devils. If it
could do so much in Angels, what can it not do in thee, who art dust and
ashes? For God is not contrary to himself, neither is he an accepter of
persons; and as he suffered not pride in Angels, so also in men it does
displease him, August. to a certain Earl.
in whom he looks for humility. Hence it is that Saint Augustine says*
Humility makes men like unto holy Angels, and pride, of Angels makes devils.
And that I may speak plainly, Pride is the beginning, end, and cause of all
sins, because it is not only a sin, but that no sin is, or has been, or
shall be without it. This says he. And Bernard says; Bernard in a certain
Sermon.
Pride casts down from heaven to hell, Humility rayseth from the lowest
place to the highest: an Angel falls from the loftiest height to the lowest
pit, and man ascends from out the world to heaven.

Then with this punishment let us consider of the inestimable example of the
humility of the son of God, who for us took upon him the most abject nature
of man, and for us in like manner was obedient to his father even to the death
of the Cross. Learn therefore o man to be humble; learn o earth to obey;
learn o dust to be despised. Learn o man of thy God, for he is meek and
humble in spirit. If it seems not honorable enough unto thee to imitate the
example of other men, imitate the example of the God of Gods, who became man,
not only that he might redeem us, but also that he might teach us humility.

Cast thine eyes also upon thy self, for in thy self thou shall find that
may persuade humility. Consider what thou wast before thou wast borne, what
thou art now being borne, and what thou shall be after death. Before thou wast
borne, thou wast filthy and obscene matter, not worthy to be named; now thou
art dung covered over with snow; and a while after thou shall be meat for
worms. Why then art thou proud o man, seeing that thy nativity is sin, thy
life misery, and thine end putrefaction and corruption? If the possession of
temporal goods do puff thee up, stay a while, and death will come, who
makes the beggar equal with the King, and the cottage with the crown. For as
we are all borne alike and equal, as much as pertayneth to the condition of
nature; so we all dye alike and equal by reason of the common necessity, that
being excepted, that after death they have the greater count to render, who
here have possessed more. Wherefore Chrysostom says excellently well: Look
into the Sepulchers of the dead, and seek amongst them for tokens and notices
of that magnificence, in which they ^^ned; seek and enquire for their riches,
seek for the solaces of this world, which they enjoyed whilst they lived. Tell
me where are now their ornaments, their precious and costly apparel, their
delights and pleasures? they are all past away, all gone, all their magnificent
and riotous banquets, laughters, sports, and all the mirth of this world is
faded and vanished away. Come nearer to the Sepulcher of whom so ever thou will, and thou shall find no other thing here but dust, ashes, worms, and
putrified bones. Here then is an end of all bodies, yea, although fed and
nourished with the greatest delicates and dainties of the world. And I would to
God that here were an end of al evils: but that which follows is much more
dreadful; that is, the fearful tribunal of the Divine judgment; the
sentence that there shall be pronounced; the weeping and gnashing of teeth, the
utter darkness without hope of light, and the gnawing worm of conscience, which
never shall dye; and to conclude, the fire, that never shall be quenched.

Consider moreover of the danger, which vain glory the daughter of Pride
brings with it, of which Saint Bernard thus speaks: Bernard in a Sermon.
Fear an arrow, it flies lightly, and pierces lightly, but I say unto thee
it makes no small wound, it suddenly kills. Vain glory is this arrow. If
men at any time do praise and honor thee, forthwith enquire, whether that be
in thee, which they so magnify and extol: for if that be not in thee, thou
art praised in vain, and gloriest without cause. But if perhaps this be found
in thee, for which they praise thee; say with the Apostle: By the grace of God
I am that I am. 1, Cor, 15.
For thou may not be proud of it, but rather humbled, and give the glory to
God, to whom thou owe all that thou art, least perhaps thou make thy self
odious unto God; for it is not to be doubted but both the honor, which is
given unto thee, and the cause for which it is given, are both of God, and
belong unto him. Therefore all the glory, that thou do arrogate unto thy
self, thou stealest from God; but what servant can be found more unfaithful
then he, that steals the glory of his Lord?

Consider also what great folly it is, that thou should esteem of thine
own power and ability according to the judgment of men, in whose will it is to
incline the balance to whether side they will: for he that praised thee ere
while, now disprayseth thee; and he that now disprayseth thee, will soon after
set forth thy praise with great honor. If thou think that thine honor
depends of their tongues, thou shall find that sometimes thou shall be
extolled to the sky, and sometimes depressed even to hell, and thy glory even
beat to dust and powder: even as it shall please the mutable tongues of men.
Therefore never measure thy self by the praises of men, which are given out of
thee but according to that thou art, and which is in thy self: albeit men
extol and magnify thee, yet look thou into thy self, what is in thee, and
what thy conscience tells thee: Rather believe thy self, to whom thou art
better known, then others, who see thee a far of, and judge of thee as it
were by hearsay. Contemn therefore the judgments of men, and commit all thy
glory to the hands of the Lord, who is wise to keep it; and faithful to
restore it.

Ponder also with thy self, o thou unhappy ambitious man, into what danger
thou castest thy self, thou desiring to rule over others, who have not yet
learned to govern thy self. How can thou give an account for many, who
can not answer for thy self? Consider of the great danger, into which thou
castest thy self headlong, by coveting to add the sins of thy subjects unto
thine own, and by putting thine and theyrs into thine own reckoning. Wherefore
the Scripture also says: An hard judgment shall they have that bear rule:
Wisdom, 6.
For he that is most low is worthy mercy, but the mighty shall be mightily
tormented. But who can recount the multitude of troubles, which they are
encumbred with all, unto whom the rule of others is committed. A certain King
of the Armenians very well understood this, A saying of Tigranes King of the
Armenians.
who when he was to be crowned, considering of the cares and pains, that
Empire brought with it, taking in his hand that princely and dignified cloth,
with which the Kings head was wont to be crowned, and long looking upon it,
said: O noble rather then happy cloth, which if any one thoroughly knew how
stuffed it were with cares and dangers, he would not stoop to the ground to
take it up.

Acknowledge, o thou proud man, that thy pride does please no body, because
thou thy self art acceptable to no body. Thou do not please God; for he is
contrary unto thee, He resists the proud, 1, Peter, 5.
and gives grace to the humble. Thou do not please the humble, who without
doubt do exceedingly hate thee: for they abhor all pride and ambition. Thou
do less please other proud men like unto thy self: for by reason of that,
that puffs thee up, thou art hateful unto them, for they cannot abide a
greater then themselves. Neither can thou content thy self in this world,
unless thou repentest, and acknowledgest thy vanity and thy folly: and much
less can thou content and please thy self in the other world, where for
thine execrable pride thou shall be tortured with everlasting torments.
Wherefore the Lord says by the mouth of Saint Bernard: O man, if thou well
knew thy self, thou would displease thy self, and please me; but
because thou do not know thy self, thou please thy self, and displeasest
me. The time will come, in which thou shall neither please thy self, nor me.
Thou shall not please me, because thou have sinned; thou shall not please thy
self, because for ever thou shall burn in hell. Thy pride only pleases the
devil, who when he was a most beautiful Angel, became a most terrible
devil. Wherefore naturally he is delighted with those that are like unto him.

It will help thee also in the way of humility, if thou considerest, how few
thy merrits are before God, and how few or none thy services, which may be
truly and purely called so: because there are many vices found in them, which
have a show of Virtue, and also vain glory does corrupt oftentimes many works
which are good of themselves, neither sildome is that vild in Gods eyes, which
shines most gloriously in the eyes of men. The judgments of the most just
Judge are of one sort, and ours of another; and are far unlike to Gods: For an
humble sinner less displeases God the^ a proud just man: although no man can
be termed just, who is proud. But if perhaps tho^ shall do any good work,
remember that it may so come (...) pass, that whatsoever thou have done may
prove stark naug^^ Yea, Greg. in the 9. book of his Morals. Chap. 11,
although thy works be good, yet they are not without th^^ defects, so that it
is more needful for thee to crave pardon, the^ to look for a reward. Wherefore
Saint Gregory says: If (...) life of the righteous should straightly be
examined, it would (...) hold out for current. For it may be, that those
things, which thou think please God, do offend him. For all our evil
deeds are simply evil; but our good deeds are not simply good, seeing that they
are mingled with many imperfections: and therefore it is more agreeable to
reason, that thou should rather suspect thy good works, then that thou
should glory in them: Job, 9.
as holy Job did, who said: I was afraid of all my works, knowing that thou
do not spare the offender.

Other remedies against Pride more particular.
EVen as the knowledge of our selves is the foundation of all humility, so the
root and fountain of Pride is the ignorance of our selves: for he that
desires truly to be humbled, it is necessary that he should perfectly know
himself, and so at length he shall be humbled. For how can it be, that a man
should not humble his thoughts, See Bernard in his 36, Sermon upon the
Canticles.
who being enlightened with the brightness of truth without flattery
understands himself to be laden with sins, burdened with the mass of
this mortal body, entangled with earthly cares, infected with the dreggs of
carnal concupiscence, blind, weak, inwrapped in many errors, exposed to a
thousand dangers, encompassed with a thousand terrors, plunged in a thousand
difficulties, prone unto vices, and wayward unto virtues. Whence comes this
lifting up of thine eyes? and this casting up of thine head? Therefore out of
the knowledge of ourselves, humility the mother of salvation arises, says
Saint Bernard. For if thou would diligently search into thy self, thou
should see clearer then the noone day, that thou have no cause in thy self
to be proud.

There are some, who when they look into themselves, are humbled; but if they
behold others, they are swelled and puffed up: for whilst they compare
themselves with others, they think that they are better and worthier then any
other. These, that are thus puffed up, must remember, that although in some
things, they are better then others, yet in many things, if all things be
justly balanced, they shall be found much worse then others. Therefore, o thou
proud dust and ashes, what matter ^o be proud of have thou found in thy self,
or that thou shoul^est contemn thy neighbor? Perhaps because thou art more
continent then he, and art thought to be stronger then he? Peradventure
although he be less continent then thou, or weaker, yet he is more humble then
thou art, or wiser, or more patient, or more fervent in charity. Therefore,
thou ought rather to consider what thou lackest, then what thou have: and to
look rather upon the virtues, which are in another, then those that are in thy
self. For such a consideration will preserve thee in humility, and will stir
up in thee a desire of perfection. But contrarily, if thou shall cast thine
eyes upon that that thou have, and which is wanting to another, thou will
suppose thy self better then he, and so thou shall fail in the study of
Virtue. For when as thou shall compare thy self to another, and shall see that
thou have somewhat in thy self, thou will be satisfied and contented
therewith, and all desire to proceed any further, will be extinguished in thee.
If at any time thy thoughts shall be exalted through any good work, then thou
must watch diligently, least self-love spoil that good work, and vainglory
corrupt it, which is the plague and bane of all good works: but arrogating
nothing to thy self, or to thy deserts, ascribe all that thou have received,
to the Divine favor and clemency, and chasten thy pride, with the words of
the holy Apostle, saying: What have thou, that thou have not received? But if
thou have rece^ued it, 1, Cor, 4.
why reioycest thou, as though thou had not received it? For vainglory
continually lies in wait to entrappe good works.

When thou shall feel thine heart swell and lifted up, presently thou must
apply the remedy, in remembering thy greatest transgressions, and by this means
one venim is expelled with another, as Physicians use to do. And so after the
manner of* Peacocks, looking to that which is the filthiest and foulest in
thee, thou may suddenly cast down thy Peacocke plumes of vanity. By how
much greater thou art, by so much behave thy self more submissiuely: For if
thou be an inferior man, and one of low degree, it is not so material if
thou be humble: but if thou be of high degree, and famous through great
and noble dignities, and yet nevertheless shall be humble and lowly, this is
thank-worthy, and thou purchasest to thy self a great and a rare virtue. For
humility in honor, is the honor of honor, and the dignity of dignity: but if
humility be absent, the dignity of it self perishes. If thou will aspire to
the virtue of humility; follow the way of humiliation: for if thou will not be
made low, neither ever shall thou be said to be humble. And albeit that many
are made low and abased, who are not truly humble, yet it is certain, that
humiliation, as Bernard says, is the way to humility, Ber. in his 88. Epistle.
as patience is the way to peace, and as reading to knowledge. Therefore, if
thou desire the virtue of humility, refuse not the way of humiliation.
Therefore humble thy self unto God, and, as Saint Peter admonishes, unto
every ordinance of God, for Gods sake.

Saint Bernard wishes that three fears may always dwell in our souls: Ber.
in his 54. Sermon upon the Canticles.
Blessed art thou says he, if thou shall fill thine heart with a triple fear,
that thou may fear for grace received, but more for grace lost, and most of
all for grace recovered again. When it is present, fear, least thou prove thy
self unworthy of it: when it is gone, fear much more, because where grace
fails, there thou faylest also: fear therefore grace being taken away, as
though thou should presently fall; fear, because thy guard has forsaken
thee. But if grace shall be so propitious unto thee, as again to return, then
much more fear, least thou have another relapse, which is exceeding dangerous.
And after this manner fearing, do not presume any thing of thy self, being
full of the fear of the Lord. Be patient in all thy persecutions: for in the
suffering of injuries true humility is tried. Do not despise the poor: for
the misery of thy neighbor, rather deserves compassion then contempt. Let not
thy garments be curious; for they that love precious and costly garments, are
sildome humble in heart; and they that put them on, love to be seen of men:
for, says Gregory, no body will there be clothed with sumptuous and rich
apparel, Greg. in his 40. homily upon the Gospels.
where he may not be seen of others. Take heed also, that thy garments be not
too vild and base, and unworthy of thy degree; least while thou seek to
shun vainglory, thou fall into it. Which thing happens to many, who
willing to please men, do show, or rather do dissemble* that they would not
please them and whilst they seem to fly the praises of men, they most of all
desire them.

Do not refuse low and inferior offices: for he that is truly humble, does
not disdain to attend upon the humble, yea he does of his own accord offer
himself unto them, as a man reputed in his own judgment most abject.

Of the remedies against Covetousness. CHAP. V.
Covetousness is an inordinate desire of riches. Wherefore, not only he that
steals, but also he that desires another man's riches with an inordinate
desire, and he that inordinately keeps them, is covetous. The Apostle
condemns this vice, 1, Tim, 6,
when he says: They that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares of the
devil, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition
and destruction. For the desire of money, is the root of all evil. The
naughtines and malignitie of this vice, cannot be described more cunningly or
curiously. For it is manifest by these words, that that unhappy man, who is
subject to this evil, is the servant and slave of all other sins. Wherefore
when this vice does assault thine heart, thou shall defend thy self with these
weapons following.

Christ an example poverty.
First therefore, o thou covetous man, consider, that when the Lord and thy GOD
descended from the highest heaven to the earth, he would not possess riches,
which thou so greatly desire; yea he loved poverty so well, that he would take
flesh of a Virgin most poor and lowly, and not of a Queen rich and mighty.
When he was borne, he would not lodge in a stately and wealthy palace; he
would not lie upon a soft bed; he refused dainty swadling-clothes, and
embraced for his cradle a hard Cratch. So long as he lived in the world, he
always loved poverty, and contemned riches; He chose his Apostles and his
Ambassadors, not Princes and great men, but base and abject Fishers. What
preposterous order then is this, that the most vild worm should seek riches,
which the Lord of all the world, and of all creatures, contemned for his cause.

Consider furthermore, the exceeding great baseness of thine heart, that when as
thy soul is created according to the image and similitude of God, How
unworthy, and how vilde a thing it is, to lose thy soul for gold.
and redeemed by his own blood, in comparison of which all the world is
nothing, yet thou art not ashamed to lose it for so small a gain. God would
not have given his life for the whole world, which notwithstanding he willingly
laid down for the soul of man. Therefore thy soul is worthier, and of more
price then the whole world. True riches are not gold, nor silver, nor precious
stones: but they are found in Virtue, which a good conscience brings with it.
Relinquish the false opinion of men, and thou shall see that gold and silver
are no other things, but yellow and white earth, which through the error of
men is crept into so great credit. That which has been despised by all the
Philosophers of the world, do thou being a disciple of Christ so much
esteem it, that thou should make thy self a servant and slave unto it? For
as S. Jerome says, he is a servant unto riches, who keeps and tends them
as a servant; but he who has cast off that yoke, deuideth them as a Lord.

Consider also what the Lord says in the Gospel: Math, 6,
No man can serve two Master, God and Mammon, that is, riches. The soul
cannot freely serve God, if it follow and hunt after riches so greedily, and
with so open a mouth. Spiritual delights, do shun a heart busied and
occupied about earthly matters: neither do things counterfeit and true, agree
together, nor things hie and low, temporal and eternal, spiritual, and
carnal, neither can any man rejoice and recreate himself, in them both
together.

Consider in like manner, Riches bring many evils, and inconveniences with them.
that by how much more prosperously earthly matters succeed with thee, by so
much perhaps thou art more miserable, by reason of that pledge which here is
given unto thee; that thou may rely upon vain felicity, which here is
offered unto thee. Ah that thou knew what great evils, and how many
inconveniences this small prosperity brings with it, thou should see the
love of riches more to afflict by desire, then to delight by use. For it
enwrappeth the soul in diverse temptations; and binds it in infinite cares:
it allureth it with sundry delights, provoke it to sin, and disturbeth the
quiet no less of the body then of the soul. And that which is greater,
riches are never gotten without trouble, nor possessed without care; nor lost
without grief; and that which is worser, they are sildome gathered without sin
and offense to God. Hence is that proverb; A rich man is either a wicked man,
or the he^re of a wicked man.

Consider moreover, how great an error it is, without intermission to desire
those things, Riches do not satisfy the appetite A similitude.
which albeit they be most plentiful, yet they can never satisfy the desire
of man, yea they provoke it, and inflame it more, as drink in a Dropsy is the
cause of greater thirst; so that although thou have, yet thou always couetest
that, which thou want, and always couetest more and more. So that the
miserable and wretched heart, wandering through all the things of this world, is
wearied, but never satisfied: it drinks, but the thirst is not quenched: for
it esteems not those things which it has, unless also it possess in like
manner those things, which further it may have: and there is no less trouble
for things, which it compasses not, the^ there is pleasure in things, which it
possesses; neither is the heart more satisfied with gold, then the body with
wind or air.

Wherefore, not without cause Saint Augustine maruelleth, saying: Aug. of the
words of the Lord,
What greedines, says he, of desire is this, seeing that the beasts have a
mean? For then they rauine, when they are hungry, but they spare the pray when
they feel fulness. Only the covetousness of riches is vnfatiable; it always
raueneth, and is never satisfied, neither fears GOD, nor reuerenceth man,
neither spares Father, nor acknowledges Mother, neither yields unto
brother, nor keeps faith with friend.

Consider that where much riches is, there are many that eat and devour them,
many that covet them, and many that lie in wait to steal them. Riches are not
safe.
What has the richest man of this world more of all his riches, then whereof
he may necessarily live? and of this yrksome care thou may disburthen thy
self, if thou will cast thy care upon God, and commit thy self to his
providence: for God never confounds them that trust in him. For whom God
made, he will not suffer to die through hunger. He that feeds the fowls of
heaven, and clotheth the Lillyes of the field, how is it possible that he
should forsake man; especially, seeing that so small a thing suffices the
necessity of man? The life is short, and death follows at our heels; what
need is there then of so great provision for so short a journey? What will thou
do with so much riches, especially seeing that the less thou have, the more
lightly and freely thou may walk? and when thou shall come to the end of
thy pilgrimage, if thou be poor, thy estate shall not be worser, then rich
men's, who are laden with much gold. Yea it shall be much better: for thou
shall feel lesser grief in forsaking this trash and pelf of the world, and a
smaller account is to be rendered before God. On the contrary part, rich men in
the end of their journey, leave their mountains of gold not without great
grief of heart, which they adored as GOD: neither without exceeding great
danger and hazard unto them an account is to be rendered of those things they
possessed.

Consider also, Riches profit nothing in death.
o thou covetous man, for whom thou gatherest so great riches: for it is most
certain that like as thou camst naked into this world, so thou shall depart
naked hence: thou entrest poor, and shall return poor. These things are
often to be meditated of thee. For he easily contemns all things, says
Jerome, who persuades himself that he shall dye. At the hour of death thou
must leave all temporal things, only thy works, which thou have done, whether
they be good or evil, shall wait upon thee: then thou shall remember how thou
have changed eternal things for things temporal, in heaping up of which thou
have consumed thy time, thy affections, and all thy labors. Then thy goods
shall be divided into three parts; thy body shall be given to the worms, thy
soul to devils, and thy temporal goods shall fall to thine heirs, which
perhaps shall be ungrateful, spend-thrifts, and wicked. Therefore it is much
better and safer to follow the counsel of our Savior, who wills us to
divide our goods amongst the poor, that they may prepare an entrance into life
for us; A similitude.
as the Princes of this world do, who determining a voyage, do send their
furniture and treasure before them, and such provision as would hinder their
speed, and they themselves follow after. What greater folly and madness I pray
thee can be thought of, then to leave thy treasure in a place, to the which
thou shall never return again: and not to send it before thee to that place,
in which thou shall always abide?

Consider moreover of the great Governor and high director of this spacious
Universe, who like a wise Householder has so disposed of the goods of this
world, as he has done of offices and degrees of estate, and has so ordered
all things, that one should rule, and another be ruled; that one should
distribute and divide wealth, and another should receive it. Seeing therefore
that thou art one of those, on whom much wealth is bestowed to give to those
that need, thine own necessity being supplied, think thou that it is
lawful to reserve it solely to thy self, Ambrose in a certain Sermon.
which thou have received for many? Hear what Ambrose says: It is no lesser
fault to deny that to the needy which he wants, thou being of ability to give
it, then it is to take by force from him that has: It is the bread of the
hungry that thou detaynest; the garment of the naked, which thou layest by
thee; and the money and ransom of the captive and miserable, which thou hidest
in the earth. Riches are remedies and reliefes of man's misery, and not
instruments of pleasure.
Consider therefore, that those goods, which thou have received of the Lord, are
remedies and releefes of man's misery, and not instruments of pleasure and
pride. Have an eye, that seeing all things prosperously succeed with thee, thou
remember him, who is the author and giver of them, and beware that the
remedies of another man's misery do not minister matter unto thee of vain
glory. Do not, o my brother, more love banishment, then thy Country; Let not
the furniture and provision of thy voyage be an hinderance and a burden to thy
journey. Do not so love the Moone-shine, that thou contemn the noone-sunne:
do not so live, that the solaces of this present life minister matter of
eternal death. Be content with the condition and estate, which is happened to
thee being mindful of that of the Apostle: 1, Tim. 6.
Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content. For the servant of
God, as Chrysostom says, ought not to be clothed gorgiously, to fare
deliciously, and to pamper his flesh delicatly, but only to satisfy his
necessity. Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other
things shall be ministered unto you: For God, who is willing to bestow great
matters upon thee, will not deny thee small. And if it please him, to give thee
poverty, take it patiently, for the poor are like unto Christ, who when he was
rich became poor for our sakes. They that are poor, and with patience abide
the Lords leisure, and do not respect riches, which they have not, these make
their poverty a virtue. And as the poor in their poverty do imitate Christ,
and are fashioned like unto Christ, Rich men may also be saved.
so the rich bestowing and laying out their alms are renewed and reformed by
Christ: for not only the poor sheepheards found Christ; but also the Wisemen
that came from the East, and brought him their treasures. Wherefore thou that
art rich, give alms to the poor, which if thou do, Christ himself
receaueth them. And doubt not, but that alms that thou now give, shall be
reserved for thee in heaven, where thy mansion shall be for ever: but if in this
earth thou hidest thy treasures, thou shall not there find any thing, where
thou have laid up nothing. How then shall any man truly term those goods, which
cannot be taken away with us, yea, which may be lost we looking on? Ambrose in
a Sermon.
What do they profit me, says Ambrose, if they may not be with me after
death? They are gotten here, and here shall be left. But on the contrary part,
spiritual goods are goods truly and in deed; for they never leave nor forsake
their Lord, neither fail in death, neither can any man take them away, we
living and being against it.

That no man ought to detayne goods that are not his own, their Lord and
Master being either against it, or not knowing of it.
ABout this sin a very great danger is to be considered of, which men
oftentimes do incur in detayning other men's goods: for we must know, that it
is not only a sin to steal other men's goods, but also to keep them against
their owners wills; neither is it sufficient to have a determination at the
length to restore them again, if forthwith they may be restored. For we are
not only bound to restore, but also forthwith to restore; If so be we be able;
but if we be not able forthwith to restore, or not able to restore the whole,
by reason of poverty, in such a case we are not bound to the one, nor to the
other. For God compels no man to perform impossibilities.

To the confirmation of this conclusion I think that we need not many words,
Gregory in the 1. book of his Register. chap. 2.
for that of Saint Gregory will be sufficient, who writing to Justinius, a
certain Praetor of Sicilia, says: Let not any bribes or gains allure and hale
thee to injustice, let no man's threatenings or friendship make thee to decline
from the right and straight way. It is a thing diligently and seriously to be
thought of, that we leave all gains and bribes here behind us, and carry to
judgment only the pleas and actions of harmfull and hurtful gains. What
greater madness is there then, then here to leave the profit, and to carry the
loss with thee? to do another man a commodity, and to disprofit thy self? to
procure mirth to another, and torment to thy self? what is more foolish, then
to suffer punishment for that in another life, which of others is consumed in
this? Furthermore, it is an intolerable error, that any man should more
esteem his riches then himself, and rather make shipwreck of his soul then
of his substance; and expose his body to the sword, that his garment might not
be rent. Such an one whosoever he be, seems to me not much to differ from
Judas, who for a few pence sold justice, sold grace, and sold his own soul.
To conclude, if it be certain (as we assuredly believe) that thou in the hour
of death (if thou meanest to be saved) art bound of necessity to make
restitution, what greater madness can there be, then when thou art bound to
restore and repay that thou owe, to persist and continue in sin to the
hour of death, to go to bed in sin, to rise in sin, to live and receive
the communion in sin, and to lose all that he loses, who perseuereth in
sin, rather then to restore forthwith? what perdition can be greater in the
universal world? He seems to have no judgment, who slenderly accounts of so
great a loss.

Labor therefore, my brother, that thou may speedily and fully restore that
thou owe, neither hereafter offer injury or loose to any man. Hirelings are
not to be defrauded of their wages.
Beware in like manner that the wages of thine hireling do not sleep with thee
til the morrow: Do not cause him to come often unto thee, and to depart heavy
and sad from thee, before he receive his stipend, least he lose more time in
receiving then in earning it; which oftentimes comes to pass through the
injury of evil pay-maisters.

Wills are speedily to be discharged.
If thou be the executour of any man's will and testament, beware that thou
deceauest not the soul of the deceased, least it prove another day a burden
and clogge to thy soul.

If thou have a family, and many accounts to cast up, endeavor that they may be
clear and absolute, or at least whilst thou lyuest that they may be cleared:
least when thou dyest, strife and contention fall amongst thy family.

All that thou can do for the finishing and perfecting of thine own will
and testament, pass it not over to the trust of another: for if thou shall be
negligent in thine own business, what think thou others will be in other
men's? A joyful and plesa^t thing not to be endangered and endebted to others.
Rejoice if thou owe not any thing to another but charity: for then thou
shall sleep securely, and thou shall feel no prick of conscience: thy life
shall be peaceable, and thy death in tranquillity. But that thou may more be
stirred up to all these things, cast a bridle upon thine appetites and desires,
least thou give the raynes unto thy will, and so out-runne thine estate,
dispose of thy diet and charges according to thy substance, measure thine
expenses not by thy will, but by thine ability, least thou be oppressed with
the lone of other men's money. The burden of lones is drawn upon us by our own
affections; temperance alone is more worth, then many thousand of yearly
revenues. Possess those blessed and true riches, 1, Tim, 6.
of which Paul speaks: Godliness is great gain. If men would be content with
that estate, that God has sent them, neither murmur against the Divine
ordinance, they should always live in peace: but when they will ouerpasse
these bonds and limits, it is necessary that they should lose much of their
tranquillity and quiet. For those things have never a happy end, which are
taken in hand against the will of the Lord.

Remedies against Luxury. CHAP. VI.
LVxury is an ordinate desire of filthy and dishonest pleasures. This sin is
very general and common, and more violent then all the rest. For of all the
combats and battles, which Christians are to fight, The combat of Chastity
difficult.
the combat of Chastity is most difficult, for the wrestling is perpetual, and
the victory rare, as says Bernard. Therefore when as this soul and obscene
vice does tempt thy mind, and thy flesh begins to tickle and provoke thee,
thou shall meet these motions with the cogitations following.

First and foremost consider with thy self, that this vice does not only
pollute and contaminate thy soul, Luxury polluteth the liu^ly temple of GOD.
which the son of God has washed and beautified with his own blood, but
also it defiles thy body, which is a member of Christ, and the temple of the
holy Ghost. But if it be a great wickedness to pollute the material Church of
GOD, what an heinous offense will it be to profane this temple, which is the
lively habitation of the true God? For every sin, says the Apostle, that a
man does, 1, Cor, 6,
is without the body, but he that commits fornication, sins against his
own body: that is, by profaning and coinquinating it with carnal lust and
fleshly sin.

Consider that this sin cannot be done without the scandal and prejudice of
many persons, which concur to the effecting of it: which thing wonderfully
afflicts the conscience at the hour of death. For if the Law of the Lord
commands that life is to be tendered for life, an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth: how can he give a like recompense to God, who has destroyed so
many Christian souls? how shall he be able to make satisfaction for so many
souls, which Christ has purchased unto him by his precious blood?

The beginning of luxury pleasant, but ye end bitter. Prou, 23,
See how many delights and pleasures this sin has in the beginning, but the
end is most bitter: the entrance is easy, but the issue and egresse most
difficult. Therefore the Wiseman says; A whore is as a deep ditch, and a
strange woman is as anarrow pit. Ingresse to her is easy, but egresse
difficult. For truly there is nothing found, in which men are more easily
taken, then in the sweetness of this sin, which appears by the beginnings and
entrance into it. But when as hands have strooken friendship, and this league
is confirmed, and lust has captiuated thy soul, who shall be able to deliver
and free it? Wherefore not without cause this sin is said to be most like a
fishers We Will or bow-net, which has a large entrance into it, but a narrovve
getting out; and therefore the fishes that once go in, cannot get out. Hence
it appears, how great is the multitude of sins which arises from this one,
when as in all that time, in which the way is prepared, and the deed
committed, God is a thousand ways offended, by thoughts, desires, and works.

Consider furthermore, Mischiefs joined to this vice.
(as a certain learned Doctor says) what a multitude of other mischiefs this
deceitful pestilence brings with it. First it spoyleth thy good name, which
is the most precious thing that belongs to man, neither is there any sin,
that pulls more heinous infamy upon thee, then luxury does. After that it
weakeneth and enfeebleth the strength of man, it takes away the beauty, it
hurts the sound constitution, it brings infinite diseases, which are both
filthy, and reproachful; it perishes and blasteth the flourish and blossom of
thy youth, neither suffers it to bud and increase; it brings old age before
the time, it breaks the force and strength of thy wit, it dulleth the
subtlety of thine understanding, and makes a man like unto a brute beast. It
with-draweth man from all honest studies and exercises, and drowneth him in the
sea of carnal pleasures, so that miserable man dare not presume, nor offer to
speak o f +any other thing, then of dishonest and carnal delights.

It makes young men foolish and reprochful, and exposes old men to the scorn
of men: Neither is this vice content thus to have plunged men, unless also it
overthrow and squander abroad his riches and substance. There are no riches so
abundant, no treasures so infinite, which luxury will not exhaust and consume
in a short time. For the belly, and the instruments of lust are near
neighbors, and very well agree between themselves, and are faithful
accomplices and confederates in this work. Hence it is, that men given to
luxury, are for the most part prodigal and lauishers, and delight in banquets
and drunkenness; and riches are chiefly consumed through gluttony, and
sumptuosnesse of apparel. This also is common to all luxurious persons:
dishonest women are never satisfied, neither ever cry they hoe, albeit very many
ouches, tablets, jewels, precious stones, rings, and such like be given them,
and they take more delight to be honored with such things, then with their
wretched lovers, who give these unto them. All these are proved to be true by
the example of the prodigal child, Luke, 15,
who spent all his substance by living riotously and luxuriously.

Remember, that the oftener thou gyuest thy thoughts and thy body for a pray to
carnal lust, thou shall find the lesser satietie in them. For the delight
does not bring satietie unto them, but does procure and increase a further
thirst: for the love between a man and a woman is never altogether
extinguished, yea the flame when it is supposed extinct, on a sudden
reuiueth, and burns more fiercely.

Consider moreover diligently, that the pleasure, which is reaped of this vice,
is short, and momentany, but the punishment which follows, is eternal.
Surely this change is too unequal, that for so filthy a pleasure, of so short
continuance, thou should lose in this life the joy of a good conscience, and
in that to come everlasting glory; besides, to suffer pains which never shall
have end. Therefore, very well said Saint Gregory: It is momentany and short,
says he, that delights, but eternal that tormenteth.

The chaste begin an Angels life in this life.
Look upon the price of virginity, and the dignity of that purity, which
perishes and is violated by this filthy vice, and thou shall see that virgins
in this life do begin to lead an Angels life, and by the singular privilege
of this purity, to be like unto celestial spirits. For to live in the flesh
without sensual carnality, this is to live rather an Angels life, then an
humane life. This is that which Bernard says; Bernard, Epistle, 42
It is only chastity, that in this place and time of mortality, represents a
certain state of immortal glory. For amongst the solemnities of marriage, it
only chalengeth the custom of that blessed Country, wherein they do neither
marry, nor are married, showing on the earth, after a certain manner, an
experience of that heavenly conversation. For this cause that singular
privilege is given to virgins in heaven, of which S. John writes in his
Revelation: These are they, Apoc, 14,
says he, which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins: these follow
the Lamb whether soever he goes. And because they have performed better
things in the world then others, following the Lord Jesus Christ in pure
virginity, therefore in the world to come they shall come more near unto him,
and shall more familiarly converse with him, and shall singulerly be delighted
with the purity of their bodies. This virtue makes men not only like unto
Christ, but also temples of the holy Ghost. For the holy Spirit being a lover
of purity, as he detesteth the pollution of luxury, more then other vices
(albeit all vices displease him) so in nothing more willingly or with greater
joy he rests, then in a soul pure and clean from all carnal pleasure.
Wherefore the son of GOD conceived by the holy Ghost, so loved and priced
virginity, that for the love of it he did this stupendous miracle, that is, he
would be borne of a Mother being a Virgin. But if thou have lost thy
virginity, at least after shipwreck fear the dangers, which now thou have
tried: and thou who would not keep the benefit of nature uncorrupted, now
it is corrupted, strive to repair it, by converting thy self unto the Lord,
and so much the more diligently turn thy good works unto God, by how much for
thy sins thou have judged thy self worthy of greater punishment. For
oftentimes, says Saint Gregory, it comes to pass, that the soul after
sin is more fervent, which in the state of greater inn ocencie, was
lukewarm, and altogether negligent. And because GOD has preserved thee,
albeit thou have committed so enormous sins and offenses, commit them now no
more, least God chastise thee together, both for thy sins past, and also for
those present: and so the last error be worse then the first. With these and
such like considerations, man ought to arm himself against this sin. And
these be the remedies of the first kind, which we have given against this
sin of Luxury.

Other kind of remedies against Luxury.
BEsides those remedies, which commonly are wont to be delivered against this
vice, there are others also more effectual, and more particular, of which we
will also speak in this place. Let this therefore be the first, stay the
beginnings, kill the Serpent when it is young: for if the enemy be not repelled
at the first onset, he increases and becomes stronger. For, as Saint Gregory
says, after the desire of pleasure is kindled and increases in the heart, it
suffers a man to think on nothing else, but on filthy pleasures and unclean
lusts. Forthwith therefore the motives of vices must be killed in the mind,
whilst they are yet but only in thought: for even as wood preserves fire, so
the thought preserves and nourishes desires and concupiscences: and if the
thoughts be good, they do kindle the fire of charity; The outward senses are
to be kept.
if they be evil, they stir up the flame of lust. It is needful also, that
all the outward senses, but especially the sight, or the eyes be most
diligently kept, least they see that, which may procure danger; for oftentimes
a man simply sees that, which when it is seen, wounds the soul. Therefore
unadvisedly to look on women, either peruerteth, or weakeneth the constancy of
the beholder. Therefore Ecclesiasticus does give thee very good counsel:
Ecclesi. 9.
Gaze not on a Maid, that thou fall not by that that is precious in her. Go
not about gazing in the streets of the City, neither wander thou in the
secret places thereof. Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look
not upon others beauty.

To persuade this, that doctrine of holy Job ought to be sufficient, who
although he was a most just man, yet nevertheless he did keep his eyes most
diligently, Job, 31.
as he speaks of himself, neither did he trust to himself, neither to the
long experience of his good life. But if this be not sufficient for thee, ad
also the example of David; who although he was a most holy man, and a man
according to Gods own heart, yet when he beheld a woman, he fell into three
most grievous sins, into adultery, scandal, and murder. Thy ears also must
be carefully kept, least they hear obscene and dishonest speeches; which if
thou at any time shall hear, let them displease thee; for a man is easily
brought to effect that in his deed, which he with joy hears with his ears.
Refrain also thy tongue, that thou speak not filthy and unclean words: for
evil words corrupt good manners. The tongue does discover the heart of a man,
and bewrays his affections: for the tongue speaks out of the abundance of
the heart. Let thy heart be always busied with holy thoughts, and thy body with
godly exercises: for devils cast into an idle soul dangerous thoughts, says
Bernard, with which it is occupied, that although the offense be not in deed,
yet it is in thought.

The presence of God, of thy Angel, and of the devil is to be thought upon.
In every temptation, and most of all in this, set before thine eyes thy Angel,
who is thy keeper, and the devil thine accuser, who are always and every
where with thee, and see all thy works, and present them before thy Judge, who
sees all things. For this cogitation will work that in thee, that thou dare
not pre^ume to do any filthy thing in their sight. For how dare thou do
that, which thou blushest to do, if a wretched man see thee do it, thy
keeper, thine accuser, and thy Judge looking upon it.

Consider also that dreadful tribunal, strict judgment, and flame of
eternal torments: for every punishment is ouercommed with a punishment more
grievous, none otherwise then one nail is driven out with another. And by this
means the heat of luxury may be extinguished by the thought of hell fire.

Furthermore take heed, It is dangerous for a man alone to speak with a woman
alone.
that as sildome as possibly it may be thou alone speak with a woman alone,
especially in thy suspected years. For, as Chrysostom says, then the devil
more boldly insulteth over men and women, when he espieth them alone; and where
many fears not the reprehendour, he is the bolder, and the tempter comes
the nearer: beware therefore, to converse with women, when no witness is by; for
solitarines inuiteth to all mischief. Do not rely upon thy strength and
virtue past, Dan. 13.
albeit it be ancient and stable: for we know how those old men were inflamed
with the love of Susanna, who alone was seen of them in the garden. August. of
the words of our Lord.
How great Bishops and excellent Clarks after great combats and victories,
says Augustine, have been known to have made shipwreck with them all, when
they would sail in a slender and weak ship? What strong Lions has this one
delicate infirmity, which is luxury, tamed, which being vild and miserable,
yet makes a pray of those that be great? And in another place: Believe me
assuredly, I speak by experience, before the Lord I lie not, I have known the
Cedars of Libanus, the guides of the flocks to have fallen by the pestilence of
luxury, whose falls I did no more suspect, then I suspected the shameless
rebuke of Ambrose and Jerome. Fly therefore all suspected company of women: for
to see them does hurt the heart, to hear them does inflame thy mind, to touch
them does provoke thy flesh; to be brief all that that is done with women, is
a snare to that man that is conversant with them. This is that which Gregory
admonishes us of: Let not them presume to dwell with women, who have
consecrated their bodies to continency, Greg. in the 3, book of his Dialogue.
chapter 7.
least they devour the bayte before they be aware, for the presence of beauty
does suddenly entrap. Fly therefore the familiarities, visitations, and gifts of
women: for all these be as lime-twigs, by which the hearts of men are ensnared;
and as a bellows, by which the fire of concupiscence is blown, when as
otherwise perhaps the flame would fail and dye. If thou wishest well to any
honest and deuou^ woman, let it be done in thy mind, without often visiting,
and too familier conuersing with her. For the chief of this business consists
especially in flying and avoiding occasions.

Remedies against Envy. CHAP. VII.
Envy is a grief taken at the good of another man, and an irksomnes conceived
by another man's felicity: I mean at one greater then himself; whom he enuies
because he cannot be equal unto him; and at his inferior, because he thinks
that he would be equal unto him; and at his equal, because his degree and
state does iumpe with his. So King Saul envied David, and the Pharisees Christ,
who lay in wait for their life's: for so cruel a beast is this envy, that it
cannot abide, nor any way brook those men, whom it enuieth. This sin is
mortal and deadly, and Diameter-wise is opposed unto Charity; even as hatred
is. This sin is one of the mightiest and most dangerous, and which most
spaciously dominereth throughout the whole world, but especially in the Courts,
Palaces, Envy is familier with every age and person.
and houses of Kings and Princes. Although also it is no stranger in
Universities, Colleges, and conuents of religious men. Who therefore may
defend himself from this monster? Who is so happy, that runs not into this
vice, either by falling into another man's envy, or by envying another man
himself? For he that considers of the envy, which was between those two
brethren, I do not say the founders of the City of Rome, but the sons of
our first parents, which was so great, that one slew the other: or of that,
which was between the brothers of Joseph, Genesis 37.
which forced them to sell Joseph for a servant and a slave; or that, which was
between the very Disciples of Christ, before they had received the holy Ghost;
and above all the envy, Number. 12.
with which Aaron and Miriam being both elected of the Lord, burned against
their brother Moses: He, I say, that reads these examples, what think thou
that he will think of other men of this world, amongst whom there is not so
great kindred, nor so much sanctity? Assuredly this vice is one of the
mightiest, and most powerful, which without controversy at this day most
largely swayeth empire throughout the whole world, and more cruelly and
tirannously overthrows and wastes kingdoms and dominions, then the other
vices. For it is a proper effect of envy to persecute the good, and those that
are famous and held in honor for their virtues and excellent gifts. Against
these the envious do direct their poisoned and venomous arrows as to a white,
wherefore it is very well said of Solomon: I beheld all travail of men, Eccles.
4.
and all perfection of works, to suffer the envy of man.

Therefore it is very requisite and necessary, that thou should very well
arm thy self, whereby thou may be able to resist so powerful an enemy; by
daily desiring aid and assistance of the Lord, and by impugning this beast with
all the strength of thy wit; which if it persevere to solicit thy mind, be
thou so much the more cherefully instant to resist it, and fight with greater
valiancy and fortitude of mind. For he that willingly consents not to this
evil, is not hurt, albeit his malicious flesh does hale and pull him to impure
and odious conditions. But if thou shall see that all things fall out more
prosperously to thy neighbor or to thy friend, then to thy self, give God
thanks, and think that either thou art unworthy of such prosperity; or at
least that it is not profitable or conducent for thee; and remember that thy
businesses shall not succeed the more prosperously with thee, because thou
enuiest the happy estate of thy neighbor: but that they will fall out more
aduersly and disasterously. But if thou desire to know, with what armor and
weapons thou may resist this vice, observe the considerations following.

First consider that all envious men are like unto the devil, whom our good
works do exceedingly afflict, Envious men like unto the devil.
and whom our felicity does torment with intolerable dolor: not because he
can enjoy it, albeit men should lose it, for he has lost it without hope of
recovery; but that men taken from dust and earth, should not possess those
blessings he lost. Hence is that of Augustine in his book of Christian
doctrine: August. in his book of Christian doctrine.
God turn, says he, the plague of envy from the minds of all Christians:
For envy is the devils sin, of which alone the devil is guilty, and
vnpardonably guilty. For it is not said to the devil that he is damned,
because thou have committed adultery, because thou have stolen, because thou
have violently taken away other men's goods, and possessions; but because thou
falling thy self, forthwith did envy man standing. After this manner men
imitating the devil, are wont to envy other men, not because they hope to
translate their prosperity to themselves, but because they desire that all may
be as miserable and wretched, as they themselves are. Mark and consider, o
thou envious man, that although he, whom thou enuiest, should not have those
goods, for which envy does so haunt thee, yet it follows not that presently
they should be thine. Because therefore that he possesses them without thy
loss or hurt, why does it grieve thee, that he possesses them without thy
prejudice?

We must not envy the virtues of our neighbor.
But if peradventure envy has possessed thy mind, because an other excels
thee in some virtue and grace of mind, as in religion, and feruencie of prayer,
I pray thee see what an enemy thou art to thy self. For thou art pertaker of
all the good prayers of thy neighbor, so that thou be in the favor of GOD:
and by how much thy neighbor excels, in feruencie of spirit, by so much
thou growest richer in spiritual things: and therefore thou enuiest him quite
beyond all reason: but on the contrary part thou ought to rejoice, because
the profit is common to you both, and thou also pertakest of his blessings.

Consider therefore how great thy misery is, that by how much thy neighbor
profits in goodness, by so much thou art the worser: but if thou did love
the good things in thy neighbor, which thou have not, the same good things
should be thine by the virtue of Charity, and so thou should enjoy another
man's labors without thine own labor. This Saint Gregory shows, By Charity,
other men's good things are made ours.
when he says; Charity by loving another man's goodness, makes it her own;
but Envy, by hating that same goodness, turns it to the wounding of her own
breast.

Perpend also, and ponder I pray thee, how envy burns the heart, The
mischiefs of Envy.
dries the flesh, tortureth the understanding, disturbeth the peace of
conscience, makes all the days of the life sorrowful and heavy, and
banisheth all tranquillity and all joy from the heart of man. For envy is like a
worm in wood, which as it is bred in the wood, A similitude.
so it consumes it: so also envy is bredde in the heart, and the heart is the
first thing that it excruciateth, and when it has corrupted the heart, it also
takes away the natural color of the countenance: for the pale and wanne
color of the face, is a token of the greatness of the envy, that tormenteth man
within. There is no Judge so severe against a man as envy: for it continually
afflicts him, Envy is a just sin.
and tortureth her own Author. For this cause some Authors call this vice
just, not that it is just (for it is a sin) but because by her own torment
she chastises him, in whom she is, and exercises punishment upon him.

See also how contrary this vice is unto Charity, which is God, and to the
common good, which God every where respects and promoteth. For it enuyeth the
good things of other men, and abhors those, whom God has made and redeemed,
and on whom GOD bestows his blessings, which thing is manifestly condemned:
for it dissolueth that, that is made of God, if not indeed, yet in will. But
if thou will use a present remedy for this disease, love Humility, and fly
Pride, which is the mother of this deadly plague. For when as a proud man
cannot away with a superior or an equal, envy is easily inflamed against
them, who excel in any thing; for if it see any man either superior or
better, it thinks it self worser and baser. The Apostle understood this
well, Gala, 5,
when he said; Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another. He therefore that would cut off the branches of envy, it
is needful that first he dig up the root of ambition, from which envy
arises. Furthermore, thou must also withdraw thy mind from an inordinate
desire of temporal goods, and thou must only love the celestial inheritance,
and spiritual blessings; which are not diminished, albeit there are many, who
love and possess them; yea, they so much the more increase, by how much the
possessors are multiplied. On the contrary part, temporal goods are so much
the more diminished, by how much they are more amongst who^ they are divided:
and therefore envy discruciateth the mind of him that lusts after them. For
when as another receaueth that that he desired, or it altogether perishes, or
is diminished, it certainly cannot be done without grief. But it suffices not
that thou should not grieve at the good of thy neighbor, but it is
necessary that thou should do well unto him, as much as lies in thy power;
and moreover, thou should pray unto the Lord God, that he would supply,
those things that thou art not able to do. Thou must not contemn any man.
Love thy friends in the Lord, and thine enemies for the Lords sake: who, when
thou wast his enemy, he so loved thee, that to redeem thee, and deliver thee
out of the hands of thine enemies, he gave his own life. Although thy
neighbor be evil, yet for all this he must not be contemned: but in this thou
must imitate the Physician, A similitude*
who hates the disease, yet loves the person of the diseased: So do thou,
loving that which is made of GOD, and abhorring that, which man has made evil.

But perhaps thou will reason with thy self, An objection.
and say: What have I to do with him? in what thing am I bound to him? I know
him not: he is not my father nor my kinsman: he never pleasured me, nor
performed any duty unto me, yea, he has some-time endamaged me. The answer.
But remember that GOD without any desert of thine has heaped many benefits
upon thee, and therefore has commanded thee, that in being thankful, and
making some recompense for this his bounty, thou in like manner should be
liberal, not toward him (for he needs none of thy goods) but toward thy
neighbor, whom ^e has commended and committed unto thee.

Of the remedies against Gluttony. CHAP. VIII.
GLuttony is an inordinate desire or appetite of meat and drink. Christ
exhorts us to beware of this vice, Luke, 21.
when he says: Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life. When as this
vice does knock at the gates of thy heart, resist it with these considerations.
First consider how for one sin of gluttony death entered upon all mankind:
Gluttony the cause of death.
and therefore it is necessary that thou should be superior, and have the
upper hand in this first combat, in which if thou fayntest or yeeldest, thou
shall be impugned more noisomly of there vices, and shall be much more weak and
unable to make resistance. Therefore above all things resist the temptation of
gluttony with a manly courage: which unless thou conquerest, thou shall in
vain oppose thy self against other vices. But thou shall easily overcome all
other enemies, which are without, if first thou shall overthrow and kill those,
that are bred in thee. For he to no end fights with them, that are without,
if he has an enemy within. Wherefore the devil first tempted Christ with
gluttony, thinking so to open a gate for other vices.

Consider also the rare and singular abstinence of our Lord Jesus Christ, The
Abstinence of Christ.
who not only after his fast in the Wilderness, but also other where oftentimes
handled his most holy and sacred flesh most sharply, and suffered hunger for
our comfort, that he might give us an example. For if he that by his only
presence nourishes Angels, and feeds the fowls of heaven, suffered hunger
for thee; how much more ought thou to suffer something for thy self? by what
title will thou glory that thou art the servant of Christ, if he hungered, and
thou consumest thy whole life in gluttony and drunkenness? he suffered troubles
and punishments for thy salvation, and wilt not thou suffer for the same? If
the cross of abstinence seem too grievous unto thee, remember the gall and
Vinegar, which Christ tasted upon the Cross: because as Bernard says: No
meat is so bitter, which if it be tempered with the remembrance of the
Vinegar and gall of Christ, is not forthwith made sweeter.

The abstinence of the holy fathers
Recall also into thy memory the abstinence of all the holy Fathers in the
Wilderness, who frequenting desert places, have with Christ crucified their
flesh with all the lusts and concupiscences, and by the grace of God have
sustained themselves many years only with the roots of herbs, and have
macerated themselves with so great abstinence, that almost it seems
incredible. If therefore our fathers have thus imitated Christ, and after this
manner have followed him into heaven, how think thou to come thither by the
way of deliciousnes and pleasure.

Remember how many poor there be in the world, who think themselves happy, if
they may satisfy their bellies with bread and water, and thou shall understand
how bountifully the Lord has dealt with thee, who has bestowed much more upon
thee, then upon them. Therefore there is no reason, neither is it meet that
thou should convert this liberality of thy Lord, to be an instrument of thy
gluttony.

To be brief* consider that the delight of gluttony does not consist in a
greater place, The delight of gluttony very short.
then of two fingers, nor in a longer time, then of two minutes, in which the
meat passes down and is gone: neither is it meet that for a place of man's
gluttony so narrow, and for a pleasure so short and momentany, that the Land,
the Sea, nor the air should suffice. To satisfy this gourmandizing gluttony
oftentimes the poor are spoiled, and many injuries are done, that the hunger
of the feeble may be converted into the delicates of the mighty. Certainly it
is a thing miserable and lamentable, and much to be deplored, that a pleasure
of so small a part of man's body should cast the whole man into hell, and that
all the members and senses of the body should suffer eternal punishment, for
the momentany greedines of one member. Thou do not mark how shamefully thou
errest, nourishing thy body so delicately and with such costly meats, (which
ere it be long shall be meat for worms) but neglectest thy soul, which
before it be long shall stand before the Divine tribunal, which being void of
virtues, when as the body is full of delicate meats, shall be punished with
eternal torments. And if thy soul be damned, be sure that thy body also shall
have her punishment: for even as the body is created for the soul, so it shall
be punished with the soul. Therefore thou contemning the nobler part of thy
self, and nourishing in delicacie the ignobler, thou do destroy them both,
and thou killest thy self with thine own sword. For thy flesh, which is given
to be an help unto thee, does lay a snare for thy life, and does attend thee
unto torments, as it followed thee here in vices.

Remember the hunger of Lazarus, Luke, 16.
who desired to be relieved with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table,
and there was no man, that gave them unto him. Wherefore when he was dead, he
was carried by the hands of Angels into Abraham's bosom; but on the contrary
part the rich Glutton, who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared
well and delicately, every day, was buried in hell: for hunger and fulness,
pleasure and continency, have not the same event: for after death misery
follows pleasure, and pleasure misery. Let us put the case; thou ^atest and
drunkest the last year both delicately and largely, tell me now what remains
unto thee of all those pleasures? surely nothing at all, except it be the sting
and remorse of conscience, which perhaps will torment thee everlastingly.
Therefore all that thou have prodigally wasted and devoured beyond reason and
measure, all that thou have utterly lost: and that thou have with-drawne from
thy self, and distributed to the poor, that is very well disposed and
bestowed, and as a treasure laid up for thine own use, which shall be restored
and repayed unto thee in the heavenly City.

Least thou be entrapped by ouer-sight and at unawares in this vice, We must be
wary in the refection of our bodies.
thou must very heedfully beware, because oftentimes when as necessity
desires to be satisfied and relee^ed, the pleasure which lurk^th under
necessity, craves that t^ou would satisfy and fulfill her desire: and it
so much the sooner deceau^th, by how much it more covertly insinuates it self
under the c^lour of honest necessity, and hides from thee her inordinary.
Therefore very especial warines and wisdom is here to be used, to bridle the
appetite of pleasure, and to subject and subingate the sensuality under the
rule of reason. If therefore thou desire that thy flesh should be a servant
and a subject under the soueranity of thy soul, look that thy soul be
subject unto God: for it is requisite that thy soul be governed of God, that
it may in like manner rule over the flesh. And by this admirable and amiable
order, man shall be reformed, that is, that GOD may rule over his reason, How
man is reformed
the reason may govern the soul, and the soul the body; and so man shall be
wholly reformed. But the body strives and strugleth against the government of
the soul, if the soul be not subject under the rule of reason, and if the
reason be not conformable to the divine will. When thou art tempted of
Gluttony, think and consider that thou enioyest a very short delight, which
soon passes away: and that the pleasure of the taste, is like a dream of the
night, vanishing away, and flying from the eyes; and consider that this
pleasure, when it is past, leaves the soul heavy in the conscience: but if
that pleasure be conquered, the soul rejoices, frolicketh, and the conscience
is quiet, and full of peace: according to that most excellent and egregious
sentence of that wise man. If thou shall do any honest thing with pains
taking, A^lus G^li^^.
the pains passes, but the honesty remains: if thou do any filthy or
dishonest thing with pleasure taking, the filthiness and dishonestie remains,
but the pleasure passes away.

Remedies against anger, hatred, and enmities, which arise of anger and wrath.
CHAP. IX.
ANger is an inordinate desire to be revenged of him, whom we suppose to have
wronged us. Against this pestilent vice the Apostle shows unto us an
antidote, saying: Let all bitterness, and anger, Ephe, 4,
and wrath, crying, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all
maliciousnes. Be ye courteous one to another, and tender-harted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. Of this sin the Lord
speaks in Matthew: But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment. Math, 5,
And whosoever says unto his brother, R^c^, shall be worthy to be punished by
the Counsel. And whosoever shall say, fool, shall be worthy to be punished
with hell fire. Therefore, when this outrageous vice does solicit and disquiet
thy mind, repel it by these considerations following.

First consider, Man more wrathful then beasts.
that brute beasts do live peaceably with those that are of the same kind.
Elephants accompany with Elephants: in like manner, Kine and Sheep feed
rogether in their herds and flocks. Byrds of a feather fly together. Cranes
on the day time fly together, and at night one plaieth the Sentinel for the
other. The same thing also do Storkes, Hearts, Delphins, and many other
creatures. The concord and order of Ants and Bees, is known unto every body.
And amongst wild beasts there is a certain peace and agreement: The
fiercenes of Lions is not exercised against them of the same kind: the Boar
is not spightfull and hurtful to the Boar: the Linx vvarreth not with the
Linx, nor the Dragon with the Dragon. What need we many words? the wicked
spirits themselves, who are the authors of all our discord, observe the league
between them selves, and by common consent do exercise their tyranny. Only
men, to whom courtesy and peace are very necessary, and most conducent, nourish
deadly discords and cruel variance. These things are worthy of great
consideration.

Neither is it less to be considered of, that nature has given weapons to all
living creatures to fight: Man has no weapons given him of nature.
hoofes to horses, horns to Bulls, tusks to Boares, a sting to Bees, claws and
beakes to birds, yea to Gnats and fleas, nature has given weapons to bite and
sting, by which they fetch out blood. But thou o man, because thou art created
to peace and concord, are created unarmed and naked, that thou may not have
any thing to hurt or offend another. Therefore consider how unnatural it is,
that thou should revenge, and hurt him of whom thou art offended;
especially, by seeking for weapons which are without thee, which nature has
denied unto thee.

Remember that anger and desire of revenge is proper unto wild beasts, of
whose anger thus speaks a certain wise man: O man, why do thou degenerate
from the nobility of thine estate and condition, by following the nature of
Lions, Serpents, and other fierce and cruel beasts? The anger of a certain
Lion.
Aelianus writes of a certain Lion, who being wounded in hunting with a
lance, more then a year after espied him a far of that had wounded him,
passing that way in the company of the King of Iuba, and many other men; the
Lion forthwith knew him, and rushing violently through the ranckes of the men,
they with all their forces resisting him, he rested not till he came unto him,
who had hurt him, whom presently he rent and tare in pieces. The same thing we
have seen done of a certain Bull, against them of whom he was smitten and
hurt. Wrathful and angry men, are the imitators of these fierce and cruel
beasts; who when they might mitigate their wrath by reason and discretion, (as
it becomes men) they had rather follow their beastly force and fury,
glorying in their ignobler part, which is common unto them with beasts, when as
they should use divine reason, in which they partake with Angels.

If thou shall say, that it is an hard thing for thee to mitigate and assuage
thine angry heart: From the example of Christ.
I answer, that thou ought in like manner to consider, that it was much
more difficult that the son of GOD should suffer for the love of thee. What
wast thou when he shed his blood for thee? wast not thou his enemy? Do
thou not see with what great clemency and gentleness he suffers thee, sinning
daily, and with what great benignity and goodness he receaueth thee turning unto
him? Peradventure thou will say, that thine enemy is not worthy to have his
fault forgiven. Tell me, deseruest thou, or art thou worthy, that God should
pardon thee? Would thou that God should pardon thee, and will thou use
extreamitie against thy neighbor? If thine enemy be not worthy that he should
have pardon, yet thou art worthy to pardon him, and Christ most worthy, for
whose love thou ought to forgive him.

An angry man without ye grace and favor of God. Math, 5,
Further observe, that all the time that thou burnest with hatred and rancour
against thy neighbor, thou art not worthy to offer any sacrifice to the Lord,
grateful and acceptable unto him, which our Savior intimates when he says;
If then thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
By which precept, we know more clearly then the noone day, how great a sin
discord with our neighbor is: man being out of the favor of God, so long as
this contention lasts, and therefore he does nothing pleasing unto him,
whilst he is guilty of this crime. In his 8. homily upon Ezech.
Such a like thing Gregory insinuates when he says; Because nothing pleases
God without concord, the good things that are done of us profit nothing,
unless we carry with a quiet mind the wrongs done unto us.

Consider also who is he, whom thou supposest to be thine enemy: for it is of
necessity, that he is either just or unjust. If he be just, certainly it is an
evil and a vild thing, to wish and do ill to a righteous man, and to be an
enemy unto him, who has God for his friend: but if he be unjust, it is a thing
also altogether to be detested, that thou should revenge another man's
maliciousnes with thine own maliciousnes; and appointing thy self Judge in
thine own cause, should chastise another man's injustice with thine own. If
thou reuengest thine own injury upon thine enemy, and thine enemy his upon
thee, there shall never be an end of discord and reuengement. But that is the
most glorious kind of revenge which the Apostle teaches, saying: Overcome
evil with good: that is, overcome other men's vices with thine own virtues.
How we must revenge.
For whilst men render evil for evil, neither will be brought to yield, it
comes to pass many times, that at length they are overcome by ignominy and
reproach: for anger afflicts them, and they are shamefully conquered of their
own passions, which if they had overcome and tamed, their victory had been
more glorious then his, that has won and vanquished a City by force of
Arms: yea the victory is much lesser to have taken one or many Cities, which
are without us, then to conquer our own affections, which rule and revel
within us; and to bridle our proud disdain and indignation, which is shut
within us: which except we hold under, it will rise against us, and will
force us to assay those things, which afterward we shall repent us of, and be
ashamed of: and that which is worser, we our selves shall scarcely understand
of the evil that we do: for he that is angry, thinks all revenge just, and
is often deceived, supposing the prick of anger to be the zeal of justice,
and by this means the vice is covered with the semblance of virtue.

Therefore to overcome this vice, it is the best remedy that thou be very
careful and diligent to pull up by the roots all inordinate love of thy
self, Self-love is to be pulld up by the roots.
and of thine affairs. for otherwise anger will easily wax hot, if either
thou, or any of thine be hurt, although with the least word. Furthermore, when
thou feel the beginnings of the temptation of anger, thou must prepare thy
self unto patience, foreseeing wisely all the kinds of evil, which may arise
in any business; because a dart foreseen does less hurt. We must do nothing in
our anger.
Thou must firmly purpose in thy mind, that as often as choler fumeth and
heateth in thee, that thou neither say nor do any thing; yea, believe not, nor
trust to thy self; but let all things be suspected of thee, which thy heart
persuades thee at this time, albeit they seem to agree unto reason. Defer
the execution of thy will whilst anger boyleth, or until thou have once or
oftener said over the Lords prayer, or some other thing. That wholesome counsel
of Athenodorus, which is reported by Plutarch, Plutarch in the Apothegs of the
Romans.
ought here to be observed. For when as he by reason of his old age, desired
leave to return to his own house, and Augustus the Emperor had granted him
leave. When he took his farewell of Caesar, desirous to leave behind him some
memorial worthy a Philosopher, he said; O Caesar when thou art angry, before
thou shall say or do any thing, repeat over in thy mind the four and twenty
Greek letters. Caesar taking the Philosopher by the right hand, said; Yet I
have need of thy presence; and so retained him with him another whole year.
For the Philosopher by this advice taught, that those things were done mithout
reason, which were done at such time as anger boyleth in the heart. In the time
of anger we must decree of nothing.
And it is diligently to be marked, that there is not a worser time to
deliberate in, what should be done, then when a man is angry; and yet all men
especially would then dispatch what they have to do. Therefore it is very
meet that a man at that time when fury and wrath has possessed his mind,
should resist such enterprises with a manly courage. A similitude.
For as it is known to all men, that a drunken man cannot do any thing wisely
and with reason, and of which he does not afterward repent him (as we read of
Alexander the great) so when a man is disturbed and troubled with anger, and
blinded with the smoke of this passion, he cannot rest, neither take
aduisement, which to day although it seem just and reasonable unto him, yet to
morrow, when the fury of his passion shall be over, he shall confess that it
was unjust and unreasonable: for it is without controuesie, that anger, wine,
and love, that is carnal concupiscence, are the worst counsailers, that may be
found. Whereupon the Wiseman says very well: Wine and women lead wisemen
out of the way, and put men of understanding to reproof. Ecclesi. 19.
By wine the vvise-man understands, not only material wine, which is wont
to blind and obscure the reason; but any passion that stragleth out of the
right way, which in like manner blinds and obscureth the reason, albeit not
every thing that then is done is always culpable.

And this advice is not to be contemned; if when thou art angry, Another advice.
thou shall forthwith occupy thy self with some manner of business, and so
divert and turn thy cogitations from anger; for if thou do withdraw wood
from the fire, the flame is extinguished. And with all thy strength contend to
love them, whom thou must necessarily suffer: for if that sufferance be not
joined to love, the patience which outwardly appears, is oftentimes converted
into rancour. Therefore when Saint Paul says, 1, Cor. 13.
Love is patient: he presently adds, and bountiful: For true love omitteth
not to love those bountifully, whom it suffers patiently. In like manner it
is wisdom to give place to the wrath of thy brother: for if thou shall
separate thy self from him being angry, thou shall give him place, till his
anger be over; or at least if thou will not depart, answer him courteously. For
as Solomon says: Prou, 15.
A soft answer puts away wrath.

Remedies against Idleness. CHAP. X.
Idleness is a slothfulnes and a slugishnes of the mind to do any good: but in
this place it is a lothsomnes and a wearines of spiritual things. How
dangerous this sin is, appears by these words of Christ: Math. 7.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire. And in another place admonishing us to live circumspectly and
carefully, which is opposite to this vice, he says: Be ye ready, watch, and
pray: Math, 24,
for in the hour that ye think not of, will the son of man come. Therefore
when this slothful and idle vice tempts thine heart, thou may arm thy
self with these considerations following.

First consider what great labors and troubles Christ from the beginning of
his life suffered for thee; The lobors of Christ.
how he continued whole nights in prayer for thee; how he ran up and down
from one country to another, teaching and healing men; how he was always
busied about those things, which belong unto our salvation; and above all these
things how at the time of his passion he bare that heavy cross being wearied
and martired through many stripes and whippings. If therefore the Lord of
majesty suffered so many labors and sorrows for the salvation and safety of
others* how much more meet is it, that thou should do and suffer some
thing for thine own? That most immaculate Lamb suffered so great things to
deliver thee from thy sins; and will thou not suffer a little while and a
small thing for his love?

Consider also what the Apostles have suffered, when travailing throughout all
the world, The labors of ye Saints.
they preached the Gospel, and what the Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins have
suffered, with those holy Fathers, that lived in most vast and solitary
wildernesses, far remote from any humane resort. To be brief, consider of
all the labors and travails of the Saints, who now triumph with the Lord in
heaven, by whose labors and toils the Church of God to this day enjoys many
notable blessings.

Nothing created to be idle.
Contemplate moreover, how nothing is created to be idle: for the heavenly
Armies cease not to praise the Lord: The Sun, the Moon, the stars, and
all the celestial bodies, are every day once turned about the universal Orb
for our commodity; herbs, plants, and trees, from small bodies increase to
their just magnitude; Ants in summer gather their grayn^, which they may live
of in winter; Bees make their Honeycombes; and with all diligence persecute the
Drone. Thou shall find the same thing to have place in all, if thou shall run
through all the kinds of living creatures. Therefore, o thou man capable of
reason, let it shame thee of idleness, which all creatures detest, and that
only by the instinct of nature.

Behold how great pains and travails those do sustain, who gather earthly
riches together, which shall perrish, which are gotten with great labor, and
are possessed with gr^^ter cares and dangers: what ought not thou rather to
do, who dealest for heavenly matters, who laborest for celestial treasures,
which endure for ever? Beware that now, when thou art sound and strong, and
have time, that thou walk not idely, least something be wanting unto thee,
which hereafter thou can not labor for, and yet would feign have. Which we
see to happen to many. The time of our life is short, and full of a thousand
miseries: therefore, whilst thou have fit time to work, take heed that it
slide not away vainly in idleness. John, 5,
For the night shall come, in which no man can work.

Remember, Great repentance is required for sins.
that the multitude of thine enormous sins do ask great repentance. Saint
Peter denied the Lord thrice, and he mourned for this sin all the days of
his life, although it was already forgiven him. Mary Magdalen deplored her
sins to her dying day, which she had committed before her conversion, albeit
she had heard those sweet words of Christ; Luke, 7
Thy sins are forgiven thee. But because I labor to be brief, I cease to
rehearse more examples of this sort of those, who in like manner have ended
their repentance with their life, many of whom had committed both fewer and
lesser sins then thou have. But thou, who daily heapest sins to sins, how
dare thou say, that it seems a thing too hard and difficult unto thee, to
do necessary labors, by which thou may fly sins? Therefore, in the time
of grace and mercy, endeavor with thy full strength that thou may bring forth
fruit worthy of repentance. And set before thine eyes that example of a
certain godly man, who as often as the clock made a report of a passed hour,
was wont to say: The saying of a godly man.
O Lord GOD, behold now another hour of them is already past, which thou
have allotted unto my life, for which how shall I be able to render thee an
account?

If at any time we be wearied in our godly exercises and labors, let us
forthwith consider by how many tribulations and troubles we must enter into
the kingdom of heaven; and that he shall not be crowned, that has not
lawfully contended. And if thou think that thou have labored enough
already, Without perseuera^ce no salvation.
and that no further pains is to be endured, remember that he only shall be
s^^ed, who continues and perseuereth to the end. For without (...) all
perseverance, neither the course is worthy of reward, nor of the small favor
of the Lord. For this cause the Lord would not descend from the Cross, when
the Jews willed him, because he would not leave the work of our redemption
imperfect. If therefore we will follow our head, it is necessary that we should
labor with all diligence till death; because the reward of our Savior
endures for ever. Let us not leave of continual repentance, let us not be
weary in bearing the Cross of the Lord, A similitude.
by following Christ: otherwise what shall it profit to have sailed succesfully
and prosperously a long voyage, if at length we make shipwreck in the Haven?
Thou ought not to fear the difficulty of fighting, God, who sends thee to
the war, does promise thee help to overcome; he is a present beholder of thy
fight, and does aid and succor thee with a fresh supply, when thou art
e^ndangered, or when thy strength fails; but crowns thee when thou have
overcome.

Very good and wholesome counsel.
When thou art wearied through tediousnes of travail, thus resolve with thy
self: Do not compare the labors of Virtue with the sweetness and delight of
the contrary vice: but confer the sorrow and anguish, which thou now feel
in Virtue, with the sorrow and disquietnes, which thou shall feel after thou
have sinned; and the joy, which thou feel in sinning, with the joy, which
for virtue remains for thee in the glory to come; and thou shall presently
see, how much better the condition of virtue is, After victory a new war
approaches.
then of vice. When thou shall come Victour from one war, be not idle, be not
void of care: for oftentimes, as a certain Wiseman says, after victory the
conqueror casts away all care: yea, always stand upon the watch: for by and
by thine enemy will approach again, and his trumpet will give a sign of a new
onset, and a new assault will begin. For the Sea cannot be without waves and
billows, nor this life without tribulation and temptation. For he that is a
young freshwater Soldier, and begins to lead a godly life, he is more
strongly and more importunatly impugned of the enemy, who is not troublesome
nor noisome unto them, whom he is quietly possessed of; but to them, who are
without his regiment and jurisdiction. Therefore the young Soldier of Christ
must always stand upon his court of guard, and diligently watch so long as he
is employed in this war, being armed from top to toe with Christian complete
armor. But if at any time thou shall feel thy soul wounded, A similitude.
beware that thou cast not away thine armor and shield, and shake hands with
thine enemy, and yield thy self unto him: but imitate valiant and brave men of
Arms, who oftentimes through shame to be overcome, and through grief of their
wounds are forced not to fly, but to fight again; and so taking heart at
grass, and calling to thee thy spirits a fresh, thou shall forthwith see that
by thine own misfortune and mischaunce, thou shall cause them to fly from
thee, whom a little before thou did fly from, and thou shall prosecute them,
who prosecuted thee. And if peradventure thou be wounded the second time,
(which oftentimes happens in war) yet be not discouraged, but remember,
that the same thing happens often to them that fight most valiantly, not
because they are never wounded, but because they are never conquered. For he is
not said to be conquered, that is often wounded, but he, that loses his
armor and his courage. If thou be wounded, seek presently for remedy; for
a fresh and new wound is sooner cured, then anolde ulcer, and that which is
putrified: and one is easilier cured, then many.

If thou be tempted at any time, How temptation is to be turned into good.
it is not enough for thee not to have entertained the temptation, but endeavor
by the same temptation to take a greater occasion to embrace Virtue; so by this
diligence and the Divine grace by temptation thou shall not be made worser, but
much better, and all things shall fall out with thee more happily and
currantly. If thou be tempted of Luxury and Gluttony, cease a while from
thine accustomed delicates, yea, albeit they be lawful, and entertain
fasting, and holy and godly exercises. If covetousness assault thee, give larger
alms, and do other works of mercy oftener then thou wast wont. If vainglory
assail thee, in all things humble thy self more lowly. Doing thus, perhaps
the devil will not dare further to tempt thee, least he should give thee an
occasion to become better, and thou should exercise better works, when as
his casting is that thou should do worser* As much as lies in thee fly
idleness, and always meditate upon some good and profitable thing: and beware
that thou be not so overwhelmed with the multitude of business, that thine
heart be estranged from GOD, so that thou can not meditate on him.

Of other kinds of sins, which a good Christian ought to eschew. CHAP. XI.
BEsides the seven sins, which are called capital, there are others, which
depend of them, which a Christian ought to eschew with all diligence no less
then the former. Amongst these one of the chiefest is, to swear vainly by
God: for this sin is directly against God, and therefore in his own nature
it is more grievous then any other sin, which is committed against thy
neighbor, albeit it be enormous and very far out ofsquare. And this is done
not only when the name of God is sworn by, but when we swear by the Cross,
Mass, Sacraments, Saints, or by our own life, for every one of these are
heinous sins also and idolatrous, for by protesting by them we place them in
Gods stead, which unlawful oaths are much reprehended in the holy Scriptures,
because of the injury, which is offered to the Divine majesty. Greatly to
blame are they, and much have they to answer for, who swear of custom for
every light matter, having no respect how or wherefore they swear, neither do
repent themselves of this custom, neither endeavor to root out this corrupt
and depraved use. Neither are they to be excused, if they say, that they do
not swear of set purpose or it was not their mind and intent to sweat vainly:
for the case being put, that they are willing to entertain this naughty and
corrupt custom, they are also willing to entertain that, which follows of
it, that is this, and such like evils, and therefore they are not free from
great and enormous wickedness.

Wherefore a Christian ought to endeavor himself as much as lies in him to
banish and root out this evil custom, least this incircumspection prove his
bane. That this may be done the more easily, we must diligently observe and
mark that counsel of Christ, James, 5,
and of his most loving Disciple James, saying; Before all things, my brethren,
swear not, neither by heaven; nor by earth, nor by any other oath: but let
your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation: He
means, that the custom of swearing should not draw them to false swearing,
and therefore should be judged, and condemned to everlasting death:

Neither ought any man to swear by the life of his sons, We must not swear
by the life of another.
or of any other in his family. And he must also diligently take heed, that
as no man swear after this manner in his family, so let him cast out of his
house all such oaths, by admonishing and chasticing all, that are under his
jurisdiction. And if there be any man, to whom this custom is so turned into a
nature, that he can hardly expel it, let him accustom himself, that for
every such offense he give some thing to the poor, or exact some other thing
of himself, that by it he may not only be put in mind of his repentance,
but also, that it may be an admonition unto him, not to incur the same fault
again.

Of murmuring, detraction, and rash judgment.
ANother sin, which every one ought to fly and avoid, is murmuring: which
vice does no less reign in the world at this day, then that before. For there
is neither house, nor assembly of religious persons, nor holy place, which is
altogether free from murmuring. And although this vice is acquainted and
familiar with all estates of men, (for the world through her wavering and
mutability, ministers matter of tears to the good, and an occasion of
murmuring to the weak) yet some are more inclined to this vice of their own
nature, A similitude.
then others. For even as men's tastes are diverse, for all things taste not alike
to all men; sweet tastes displease this man, and sower tastes please another,
and some please their tastes in sweet things: so the wills of some men are so
corrupt, and repleate with hurtful and melancholy humors, that they have not
any pleasure in any thing that is joined with virtue, they cannot away to hear
their neighbor praised, and nothing does please them but evil speaking, and
scorning others; so that in all their conversation they seem dull, and
benumbed; but if they light in a vain of evil speaking, and spightfull
reproching, in this they seem as though they were waked out of sleep, and
they quicken up their spirits to descant on this theme.

Three evils spring from murmuring
That an hatred of this abominable and hurtful sin may be bred in thine
heart, mark how this vice brings with it three kind of evils. The first is,
it brings forth detraction and backbyting A similitude.
So we often see, when men begin to murmr, that they most easily descend from
more common defects to particular, and from public defects, to defects more
secret and private, from small to great: and by infamy they wrong the fame of
their neighbor. For after the tongue has begun to wax hot through speaking,
it is a hard matter so much to restrain the lust and desire of the heart, as
the flame increases the wind raising and puffing it; as it is hard to hinder
and hold in an unbroken and an unbridled Colt foming and chafing in the midst
of his race. Then the murmurer respects not any body, neither fears to
proceed, until he has entered into the secretest places of the house.
Wherefore, Ecclesiasticus earnestly prayed, that God would set a watch before
this gate; Who says he, Ecclus, 22,
shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that
I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not? He that
spoke this, knew very well the great weight, moment, and difficulty of this
thing: for he looked for remedy of this from GOD alone, who is the true
Physician of this disease, Prou, 16,
as Solomon testifies, saying: The preparations of the heart are in man, but
the answer of the tongue is of the Lord. Of so great moment is this business.

words have wings, and men are desirous of favor and friendship, and by
broching such trifles, they hunt for the favor and familiarity of others,
under pretense as though they had a great care of his honor, whose fame is
hurt and wronged. Hence it arises, that when such words are carried to the
ears of him that is defamed, he is offended, and to his own grief he rages
against him, of whom he is defamed. Hence come perpetual enmities, hence
continual hatred, hence wars and slaughters proceed. Ecclus, 28,
Wherefore worthily said the Wiseman; Abhor the slaunderer and double
tongued: for such have destroyed many that were at peace. And all this
mischief, as thou see, oftentimes is derived from one word ill spoken,
Ecclus, 11,
as the Wiseman says; Of one little spark is made a great fire, and of one
deceitful man, is blood increased.

In regard of this mischief, the holy Scripture compares the words of
detractors and murmurers to sharp rasers, which shave the hayres, he not
feeling that is shaued; after that also to Bow and arrows, which are sent from
far, and wound the absent: sometimes slaunderers and reprochers are called
serpents, which bite privily, and leave poison in the wound: by which
similitudes, the holy Ghost would intimate unto us, the malignitie and harms
of this vice, which is so great, that the Wiseman says; Ecclus. 28,
The stroke of the rod, makes marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the
tongue breaks the bones.

The third evil that murmuring brings with it, is, that it Ecclus, 9,
A man full of words, is dangerous in his City. Although there were no other
cause to hate this vice, neither that it were very hurtful on the one part,
nor fruitless on the other, yet who is he that would be infamous, and
execrable both to God and men? especially for a vice so common and usual, into
danger of which a man does run, so often as he conferreth with another.

Therefore persuade thy self, that the life of thy neighbor, as much as it
pertaines to thee, is as a forbidden tree, whose fruit it is not lawful for
thee to touch, nor taste. Beware therefore, that thou do not speak well of thy
self, and ill of another: for this is the property of slaunderers and
backbiters, and that of bragarts and vainglorious Thrasoes. In thy mouth let
all men be honest and honorable, and let all the world believe by thy words,
that there is not an evil man in it. By this means thou shall eschew many
sins, and infinite scruples and bytings of conscience, and thou shall be
acceptable to God, and loved of men: and as all are honored by thee, so in
like manner thou shall be honored of all. Bridle thy tongue, and be thou
careful to keep in those words that thy stomach belcheth up: The greatest
soueranity to be able to rule thy tongue.
especially when thou see that by them there is danger of bloodshed. And
constantly believe this, that it is the greatest wisdom, and the most
sovereign empire, to be able to bridle and restrain thy tongue.

Neither think that thou art freed from this vice, when thou murmurest
artificially, first praising the man, whom thou have purposed to dispraise: A
similitude.
For there are some murmurers and repiners, that imitate Chirurgians; who
being about to open a vain, do first annoint it with oil, and presently
make incision, and extract blood. Psalm, 55,
Of these the Prophet speaks: His words were more gentle then oil, yet they
were swords. And even as it is landable to abstain from all kind of murmuring
and repining, so it is much more praiseworthy, to moderate and temper our
selfs from railing and reproching them, who have offended us: for by how much
more the desire of railing is violenter, by so much more it is an euidenter
sign of a generous mind, to be able to contain himself in this, and to
restrain this affection; therefore, Murmurers and detractors, are not to be
heard. Ecclus, 29,
where the danger is greater, there we ought to be more cautelous and wary.
Neither ought we only to abstain from reproching and murmuring, but our ears
ought not to be open to detractors and slaunderers, that we may follow the
counsel of Ecclesiasticus, saying; Hedge in thine ears with thorns, and
do not bear a wicked tongue. By which words it is manifest, of what great
moment it is, not to hear cursed and slanderous speakers. For he says not,
shut, or stop thine ears with Cotton, Woll, or with soft Furre or Down;
but he would have them hedged about with thorns, that not only such
reproachful speeches may not enter into thine heart, by hearing them and
delighting in them, but that thou show a sower and displeased count on (...) to
the slaunderer, and that thou with grief hear them which thing also
Solomon teaches more plainly, Prou, 25^punc;
when he says: As the North-winde drives away the rain, so does an angry
countenance the slaundering tongue. For as S. Jerome says: An arrow shot from
a bow, sticks not in the hard Rock, but with violence reboundeth back
again, and hurts him that shot it. But if this Buzzer and Detractor be thy
subject, How a backbiter and a detractour is to be reproved.
or thine inferious without offense thou may command him to hold his
peace; for thou art bound to do so: but if thou caust not command him
silence, at least discreetly with some other discourse break of the course of
his speech, or show him that countenance, whereby he may be ashamed to proceed
any further. Therefore being modestly admonished, he will either hold his
peace, or alte r his speech. Otherwise, if thou entertainest his talk with a
merry and cheerful countenance, thou ministrest, occasion unto him, to
persist in his purpose, A similitude,
and so thou do no less off^nd in hearing, the^ he in speaking. For even as
he does ill, that fireth an house, so also he does ill, that when he may
quench the fire, will not, but coming to the flame, warmeth himself by it.

Amongst all the kinds of murmuring and detraction that is the worst, Scandal
that comes by detraction.
when as any one detracteth from the estimation of a just and a righteous man*
for he by this manner of reproching, gives occasion to the weak and
faint-harted to become more slow in goodness, neither to go forward with so
great zeal as they were wont. Which albeit he offend not the stronger, yet it
cannot be denied, but that he much wrongeth the weak and imperfect. Least that
this kind of scandal seem small in thine eyes, Math, 18,
remember the words of the Lord: Whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a Mil-stone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

Wherefore, my brother, think it a kind of sacrilege to sharp and whet thy
tongue against them, who serve the Lord God: for albeit it be true that the
detractor speaks of them, yet for the title only, which they have and the
office that they bear, they are worthy of honor especially seeing that GOD
h^th ^ayde o^ them: Zach. 2.
He ^ha^ touches you, touches the apple of (...) eye. Whatsoever we have
hitherto spoken of murmurers, detractors, Against ie^ters and Iibers.
and backbyters, it is to be understood also of iesten, flowters, and deriders,
and much more of them then of the other: for this vice has all the evils and
mischiefs in it, which before we have numbered up, and besides those, it has
another blemish annexed to it, that is, pride, arrogancy, and contempt of thy
neighbor: therefore we must eschew and avoid this vice more warily then the
other, as the Lord has commanded in his Law, Leuit. 19.
when he said: There shall not be a tale-carrier, or a backebyting whisperer
among my people. Therefore, it is not needful further to enlarge the vildnes
and filthiness of this sin, but let these things suffice which hitherto we
have spoken.

Of rash judgment, and the precepts of the Church.
TO the two precedent sins a third is joined being very near unto them,
which is to judge rashly: for detracters and slaunderers not o^^ly speak evil
of matters past and evident, but also of those that are judged of them, and
which breed any suspicion in them. For that they may not want matter of
detraction, they minister matter unto themselves, interpreting by their
perverse judgment and peevish suspicion the matter to the worst sense, which
they ought to have interpreted to a good meaning. Which kind of judgment is
against the commandment of the Lord: Judge not, that ye be not judged: and
condemn not, Math. 7.
that ye be not condemned.

With these sins, which are against God, those are numbered which are
committed against these four precepts of the Church, Four precepts of the
Church.
which are commended unto us under commandment, as: On the Sabbath days, and
on certain other days, it is thought good by the Church, to hear Divine
service and sermons: to receive the holy Sacrament of the blessed body and
blood of our Savior Christ: to fast on days appointed: and faithfully to pay
Tithes.

For as much as man is bound both by the law of God and man, to hear Divine
service and sermons, he ought not only to be present in body, but also in
spirit, and to gather up his spirits, that he may hear with understanding, and
carry away that, that may fr^ctifie in him, and nourish him unto eternal life:
keeping silence, and having his heart lifted up to God, considering of the high
mysteries revealed in his word, with great feruency and devotion praying
together with the congregation, and attentively hearing that which is delivered
unto him. They who have families, Householders ought to look that their
families keep the Sabbath.
children, men-seruants, and maids, they ought to be careful that they come
to Church, and that they spend the Sabbath days holily. In which thing many
Householders are faulty, and worthy of great reprehension; who shall render an
account to God for this negligence. These are the sins, which men are wont to
fall into more usually and commonly, and all these we ought to eschew with
great diligence. By this means we shall remain in innocence, and we shall
keep our garments white and clean, which Solomon commands: At all times,
Eccles. 9.
says he, let thy garments be white, and let not oil be lacking upon thine
head: Which is the unction of Divine grace, which yields light and courage in
every matter: and teaches us all good, for this is the fruit of this heavenly
oil.

Of other kind of sins, which because they seem small, therefore the world
makes no account to commit them.
ALbeit these sins aforesaid are more principal, from which we ought to fly
with special care and diligence, yet the raynes it not to be given to other
sins, which seem less unto us, and which we make no scruple to commit; yea,
I beseech thee by the bowels of Gods mercy, that thou be not of their
number, who when they hear that one sin is not so great as another,
forthwith run into it without any scruple or regard. Remember that saying of
the Wiseman: Eccle. 19.
He that contemns small things, shall fall by little and little into
greater. Remember that Proverb; For the want of a nail, the Iron shoe falls
off, and for the want of a shoe the Horse falls, and he perishes that
fitteth on him. The houses, that ruin threatens through age, first give a
token of their decay by the fall of some stone, or ^mall piece of timber, and
the ruin daily increasing, at length ^hey come topsey turuey down. Aug. in
his book of ye (...).
Very well says Saint Augu^^ne: Contemn not sins, because they be little;
but fear them, because they be many. For many times many little beasts kill.
Are not the co^^es of sand very small and little, but if plenty of them be put
into a ship, they drown it? How small are the drops of rain, and yet they
fill ra^ers, and cast down houses? Therefore the ruin of multitude, although
not of magnitude is to be feared. Greg. in his Pastorals.
This says Augustine. This is not only true, but also that, which Saint
Gregory says: Sometimes we sin worser in small things, then in greater. For
the greater because sooner they are known and acknowledged, are speedilier
amended: but the lesser, whilst they are supposed and held as no faults, are so
much the worser, by how much we more securely rest in them.

The hurt that the sins bring to the soul, which we make so small account of.
To be brief, although these sins seem small, yet they bring great hurt to
the soul: for they take away devotion, they trouble the peace of conscience,
they quench the heat of Charity, they weaken the heart, they take away the
strength of the mind, they corrupt the vigor of the spiritual life, and
lastly in their degree they resist the holy Ghost, and hinder his work in us.
Therefore we ought to eschew them with great endeavor: for there is not an enemy
so weak, but being contemned may hurt. In what things they are committed.
But if thou would know in what things these sins are committed, I say, in
a little anger or gluttony, or vain glory; in words, in idle thoughts, in
laughing, in trifling and toying beyond measure, in passing the time without
fruit or profit, in sleeping beyond compass, in small lies, in flattering
about light matters, and in such like things.

All these we ought to avoid, because they break the peace and league
between God and us, and dispoyle us of those blessings and virtues, that God
bestows upon us.

Of other shorter remedies against all kind of sins, but most especially
against the seven capital sins. CHAP. XII.
THE considerations hitherto set down are profitable for men, that they may
always have their minds well disposed, and sufficiently armed against all
kind of sins. But in the time of combat, that is, when any of those crimes
do tempt thine heart, these brief sentences may be profitable unto thee,
gathered of a certain religious man, and left unto us in writing: who thus
defended himself, when any sin did assault him. Against Pride he said; When
I consider of the exceeding humility, to which the most glorious son of God
cast down himself for me, I confess that no creature can do me so great
injury, that I do not think my self worthy of greater.

Against Covetousness, he said; When I understand that my soul cannot be
satisfied with any other thing, then with God alone; I judge it great folly,
to seek for any thing besides him.

Against Luxury, he said; When I meditate of that excellent dignity, which is
bestowed upon my body, that it is made the temple of God; it seems unto me a
great sacrilege to profane the temple, which is framed of him for himself:
which is done, if I coinquinate and pollute it with the filth of carnal sins.

Against Anger, he said; No injury done unto me of men, shall disturb or vex
me, if I remember mine own injuries, by which I have offended my God.

Against Hatred and Envy, he said; After that I have learned that God has
received into favor so great a sinner, as I am, I cannot wish ill to any one,
I cannot deny pardon of an offense to any body.

Against Gluttony, he said; He that considers of that most bitter gall and
vinegar, which in the midst of his torments was given to the son of God in
stead of his last refreshing, whilst he suffered for the sins of others, it
will make him ashamed to live delicately, seeing he is bound to suffer
something for his own sins.

Lastly, against Idleness, he said; As often as I think, that after these short
labors I shall have eternal glory, I think that all troubles and vvearines
is but small, which any one suffers for that everlasting rest.

Certain other kind of brief remedies, S. Augustine gives, against all kind
of vices; in which a certain show of temptation is set down before, and
presently after the consideration is annexed, by which the temptation is
repelled. Which remedies, because they seem profitable unto me, I will add
them to the precedent.

Therefore Pride first begins, and says.
Aug. in his book of the conflict of virtues and vices. Tom 9.
Thou art better then many, yea, almost then all; in tongue, in knowledge, in
riches, in honors, and thou excellest all in temporal and spiritual gifts.
Therefore despise all, and account thy self superior to all.

True humility answers.
Remember that thou art dust and ashes, that thou art corruption and a worm,
and if thou be any thing, unless thou humble thy self as much, as thou art
great, thou shall lose all that thou art. Art thou higher then the first
Angel? Art thou more glorious upon the earth, then Lucifer was in heaven? But
if he fell from so great height by pride, how will thou ascend by pride from so
low a degree to so great height, seeing that thou art holden at that stay so
long as thou live here.

Vainglory says.
Do the good thou can, show to every body the good thou do, that thou
may be called good of all, that thou may be reported of men holy and
venerable, that thou may be named the chosen of God, that no man may contemn
thee, that no man may despise thee, but that all may yield thee the honor due
unto thee.

The fear of the Lord answers.
If thou do any good, do it not for transitory, but for eternal honors.
Keep secret that thou do as much as thou can. But if thou can not keep
it secret altogether, have an intent to keep it secret, and so thou shall
escape the blame of ostentation; neither shall it be faulty in thee sometimes
to manifest that, which thou would have always kept in secrecy. So thou
shall fulfill these two sentences of our Redeemer, which seem contrary to
themselves, Math 6.
in which it is said: When thou do thine alms, let not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does, that thine alms may be in secret, and thy Father
which sees in secret, he will reward thee openly: And, Let them see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Counterfaiting of true Religion says.
Because thou do no good in secret, least thou being known of all be
detested, feign to be that outwardly, which inwardly thou desire not to be.

True Religion answers.
Yea, rather endeavor to be that thou art not: for to show that to men that
thou art not, what other thing is it then damnation? Therefore be mindful of
that which is said, Math, 23,
Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye make clean the
outside of the cup, and of the platter: but within they are full of bribery
and excess. Thou blind Pharisie, cleanse first the inside of the cup and
platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

Disobedience says.
Who art thou that obeyest worse then thy self, and attendest upon them that
are vilder then thou art? It is more meet that thou should rule then they,
who cannot equalize thee, either in wit or industry. Therefore rather obey the
rule of the Lord, and respect not others.

Blessed subjection answers.
If the Lords rule be to be obeyed, it follows of necessity, that we must be
subject to man's magistracy. For he has said: He that hears you, Luke, 10*
hears me: and he that despises you, despises me. So, thou say, that it
is meet; if he be such an one as he ought to be, but by such an one as he is
God rules not. But the Apostle speaks otherwise; Rom, 13,
There is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. For
what ones they ought to be that rule, is not to be discussed of the subjects.

Envy says.
In what thing art thou inferior to him or him? why therefore art thou not
equal or superior unto them? What great things can thou do, that they
cannot do? Therefore they ought not to be either thy superiors, or thine
equals.

Congratulation for thy brothers good answers.
If thou excellest others in virtues, it is safer for thee to keep thy self in
a low place, then in a high. For the higher the place is, the greater is the
fall. But if there be some, as thou affirmest, that are thy superiors or thine
equals, what does it hurt thee, what does it iniure thee? Beware least while
thou enuiest the height of others, thou imitate him, of whom it is written,
Through (...) of the devil (...) death into the world: Wisdom, 2,
and they that hold of his side, prove it.

Hatred says.
God forbid that thou should love him, who is contrary to thee in all
things, who derogateth from thee, who insulteth over thee, who vexes thee with
injuries, who casts thy faults in thy teeth, who always hastes to be before
thee in words, works, and honors: and unless he did envy thee, he would
never so prefer himself before thee.

True Charity answers.
Because these that thou reckonest up are worthy to be hated in a man, is not
therefore the image of God to be loved in man? As Christ being nailed upon the
Cross loved his enemies, and before his torments on the Cross admonished us,
saying; Love your enemies, Math* 5,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which hurt you and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your Father
which is in heaven. But thou say, It is sufficient that I love them that love
me. But the Lord speaks contrarily. For if ye love them, which love you, wh^^
reward shall you have? Do not the Publicans even the same? What art thou able
to object against this? Surely, He that hates his brother, abides in death:
and her that loves; abides in God, and God in him. Therefore cast forth all
the bitterness of gall, and as far as lies in thee, take unto thee the
sweetness of Charity. For there is nothing sweeter then it, nothing more
blessed. John the Evangelist auouching this, 1, John, 4,
says, God is Charity.

Detraction says.
Who can bear with, who can pass over in silence those great evils he
commits, unless perhaps he consent unto them?

The liberty of just and upright correction answers.
The faults of thy neighbor, are neither to be concealed, nor consented unto:
but in brotherly charity thy neighbor is to be reproved before his face, and
not privily and behind his back to be spightfully handled and reproched. But
if it be objected, I will not therefore reprehend my brother before his face,
least he being exasperated and vexed, should not profit by my reproof, but
rather take offense at my correction: the holy Scripture does meet with this,
and the case being altered tells thee, Psalm, 5*
that this is a greater offense, saying; Thou sattest and spakest against thy
brother: yea and have slaundered thine own mothers son. For he takes a
greater offense, who understands himself to be backbytten, then he that
sustaineth a reproouer. And because sometimes the faults of offenders are for
a time to be passed over in silence, that they may be reproved in a time more
fit and seasonable, therefore it is added. These things have thou done, and I
held my tongue. But least by this discreet silence detracters and backbyters
should applaude themselves, who whilst they had always rather privily
derogate and detract, and never come to open reproof; therefore he further
infers, And thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such an one as thy
self. As if he should have said, It is a wicked thought to think, that
therefore I am like unto a detracter, because I not derogating for a time
silence my self, expecting a fit place and time for open correction. Whereupon
this is foorth-with annexed, But I will reprove thee, and set before thee the
things that thou have done: As if he should have said, Not privily, as it is
thy custom, but openly, as it is my care, expecting a fit time of reproof,
will I reprove a sinner, that I may set his offenses before his face. But
thou say, I do not hate him, but love him, whom I so reprehend in priuitie.
Yea thou do so much the more hate him and not love him, because thou
detractest, and not correctest.

Anger says.
Those things which are done against thee, cannot patiently be borne, yea it is
a sin to suffer them: because if thou with great indignation do not
resist them, they with greater measure will be heaped upon thee.

Patience answers.
If the passion of our Redeemer be called to mind, nothing is so hard or
rough, 1, Peter, 2,
that with patience may not be borne. For Christ, says Peter, has suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. Math, 10,
For he himself says: If they have called the Lord of the house Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call them of his household? If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you. But how small are the things that we suffer,
in comparison of his passions? For he suffered reproaches, mockings, reuilings,
slanders, blows, spettings, whippings, the thornie crown, and the Cross;
and we wretches to our own confusion are wearied, vexed, and cast down at one
word.

Frowardnes and malapartnes says.
Are not rough and sharp words rather to be given to fools, to brutish and
insensible creatures, then gentle and mild speeches, when they offend?

Meekenes and gentleness answers.
Not thine own persuasion, but the precept of the Apostle is to be followed in
this, who as concerning this matter, has admonished his beloved disciple,
saying; Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a father, 1. Tim, 4,
and the younger men as brethren, the elder women as mothers, the younger as
sisters, with all pureness. And again; 2, Tim. 2,
The servant of the Lord, says he, must not strive, but must be gentle toward
all men: apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently, instructing them with
meekenes that are contrary minded. And gain, 2, Tim, 4,
Rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.

Swelling loftiness says.
Thy witness is in heaven, care not what men think or suspect by thee in
earth.

Humble satisfaction, which would willingly content all, answers.
Occasion of detraction, nor suspicion of surmizing is to be given: but if thou
be rightly accused or lawfully convinced, confess: but if unjustly, or
wrongfully, deny with an humble protestation: because the Apostle admonishes
that we should give no occasion to the devil by reason of ill report. Which is
detested in them, who consenting to the Christian faith, satte down to eat
meat sacrificed to Idols.

Sorrowfulnes says.
What have thou whereof thou may rejoice, when as so great evils are spoken
of thee? Consider how grievously they look, who are in such bitterness.

Spiritual joy answers.
I know that there are two kinds of sorrowfulnes, one which works to
salvation, the other to destruction: one which d^^weth to repentance, the other
which leads to desperation Thou art known to be one of them, but that which
works death. Therefore I am not to be heavy and sorrowful at these things,
as thou would persuade me, but contrarily I ought to rejoice for those
things, which yet are not understood; because the giver of everlasting joy
says, Math, 5.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of
evil against you for my sake, falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in heaven.

Drowsines or Idleness says.
If thou attendest reading and continual study, thine eyes will wax dim: if
thou pourest forth tears abundantly, thou will be blind: if thou give thy
self much to singing of Psalms, thou will catch the swimming of the head: if
thou spendest thy self with daily labor, how shall thou be enabled for
spiritual labor?

The exercise of virtue answers.
Why do thou use so vain excuses? and proposest unto thy self so frivolous
procrastination? Know thou whether thou shall live to morrow or no? Yea,
thou know not whether thou shall continue one hour in this life. Is it
slipped out of thy mind, what our Savior says in the Gospel, Watch therefore,
because ye know neither the day nor hour? Math. 25.
Wherefore shake off this slugishnes of thy body, and always remember, that
neither the tender, nor the effeminate, nor the slothful, nor the lukewarm,
but the violent and fervent do take hold of the kingdom of heaven.

Dissolute wandering says.
If thou beleeuest that God is every where, why do thou keep one place
above all other, where so many evils are committed, and rather go not unto
others?

Firm stability answers.
If it be so as thou affirmest, that God is every where, then this place where
I am is not to be left, which thou willest me to forsake, because God is also
in it. But thou say I seek for a better, and I find a better. I answer,
Shall thou find a better, or such an one, as thou know that the devil and
his angels and man have lost? Be circumspect therefore what thou do, for the
first angel fell from heaven, and the first man b^^^ng expelled out of
Paradise, came into the misery of this world.

Desperation says.
How many and how great be the faults and transgressions, which thou have
committed, and yet thou have not bettered thy life, neither have amended thy
conversation: for behold, as thou see, custom has so fettered thee, that
thou art not able to arise. Thou endeuourest to rise, but being ouer-loaden
with the burden of sins thou fallest down again. Therefore what will thou
do, seeing that certain damnation hangs over thee for thy sins past, and
no amendment comes for those that be present: unless thou beware that thou
lose not the pleasures of temporal delights, seeing that thou can not attain
the joys of the world to come?

The assurance of Hope answers.
If thou speak of crimes and transgressions, behold David guilty of adultery
and murder, freed and taken by the mercy of the Lord out of the jaws of hell.
Behold Manasses the wickedst, impurest, and vildest of all sinners, one of the
most damnable and detestable men that ever lived, by repentance returned from
death to life. Behold Mary Magdalen polluted and stained with innumerable
blemishes of sins, penitently running to the fountain of piety and mercy,
washing the feet of the Lord with her tears, and wiping them with her hairs,
and also kissing them, and annoynting them with ointment, she herself was
washed from her sins. Behold, Peter bound with the chains of his denial,
broke in sunder the knots of infidelity with his bitter tears. Behold the
thief that in the moment of one hour, passed from the Cross to Paradise.
Behold Saul persecuting the Church of God, slaying many for the name of
Christ, and as I may say, bathing himself in the blood of the Martirs, being
made an Apostle, was changed into a vessel of election. Therefore where so
many and so great examples go before, let no place be left for desperation:
seeing that it is written, At what time so ever a sinner repents himself and
turns (...) the Lord, Ezech. 18,
he shall be saved.

Covetousness says.
Thou art altogether without fault, in that thou desire (...) possess those
things thou have, and wishest some things thou have not, not because thou
greedily desire to multiply much, but because thou fear to want, and that
another man keeps ill, thou spendest better.

The contempt of the world answers.
These things are not procured of the men of this world without danger and
offense, because by how much every man begins to possess more, by so much
he coueteth to have more: and it comes to pass that he has no measure in
coveting, whilst he posteth to engorge himself with the infinite cares of this
world. Eccles. 5.
For as the Scripture says, A covetous man shall never be satisfied with money.

Gluttony says.
God has made all clean things for our feeding: and he that refuses to be
satisfied with meat, what other thing does he, then contradictorily deny a gift
given him?

Temperance answers.
One of these which thou namest is true. For least man should pine and dye
through hunger, God has created all things for his feeding: but least he
should exceed measure in eating, he has also commanded to him abstinence.
For amongst other evils, Sodom especially perished by fulness of bread: the
Lord testifying it, who speaks to Jerusalem by his Prophet, saying. This was
the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Ezech. 16.
fullness of bread. Wherefore, as a sick man comes to Physic, A similitude.
so every one should come to feed on dainties, that is, not seeking for
pleasure in them, but relief of necessity.

Vain foolish mirth says.
To what end do thou hide the joy of thine heart within thee? Walk merrily
abroad and frolic, make thy self and thy neighbors laugh, make them merry
with thy mirth.

Moderate sadness answers.
From whence have thou this mirth? Have thou already overcome the devil? have
thou already escaped the pains of hell? Do thou now return out of
banishment into thy Country? have thou already received security of thine
election? Or have thou forgotten that which the Lord said; The world shall
rejoice, 1, John, 16,
and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy? Or has it
slipped out of thy memory, which the same Lord says in another place, Luke. 6.
W^e be to you that now laugh, for ye shall (...) weep.

Many words and much babbling says.
He is not faulty that speaks many words, so they be good: (...) he that
speaks few, and those ill.

Discreet (...) answers.
It is true that thou say, but whilst many good words are uttered, it often
happens that the speech begun of good words, often ends in ill. This the
holy Scripture tells; In (...) ^^rds there cannot want iniqu^ty. Is it
possible that in many words there should be none faulty? But can idle and
unprofitable words be avoided, of which thou art sure to render an account
hereafter?

Luxury says.
Why do thou not wallow thy self in pleasure, seeing that thou know not
what will become of thee? Therefore thou ought not to lose the time allotted
unto thee, in want, because thou know not how soon it may fade away. For if
GOD would not have had man no take his pleasure with woman, at the beginning
he would have only created male, and not female.

Undefiled Chastity answers.
I would not have thee to said thy self ignorant, what shall become of thee
after this life. For if thou live religiously and chastely, thy joy shall be
without end: but if thou leadest thy life irreligiously and luxuriously, thou
shall be tortured with eternal pains.

Spiritual fornication says.
Does he do any thing damnable, who consents to lust, in his heart, and does
not effect the deed of his desired lust?

Cleannes and purity of heart answers.
He offends very deeply that keeps not purely the cleannes and chastity of
his heart. Wher-vpon the Author of cleannes and chastity says in the Gospel,
^ath. 5,
Whosoever looks on a w^m^n to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already i^ his heart. I^b, 31,
To avoid, this holy Job says: I made a covenant (...) ^i^e eyes, that I
should not think on a maid.

The love of this world says.
What can be more beautiful, honest, or delectable, then that we daily behold
in this present life? O how admirable i^ the glorious vaute of heaven in the
tralucent air, in the light of the Sun, in the increase and decrease of the
Moon, in the variety and course of the stars: how delightful is the earth,
in the flowers and flourish of vvoods, in the sweetness of fruits, in the
pleasantnes of meddowes and rivers, in the ripenes and plenty of corn, in the
fruitfulnes of Vineyards laden with clusters of Grapes, in the shades and
chaces of woods, in the running and coursing of Horses and Dogs, in the
skippings and iumpings of Hearts and Goats, in the flying of Hawks, in the
necks and feathers of Peacocks, Doves, and Turtles, in the painted walls and
carved roofes of houses, in the sweet and pleasing sounds and tunes of Organes,
and all music, in the beautiful aspects of women, in their foreheads, in
their hair, in their eyes and cheeks, in their lips and necks, in their nose
and hands, and especially if they be beautified and adorned with gold and
precious stones, with Bracelets, Ouches, Carcan^ts, and Tablets, and such other
Ornaments, which I cannot in any wise reckon?

The love of the heavenly Country answers.
If these things delight thee, which are under heaven, if the prison be so
beautiful, what is the Country, the City, and the house? If they be such and
so excellent, which the strangers enjoy, what be they which the children
possess? If they that be mortal and miserable, be so rewarded in this life,
how are they that be immortal and blessed, enriched in that life. Wherefore
let the love of this present world go, where none is so borne, that he does
not dye: and let the love of the future world come in the place, where all so
live and are revived, that they dye no more. Where no adversity disturbeth, no
necessity pincheth, no grief disquieteth, but everlasting joy reigns and
remains for ever and ever. If thou demaundest what is there, where there is
such and so great felicity? it cannot be answered otherwise, but that
whatsoever good is, that is there: and whatsoever evil is, that is not there.
Thou ask, what that good is? Why do thou ask me? It is answered thee of
a Prophet and of an Apostle. Esaias, 46.
The things, which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, 1, Cor. 2.
^eyther h^th entr^d into m^ns heart, has God prep^red for them that love him.

The conclusion of the first part of the second book.
Whatsoever has hitherto been spoken of us, has this ^yme, that it may move
us, to have always our spiritual weapons in a readiness; which are necessary
for us in this warfare, for the attaynement of the first part of virtue, which
is the flying and eschewing of vices: and to defend this frail house of ours,
in which God has placed us, least it should be surprised of enemies. For if we
shall faithfully keep this Mansion and Habitacle, there is no doubt, but that
heavenly guest will turn in unto it, and will lodge and dwell in it: Seeing
that Saint John says: 1, John, 4.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
But he dwells in love, who does nothing contrary to love: and the opposition
and contrary to love is only sin. And against this sin all that fights
and warreth, which hitherto has been spoken of us.

The end of the first part of the second Book.
THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SINNERS GVYDE.
In which we entreat of the exercise of Virtues.

Of the three kind of Virtues, in which the whole sum of Christian
righteousness is contained. CHAP. XIII.
SEeing that in the former part of this Book we have spoken largely and
sufficiently of sins, by contagion of which our souls are polluted and
obscured; now we will entreat of Virtues, which beautify them with spiritual
graces, and adorn them with the ornaments of righteousness, making them seem
fair and beauteous in the sight of the Divine Majesty. Even as it pertains
unto justice to give to every one that is his own, The duties of justice.
and belongs unto him; that is, to God, to our neighbor, and to our selves: so
also there are three kinds of virtues, pertaining to righteousness and justice,
and which concur to the effecting and perfecting of it. One is, by which we
render to GOD, that which is due unto him; the second is, by which we give to
our neighbor, that which is his; and the third, by which man is bound unto
himself. When man has attained these three kinds of virtues, nothing is
further required, to fulfill all that righteousness, which he professes. But
if thou would learn in few words, and very summarily how this may be
brought to pass, I will tell thee: by this triple duty and bond, man shall
repay most exactly all his debt; Note.
that is, if toward GOD he has the heart of a son, toward his neighbor the
heart of a mother, and toward himself the heart and spirit of a Judge. These be
the three parts of justice or righteousness, in which the Prophet teaches that
all our good consists, Miche. 6,
when he says; I will show unto thee, o man what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee: surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and humbly to walk
with thy God. For of these three kinds of duties, the first belongs unto us,
namely, to do justly: the second to our neighbor, to love mercy: and the
third to God, which the words of the Prophet declare, when he says, humbly to
walk with thy God. Of these three kinds therefore in this last part we will
speak, seeing that all our good is contained in them.

Of the bond and duty of man toward himself. CHAP. XIIII.
SEeing that love rightly ordered in man begins of himself, we will begin
this matter from that member, which the Prophet has put in the first place,
that is, To do justly. Which pertayneth to the spirit and heart of the Judge:
and this duty man owes to himself. It is the part of a good Judge, to have
his province well composed and ordered. And because in man, The parts to be
reformed in man.
as in a little Commonwealth, two principal parts are to be reformed, that
is, the body with all his members and senses, and the soul with all her
affections and powers, it is necessary that these parts should be reformed,
and well ordered, according to the rule of Virtue, which we will declare in
this place. And so a man shall repay and render that he owes to himself.

Of the reforming of the body.
TO the reformation of the body first an orderly discipline of the exterior
man is required; that that may be observed, which Saint Augustine requires in
his rule: that is, that there be nothing in thy gate, in thy state, or in thy
sitting, or in thy clothing, that may offend any man's eyes: but that all things
be agreeable to thy profession. What manner of conu^rsation man ought to have.
Wherefore the servant of GOD ought especially to be careful, that his
conversation amongst men be grave, humble, sweet, and courteous, that as many as
do converse with him, may always be edified, and may daily be bettered
through his good example.

The Apostle would have us to be a good savor, which may communicate and
participate his sweet smell to every thing that it partaketh with. The hands
which have handled any fragrant and odoriferous thing, participate of the
smell: so the words, the deeds, the iestures, and the conversation of the
servants of God ought to be such, that what man soever uses them familiarly,
may be edified; and after a certain manner be sanctified by their examples and
conversation. The first fruit of this modesty.
This is the especiallest fruit, which springs of this modesty: which is as
a silent Preacher: for not by the noise of words, but by the examples of
virtues he inuiteth man to glorify GOD, and to embrace Virtue. Wherefore also
our Savior himself stirs us up unto this, when he says; Math, 5,
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. To whom agrees Esaias, when he says;
that the servant of the Lord is like to beautiful vvood, planted of God,
which whosoever sees, will glorify the Lord.

We must here observe, that a man ought not therefore to do good works, A
caution.
that he may be seen: but as Saint Gregory says, Good works are so to be
done in public, that the intent may remain in secret: that by our good
works we may give an example to our neighbor, and by our intent to please
God only, we may always wish that they may remain secret.

The second fruit of this composition and orderly disposition, is, The second
fruit.
that the exterior man is the best keeper of the interior, and notably
preserves devotion: for between either man there is a great confederacy, and
near league; that that which is done of one, is forthwith communicated to the
other: and the course being altered, that which this does, he communicates it
to the other: that if the spirit be well disposed, immediately the body is well
composed; and contrarily, if the body be ill ordered, the spirit also puts
on the same habit. So that one of the^ is as it were the glass of the other.
For even as whatsoever thou do, A similitude.
that also the glass opposed to thee does imitate: so also whatsoever either
of these two men does, forthwith one of them imitateth it: and therefore the
outward modesty and gravity much helps the inward: and surely it is a matter
of great wonder, to find a modest and a quiet spirit, in an immodest and
unquiet body. Ecclus, 19,
Hence it is that Ecclesiasticus says; He that is too hasty in his gate,
shall offend. Insinuating by this kind of speaking, that those to whom that
gravity is wanting which becomes Christians, do often stumble, and fall
through many defects, as they who lift up their feet too lightly, when they
go.

The third fruit.
The third fruit of this virtue is, that by it a man preserves that grave
authority, which is agreeable both to his person and place, especially if he
be a man seated in dignity: as holy Job kept his, as he testifies of himself,
saying: The light of my countenance did not fall to the earth. Job, 29*
And a little before; When I went out to the gate, even to my judgment seat,
and when I caused them to prepare my seat in the street. The young men saw
me and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up. The Princes stayed
talk, and laid their hand on their mouth. The voice of Princes was hid, and
their tongue cleaued to the roof of their mouth. So great was their reverence
toward Job. Which gravity, that it might be free from all pride, this holy man
had joined unto it so great courtesy, that he says of himself, that sitting
in his throne as King, his Princes and people standing about him, he ceased not
to be an eye to the blind, In the same chapter.
a foot to the lame, and a father unto the poor. We must here note, that as
benignity and courtesy, and the good carriage of the outward man is
commendable, so to affect company and society too much, too much to care for
the furniture and accoustrements of the body, too much to cherish and make of
the exterior man, is faulty and immoderate. Wherefore Ecclesiasticus says:
Eccl^s, 19,
A man's garment, and his excessive laughter, and going declare, what person he
is. Like to this is that which Solomon said; Prou, 27,
As the face of the lookers are beheld in the waters: so the hearts of men are
manifested to the wise; by exterior works.

These be the commodities, which this modesty brings with her, and certainly
they be very great. Neither is it a thing that should delight any man, to love
too much the familiarity and company of men, to be too familiar and populer,
which many men do, that because they would not be taken for hypocrites, they
laugh, they utter many vain and idle words, they show themselves dissolute
and careless in all their conversation: and therefore they are deprived of all
these commodities. For as a learned man says: No man ought to violate the
laws of abstinence for the fear of vainglory: neither is it meet, that for
the opinion of the world, a man should leave to be abstinent. For even as one
vice is not to be restrained or repressed by another, so no man ought to start
back from virtue, for the censure of the world.

This is that which especially and generally pertayneth to the modesty of the
exterior man in all places, and at all times. But because this modesty is most
chiefly required at feasts and banquets, we will speak more largely of it
in the Chapter following.

Of the virtue of Abstinence.
THat we may prosecute the matter begun of the reformation of the body, The
body ought to be h^ndled ^usterely.
I say that it is more meet and convenient that the body should be handled
with rigor and sharpnes, then with daintines and delicacie. For even as a dead
body is preserved by Mirrh, A similitude,
which is bitter, otherwise it would putrify and breed worms; so also our
flesh is corrupted through delicacies and effeminacy, and brings forth vices;
which otherwise by austerity is kept in the duty of virtue. Therefore in this
place we will handle Abstinence, which is one of the principal virtues, which
are necessary to the attainment of others. It is very true, that it is a most
difficult thing to attain it, by reason of the rebellion of our corrupt nature
against it. Albeit therefore that we have before sufficiently spoken of
gluttony, so that the condition and excellency of this virtue of abstinence may
be understood: for he that knows one of the contraries, knows also the
other; seeing that there is the same reason of contraries: yet for the more
manifestation of this doctrine, I account it worth the labor to entreat
peculierly of it: teaching how this virtue may be gotten, and how exercised.
Therefore beginning to speak of modesty, Rules to be observed in eating.
which ought to be observed at the table, I say that Ecclesiasticus teaches it
after a singular manner in these words; Ecclesi. 31.
Eat modestly that which is set before thee, and devour not, least thou be
hated. Leave thou of first for nurtures sake, and be Certainly this rule is
very well fitting a morrall life, and is worthy of that wise man, who would
have us keep this order. The very same doctrine Saint Bernard Bernard in his
Epistles.
The measure, time, quantity, and quality of the meat, says he, is to be
observed; superfluities also are to be avoided, and artificial and new fangled
sauces. The measure is to be observed, that he that eats do not pour forth
his soul upon every dish. The time, not before the hour. The quality, such as
our brethren eat, if infirmity does not will otherwise. This is the rule of S.
Bernard.

The rule which Saint Gregory delivers in his Morrall Greg. in the 2* book
of his Morals.
does not differ much from this. That says he is Abstinence, which preuenteth
not the hour of eating, as ^^d Ionathas in his honey comb: which seeks not
to eat dainties, as the Israelites in the Wilderness; not deliciously prepared,
as the sons of Ely in Silo; not to superfluity, as the Sodomites; not every
vild and base meat, as Esau in his hunger cared not what it was so he had it.
Hitherto be the words of S. Gregory.

A similitude.
on every side vieweth it, so they sit musing and consulting with themselves,
of what meat they should begin, that they may go the currantlier through all.
All this inciuility he ought to avoid that eats, and in eating he ought to
see what he eats, and that with modesty, less he pass the bonds and limits
of honesty and ciuility, and offend those that sit at meat with him.

And although at all times we ought to come to meat with this ciuility, yet
especially when hunger does more provoke us, and delicates do stir up our
appetites: for then there are greater motives of gluttony, both in respect of
the good disposition of the organ of tasting, and in respect of the excellency
of the object. Then let a man diligently take heed, least in this case his
ravenous gullet persuade him, that he is so hungry, that he thinks that he is
able to devour both the meat and the trenchers. Therefore a learned man very
well callet^ this ravening gluttony a deceitful counterfeit to the belly:
Gluttony a deceitful pretender of y^ which is not.
for when the belly is satisfied, this still cries out that it wants, that it
has not enough. He calls it also a seducer of the eyes, receiving a little,
but in conceit provoking to devour all. At the first when a man begins to
eat, he supposes that he is more hungry, then he is in very deed: and
therefore he thinks that he can devour all; but a little after being
satisfied with a small pittance, all this appetite is gone.

Against this evil, when thou come to the table, remember the saying of a
certain Philosopher, Epictetes.
that two guests are to be refreshed of thee, that is, the body and the soul:
the body by receiving meat; but the soul, by taking it temperatly and
soberly, not for pleasure and satiety, but according to the prescript rule of
temperance, for even as the body is satisfied and filled with meat, so the
soul is refreshed with this sobriety and parsimony, as with virtue.

No less remedy against gluttony is it, if any one would weigh in equal
balance all the fruits of abstinence, with the short pleasure of ravenous
gurmandizing: then he should manifestly see, how unjust and how unequal a
thing it is to lose such excellent fruits, for so momentany and perishing a
pleasure. But that thou may more evidently understand this, thou must know
that among the five corporal senses, The touch and the taste are the ignoblest
senses.
that the touch and the taste are the ignoblest: for there is not a living
creature in all the world, although most imperfect, which is not endued with
these two senses: although there be many, which have not the other three, the
sight, the smelling, and the hearing: and as these two senses are most gross
and material, and vnworthier then the rest; so the delights, which are derived
from them, are baser, and more beastly; seeing there is found no living
creature, which does not enjoy them.

The ple^sure of the taste short.
These delights are not only most vild, but also exceeding short: for they do
no longer delight, then the object is materially joined with the organs and
instruments of the senses; as we see in the pleasure of the taste, which does no
longer endure, then the meat touches the palate; from the which as soon as
it is separated, all the delight fades and perishes. Wherefore seeing that
this pleasure is so beast-like and short; what man will be so sottish, and so
like to brute beasts, that will abandon the virtue of abstinence (of which so
great things are spoken, and so excellent fruits do arise) for so vild, so
abject, and so unworthy a pleasure.

This one thing ought to be sufficient to restrain this appetite. And much
more, if other reasons also be brought hither, which make us bound to
abstinence. Therefore, as we have said, let the servant of the Lord hang up the
balance, and in one balance let the shortness and profit of this pleasure be
put: and in the other the beauty of abstinence, with the fruits, which come of
it: the examples also of the Saints, and the labors of Martirs, who have gone
to heaven through fire and water; the memory of sinners with the pains of
hell, and in each consideration he will say, that the cross is to be embraced,
and the flesh to be afflicted, that gluttony is to be avoided, and that God is
to be satisfied with the sorrows of repentance for the pleasure of the fault.
If thou shall come thus prepared to the table, thou shall see, how easy a
thing it shall be unto thee to renounce all these pleasures and delights.

Wine immoderatly taken how dangerous.
If all this provident circumspection be necessary in eating, much more is it
required in drinking of wine: for amongst all those things, that are opposed
to chastity, there is nothing more contrary unto it then wine: for it fears
wine as a capital enemy. Therefore the Apostle very well admonishes us,
Ephesi. 5.
Be (...) drunk with wine, wherein is excess: Which is so much the more
dangerous, by how much the youthful blood is more heated and boiled. For wine
and youth, as says Saint Jerome, are two fires of pleasure. In an Epistle to
Eustochium of keeping virginity.
Why do we cast oil into the flame? why do we minister fuel to a fire
flaming? For seeing that wine is most hot, it inflameth all the humors and
all the members of the body, but especially the heart, whether it directly
goes: and in the heart is the seat of all our affections: which being inflamed
by the strength of wine, for every light matter there arises great joy,
anger, fury, love, rashness, delight, and other like perturbations. Wherefore it
appears, that seeing that it is the chiefest duty of moral virtue, to
moderate and mitigate the misgouernment of these perturbations, that wine is
of an opposite nature, and does all things contrarily. For by the vehemence of
this heat that is again revived, which by virtue was mortified: and that
quickened, which before was extinct. Therefore a man must very carefully abstain
from drinking too much wine. From bibbing of wine are wont to proceed
unmeasurable laughter, superfluous iering, ostentation, contention, clamours,
revealing of secrets, and other like vices. For then the perturbations of the
mind be greater, and the reason is obscured through the vapors of wine. Here
also occasion is offered to pass the bonds of decency, that thou may please
the company who sits with thee, and with whom thou drinkest. All these and
many other discommodities come from too much drinking of wine. Wherefore very
excellent well a certain Philosopher said, The Vine brings forth three kind
of Grapes.
that the vine brigeth forth three kind of Grapes, one of necessity, another
of delight, and the third of fury: by which kind of speech he would intimate
unto us, that to drink a little wine does serve our natural necessity;
somewhat to exceed measure, is more for delight, then necessity; but to keep no
mean nor measure, is the cause of fury and madness. And therefore whatsoever a
man does at that time, ought worthily to be suspected: for then after our
common manner of speaking not only reason has no place in man, which lies
buried; but also the heat of wine rules and reigns in him, which is a very
bad counsaylour. Wine a very bad counsayler. Much talk to be avoided.


No less also a man ought to abstain from much talk, and from contention and
altercation at the table, who after he is risen from the table, would be free
from all danger. For oftentimes this disputation begins in peace, but ends
in war. And oftentimes in the heat of wine a man speaks that, which
afterward he wishes that he had kept in: wherefore Solomon says; Prou, 31,
Where drunkenness reigns, there are no secrets kept. And albeit at that
time all superfluous talk, and vain multiplying of words is worthily to be
reprehended, yet much more that, that a man speaks of eating and drinking, in
praising the wine, fruits, fishes, or any other thing that he eats or
drinks: or in discoursing of the diversity of these and those country meats,
or of the fishes of this and that River: for all such speeches are tokens of
the mind of an intemperate man, who is willing to spend the whole course of
his life in devouring and gurmadizing, not only with his mouth, but also with
his heart, and understanding, with his memory, and words.

But he that sits at meat, ought especially to take heed, that he eat not
the life of his neighbor: for this pearceth deeply, and teareth the bowels of
a man. This according to S. Chrysostom, is not to eat the flesh of other
creatures, but of men: which is contrary to all humanity. Possidonius
testifies of S. Augustine, that to banish this vice from his house, which is
too familiar at every man's table, he commanded that in his dining Chamber this
distic^^on should be written; In the life of August. chap, 22. Jerome in an
Epistle to Furia.
Who so detracteth him that is absent,
At my table shall be no more present.


Here is to be noted also that which S. Jerome admonishes: A spare diet, says
he, and a belly always hungry, is to be preferred before a fast of three days
continuance. And it is much better, every day to take a little, then sildome to
take enough. That rain is the best, A similitude.
that mildly showreth upon the earth. A sudden and a violent rain, hurts
the Meddowes, and destroys the Corn. When thou eatest, think that thou
lyuest not to feed thy belly; but that thou must pray, and forth-vvith read,
or study or some other good work is to be done, for which thou art unfit, if
thou burdenest thy stomach beyond measure. Wherefore, when thou come to
eat or drink, d^ not respect how much thy mouth delights to eat, but how
much is sufficient for thy life, and to sustain thy necessity.

We do not say, that thou should kill thy self through fasting, but that
thou should not pamper thine appetite f^rther, then the use of thy life
requires. For thy body, as the bodies of all other living creatures,
necessarily requires nourishment, that it faint not: but thou must beware,
that through superfluity of nourishment thou surfeit not. Hence Bernard: The
body says he, Bernard in his Epistles.
is to be handled severely, that it rebel not, that it wax not proud; yet
so, that it may be of sufficient strength to serve: because it is given to
serve the spirit: let thy flesh be restrained, not consumed: let it be pressed,
but not oppressed: let it be humbled, that it grow not insolent, and let it
serve, and not rule. Hitherto of the virtue of Abstinence.

Of the keeping of the Senses.
AFter that we have chastened and reformed our bodies, according to the rule
delivered, it is necessary also, that we should reform the senses of our
bodies; in which thing the servants of God ought carefully to watch, and to use
especial heed and warines, least their eyes, which are as wide gates, by
which all vanities enter into us, which pierce even to our souls, and often
are the windows of our perdition, by which death enters, least I say that
they wander and stray abroad too licenciously. But especially they that attend
prayer, ought warily to keep this sense: At the time of prayer, the eyes are
especially to be kept.
both that chastity may be preserved, and the heart being fixed, may attend his
deuoier. Otherwise, the images and shapes of things, which enter into us by
this gate, do leave many painted toys and fancies behind them, which hinder
us when we pray or meditate: and they make us scarcely think of any other
thing, then of that impression they have left. For this cause devout religious
men have been so careful to moderate their sight, that not only they have not
seen those things which might harm them; but they have avoided costly
buildings, ^rtificiall pictures, and precious and curious works: that they
^ight have their imaginations pure and free at that ti^e, when ^hey were to
deal with God. For this exercise is such, and so ^elicate, that it is not
only hindered through sins, but also ^^rough the representation of those
things, which of themselves (...) not evil.

The care and watch of the ears is no lesser, The ears are to be kept.
then that of the (...); for by these gates oftentimes those things enter into
our souls, which do hinder and disturb them, destroy and pollute them. We
must not have our ears only shut to hurtful matters, but also to the flying
brutes and rumors of this world, which nothing concern us. For he that
bewareth not of these things, o^^entimes when he would gather his spirits
together more firmly to meditate on God and heavenly things, his heart is so
troubled with the remembrance of things heard, that they do not suffer him
rightly to meditate.

Smelling.
Of smelling I have not much to say; seeing that to carry about strange and
outlandish smells, and fumigations, or to be delighted with them, besides that
it is the property of lascivious and sensual men, it is also infamous, not
only for men, but also for honest and chaste women.

The taste.
Of the taste also something were to be added, but that we have already spoken
of it in the precedent Section, when we handled Abstinence.

Of the keeping of the tongue.
THE tongue is a copious theme to discourse of; for as the Wiseman says,
Ecclus, 18,
Death and life are in the power of the tongue. By which words it is manifest,
that all the good and ill of man consist in the good or ill keeping of this
member. Saint James the Apostle admonishes us of this watch and guarde,
saying; Behold, we put bits into the horses mouths, that they should obey us,
and we turn about all their body. James. 3,
Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of
fierce winds; yet are they turned about with a very small rudder, whither
soever the Governor lists. Even so the tongue is a little member, and
boasts of great things: behold, how great a thing a little fire kindles?
And the tongue is fire, yea a world of wickedness: so is our tongue set among
our members, that it defiles the whole body.

That we may govern and rule this member well, we must observe four things:
4. Things are to be observed in speaking.
that is, what is to be spoken, the manner how it is to be spoken, the time
when it is to be spoken, and the cause why it is to be spoken. First therefore
we will handle what is to be spoken: The matter is to be observed.
that is, the matter, which we would speak of* Wherein that of Paul is to be
observed; Let no corrupt com^^nication proceed out of your mouths: but that
which is good, to (...) use of edifying, Ephe, 4,
that it may minister grace to the hearers. And (...) another place, showing
more plainly what is corrupt communication, he says: But fornication, Ephe, 5,
and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as
it becomes Saints, neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither
jesting, which are things not comely.

Even as therefore Sailors are wont to have all dangerous places noted and
deciphered in their Mappes, A similitude.
by which their ships might be endangered and hazarded; that they may avoid
them: So the servant of God ought to have all kind of corrupt speeches noted
and set down, that he may not be endangered by them. Neither ought thou
to be less faithful and silent in these, which are commended unto thee, that
thou should conceal them, then the Sailors do, who knowing of a dangerous
Rock, are very wary not to discover it, least they should be ieoparded upon it.

In the manner of our speaking we must be circumspect, The manner is to be
observed in speaking.
that we speak not too finely and delicately, too unadvisedly, too affectedly,
too curiously, and with words too exquisite: but with gravity, leysurely, and
with gentleness, simple and plain words. Here he that speaks is to be
admonished, that he be not headstrong and obstinate, of their number that
would always overcome: for by this oftentimes the peace of conscience is
disturbed, charity, patience, and our friends are offended. It is the part of
a generous and noble mind, sometimes to give place, and in disputation to give
the victory to another. It is the part of wise and discreet men, to follow the
counsel of the VVise-man, who says, Ecclus, 32,
In many things be as one that is ignorant be as one that understands, and
yet hold thy tongue. If thou be among great men, compare not thy self unto
them, and when an Elder speaks, babble not much.

The third thing which ought to be observed, The time.
is the time: that is, Ecclus. 20.
that we speak in due time, for as the Wise man says; A wise sentence loses
grace when it comes out of a fools mouth, for he speaks not in due season.

The last is the end and intent, The intent of the speaker.
which we ought to have when we speak. For some speak good things, that they
may be counted Saints: others, that they may make boast of their eloquence and
subtilty of wit; the first is an hypocrite, and the other a vainglorious
bragart and a fool. Therefore he that speaks, ought to mark, that not only
his words are good, but also that the end be good, for which he speaks the^.
But then the end is good, when the glory of GOD, and the profit of our
neighbor are only sought. Also we must respect who speaks: whether a young
man amongst old men, an idiote among wise men, or a profane man among those
that be religious. To be brief, when the words of the Speaker are not heard,
silence may be laudably kept. All these things he ought to observe who
speaks, least he offend: and because all men are not able to observe all
these, therefore it is the safest remedy, to take refuge in the Haven of
silence: for by silence and sole cogitations, a man may satisfy all these
precepts. This is that the Wise man says, Even a fool when he holds his
peace, Prou, 17,
is counted wise.

Of the mortification of the affections.
AFter that we have thus ordered and reformed the body, with all the senses,
yet the greater part of business still remains: that is, the moderating of the
soul, with all her faculties and powers. And first of all the sensual
appetite offers it self, which comprehends and contains all the lusts
and carnal motions: as are love, hatred, mirth, mourning, lust, fear, hope,
indignation, and such like perturbations. This appetite is the ignobler part of
our soul, which makes us like unto beasts, which are led in all things by
their affections and appetites. This appetite makes us wax brutish, The evils
and mischiefs of our own will.
and mightily draws us to earthly things, whilst it withholds us a far
of from heavenly things. This is the vain, this is the fountain of all evils
and mischiefs, that are in the world, and the chiefest cause of our
destruction. Bernard in his third sermon of the resurrection of the Lord.
Therefore Saint Bernard said: Let thine own will cease and give place, and
there shall be no hell. For against who^ should that fire rage, but against
thine own will? For thine own will impugneth God, and is lifted up against
him. It is it that robs Paradise, and enricheth hell, that makes the blood
of Christ of none effect, The inferior part of the soul is to be watched and
kept
and subdueth the world under the jurisdiction of the devil. For in this part
is the shop and Storehouse of sin: for out of it sin draws strength and
armor, to wound more cruelly.

This is in us another Eve, which is the weaker part, and more inclined to the
inferior matters of our soul; by which the old serpent inuadeth our Adam,
that is, the superior part of our soul, in which the understanding and the
will is, inuiting it to lift up his eyes to the forbidden tree. This is that
part, in which original sin does especially show his strength, and in which
it hides the greater abundance of his poison. Here are fights, here are
fallings, here victories, and here crowns. Here I say, are fallings of the
weak, victories of the strong, crowns of the Conquerers: to be brief, here
is the whole warfare and exercise of virtue. For in taming and restraining this
cruel and fierce beast, a great part of the exercise of morrall virtues
consist. This is the Vineyard in which we must continually labor: and the
Garden which we must without intermission till. Here are sundry weeds and
noisome plants, which must be pulled up, that the young and tender sprigs of
Virtue may be grafted into their place. It behooves therefore the servant of
the Lord always to walk in this Garden with his weeding-knife in his hand,
with which he may cut up and eradicate the superfluous and pernicious plants,
which grow and spring up among the good: or that like a wise Leader and a good
Captain marching among these affections, he may restrain, guide, and direct
them, sometimes by enlarging, sometimes by brideling and plucking in the
raynes: that they may not wander as they list; but that they may be led and
guided according to the prescript and law of reason.

This is an especial exercise of the sons of God, The difference between
the sons of God, and the children of the world.
who are no more governed by the affections of flesh and blood: but by the
spirit of GOD. This is the difference between spiritual and carnal men: for
these are ruled by the lusts of the flesh, like brute beasts: the other are
moved by the spirit of God; and by reason. This is that mortification, and
laudable mirth, which the Scripture does often mention. This is that
mortification and sepulture to which the Apostle inuiteth us so often. This is
that Cross, and the denial of our selves, which the Gospel preaches unto
us. This is to do judgment and justice, which so often is repeated in the
Psalms and in the Prophets. Here all our strength is to be expressed; hither
our labors prayers, and exercises must be intended.

It is here also necessary that every one very well know and discern his own
disposition, and natural inclination: for in what part so ever he feels
chiefly this inclination, let him know that in that part he is most
endangered. And although we are continually to war with all affections, With
what affections we are especially to war.
yet especially we are to fight with the appetites of honors, pleasures, and
riches. For these be the three fountains, and veins of all evils. Let us
beware that we do not covet or desire always that our own will may be done,
and our own affections satisfied: for this is a most dangerous vice, most
powerful to cast a man out of his right wits, and to mad his mind. Which vice
is very common and familier to mighty and great men, and to those that are
accustomed to reign and rule over others. Wherefore it shall be very profitable
for them to exercise themselves in matters contrary to their appetites and
humors, and to deprive their will, yea of things lawful, that they may be
more prompt and ready to temper and moderate themselves in things unlawful.
For this exercise is no whit less required, that a man may as well be ready in
spiritual arms, as in carnal: yea, so much the more, as the victory is
greater and more difficult to conquer himself and the devil, then all other
things. We must also be exercised in humble and contemptible duties and
offices: and not aspire to dignities and honors: for the world can give
nothing, nor take away any thing from him, Note.
who has God for his inheritance, and his treasure.

Of the reforming of the Will.
TO the attainment of this fore-sayd mortification the moderating and reforming
of the superior will, which is the reasonable appetite, is much available:
which among others we ought to moderate and adorn with three holy affections;
as are, How the superior part of the soul is to be reformed.
Humility of heart, Poorenes of spirit, and an holy Hatred of our selves. For
these three do make the business of mortification very easy. Humility, as
Saint Bernard defines, is a contempt of our selves, which springs of a deep
and true knowledge of our selves. For it is the property of this virtue to cast
out of the soul all the branches, and all the daughters of Pride, with the
whole progeny of ambition; and to cast us down under all creatures, and to
think that any other creature, if so it were given unto him of God to work
well (as it is given unto us) would be much more grateful, and would bring
forth many more fruits, then we do. Neither is it sufficient that man has
this contempt of himself hid within him; but it is necessary, that it should
appear and show it self in his conversation, so that in all things as much as
may be he show himself most humble, according to the quality of his estate,
having no regard of the judgment and estimation of this world, which perhaps
opposes her self against him. Wherefore it is necessary, that all our actions
and affairs have a relish of humility and poverty; and that we submit our
selves for the love of God, not only to our elders and equals, but also to our
inferiors.

The second thing which is required in this place, is the poverty of spirit,
The poverty of spirit.
which is a voluntary contempt of the things of this world, and a mind content
with that estate, which is allotted of God, although it be mean and low. At
this stroke that root of all mischief is cut up, which they call covetousness,
and it brings to man so great peace and tranquillity of heart, Seneca in his
18. Epist.
that Seneca is not afraid to say; He that has his gate shut to the lust of
his desires, may for felicity contend with Jupiter himself. And in another
place; No man else is worthy of God, but he that has contemned riches. Has he
little, that chilleth not for cold, that hungreth not, that thirsts not?
Jupiter has no more. He has never little that has enough. This says Seneca.
By which words he intimates that the felicity of man consists in the satiety
and contentednes of the hearts desire. He that comes to this stayednes and
quiet of desire, he may say, that he is come to the height of felicity, or at
least has attained a great part of it.

The third affection is, an holy Hatred of our selves; of which our Savior
says, John, 12.
He that loves his life, shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto life eternal. Which doctrine is not to be
understood of a peevish and a perverse hate, as the desperate do hate
themselves: but it must be understood of an hate, which the Saints bear
toward their own flesh, as against a thing, which was the cause of many and
great evils, and which hindered much good: and therefore they handled it not
according to the will and lust of it, but according to the prescription of
reason; which commands, that we should often handle it, not as a Mistres,
but as a servant of the spirit; otherwise that of the Wiseman will happen unto
us; He that delicately brings up his servant, Prou. 29.
afterward shall find him obstinate and cont^macious.

Wherefore in another place we are admonished, that we should smite it with
clubs as an untamed beast, and bridle it; The yoke and the whip, Eccles. 33.
says Ecclesiasticus, bow down the hard neck: so tame thine evil servant
(that is thy body) with the whips and correction. Send him to labor, that he
go not idle: for idleness brings much evil. Send him to work, for that
belongs unto him: if he be not obedient, put on more heavy fetters. That he
insult not, nor wax proud, that he be not idle, and rush into open wickedness.
This holy hatred is much available in the business of mortification: that is,
it is very conducent to the mortifying and cutting away of our evil desires,
although it be hard and difficult. For without this hatred how can we make
incision, A similitude.
and draw forth blood, and grievously wound a thing so dearly beloved of us?
For the arm and strength of mortification gets valor not only from the
love God, but also from the hate of our selves: by virtue of which strength and
valor man does not excruciate his soul of passion, but as a severe Chirurgian
does cleanse and wipe away the corruption of a member affected and putrified.

Of the reforming of the Imagination.
AFter these two sensual faculties, there are other two, which pertain to
knowledge; (...) Imagination, and the Understanding; which answer to the two
former: that both of these appetites may have his guide, and knowledge
convenient and fit. Imagination, which is the ignobler of these two, is called
a power of our soul, greatly weakened through sin, and which is very haggard
to be subjected unto reason. For oftentimes as a fugitive servant, that
departs without license, it rusheth out of doors, and wandreth throughout the
whole world, before we understand where it is. It is a faculty also very
greedy, in excogitating or searching out any matter, which it has a desire to:
and it imitateth hungry dogs, A similitude.
who toss and turn all things vpside down, and thrust their snowt into every
dish, now lapping of this, now of that: and although they are beat from it,
yet always they return to their repast fore-tasted. This faculty also is very
glib and fleeting, The Imagination a wanderer and a fugi^iue.
as a wild and an untamed beast, flying very swiftly from one mountain to
another, least it should be taken and restrained: for it cannot abide a bridle
or a bit: neither is it willing to be governed or managed of man.
Notwithstanding this licenciousnes and natural wildnes, there are some, A
similitude.
that daily make it worser: as they, that bring up their children most
deliciously and daintily, permitting them to vage freely, whether so ever they
list, and to do whatsoever pleasure wills them, without any reprehension.
Wherefore when as man would, that this imagination should quietly persist in
the contemplation of Divine things, it is disobedient and immorigerous, because
it has accustomed to wander licentiously, neither acknowledges it any
moderation. Therefore it is needful that after we have acquainted our selves
with the bad conditions of this beast, that we restrain it, and that we bind
it to a cratch, that is, to the consideration of good and necessary things, and
that we command it perpetual silence in all-other things. So that, as a
little before we have bound the tongue, that it speaks not any thing, but
good words and to the purpose; so let us bind our imagination, that it may
remain and continue in good and holy cogitations, and to all other that we
shut the gate against it. Herein we are to use great discretion, to examine
what cogitations are to be admitted, and what to be excluded: that these may be
entertained as friends, and those expelled as enemies. They that are negligent
and remiss in this respect, do let oftentimes those things enter into their
souls, which do not only take away the devotion and fervor of the spirit,
but also charity and love, in which the life of the soul consists. Whilst
Isboseth the son of Saul slept on his bed, 2, Kings, 4.
his murdering servants came in upon him, slew him, and took away his head. In
like manner when as discretion lies slumbering, whose duty it is to purge and
sever the fruit from the chafe, that is, profitable and good cogitations from
the bad and hurtful, those oftentimes enter into the soul, which kill it, and
deprive it of life. This diligence is not only conducent for the preservation
of life, but to keep silence, and it much furthereth prayer. For an unquiet
and a troubled imagination, does not suffer a man to pray without variety of
cogitations, and vagaries of the senses: but that which is quiet, and reduced
into order, very easily perseuereth in prayer.

Of the reforming of the understanding, and of the duties of wisdom.
AFter that we have entreated of all the fore-sayd parts and powers of man, it
remains that we speak something of the excellentest and noblest of them,
which is the understanding: which amongst other virtues is to be adorned and
beautified, with the most rare and beautiful virtue of discretion and
wisdom. The duty and office of this virtue in a spiritual life has great
proportion with that, The duty and office of wisdom. Similitudes.
which the eyes are in the body, the Pilot in a ship, the King in his kingdom,
and the Charret-man in his Charret, who holding his whip in his right hand, and
the raines of the bridels in his left, directs and drives his Horses whether
he will. Without this virtue the spiritual life is altogether blind, Wisdom
the Captain and guide of other virtues.
disordered, and full of confusion. For this cause a certain excellent writer
does place this virtue in the first place, as the Captain and guide of all
others. Wherefore all the lovers of virtue before all things ought to cast
their eyes hither, and diligently behold this virtue, that they may proceed
with greater fruit in all others. This virtue not only has one duty and
office, but many, and those diverse: for it is not only a particular virtue, but
a general, which concurreth with the exercises of all virtues, conveniently
and fitly reducing and bringing them into order. According to this general
duty we will here speak of certain actions, which belong unto it.

The first duty of wisdom.
First and foremost it belongs unto wisdom (faith and charity being
presupposed) to direct all our actions to God, as to the last end: by examining
subtly and ingeniously the intent, which we have in working and acting: that
we may see, if we simply and purely seek God, or rather our selves. For the
nature of our own self-love (as a certain famous Doctor says) is very
subtle and full of fetches, and seeks it self in every thing, yea in the
noblest exercises.

It is also the duty of Wisdom, The second duty.
to know how to converse with thy neighbor without quarrel or complaint: to
help him, and not to offend him and scandalize him. It is needful therefore,
wisely to discover every man's vain, that is, every man's condition, and of what
spirit he is, and to lead and conduct him by those means, which are most
profitable for him.

It is wisdom, The third duty.
to know how to bear patiently other men's defects, and to dissemble them, not
to take knowledge of them, and not to search their wounds to the bones:
remembering that all humane affairs are composed of act and potentiall power,
that is, of perfection and imperfection: neither that it can be otherwise, but
that always there must be infinite imperfections and defects in man's life,
especially after that great and grievous lapse of nature by sin. And
therefore Aristotle says, that it is not the part of a Wiseman, in every
matter to seek for like certainty and demonstration. For some things may be
demonstrated, and some cannot: the truth and certainty of one thing may be
found out, which of another thing cannot. In like manner it is not the part of
a wise man, to look that all the affairs of man should be peysed in a like
balance, neither that any thing should be wanting, for some things can carry
this, and somethings cannot. He that stiflie urges the contrary, perhaps shall
more hurt those means, that he works by, then he shall profit by the end he
intends, albeit the thing take effect according to his mind.

It is wisdom, The fourth duty.
if a man know himself, and all things within him: that is, all his senses,
cogitations, evil appetites, and his sinister intents, to be brief, his own
ignorance, and his small virtues: that his soul be not puffed up with vain
glory, to presume any thing of it self rashly: and that he may better
understand, with what enemies he is continually to war: until he has cast
them all out of the land of Promise, that is, out of his soul. It is also
wisdom to consider with what great diligence a man ought to prosecute and
attend this work.

It is wisdom, The fifth duty.
to be able to govern the tongue according to the prescript of Gods law, and
the circumstances before remembered. To know also what is to be spoken, and what
to be concealed, with their due times and seasons. For as Solomon says,
Eccles, 3,
There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak. For it is certain,
that a wise man may with greater praise hold his peace, then speak, at the
table, at bankets, and at such like places and oppertunities. It is wisdom
also, not to believe every body: not forthwith to pour forth all the spirit
in the beginning and heat of disputation; neither to speak rashly, or give
judgment on a sudden what he thinks of matters: for Solomon says: A fool
utters all his mind at once, Prou, 29.
but a wise man keeps it in till afterward. Eccles, 8.
He that trusts him, whom he ought not to trust, shall always live in
danger, and shall always be his slave, who^ he has trusted, and concredited
himself unto.

It is wisdom, if a man has learned to foresee a far of dangers coming;
The 6* duty
to diminish blood in the time of health, and to discern war a far of.
That is, to prevent and turn away the difficulty or strife, that might grow
of this or that matter, and to avoid all evil by prayers, or such like
remedies. This is the counsel of Ecclesiasticus when he says, Ecclus: 18.
Before the grief be grown, use Physic. Therefore, when thou art to go to
bankets, or to any solemnity, when thou art to have business with litigious or
contentious men, or with those of a perverse disposition: or if thou art to go
to any other place, where perhaps thou may be endangered, always come
advisedly thither, and prepared for all things which may happen.

It is wisdom, The 7. duty
to know how to handle the body with discretion and temperance, that it neither
be nourished too delicately, nor be killed through hunger. That we neither
withdraw necessary things from it, neither that we give it that which is
superfluous: that we carry it about chastised, but not almost dead: that
through too much weakness it faint not in the way, nor that through too much
abou^dance it grow restie and iadish, and cast the ryder.

It is wisdom, The 8. duty
moderately to labor and exercise, least through the grieuousnes of the burden,
the spirit (whose turn all exercises ought to serve) be oppressed: that so we
apply our selves to outward things, that we lose not the inward: and so intend
the love of our neighbor, that we do not lose the divine love. For if the
Apostles themselves, Acts, 6,
who had great measure of Gods Spirit, and great strength, sufficient to carry
out all matters, did disburthen themselves of matters of lesser moment, that
they might not fail nor faint in greater: no man ought so to presume of his
own strength, that he should think himself sufficient for all things:
seeing that many times comes to pass, which is wont to be said, A mind that
in all things makes assayes,
Performs particulers by delays.
And that he that follows two Hares, catches neither.

It is wisdom, The 9. duty
to observe the crafts and subtle deceits of the old enemy: to observe his
out-roades and in-roades, and all his stratagems; not to believe every spirit,
neither to be deceived by any appearance and glozing of that which seems good.
For oftentimes the Angel of satan transformeth himself into an Angel of
light, and always endeavors to deceive the good by some semblance and show
of good. No man hurts more, then he ye hurts under the show of piety.
Therefore in no danger we ought to be more careful of our selves, then in
that, which is offered unto us under the vizard and disguise of Virtue. For by
this kind of deceit and imposture, they for the most part are tempted, who are
accustomed to work well, and to bring forth good fruits.

To conclude, The tenth duty.
it is wisdom, to know how to march forward, and how to retire: to know
when it is expedient to overcome, and when to be overcome: and especially to be
able to contemn the judgment of the world, the censures of the vulgar sort,
and to pass by with a deaf ear, the barkings of most vild dogs: who
always bark and bawle without a cause, and to remember that of Paul, Gala, 1,
If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Surely, this is
most true, that a man cannot do any thing more foolishly, then to suffer
himself to be ruled and governed by a beast of so many heads, as the common
people is: which have neither judgment, nor knowledge in those things which
they speak. It is a very good thing, and very meet to give no offense to any
body: to fear that which is to be feared, and not to be carried about with
every wind: for to find a mean in these extremes, is the part and duty of
singular wisdom.

Of the wisdom, which concerns the practice and effecting of things.
Wisdom is also necessary in acting and effecting matters, least we fall into
errors, which afterward are not amended but with great difficulty: whereby
oftentimes the peace of the conscience is lost, and the order of life is
disturbed. In which matter, these counsels that follow may bring us some
help. Of the first of which the Wiseman says: Let thine eyes behold that
thing that is right, Prou. 4.
and let thine eye lids look straight before thee. By which words the Wiseman
counsayleth us, that we should do nothing inconsideratly and unadvisedly: what
things are required for this wisdom.
but that we should long deliberate, and act things by nature and ripe
deliberation. For which purpose five aduices are necessarily required. First,
in self opinion, Four stepdames of wisdom.
and vain Foolishnes. For Praecipitation and headlong rashness deliberateth
not, Passion blinds, Obstinacy shuts the gate to good counsels, and
vain Foolishnes whatsoever deliberation it enters into, destroys and
contaminateth it.

It belongs also to this virtue, to fly extremities, and to keep a mean.
Virtue hates extremes.
For virtue and truth refuse extremes: and do fix their seats in a mean.
All things are never to be reprehended together, all things are never to be
allowed together:

And it is a rule of wisdom, in judging of things, not to respect either the
^ntiquity, or the newnes of them, that by it they Antiquity does not patronize
nor uphold sin.

This rule has place in morality not in matters of faith.


for there are many evil things, which a long time have been used; and there
be many good things, lately found out: so that antiquity is neither sufficient
to justify that which is evil; nor newnes to condemn that, which is good:
but in all things judgment ought to be taken from the price and valor of
things, not from the ^eares. For from antiquity to sin there comes no other
thing, but that it is less curable: neither does newnes take any thing from
virtue, but that it is less known.

It is another rule of wisdom, not to be deceived in figures Apparences of
things do often deceive us.
so that forthwith me pronounce ^ur opinion of them: for all is not gold that
glittereth, nor all ^ood that has the shadow of goodness. Oftentimes under
ho^ey there is gall, and under flowers thorns are hid. Remember that Aristotle
says, Some lies have more apparency and sem^ance of truth, then truth it
self. It may also be, that evil has ^ore likelihood of goodness then goodness
it self. And above (...) things it is to be observed, that as to proceed with
gravity is ^igne of wisdom; so to go forward with leuity and careles^s, is a
token of folly. In what a man ought to be circumspect.
For this cause, in these six things thou ^ghtest to be very circumspect and
prudent, that is, in believing, in yielding, in promising, in determining, in
conuersing with men, but especially in anger: for oftentimes it has been
noted that men have fallen into very great dangers, who in these have been
light and careless. Note.
For to believe easily, springs from the lenity of the heart: to promise
easily, takes away the liberty: to yield easily, begets occasion of
repentance: to determine easily, is next to the danger of erring, as it
happened to David in the cause of Mephiboseth: to be easy in acquaintance and
conversation, brings contempt: lastly, to be easily angry, is a manifest
token of foolishnes. For it is written, He that is patient, Prou. 14.
has much wisdom: but he that is soon displeased, exalts foolishnes.

Of certain means, by which this virtue is gotten.
TO the attainment of this virtue, amongst many other means, the experience of
errors past, and the event of things, both of our own, and of others well
brought to p^^se is conducent and available: for from these many counsels
and rules of wisdom are for the most part taken; and for this cause it is
said, that the memory of ancient things is a familier helper and a mistres of
wisdom; and that the present day is a Scholar of the former. Eccles. 1.
Wherefore Solomon says also; The thing that has been, comes to pass
again, and the thing that has been done, shall be done again. For by the
things past the present are judged, and by the present the things past. But
above all things profound and true humility of heart, helps very much to the
obtaining of this virtue: as on the contrary side pride hinders and
destroys all. Therefore it is written; Where there is humility, there is
wisdom. Besides this all the holy Scriptures do proclaim, that God is the
teacher of the humble, and a master unto the little ones, who reuealeth his
mysteries unto them* Nevertheless our humility ought not to be such, that it
should be subjected and ouer-ruled by every ones opinion, Every opinion is not
to be followed.
and be carried about with every wind. For this is not humility, but
insta^bility, and debility of heart. To this vice the vvise-man being willing to
use a remedy, says: Be not too humble in thy wised^^ As if he should say,
Ecclesi 13.
A man ought to be constant in the (...) things, he professes, being founded
on a just and a catholi^^ foundation; nor ought he to be easily removed from
his purpose: as some weakelings are, who suffer themselves to be seduced by
every opinion, and to be tossed and turned every way.

The last thing, which is most profitable for the attayning of this virtue, is
humble and devout Prayer. For seeing that it is an especial duty of the holy
Ghost, to illuminate man's understanding with the gift of Science, wisdom,
counsel, and understanding: with how much more humility and devotion man
comes to the holy Ghost, bringing the heart of a Disciple and a little one; so
much more perfectly is he instructed, and honored with these heavenly gifts.
Matter is not wanting unto us, to discourse of this virtue more copiously, (for
seeing that it is the guide and conducter of al other virtues, it is necessary
that being the leader it should not be blind, least the whole body of virtues
should be dark and without eyes) yet seeing that we endeavor to be brief, we
will be no more prolixe. And because all those things hitherto spoken pertain
to the reformation of ones self, and to the composition and well ordering of
his body and soul, which is the first part of the justice and righteousness,
which before we have set down: it remains that now we speak of the second
part, which teaches what man owes to his neighbor.

Of that which man owes unto his neighbor. CHAP. XV.
THE second part of justice is, that a man render to his neighbor, The second
part of justice.
that he owes him. That is, that he exercise toward him love and mercy,
according to the commandment of God. How necessary this part is, and how
often commanded in the holy Scripture, which is the rule and line, according
to which our life is to be squared, no man will easily believe except he has
been conversant in it. Read the Prophets, Gospels, and Epistles: thou shall
have it so obuious, and so many times commended unto us, that thou can not
but exceedingly marvel. In Esaias God teaches most exc^llently, how our
neighbor is to be handled: when the Jews complaining said, Lord, Esaias, 58,
wherefore fast we, and thou see it not? we put our lives t^ straightness,
and thou regardest it not? The Lord answers, Behold when you fast, your lust
remains still, for ye do no less violence to your debtors: lo ye fast to
strife and debate, and to smite with your fist without mercy: now ye shall
not fast thus, that your voice might be heard above. Think ye this fast
pleases me, that a man should chasten himself for a day? and to hang down
his head like a Bulrush, and to lie upon the earth in an hairie-cloth? Should
that be called fasting, or a day that pleases the Lord? Does not this fasting
rather please me, That thou lose the wicked bands, that thou take of the
ouer-heauy burdens, that thou let the oppressed go free, and break all manner
of yoke? To deal thy bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor wandering home
into thy house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not
thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thy health flourish right shortly: righteousness shall go before
thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee?

He prosecuteth this matter to the end of the chapter. Thou see therefore, my
brother, in what thing God has placed a great part of true justice and
righteousness, and how religiously he would have us to be charitable and
merciful, to our brethren and neighbors. What shall I (...) of the Apostle
Paul, in whose Epistles nothing is so frequent and usual, as this
commandment? With what great praise sets he forth Charity? how does he
exemplify and extol it? how gallantly does he depaint the excellency of it?
how prefers he it before all other virtues, calling it the most excellent
way to come unto the Lord? 1, Cor, 12,
Not content with this, in one place he calls it. The bond of perfection.
Colos 3,
In another place he says; That Charity is the end of all the commandments
of God. 1, Tim, 1,
And again in another place; Rom, 13,
He that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the Law. What greater praise may
be uttered or spoken of any other virtue? Besides all this, the most beloved
disciple of Christ, I mean John, in his canonical Epistles, does repeat
nothing so often, neither commends any thing so much, as this virtue. And
that he teaches in his Epistles, he confirms in his history, nothing was so
common in his mouth, as, Brethren, love one another, and that through the
whole course of his life, Jerome upon the sixth chap. of the Epistle to ye
Galathians.
yea when he was conversant among the Disciples, he would often and sundry
times on one day repeat it: and when he was demanded why he repeated it so
often, he answered the demaunders; Because it is the precept of the Lord, and
if it alone be done, it is sufficient.

Of the duties of Charity.
HE therefore that would satisfy the Divine will, let him assuredly know,
that amongst all the principal matters that GOD commands, there is not one
so much beat upon and so often required, Charity is not a naked and a bare
affection.
as this commandment of love: yet so that we understand not this to be a bare
and a naked affection, but to have annexed unto it all the effects, which are
wont to concur with true love: for otherwise it were not worthy of the name
of love, 1, John 3,
as the same Evangelist shows, saying: Who so has this worlds good, and
sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him: how
dwells the love of God in him? My babes, let us not love in word, neither in
tongue, but in deed and in verity. Therefore under the name of love, amongst
many other, Six duties of Charity
six things are comprehended; To love, to counsel, to relieve, to bear, to
pardon, and to teach by good examples: which works are so joined with
Charity, that as any one has more or fewer of them, he has more or less
Charity. This we say to this end, because there are found some who say; I
love. but their love has no effect, but the name only. There be others who
love, and by good admonitions and counsels, do give some relish of it: but
they do not open their coffers, neither put their hands into their Chest, that
they may relieve the necessities of their brethren and neighbors. Again,
there be others that help their neighbor with their advice, and relieve him
with that they possess: yet they bear not the injuries and infirmities of
their brother, nor follow the counsel of the Apostle, who says, Gala, 6.
Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Some bear
patiently the injury offered unto the^, but they do not pardon mercifully him
that has injured them: and although in their hearts they bear no hate, yet
outwardly they do not show forth their love by benefits, by pliantnesse, and
by favor. These, although they do not fail in the first, yet they do not
profit in the second: neither do they come to the perfection of this virtue.
There be some that have all the foresaid effects: but they edify their
neighbor neither with words nor with good examples, which surely is the noblest
among the duties of Charity.

According to this order every man may examine himself, that he may understand
what he has, and what is wanting unto him in this virtue. For we may say, he
that loves, is in the first degree of charity: he that loves, and gives
counsel, in the second: he that loves, counsaileth, and releeueth, in the
third: he that loves, counsaileth, releeueth, and suffers, in the fourth: he
that loves, counsaileth, releeueth, suffers, and pardons, in the fifth: but
he that loves, counsaileth, succoureth, suffers, pardons, and teaches
edyfying by examples, or godly words, which is properly of those that are
perfect, and who are Apostolic men, he has ascended the sixth step, and
stands upon the vpmost staire. And these be the positive or affirmative acts,
which are required in charity: for they show what we ought to do for our
neighbor.

The negative duties of Charity.
There be others negative, which teach what we ought not to do to our
neighbor; of which sort these are. Not to judge another; not to detract
another man's estimation; not to covet his goods; not to lust after the dignity
or the wife of our neighbor: not to give him an offense, or scandalize him,
either by raylings, or dishonest words, or those that are superfluous, much
less by examples, or ill counsels. He that diligently observes all these,
he fulfilleth whatsoever is required in the perfection of this divine
commandment. And if thou desire a particular and a brief memory of all
these comprehended in one word, see that thou have, We must have ye heart of a
mother toward our neighbor.
as we said before, the heart of a mother toward thy neighbor, and thou shall
altogether fulfill whatsoever has hitherto been spoken. Consider how a wise
and a religious mother, loving her son, admonishes him, if any danger be
near unto him; she succoureth him in need, she bears his errors and faults
with patience, sometimes chasticing them with justice, sometimes covering and
concealing them with wisdom. For all virtues do wait upon this one as the
Queen and mother of all other Virtues. Consider also how the same mother
rejoices at the good, and sorroweth at the ill hap of her son; no otherwise
then if they were her own: With what great zeal she affects his profit and
honor; how devoutly and diligently she always prays unto GOD for him; to be
short, how she is more careful for the health and safety of her son, then
for her own: and that she is cruel and severe toward herself, that she
may be gentle and good to her son. If thou can come thus far, that thou
love thy neighbor with such an heart, then thou art come to the perfection of
chatie: but if it be not given unto thee to ascend so high, yet at least let
this be the scope of thy desires, and always direct thy life hither; that thou
may be lifted higher and higher, and that thou may not stick in lower
matters.

But if thou shall ask me, how thou may be induced with such an heart to
love a forreiner: How such an heart is to be purchased.
I say that thou ought to consider of thy neighbor, not as a forreiner or
an alian; but as the image of GOD, the workmanshyp of his hands, and his son,
and the lively member of Christ. Hence it is that Saint Paul so often
admonishes us, that all we are the members of Christ: therefore, by sinning
against our neighbor, we sin against Christ; and by doing good unto our
neighbor we do good unto Christ. So that thou must consider of thy
neighbor, not as a man, or such a man, but as of Christ himself, or a lively
member of him. And although thy neighbor be not such an one in respect of the
matter of his body, yet he is such an one in regard of the participation of
the same spirit, and of the greatness of the reward and remuneration: seeing
that Christ says, He that receaueth his neighbor, receives him; neither
shall his reward be other, then if he had received Christ himself.

Remember also all the commendations of this Virtue, before set down of us,
and how greatly it is commended of God. For if there be a lively desire in
thee to please God, will thou not endeavor to perform this one thing so
acceptable unto him? Consider what the love of one kinsman is to another, for
the only participation of flesh and blood which is between them: and let it
shame thee, if the grace of the spiritual union be not as forcible in thee, as
carnal parentage or kindred. If thou shall say, that in this there is a
communion and a participation in one and the self same root, All things
common to us with our neighbor.
and in the blood of either: consider how much more noble that conjunction and
communion is, which is between the faithful, as the Apostle shows, while we
have all the same Father, the same mother, the same Lord, the same baptism,
the same hope, the same faith, the same meat; and the same spirit, who
quickneth us. We have all the same Father GOD, the Church our mother, and
Christ Jesus our Lord. We have one faith, which is that supernatural light, of
which we all partake, and which seuereth us, and makes us differ from all
other Nations: one hope, which is the very glory of the heavenly inhearitance,
in which we all shall be of one heart and one mind: We have one Baptism, by
which we are all adopted the sons of the same father, and made one another
brethren: We have one and the self same spiritual meat, even the blessed
body of Christ Jesus, which incar^ateth us together, and makes us one with
him: no otherwise then as one loaf is made of diverse corns, and one wine of
many grapes.

Besides all this, we participate of one and the selfsame spirit, which is
the holy Ghost, who dwells in all the souls of the faithful, whether it be
by faith, or by faith and grace together, quickening and sustaining us in this
life. If the members of the same body, albeit having diverse duties and
functions, and differing also in form, A simili^ude.
do so tenderly and mutually love one another, because they live by one and
the self same reasonable soul; how much more mutually ought faithful
Christians to love one another, who are made alive by that Divine Spirit; who
by how much he is more noble, by so much also he is more powerful, to knit and
unite those together, in whom he dwells? If only the kindred of flesh and
blood can procure so great love between kinsfolk, how much more shall so great
an unity procure it, and the participation and communion of so noble and
excellent things?

Let that notable and rare example of that singular love, wherewith Christ has
loved us, never slip out of thy mind: who has loved us so strongly, so
sweetly, so graciously, so perfectly, not for any profit or need to himself,
not for any merit of ours, that we being strengthened by so noble an example,
and bound by so great a benefit, may forthwith prepare our selves, and as much
as lies in us, dispose our selves to love our neighbor with such love, that
we may satisfy and observe that commandment, which our Savior Jesus has
given unto us, and so commended unto us, when he ascended to his Father, and
left this earth, saying; This is my commandment, that ye love one another,
as I have loved you.

Of that which man owes unto God. CHAP. XVI.
AFter that we have shown and declared what we owe to our selves, and to our
neighbor, now we will set down, what we owe unto God: This is the chiefest and
noblest part of Christian justice and righteousness, upon which three
Theological virtues do attend, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which have God for
their object, with that virtue, which of Divines is called Religion, whose
object is the Divine worship. A man shall satisfy all the bonds and
obligations, which are contained under this virtue, if toward God he has such
an heart, The heart of a son toward his parents.
as a son has toward his father. For even as a man shall satisfy and
content himself, if he has the heart of a good Judge; and his neighbor, if he
has the heart of a mother; so after a certain manner of speaking, he shall
satisfy God, if he love him with such an heart, as a son is wont to love his
father: for it is one of the especial functions and operations of the Spirit
of Christ, to give to man such an heart toward God. Now therefore consider
diligently, what the heart of a son is toward his father: what is his love,
his fear, his reverence, his obedience toward him, and the zeal of his
fathers honor; how he serves him freely: with what affiance and boldness he
runs unto him in all his needs, how patiently he bears his correction and
chasticement, with all other duties and obseruances. Of such an heart and mind
be thou toward God, and thou shall absolutely fulfill this part of justice and
righteousness. To prepare and procure such an ha^t, Nine virtues are required to
prepare and furnish such an heart.
nine virtues seem especially necessary unto me: the first and principal of
which is love; the second fear and reue^ence; the third trust and confidence;
the fou^th (...) of the honor of God; the fifth a pure intent in the ^^^rcise
of the Di^ine worship; the six^ prayer and refuge to God in all needs and
necessities; the seventh thanksgiving for Divine benefits; the eight obedience
and conformity of our will to Gods will; the ninth humility and patience in all
scourges and tribulations, which God sends unto us.

The love of God.
According to this order, the first and the especial thing, that we ought to
do, is to love God, after that manner, as he has commanded himself to be
loved: that is, with all the heart, with all the soul, and with all our
strength: so that whatsoever is in man, it is to worship and embrace God
according to his kind: the understanding by meditating upon him; the will by
loving him; the affections by inclining themselves unto that, which his love
requires; the strength and vigor of all the members and senses, by exercising
themselves in those things, which his love has appointed.

The second thing, that is required after this holy love, is fear, 2. Fear
and reverence.
which springs of this love: for by how much more we love any one, by so much
we fear, that we do not only not lose him, but also that we do not offend
him. This is manifest in the love of a good son toward his father, and of a
wife toward her husband: who by how much she more tenderly loves him, so much
the more diligently she endeavors, least any thing be found in the house,
that may offend her husband. This fear is the keeper of innocence: and
therefore it is necessary, that it take deep rooting in our hearts: which thing
the Prophet David long ago desired of God, when he said; Pierce through my
flesh with thy fear: Psalm. 119.
for I am afraid of thy judgments. It was not enough for this most holy King
to have fear planted in his heart; but also he would have it pierced and thrust
through his flesh and bowels, that through it he might have a smarting sense of
it, as a nail fastened through, which might stick in his mind for a perpetual
memorial, to stir him up that he might not sleep, and so in something
offend his eyes, whom he fears: therefore it is most fitly said of
Ecclesiasticus; The fear of the Lord drives out sin. Ecclesi. 1.
For by how much any one is feared, by so much more diligently we take heed
that we do not offend him. It pertayneth to this holy fear, not only not to
commit evil deeds, but also to examine the good, least perhaps they be not
pure, or want their necessary circumstances: least a thing of it self good, by
our defect be made evil, and unprofitable. For Saint Gregory said very well;
It pertayneth to a righteous man to fear a fault, where no fault is. Such a
fear holy Job had, when he said, I did fear all my works, knowing, Job. 9.
that thou do not spare the offender. It pertayneth also to this fear, that
when we are present in the Church at Divine service, especially where the holy
Sacrament is administered, that we chat not, nor walk, nor irreverently gaze
about, casting our eyes now hither, now thither, as many do: but we ought to
abide there with fear, and great reverence in the presence of the Divine
majesty, How fear is bred in us.
who is there after a special manner. But if thou ask me, how this holy
affection is begot and bred in our souls; I say, as I said a little before,
that the love of God is the especial root of it. After which, servile fear
in like manner avails, which is the beginning of filial fear, and does
bring it into the soul, no otherwise then the bristle does bring the
Shoomakers line into the shoe. To nourish and increase this holy affection,
the consideration of the exceeding highness of the Divine majesty is profitable,
and the consideration of the depth and profundity of Gods judgments, the
greatness of his justice, and the multitude of our sins, but especially the
resistance, which we make against Divine inspirations. Therefore it is great
wisdom, to busy and occupy our minds with these four considerations: for so
this holy fear is begot and preserved in our souls. Of this fear we have
more copiously spoken in the eight and twenty Chapter of the precedent book.

The third virtue, 3. Trust and confidence. A similitude.
which is required in this Divine work, is trust and confidence: that is, even
as a son in all his troubles and necessities, which happen unto him, trusts
and affianceth his repose in his father (especially if he be rich and
powerful) that his help and fatherly providence will not at any time fail
him: so also in this matter let a man have the heart of a son so enlarged,
that considering he has such a father, as he has, in whose hands is all the
power of heaven and earth, let him boldly hope and assuredly trust, that in all
troubles, that betide him he shall find help in that father; and let him
constantly persuade himself, that if he turn unto him, hoping in the mercy of
this heavenly father, he shall altogether be delivered from evil, or it shall
be ordered to his greater good, and further commodity. For if the son has so
great repose and security in his father; how much more ought to be our
confidence and trust in God, who is our father after a better manner, then all
earthly fathers; and is richer, then all the richest men of this world. But if
thou shall say, An objection.
that the scarcity of thy good works and deserts, and the multitude of the
sins of thy passed life do strike a fear into thee, whereby thou dare not
expect or promise unto thy self so great things from God; The answer
the remedy will be, if (when this cogitation comes into thy mind) thou
forthwith turnest thy mind from it, and turnest thy self wholly unto God, and
to his only son our Savior and Mediator. For then presently thou shall
recover thy courage, and thy strength shall increase in him. A similitude.
Even as we add courage unto them, who pass or ferry over any swift current or
river, which with the swiftnes and velocity of the running, causes the
swimming and giddines of the head, and with some call or encouragement admonish
them that they should not behold the water, but the earth or heaven, that they
may more securely and healthfully pass: so those that be faint-harted and
weaklings, are to be dealt withal in this business, least here they look upon
themselves, or their sins.

But perhaps thou will say, Another objection.
whether shall I turn me, that I may procure this strength and confidence unto
me? The answer
I answer, that above all things the infinite goodness and mercy of God is to
be considered, which extends it self to all the wretchedness of this world.
Then his infallible promises are to be weighed, in which he promises grace and
help to those that call upon his Name, and do fly unto him. Neither are we
further to doubt. A similitude.
For we see that the enemies themselves, do not deny, their favor and
benevolence to them that fly unto their Tents, because they are marked for
banishment with some brand or incision, but they graciously defend them in the
time of danger, and heal their wounds. Consider also the multitude of
benefits, which hitherto thou have received of his gracious and bountiful
hands; and of his mercy, which thou have already tried in benefits past, The
merits of Christ.
learn to hope for things to come. But above all these look upon Christ with
all his torments and merrits, in which there be especial causes, why we may
confidently presume to sue for the favor of GOD; seeing that it is manifest,
that those merrits on the one part are so great, that they cannot be greater;
and on the other part are the treasuries of the Church, for remedy and relief
of all them, which stand in need of them. These are the cheifest props of our
trust and confidence, which have so strengthened and encouraged the Saints in
those things they hoped, that they were more steadfast and and more immovable
then mount Sion. But it is greatly to be wondered at, that we, when we have so
great motives to move us to hope, and so just reasons to persuade us to trust,
yet that we are so weak and faint-harted, that when we see present danger to
hang over our heads, forthwith we fly into Egypt, to the shadow of Pharaoes
Charriots. So that many servants of GOD are found strong and courageous in
fastings, fervent in prayers, liberal in alms, deeds, and exercised, and
expert in other virtues: but very few are found, who have so steady a
confidence, Dan. 13.
as that holy woman Susanna had; Whose heart (when she was condemned to death,
and brought to the place of execution) had confidence and trust in the Lord.
He that desires more authorities for the persuasion of this virtue, he may
bring the whole storehouse of the holy Scripture: especially the Psalms and
the Prophets, in which nothing is so usual and common, as hope in God, and
assurednes of the Divine aid and assistance, which remains for them that
trust in him.

The fourth virtue is the zeal of Gods honor; The 4, virtue which is the
zeal of Gods honor.
that is, if all our cogitations be to this end, that the honor of the Divine
majesty may be increased; and be preferred, sanctified; and glorified before
all other things; and that his will may be done in earth as it is in heaven:
and that we have this mind in us, that no greater grief can happen unto us,
then to see the Divine honor impugned or abused. Such a will was in the hearts
of those Saints, Psalm. 69.
in whose name it is said; The zeal of thine house has (...) e^te^ me. For
their hearts were so afflicted for this cause, and so great grief of mind did
feed upon their bodies, that evident tokens of it were seen in them. If we
did burn with the like zeal, forthwith we should be marked in our foreheads
with that glorious sign of Ezechiell, and we should live free from all
punishment and scourge of the Divine justice.

5. The purity of the intent.
The fifth virtue is the purity of the intent; to which pertayneth, that in our
actions we seek not our selves, or our own commodity; but the glory and good
pleasure of our Lord God: certainly persuading our selves, that as they that
play at the game, A similitude.
called, He that wins, loses; by loosing they win, and by winning they
loose; so also we, by how much more we traffic and negotiate with God without
purpose of our own profit, by so much we make the greater gaynes, and
contrarily. Therefore in this point we must diligently advice our selves, and
examine all our actions with an upright and an impartial judgment, as men
jealous: that our mind does respect no other thing in working, but God
himself: for the property of natural self-love is very subtle (as we said
before) and seeks it self in all things. Many are rich in good works, which
if they were tried by the touch of the Divine justice, would be found without
this purity of intendment, Math. 6.
which is that Evangelical eye, which when it is clear and simple, it makes
the whole body clear; but if it be wicked, it makes the body full of darkness.
Many men in great places and dignities, placed as well in the commonwealth as
in the Church, seeing virtue laudable and beautiful in her functions, have
endeavored themselves so to walk in her trackt, that they have been reputed
for good men; and have purged their hands from all filthy luker and uncleanness,
which might by any means have polluted their honors. Yet they have done it
for this respect, that they might not fall from that authority, they were
placed in; and that they might be favored of their Princes, and graced with
great dignities and honors. And therefore their good works proceeded not from
the lively spark of love, or from the fear of God: neither had they his
obedience and glory their purposed end, but sought for their own commodity,
and the glory of man. But what soever is done after this manner, although it
seem somewhat in man's eyes, yet in Gods sight it is as smoke, and a shadow of
righteousness, and not true righteousness. For before God works are not
acceptable, commended only by the strength and grace of morrall virtues,
neither do corporal actions and businesses please him, no not if a man should
sacrifice his own son: but only that spirit of love sent from heaven, and
all that, which grows on this root, is acceptable in the Divine sight. In
the Temple there was not any thing, 3, Regum, 6
which either was not gold, or that was not covered with pure gold: so it is
not lawful that any thing should be in the lively Temple of our soul, which
is not either charity, or ouer-guilded and deaurated with charity. The intent
approves and commends the work.
Therefore the servant of God should not so much respect that he does, as the
end which he intends and destineth it for. For works very base and of low
account, being done for an excellent intent, become most ^^ellent, and
contrarily: For God does not so regard the body of the work, as the soul of
the intention, which proceeds of charity. This is to imitate after a certain
manner the most noble, and most gracious love of the son of God, who
commands in his Gospel, that we should love after the same manner, as he
before loved: that is, of pure good will, and not for the cause of any profit.
And seeing that among the circumstances of charity, which is in God, this is
most admirable, he shall be the happiest, who in all the works that he does,
endeavors to imitate this: He that does thus, let him assuredly believe,
that he is entirely beloved of God, as being very like unto him in the
perfection of beauty, and purity of intent: for similitude and likeness, is
wont to get and win love.

Wherefore, With what intent good is to be done.
let man turn his eyes from all humane respects, when he does good: and let
him have them fixed upon God, neither let him suffer, that those works which
are in so great reckoning and price with God, serve humane regards. If a noble
and a beautiful woman, A similitude.
worthy of a Kings bed, should be married to a foul Collyer, it would move
all to compassion that beheld her: after the same manner, and much more
effectually shall he be moved, that sees virtues, worthy of God, and divine
reward, to be made vassals to compass the dross and dung of this world. A
pure intent is to be craved of GOD.
But because this pureness of intent is not so easily obtained, let man desire
it instantly of God in all his prayers; especially in that part of prayer,
which the Lord himself taught his Apostles, where it is said; Thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven. That as all the heavenly Armies do the will of
GOD with a most pure intent, only that they may please him: so also let man,
as much as lies in him, here in earth imitate that heavenly custom and style:
not because besides that that we please God, we may not come to his kingdom:
but because works are so much the more perfect, as they are voyder and nakeder
of all private and self commodity.

The sixth Virtue is Prayer, by means of which we ought to have recourse to our
Father in the time of tribulation, 6. Prayer.
as children have, who when they are feared or daunted, foorth-vvith run to
the bosom and lap of their Father. We have need of this prayer, that (...)
^ay have our Father in continual remembrance, and standing in his sight, we
may often converse and have conference with him. For all these things are
annexed to the bond and duty of a good son toward his Father. But because
the use and necessity of this virtue is known to every body, seeing we labor
to be brief, in this place we will speak no further of it.

7. Thanksgiving.
The seventh Virtue is giving of thanks, to which belongs to have always a
grateful heart for all the benefits we have received of God: and such a tongue,
which always may be occupied in giving thanks to God, for the same: saying
with the Prophet, Psalm. 34,
I will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my
mouth. And in another place, O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: Psalm,
71,
that I may sing of thy glory and honor all the day long. For seeing that God
does continually give us life, and preserves us in that estate he has
allotted us, and daily, yea every moment, showreth upon us his benefits, by the
motion of the heavens, and the continual service of all creatures: who will
refuse or desist to praise him daily and continually, who always preserves
and governs us, and bestows a thousand blessings upon us? Let this be the
beginning of all our exercises* hence (as Saint (...) admonishes us) let all
our prayers begin. So that in the morning, and at noone, and at night, and in
the night, or at what time soever we give thanks to God for all his benefits,
particular and general, as well of nature as of grace: let us then yield him
greater thanks for his greater and larger benefits and blessings; of which sort
these are, that for all men he became a man; that he shed for us all the
blood he had: and especially in all these benefits this circumstance is to be
considered, that he bestowed all these benefits upon us, not moved by any
private commodity to himself, but of his mere love and goodness.

Of the four degrees of obedience.
THE eight Virtue, 8. Obedience.
which we owe to this heavenly Father, is a general obedience in all those
things, which he has commanded: in which consists the sum and complement
of all righteousness. This Virtue has three degrees; the first is, to obey the
divine commandments: the second, the divine counsels: and the third, to
obey the inspirations and inward callings of GOD. The obeying of the
commandments of God, are absolutely necessary unto salvation: the counsels
do help a man to keep them, without which, man is oftentimes endangered, and
ieopardeth himself in them: for not to swear at all, although it be in a true
and a just matter, makes us that we never swear falsely. Patience makes us,
that we lose not the peace of mind and charity. Not to possess any thing of
our own, makes us that we do not desire or covet any thing of another. To
do well unto those that do ill unto us, is profitable for us that we do not
ill unto our selves. Therefore the counsels are as Bulwarks and Fortresses
unto the commandments: and therefore let him that means to hit his aim and
obtain his purposed scope, not be content with the keeping of one, but also
let him contend, as much as he is able according to his degree and condition, A
similitude.
to observe the other. For even as he that would ferry over a swift River,
does not directly ferry over it, but somewhat crooketh his course, and forces
his boat somewhat up the stream, that he may come the better to his road: so
the servant of God ought not only to consider what is sufficient for
salvation, but also he ought to begin and keep a course somewhat more straight
and hard, that albeit he cannot attain the perfection proposed unto himself,
yet at the least he may attain salvation.

The third degree.
The third degree that we spoke of, is to obey the Divine inspirations and
callings. For good servant do not only obey their Masters in those things,
which are commanded unto them by the voice of their Masters, but also in
those things, which they signify unto them by some nod or token. But because
we may here easily be deceived, supposing that it is a Divine inspiration,
which is either of the devil, or of man, it behooves us to observe diligently
that of Saint John; Believe not every spirit, 1, John, 4,
but prove the spirits whether they are of God or not. The Scriptures are to be
our only direction in this, neither must we harken unto any thing, which
crosses the analogy of faith, or Gods revealed will in his word. That
sentence of Samuel must have place in us; 1, Kings, 15.
Obedience is better then sacrifice.

To these three degrees a fourth is joined, The fourth degree of obedience.
which is a perfect conformity of our (...) with the will of God, or a yielding
of our selves unto Gods disposing of us in whatsoever: so that with a pacified
mind and patiently we bear alike both dishonor and honor, infamy and good
report, health and sickness, death and life, humbly submitting our selves to all
those things, which he has determined and decreed of us, patiently bearing as
well scourges as cherishings and comforts, taking in good part as well the
taking away of graces, as the enjoying of them: not respecting that which is
given, but him, who gives; and the love wherewith he gives: for a Father
chasticeth and cherrisheth his son, accordingly as he knows it to be
conducent to his health and safety. We may say of that man, who has attained
these four degrees of obedience, that he has come to that resignation of
himself, which is commended with so great praises of those that set down
and extol a spiritual life, which delivers a man into Gods hands, no
otherwise to be handled, then soft wax is handled in the hands of an
Artificer. It is called Resignation, A similitude.
because even as he that resigneth a benefice, utterly depriueth himself of
it, and commits it wholly to the next incombent, that he may dispose of it
according to his mind, without contradiction of the former professor: so a
perfect man rendereth himself over into the Divine hands, so that hereafter he
will not be his own, nor live to himself; nor eat, nor sleep, nor labor
for himself, but for the only glory of his Creator, conforming himself to
the Divine will, in all things as he disposes of him: receiving from his
hands all scourges, and tribulations, which are sent, and that with great
quiet and tranquillity of mind, depriving himself of his own liberty and
will, that the will of the Lord may be only done, to whom he acknowledges
himself to be infinitely bound. After this manner the Prophet signifies
himself to have been resigned, Psalm, 73,
when he says; I am as a beast before thee: and I am always by thee. For even
as a beast goes not whether he will, nor rests nor works when he pleases,
but in all things obeys his Governor: so ought the servant of God to do, by
submitting himself perfectly unto God.

This is that whereof the Prophet Esaias speaks, saying: The Lord GOD has
opened mine ear, Esaias, 58,
and I will not gainsay him, I have not gone backewards: in those things he
has commanded me, albeit they were sharp and difficult. Those mystical
beasts of Ezechiell do signify the same thing, of which it is written,
Ezech, 1,
that whether as the spirit led them, (that is, the inspiration of the holy
Ghost) thither they went, and returned not in their going. By which figure is
declared, with what great alacrity of mind, and with what great joy a man
ought to run to all those things, which he understands to be according to
the will of his Lord. Wherefore, the readiness and promptnes of will is not
only here required, but also the discretion of the understanding, and the
discretion of the spirit, as we have said before, least we be deceived,
embracing our own will for the will of GOD: yea, speaking after the common
manner, all that ought to be suspected of us, to which at any time we are
inclined by the guydance of our own will: and that we suppose that there is
more security in whatsoever is contrary unto it.

This is the noblest and the greatest sacrifice, that man can offer unto God:
for in other sacrifices, he offers his, but in this he offers himself; and
the same difference which is between man himself and his goods, is also found
between these two kind of sacrifices. In such a sacrifice that of Saint
Augustine is fulfilled; Although God is the Lord of all things, yet it is not
lawful for all to say with David; O Lord I am thine: but for them only, who
have put of their own liberty, and have wholly vowed and devoted themselves to
the Divine worship, and after this manner are made his. This is the most
convenient disposition and order to come to the perfection of a Christian life.
For seeing that our Lord God of his infinite goodness, is always ready to
enrich and reform man, when he resists not, nor contradicts his will, but
is wholly dedicated to his obedience: he can easily work in him whatsoever he
pleases, and make him as another David, a man according to his own heart.

Of patience in adversity.
THat we may more fitly and commodiously come to that last degree of obedience,
9. Patience.
the last of those nine virtues will help us very much, which I reckoned up in
the beginning of this Chapter, that is patience in adversity and tribulation,
which oftentimes is sent unto us of our most loving father for our exercise and
greater good. To this patience Solomon inuiteth us in his Proverbs, Prou. 3.
saying; My son, refuse not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when
thou art corrected of him: For whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth, and yet
delights in him, even as a father in his own son. Which sentence of
Solomon the Apostle more largely expresses, in his Epistle to the Hebrews,
where he exhorts us to patience; Heb. 12.
My son, says he, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, neither faint
when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every son that he receaueth. If ye endure chastening, God tendreth
you as his sons: for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if
ye be without chastisement, whereof all are pertakers, then are ye bastards,
and not sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected
us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not then much rather be in subjection
unto the father of spirits, and live? All these words do sufficiently and
plainly testify, that it is the duty of a father to chastise and correct his
son: and in like manner that it is the duty of a good son, to submit
himself with all humility, and to esteem the scourges of his father, as great
benefits, and signs of love and fatherly good will. The only begotten son of
the eternal father, has ^aught us this by his own example, when he said to
Saint Pe^er* willing to deliver him from death: John, 18,
Shall I (...) drink of the cup which my father has given me? As if he should
have said: If this cup had been proffered and given to me of another, it might
have been that thou might have hindered me to drink of it: but because it
comes to me from that father, who best knows how to help, and can and will
help his sons, shall it not be drunk of, yea never seeking further any other
reason, but because it is sent of my father?

Nevertheless there are some, who in the time of peace do seem very subject
and submissiue unto this father, and conformable unto his will, who in the time
of tribulation do start backwards, and do show that this their conformity was
false and deceitful: A similitude.
because in the ^^me of need they lost it, as effeminate and cowardly
Soldiers, who in the time of peace and truce, do boast of their valor and
prowess, but when they come to fight they cast away both their courage and
Armor. Therefore in the continual conflict of this present life, it behooves
us always to be armed for the war with spiritual complete Armor, that we
may prevail and overcome in the time of need. First therefore we must
consider, that the afflictions of this world are not worthy of the future
glory, for the joy of that eternal light is so great, that although we were to
enjoy it but one small hour, yet for it we ought willingly to embrace all
afflictions, and despise all the pomp of the world. For as the Apostle says,
2, Cor. 4.
The mom^nt any lightness of our tribulation, prepares an exceeding, and an
eternal weight of glory unto us. While we look not on the things which are
seen, but on the things which are not seen: For the things which are seen,
are temporal: but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

Consider also, that too much prosperity oftentimes does puff up the mind with
pride: and contrarily that adversity does purify the heart by wholesome sorrow:
so that that does swel the heart, but this albeit it be swelled and puffed up,
does bring it down and humble it. In that man for the most part forgets
^imselfe, in this he also remembers God: by that good works (...) lost, by
(...) are (...) of and get pardon, and the soul is (...) ^ha^ it offend not
(...). If perhaps continual infirmity and sickness afflict thee, thou (...)
th^nk^, that the Lord God (when he (...) that (...) wo^ld ^or^e much mischief
if we were in health) does clip thy (...), and makes thee unapt to do things
by the means of that sick^es. And surely it seems much better unto me that a
man should be sick, and broken through dis^ases, then being sound should (...)
in sin, and add new offenses unto old. For as the Lord says; It is ^etter
for thee to (...) into life halt or maimed, Math. 1^.
rather then thou should, having (...) o^ (...) feet, (...) c^st i^to
e^erlasting fire. It is certainly known to every body, that our Lord, most
merciful by nature is not delighted in torturing us, but does seek by all
means to cure our wounds with ^^dicines contrary to our infirmity* for when as
we are fallen into a disease by pleasures, it is behoofeful that we be healed
by sorrows and adversity: and if our infirmity arise by unlawful things, that
we take it a^ay by withdrawing of things lawful. By which it is manifest,
that the supreme goodness is angry in this world, that it may not be angry in
the other* therefore he now mercifully uses his rigor, least afterward
should use just vengeance. For as Saint Jerome says, it is great anger that
God is not angry with sinners. Jerome.
He therefore that will not here be chastised with sons, shall be damned in
hell with devils. Wherefore worthily Saint Bernard praying unto God, cried out,
Bernard.
saying; O Lord here burn me, here cut me in pieces, that thou may eternally
spare me. By this we may easily see, how careful the Creator of all things is
for thee: for he does not withdraw his hand from thee, neither does he too
much give thee the rain, least thou should follow thine own desires.
Physicians for the body do willingly grant unto the sick, of whose health
they despair, A similitude.
all things that he desires; but to him whose health they hope to recover,
they prescribe a diet, and will him to abstain from all hurtful things
contrary to his health. Fathers also do deny to give money to dissolute and
prodigal children, that they may not squander abroad their wealth: but at
length they make them the heirs of all their goods. That heavenly Physician of
our souls and father of a^^ fathers, (after a certain manner of speaking)
deals so with us. Consider furthermore, how many and how great reproaches our
Redeemer suffered of them, he had created: how many slanders, and blows he
bare, and how patiently he turned his covered face to those infernal jaws,
that did spet upon him: how mildly he suffered his head to be pricked and rent
with thorns: how cheerfully he received that most bitter potion for the
quenching of his thirst: with what great silence he bore their scoffings, who
mocking at him worshipped him: lastly, with what great fervor he offered
himself, and hasted to death* that he might free us from death. Therefore let
it not seem a cruel thing unto thee, if thou miserable vild and abject man
suffer scourges, which he sends unto thee, who for thy sins would not
depart out of this life without scourges; who came into it without sins. For
it behooued Christ so to suffer, and enter into his glory: that he might act
that in work, which the Apostle teaches in words: 2, Tim. 2.
No man shall be crowned, except he wrestl^ lawfully. Therefore it is much
better to suffer patiently all present evils in this world, which are
profitable unto us; then impatiently and unquietly to suffer them: especially
seeing that will thou nill thou, thou must suffer that which it pleases God to
send, for nothing can resist his power.

Besides these, considerations and remedies, I will set down^ another yet more
effectual: that is, that a man be well arm^ always to preserve this patience,
against all afflictions and adversities, which may arise against him on any
side. A man must be arm^d against all evils that may be^ide him.
For what other thing is to be looked for of the world so perverse, of the
flesh so weak, of the envy of devils, and maliciousnes of men? Therefore he
that is wise, ought to be armed against all accidents and evils that may happen
unto him; as he, that is to take his journey through his enemies Country. For
by it he shall receive two great commodities: the first, because that which is
to be borne shall not seem so great, if it be foreseen: for darts
foreseen, as says Seneca, do less hurt. Therefore Ecclesiasticus well
admonishes; Go to physic or ever thou be sick. As he does, Ecclesi. 18.
who lets himself blood, while he is in health. The second is, that he,
that follows our counsel, is sure, to offer a s^crifice acceptable to God:
after a certain manner like unto that, which Abraham offered, when he
prepared himself to ^ffer his son Isaac. For as often as man does set down
with himself, that this evil or that may happen unto him from God, or from
men, and he as the servant of God prepares himself, and has determined
already to receive it with all humility and patience, and therefore resigneth
himself into the hands of the Lord, and is ready to entertain any
tribulation, which way so ever it comes, after that manner as David did, the
injury offered and done unto him of Semei, as though God had commanded him to
do it; let him be ascertayned, that if he have his mind thus disposed,
although that comes not to pass he expected or supposed, yet it shall be as
acceptable, as if it had happened unto him. Therefore a Christian ought to
remember, that this is one of the especial parts of Christian profession,
which Saint Peter teaches, 1, Pet. 2.
saying; If when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and shall take it patiently,
then is there thank with God: For hereunto verily were ye called. Therefore
let a Christian, that lives in this world, A similitude.
think, that he is a rock placed in the midst of the Sea, which on every side
is beat and crushed with waves and billows, yet nevertheless he persisteth
firm, neither is removed out of his place.

These things therefore are the more copiously handled of us, because seeing
that the profession of a Christian life (as Saint Bernard says) is divided
into ^wo parts, vvherof one is to do good, the other to suffer wrong; and
every one knows that the second part is more difficult then the first:
therefore it were needful to collect hither many cautions, and many remedies,
because in this part there were greater danger. It is further to be noted in
this place, that in this virtue of Patience according to the Doctors, Three
degrees of patience.
that there are three most excellent degrees, and one more perfect then
another. The first is, patiently to suffer afflictions. The second is, of own
accord to desire them for the love of Christ Jesus. The third is, to rejoice in
the same afflictions. Therefore the servant of God must not be content be to be
in the first degree of patience, but he must labor to come to the second; and
when he is come unto this, he must not rest, but proceed until he has
attained the third. We have an example of the first degree in holy Job; of the
second, in the holy Martirs, who so desired martyrdom: of the third, in the
holy Apostles, who rejoiced that they were made worthy to suffer injury for the
name of Christ. Rom, 5,
The same joy was in Saint Paul, as he testifies of himself in a certain
place; But let us glory also, says he, in tribulations. And in another place,
he ioyeth and glories in infirmities, 2, Cor, 11,
in distress, in scourges, etc. that he suffered for the Name of Christ.
Philip, 2,
In another place speaking of his imprisonment, and his bonds, he desires the
Philippians, that they would be pertakers of his joy, which he enjoyed, in that
he was imprisoned and bound with chains for the love of Christ. Moreover, he
says that this grace was given at the same time to the faithful of the Church
of Macedonia, 2, Cor, 8*
because in much trial of affliction, their joy abounded, and their deep
poverty a^ounded into the riches of their liberality. This is one of the
chiefest degrees of patience, charity, and perfection, to which an humane
creature may ascend: but few ascend so high: and therefore the Lord has
commanded it unto none. But these are not so to be understood, as though we
ought to rejoice at the death, calamities, and tribulations of our neighbors,
parents, and kinsfolks, much less of the Church: for the same charity, which
requires joy of us in the one, requires sorrow and compassion in the other,
seeing the nature of it is to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with
them that weep: which thing we see to have been done of the Prophets, who did
weep all their lives long, because they did see the calamities and scourges of
their fellow Citizens. Whosoever therefore has these nine conditions or
virtues, shall have a sons heart toward GOD; and has already fulfilled
perfectly this part of justice and righteousness, which rendereth to every one,
yea to God, that which is due unto him.

Of the bond and duty of diverse estates. CHAP. XVII.
AFter that we have largely enough handled what generally appertains to all
men, now it is time, that we speak particularly of several and particular
estates of men. But because this tractate would prove to prolixe and long,
therefore I say briefly, besides those things that have been spoken, that
every one must have an eye and a diligent respect unto those Laws, ordinances
and customs, that are prescribed and directed for his estate and condition,
which are many and diverse, according to the diversity of estates in the Church
and Commonw^^lth: in which some are Rulers and Overseers, What is meet for
Rulers, and Overseers.
and some subjects; some Clergy, some Layetie, some masters of families, etc.
Every one of which have their peculiar laws and constitutions. Of the Ruler
and Ouerseer the Apostle says; 2, Tim, 4,
Watch thou in all things, lobour, fulfill thy ministry. And Solomon
admonishes; My so^^e, Prou, 6,
if thou be surety for thy neighbor, and have fastened thy ^^^d for another
man. Thou art bound with thine own words, and taken with thine own speech.
Therefore my son do thus, and thou ^^^^t be discharged: When thou art come
into thy neighbors danger, go thy ways then son, humble thy self, and with
thy friends entreat thy Creditour. Let not thine eyes sleep, nor thine
eyelids slumber. S^ue thy self as a Do from the hand of the Hunter, and as a
bird from the hand of the Fouler. Neither ought thou to wonder, that the
Wiseman does admonish thee to be so careful in this case: For men are wont to
be careful in keeping of their things for two causes, either because they are
of great price, or because they are in great danger and ieopardy. Both of these
do concur in the charge of souls, neither can the price of any thing be
greater, nor the danger more. Therefore it is requisite and meet, that a Ruler
and an Ouerseer, should be very careful and circumspect.

It behooves a subject, that he have his eyes on his Ruler and Ouerseer, and
that he reverence him, not as a man, but as GOD; The duty of a subject.
and that he do that he commands him with as great alacrity and
cheerefulnes of mind, and with as great devotion, as if God himself had
commanded it. For if my Lord command me to obey the Steward of his house,
when I obey the Steward, whom do I obey but my Lord? so also if God command
me to obey my Ruler and Ouerseer, when I do that he commands me, I do my
obedience unto God. If S. Paul commands servants to obey their masters, not
as men, but as Christ; how much more ought subjects to obey their Rulers and
Overseers, to whom they are bound by the bond of obedience?

In this Obedience three degrees are set down: the first is, to obey only in
work: Three degrees of obedience.
the second, to obey in work and will: the third, to obey in work, will, and
understanding. For some do that they are commanded, but because the
commandment seems not unto them just and right, they do it not willingly.
Others do it willingly, but they think that he that commanded it, did not
well understand what he commanded. To be brief, there be others, who have
wholly and altogether dedicated their understanding to the divine worship; and
do obey their Ruler and Ouerseer, as God, in work, will, and understanding.
And doing this in work, will, and understanding, they humbly approve all that
is commanded them, without carrying any prejudice of them, of whom they are to
be censured and judged. Wherefore my brother, learn with all humility,
affectionately to obey thy Ruler and Ouerseer, being mindful of that is
written: He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, Luke, 10,
despises me. Do not murmr nor speak ill of them, least thou hear, Your
murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord. Exodus, 16,
Do not basely or vildly esteem of them least the Lord say unto thee; 1,
Kings, 8,
They have not cast away thee, but me, that I should not rule over them. Do
not lie unto them or deceive them, least it be said unto thee; Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto GOD. Acts, 5,
Least for thine offense thou perrish by sudden death, because thou did
dare to lie, as they, who perrished after the same manner.

Let ^married wife give her diligence to rule her house, and please her
husband: The duty of a good Matrone.
and when she has satisfied her duty, and done that belongs unto her office,
as much as she can let her attend upon religion: yet so that she pass not the
limits of her estate and condition.

The duty of a master of a family.
Let a Master of a family, to whom God has granted children, set before his
eyes as a glass, the fearful example of Ely, who was negligent in correcting
and chastening his children, whose punishment was, not only the sudden and
unthought of death of himself and his sons, but also the perpetual
deprivation and loss of the hie Priesthood, of which for that offense he was
deprived. Let him mark and consider, that the sins of the children, are
after a certain manner the sins also of the parents, and the destruction of
the child, to be in like manner the destruction of the parent, of whom he was
begotte and bred. For he is utterly unworthy the name of a Father, that
begets children not for heaven, but for this world. Therefore let him
chastise his children, withdraw them from ill company, commend and commit them
to religious Masters and Tutors, and let it be his only care, that they may
be taught and instructed in the way of virtue: and from their cradles, after
the example of Tobias, let him teach the^ the fear of the Lord. Let him often
cross them of their own wills, and they that in the birth of their children
have been Fathers of their bodies, now they are borne, let them be fathers of
their souls. For it is not enough that parents should be as byrds, and other
brute beasts, who after that they have brought forth their young ones do
only nourish them, and provide meat for them: but a Father ought to be a
father as a man, and as a Christian man, and as a true servant of God, who
educateth and traineth up his children, as the children of God, and heirs of
the kingdom of heaven: not that they should be the bond-slaues of satan, and
inhabitants of hell.

Let Masters of families, who have servants and other household, be mi^dfull of
the commination of S. Paul, who says; If any provide not for his own, 1,
Tim, 5,
and especially for them of his household, he has denied the faith: (that is,
the faithfulness that he owes, and to which he is bound) and is worse then an
infidel. Let them remember, that these are as Lambs of their sh^epefold, and
that they are the Sheepheards, that should care and vvatch over them; and let
them think that the time will come, when as GOD will exact an account for
them, Ier. 13.
saying: Where is the flock that was given thee? the sheep glorious and
noble? Worthelie he calls them glorious and noble: for great is the price by
which they are redeemed. Noble and glorious is the most sacred humanity of
Christ, by which they are enobled. Therefore there is not any servant, albeit
abject and base, who is not free and noble, in regard of the blood and humanity
of Christ. Therefore let a goo^ Christian strive and endeavor, that those that
be in his house, may be free from all enormous vices; as are quarrels and
strifes, unlawful gaming, false and vain oaths, blasphemies, fornications,
etc. And furthermore, that they have knowledge and skill in matters of
Christianity; and that they observe the orders and constitutions of the Church;
and that especially upon the Lords day they be at Church to hear Sermons and
Divine service: and that they be not contumacious and perverse inthwarting the
good and orderly proceedings of the Church, as the Puritans and Precisians of
this time are, who by their ignorant zeal, and peevish singularity disturb
the quiet and peace of the Church.

The first admonition in what esteem and price virtues are to be had, that
this rule may be better understood. CHAP. XVIII.
AS in the beginning of this rule we set down certain preambles agreeable and
convenient for this purpose; so now the rule being perfected and absolute, for
the better understanding of it, I take it to be worth the labor, if I shall
add certain admonitions. For seeing that we have spoken and discoursed of many
kinds of virtues, it is behoofefull that we teach, which is worthier, and which
less worthy: that we may estimate matters according to their dignity, and
assign a proper place to every one. For he that sells precious pearls and
rich Iems, A similitude.
ought very well to know them, that he be not deceived in the price: and the
ouer-seer and governor of any Princes house, ought to know the deserts of
every one in the house, that he may dispose of every one according to his
dignity; for otherwise he should commit many errors, and offer much
inequality: so a man that deals with the worth and value of these Iems, that
is, of virtues, and he that as a good ouer-seer and governor of an house, is
bound to render and tender to every one of these virtues the due honor; he
must most exactly know the price and dignity of them: that comparing them
between themselves, he may see which is to be preferred before another: least
he (as it is wont to be said) be penny wise and pound foolish, least he I say,
gather ashes, and cast away flower: which many do.

The twofold order of virtues.
Therefore we must know, that all the virtues, which hitherto we have spoken
of, may be reduced into a twofold order; for some of them be spiritual,
invisible, and internal; and some corporal, visible, and external. In the
first order are theological vetues, with all other, which are referred unto
God, but especially Charity, which among all other virtues possesses the first
and chief place, as the Queen of all other. To this are many other noble
virtues joined, and which are nearest unto Charity in dignity; as are,
humility, chastity, mercy, patience, discretion, devotion, poorenes of spirit,
contempt of the world, denying of our own will, the love of the Cross and of
austerity; and very many more of this kind, which, by taking largely the
signification of this word, we call virtues. They are called spiritual and
internal virtues, because principally they reside and have their being in the
soul, although also they pass into external works, as we see in Charity and
devotion: which albeit they are altogether internal, yet they produce their
external acts to the honor and glory of God.

Other virtues are more external and visible, as are fasting discipline,
silence, solitarines, reading, singing, preaching, a Christian and a religious
life. For albeit these virtues also reside and have their being in the soul,
yet their proper acts are more outward, then the former, The internal virtues
are more excellent then the external.
which are often hid, and invisible; as are to believe, to love, to hope, to
contemplate, to be humbled, to be inwardly contrite for sins, to judge
discreetly, and so in others. Among all these virtues there is no doubt, but
that the former are far more excellent, and more necessary then the latter.
For the Lord says unto the woman of Samaria: John, 4.
Woman, believe me, the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the father in spirit, and in the truth: for such the father also
requires to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit, and in the truth. The same words fall also into our
common speech, and children in Schools are wont to learn those verses. If God
be a spirit as verses record, Cato.

In spirit and truth thy worship afford.


Wherefore also the Prophet David describing the beauty of the Church, and of a
soul, that is in the favor of God, he says; The Kings daughter is all
glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold. Psalm. 45.
The same thing the Apostle insinuates, when he says to his Disciple Timothy;
1. Tim. 4.
Exercise thy self unto godliness: for bodily exercise profits little, but
godliness is profitable unto all things, having promises of the life that is
now, and of that which is to come. In which place he understands by godliness
the worship of God, and mercy toward our neighbonr: and by bodily exercise,
abstinence, and other corporal austerenes, as learned expositers auerre
expounding this place.

This also the Heathen Philosophers understood: Aristotle.
For Aristotle, who albeit he writ very little concerning God, yet says; If
humane affairs be regarded of God, as we may very probably gather that they
are, it is very likely, that he ioyeth in the best things, and in those that
are the likest unto him: but those are the mind and spirit of man. Therefore
they that have their spirits beautified and adorned with the knowledge of the
truth, and reformed affections, are most acceptable unto God.

The same thing Galen the Prince of Physicians understood; Galen.
for speaking in a certain book of the composition and frame of man's body,
and of the use and profit of the parts of it, when he had come to a certain
place, where the greatness of the wisdom and providence of the supreme and
omniscient workmaister shyned after a singular and especial manner; being
carried into a most deep admiration of so great wonders, he as one forgetting
his Physic profession, on a sudden flies to Divinity, and exclayming says;
Others honor and worship God by Frankensence and Hecatombs (which is a
sacrifice of an hundred beasts) but I will worship him by revealing and
publishing the greatness of his wisdom, which so wisely knew how to order
every thing in the frame and fructure of this admirable workmanship; and by
telling of the greatness of his power, which could effect every thing so well
ordered; with the greatness of his goodness, which has without any grudging or
repining so abundantly provided for all creatures necessaries for the
preservation of themselves. This a Heathen Philosopher said: but I pray thee
what could a Christian speak more perfectly? what could he speak better, or
more sacredly, yea, albeit he had read that of the Prophet: I desire mercy and
not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God more then whole burnt offerings? Ose 6.
Change the name of Hecatombe into a burnt offering, and thou shall see that an
Heathen Philosopher, and a Prophet of God do speak one and the self same
thing.

Notwithstanding that we have spoken so great things of the virtues of the
former kind, others also, which we have bestowed in the second place, (although
they be of lesser dignity) are of great weight and moment, both to compass
those that be greater, and also to preserve them: and also some of the^ are
necessary, because they fall under precept. This may be proved by running
through those virtues, which ere-while we spoke of. For solitarines preserves
a man that he hears not, sees not, speaks not, and that he does not a
thousand things, which might give occasion to incur danger, not only to lose
the peace and tranquillity of conscience, but also to make shipwreck of chastity
and innocence. Every one knows how profitable silence is both to preserve
piety and devotion, and also to keep a man from the sins, which are
committed in much babbling. For the Wiseman says, Prou. 10.
Where much babbling is, there must needs be offense. Fasting, besides that it
is an act of temperance, it also chasticeth the body, strengthens the spirit,
weakneth our enemies, and disposes unto prayer, reading, and contemplation; it
spares and auoydeth superfluous costs, and delivers from lusts and wanton
desires, in which gluttons, and belly-gods do live, being lovers of trifles,
contentions, quarrels, and of all dissolutenes, in all which gurmandizing
Epicures are wont to be delighted. Furthermore, to read godly books, to hear
sermons, to attend on prayer, to sing Psalms, and to be present at Divine
exercises, are plainly enough known to be acts and exercises of Religion, and
motives unto piety, and means further to enlighten the understanding, and more
and more to inflame the affections with the love of spiritual things. This is
convinced by so manifest experience, that if the Heretics would have seen to
it, they had not fallen into so absurd errors, as they have. For we daily see
with our eyes, and feel with our hands, and behold in every place where
discipline, and observance of these exterior matters are kept and observed,
that there virtues flourish most, and that there is always greater godliness,
devotion, and charity: and that there are seen more excellent persons, and
that there the fear of the Lord, and Christianity her self are more perfect.
But all things run contrary, where no regard is had of them: For this
observance being neglected, the conscience also, the manners, and life are
neglected: for where there is greater occasion of sin, there also more and
greater sins are committed.

For we all, Terence.
as one says, become worser through liberty. Even as in a Vineyard well kept,
A similitude.
and fenced with a wall or an hedge, all things are in safety: so in that,
which is ill kept, and not fenced, all things lie open to the lust and pray of
thieves. The like happens to man, that is disordered, and will not be
contained within order and rule. What argument more manifest, I pray thee, may
be desired for the dilucidation of this matter, that we may see the profit of
these things, then that which proceeds from experience; For a man that
desires to obtain and preserve that excellent virtue of devotion, which
makes a man prompt and fit for all other virtues, and is as a spur to all
good, how shall it ever be possible, that an affection so supernatural, and so
delicate should be obtained and preserved of that man; who was never careful
for the safeguard and keep of himself? The affection of devotion how tender
and delicate.
For this affection is so delicate, and if it be lawful so to speak, so
fugitive and fleeting, that in the twinkling or turning of an eye it suddenly
vadeth and vanishes. For one immoderate laughter, one superfluous word, one
gluttons supper, a little wrath, contention, or other small distraction; or
curiousnes to see, hear, or understand a thing not necessary, although it be
not evil, is sufficient to take away a good part of devotion. Therefore not
only pallable and gross sins, but also any superfluous employment, or other
matters, which withdraw our minds from God, do extinguish and quench devotion.
For he that would have Iron always to glow and shine, it is necessary that he
always apply it to the fire: For if he take it from the fire, A similitude.
forthwith it returns to his natural coldness: So this most noble
affection, for depends of that, that man be continually united unto God by
actual love and contemplation, that if he turn himself but a little from
him, forthwith he slideth back to the bosom of his mother, that is, to the
old disposition which before he had.

Therefore, whosoever desires to get v^^to him this holy affection, and
being got to preserve it, he must be diligent in the keeping of himself, that
is, of his ears, eyes, tongue and heart, he must be modest and temperate in
eating and drinking: so circumspect and grave in every word and gesture; he
must so love silence, and solitariness; he must so accustom himself to
divine exercises, that he may have all things, which may pro^oke a man unto
devotion, that by the means of this diligence he may preserve, and safely
keep this most precious treasure. He that does otherwise, let him assuredly
know, that this business shall never prosper well with him. All this does most
manifestly convince the profit and necessity of these virtues, which in the
mean time do not derogate from the dignity and excellency of them, which are
greater.

But by this the difference may be plainly known, which is between these and
those; The difference between the outward virtues, and the inward.
for those are as the end, these as the means to the end: those as health,
these as a medicine, by benefit of which we obtain health. Those are as the
spirit of Religion, these as the body of it: which albeit it is part of the
whole, yet one part is more principal then another, and whose function is more
especially required in working. Those are as the treasury, these as the keys
by which it is opened and shut. Those are the fruit of the tree, these as
leaves which adorn the tree, and do preserve the fruit from the injury of
the air. Albeit in this the comparison is lame and maimed, and somewhat
fails: because the leaves of the tree, although they preserve the fruit, yet
they are not part of the fruit: but these virtues do so preserve justice and
righteousness, that they are a part of justice and righteousness.

This therefore my brother, is the estimation which is to be made of virtues,
of which there has been made mention in this rule, as we have said in the
beginning of this Chapter; by benefit of which we may be free from two vicious
extreamities, which are in this world* Two extremes in esteeming virtues.
One is the ancient one of the Pharisees, the other is a later one of modern
Heretics. For the Pharisees, as carnal and ambi^^ous, were altogether given to
the observance of that Law, which in like manner was carnal; as for true
righteousness, which consists in spiritual virtues; it was in no esteem
among them, as the whole history of the Evangelists does testify: and the
Apostle says; that they had a show of godliness, 2, Tim, 3, Hebr, 10,
but had denied the power of it. Also that the Law had only a shadow, but
brought not men to perfection.

The modern and neotericall Heretics, after a contrary manner understanding
this error, and be^^g willing to avoid one extreme, fall into another: that
is, into contempt of all external virtues, according to that: Charybdis gulf
who thought to have escaped,
Fell into Scylla^s i^^es, th^^ widely g^p'd.


Wherefore the true and Catholic Church of Christ, condemning both extremes,
approoueth the truth which is the mean: for attributing prerogative and
excellency of dignity to the internal virtues, she also allotted their place
unto the external. Because she accounts of some, as of the order of
Senators, of others, as of the degree of nobles and gentlemen, and other she
receives into the number of Citizens, which make one Commonwealth, in which
the dignity of every one is known, and what is due and belongs unto every
one is easily seen.

(...) very profitable (...), which are (...) of the precedent doctrine. CHAP.
XIX.
OVT of the precedent doctrine four instructions do arise very profitable and
necessary for a spiritual life. The first is, that a perfect man and a true
servant of God, ought not only to seek for spiritual virtues (albeit they be
excellent and noble) b^^ a^^o he ought to join others unto the^ as well for
the preservation of them, as for the obtaining of absolute perfection, and the
whole complement of Christian righteousness. Wherefore he ought to consider,
that as man is not only a soul, nor only a body, but a soul and a body
together: (for the soul without the body, makes not a perfect man, and the
body without the soul, is no other thing then a sack full of earth and
ashes,) so also it is necessary, that he know that true and perfect
Christianity, is not only internal, nor external; but internal and
external together. For the internal alone cannot be preserved without the
external, whether it be little or much, according to the conueniencie of the
bond of every man's estate: The external virtues are to be joined to the
internal.
neither is it sufficient for the fulfilling of all righteousness. Much less
can the external without the internal make a man perfect: as neither the body
alone without the soul can make a man. Even as therefore all the life of the
body proceeds from the soul; A similitude.
so all the dignity and worth of the external, proceeds from the internal,
but especially from Charity.

He therefore that will not err from this scope and determined resolution, let
him think that as he, that made man, would not separate the soul from the
body; so he must not sever the spiritual from the corporal, that would make a
perfect Christian. The body is joined to the soul, the treasure is preserved
in the Arc, the hedge compassing the Vineyard, does make it safe, and Virtue
is defended by her Fortresses, Bulwarks, and defenses, which are her own
parts. Otherwise, believe me, one will decay and perrish another. For one
cannot be increased nor assisted, unless both be joined together. Consider how
nature, and Art the Ape and imitatour of Nature do nothing, which has not
either a bark or some cover for a fortification and defense, and also for an
ornament of it: after the same manner Grace also works, which is the most
perfect form, and most perfectly effects her operations. Remember also that
it is written; Eccles, 7,
He that fears God, neglects not any thing: And, He that sets naught by
small things, Ecclus, 29,
shall fall by little and little. Remember the example set down in the former
book, that by the want of one nail the iron shoe is lost, A similitude.
and the shoe being lost, the horse falls, and the horse falling, the rider
perishes. Remember the dangers which he incurreth, that neglects small
things: for this is the highway that leads to great errors. Mark also the
order of the plagues of Egypt, after harmless and hurtlesse Frogs, came lyce,
and great flies, Gadbees, stinging Horse-flies, and biting Oxe-flies. Whereby
it is evident, that the neglect and contempt of the lesser, does prepare the
way for greater: for they that fear not polluting and euill-sauouring Froggs,
will not fear stinging Horse-flies, and biting Oxe-flies.

The second instruction.
BY that we learn also, to what virtues we ought most especially to addict our
endeavors and studies; upon which we ought to bestow greater diligence, and
upon which lesser: as men do, who make greater account of an heap of gold,
then of silver; and do more esteem an eye then a finger: so also it is meet
and requisite, that with greater endeavor and diligence we should apply our
selves to the woorthier virtues, and with lesser to the less worthy:
otherwise, if we more diligently study, and employ our pains rather upon the
ignobler then the noble, the whole spiritual business will be disordered.
Wherefore I say, that those Bishops and Pastors do very wisely, that in their
pulpits and Sermons do often beat upon these words; Silence, Fasting,
Solitarines, Rites and Ceremonies, and that often stand upon, and preach
Charity, Humility, Prayer, Devotion, Contemplation, Internal virtues less
known the^ external.
the Fear of God, the Love of our Neighbor, and such like. And this ought to
be done so much the more often, by how much the inward defects are more secret
the^ the outward: and therefore the more dangerous. For even as men are more
diligent to amend defects that are seen of them, then those that are unseen:
so it is to be feared, that they have no care of inward defects, which are not
seen, although they are most diligent in outward, which are public, and
openly discerned. Furthermore, the exterior virtues, as they are more manifest
unto men, so also they are better known and had in greater esteem; as are
Abstinence, Watching, Discipline, and corporal austeritie. But the interior
virtues, Hope, Charity, Humility, Discretion, the Fear of God, and the
Contempt of the world, are more occult and hid: and therefore albeit they be in
greater honor with God, yet they are not so valued in man's judgment. Luke, 16,
And therefore our Savior says; Ye are they that justify your selves before
men, but God knows your hearts. Not dissonant to this, is that of Paul; He
is not a Jew which is a Jew outward. Romans 2,
Neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and the circumcision of the heart, which consists in
the spirit, and not in the letter, is circumcision, whose praise is not of men,
but of God.

Seeing therefore, that those external are in so great estimation among men,
and are so admired of all, and the appetite of self honor and excellency is
so subtle, and the most powerful of all the appetites, it is to be feared,
least that affection draw a man rather to love and seek after those virtues,
by which greater honor is expected, then those, by which lesser: yea perhaps
among men none. For to the love of these, the spirit inuiteth, but to the love
of the other, the spirit and the flesh inuit together, which is exceeding
vehement, and most impatient in her desires. Which seeing that it is so, not
without cause it is to be feared, least these two affections should overcome
that one, and should carry the victory from it. To this mischief the light of
this doctrine opposes it self, which defends and patronizeth a iuster
cause, and notwithstanding these, commands place to be given to this, which
deserves more: admonishing us, that we love that, and embrace it with greater
feruency, which is more profitable, and more necessary.

The third instruction.
BY that also we gather, that as often as it happens that these virtues do
so concur at one and the self same time, that we cannot entertain and
content them altogether; then according to the rule of Gods precepts, the
lesser must give place to the greater. Otherwise order will be inuerted and
disturbed. Bernard in his book of the precept of dispensation a little after
yc beginning.
This Saint Bernard teaches in his book of the precept and the dispensation;
Furthermore, says he, many things are invented and ordained, not because we
may not live otherwise, but because so to live is more expedient: neither are
they devised for any other end, then for the preserving and good of charity. So
long therefore as they respect and aim at charity, they stand firm and
immovable, and may not be changed without offense, no not of the inuenters and
ordayners. But if contrarily at any time they seem contrary unto charity, they
are to be changed and altered, but only of those to whom it is given to see
this, and to whom this business is committed to be ouer-seene; and not of every
ouer-weening Disciplinarian, and giddy-braind humorist: seems it not most
meet and requisite, that those things that were invented for Charity, should
also for charity, when it seems convenient, be either omitted, or
intermitted, or be changed into some other thing more commodious? For otherwise
without doubt it is most unjust, if ordinances and constitutions only devised
for charity, should be held and maintained against charity. Therefore let them
be held assuredly and firmly immutable, yea, amongst Prelates, which are
grounded upon necessary considerations, but so far forth as they serve unto
charity. Hitherto are the words of Saint Bernard.

The fourth instruction.
TWo kinds of justice and righteousness are gathered out of this same Doctrine;
A twofold righteousness.
one is true, the other false. True righteousness and justice comprehends
together both things internal and external, which are required to the
preserving of them. That which is false and counterfeit, observes some
external without internal: without the love and fear of God, without
humility, without devotion, and without other internal virtues. Like to this
was the righteousness of the Phariseis, of whom the Lord speaks in Matthew;
Math. 23.
Woe, says he, unto you Scribes and Phariseis hipocrits, for ye tithe Mint,
and Annise, and Cummin, and have left the waightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain out a gnat, and swallow a Camel.
Woe unto you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrites, for ye make clean the utter side
of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of bribery and
excess. And a little after; Woe unto you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrites, for
ye are like unto painted Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward:
but are within full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness. Of the same kind
is that righteousness, which so often is reprehended of God in the Scriptures by
the Prophets, for whom the mouth of one speaks; This people honors me with
their mouth, ^say, 29.
and glorifieth me with their lips: but their heart is far from me, and the
fear which they have unto me, proceeds of a commandment that is taught of
men, Esaias, 1.
but they have despised my law. And in another place; Why offer ye so many
sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of
vveathers, and of the fatnes of fed beasts, I have no pleasure in the blood of
bullocks, lambs, and goats. Offer me no more oblations, for it is but lost
labor: Incense is an abominable thing unto me, I may not away with your new
moons, your Sabaoths, and solemn meetings, your solemn assemblies are
wicked. I hate your new moons, and appointed feasts even from my very heart,
they make me weary, I cannot abide them.

What means this? what does God condemn, that he appointed, and expressly
commanded; especially seeing that they be the acts of the noblest virtue,
which we call Religion: whose proper function and duty is to worship God with
the service of adoration, and Religion? No certainly: but he condemns the
men, that contenting themselves with those external ceremonies, had no regard
nor care of true righteousness, and the fear of the Lord, as forthwith he
declares, saying; Wash you, make you clean, put away your evil thoughts out
of my sight: cease from doing of evil, learn to do well, apply your selves
to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles to his right, let the
widows complain come before you: And then go to, says the Lord, let us
talk together: though your sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow: and though they were like purple, they shall be as white as wool. In
another place he repeateth the same thing, and that with greater vehemence: He
that slays, says he, Esaias, 66.
an Ox for me, does me so great dishonor, as he that kills a man: he that
kills a sheep for me, knetcheth a dog: he that brings me meat
offerings, offers swines blood: who so makes me a memorial of incense,
prayseth the thing that is unright. O Lord, whence comes this? why are they
now abominable and vild in thine eyes, which in times past thou did ordain
and command? Presently after he adds the reason saying; These have they done
according to their own ways, and their soul delights in these
abominations. Thou see therefore, my brother, in what base account those
outward works are with God without this inward foundation. Of these outward
works he says thus by another Prophet; Though ye offer me whole burnt
offerings, and meat offerings, Amos, 5.
I will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offering of your fat
beasts. Take thou away from me the multitude of thy songs, for I will not hear
the melody of thy Vials. And in another place with greater vehemence; Mal. 2.
And I will, says he, cast dung on your faces, even the dung of your solemn
feasts.

What need we more words to understand how little these external works do
profit, although very excellent, if that foundation of righteousness be wanting,
which consists in the love and fear of God, and in the hatred of sin? But
if any shall ask me, why GOD does so greatly condemn this worship, comparing
the sacrifices to murders, and the incense to idolatry, calling the singing of
Psalms iangling, and their solemnities dung? I answer, because besides that
such works are not acceptable, What evils do arise from this false
righteousness.
wanting the foundation, of which we spoke a little before; many also hence
take an occasion to be proud, to presume great matters of themselves, and to
despise others, because they do not like them: and that which is worser, at
length they come into a false security, which arises from this counterfeit
righteousness: and this is the greatest danger, that meets with men in this
life: for they being lulled a sleep with this vain security, do not study,
nor strive to compass those things they want, and which are of greater weight.
I would not that thou should credit me, read that which the Gospel
speaks of the prayer of the Pharisey, who praying said; God I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are, Luke, 18.
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this Public^ne. I fast twice in the
week, I give tithe of all that I possess. Thou see here how plainly those
three most dangerous rocks are discovered, of which we spoke a little before.
Presumption, when he says; I am not as other men: Contempt of others, when he
says; As this Publicane: False security, when he gives thanks to God for the
condition and quality of his life he led: supposing that by it he was safe and
secure, neither that he had any cause to fear. Hence it is, that they that are
just and righteous after this manner, do run into most dangerous hypocrisy.
For we are to note in this place, that there are two kinds of hypocrisy: Two
kinds of hypocrisy.
one is open and vild, as that is in them, whose wickedness is public and
known to many, and yet nevertheless in outward conversation they pretend great
sanctity, that they may deceive the people. The other is more subtle and more
secret, by which a man does not only deceive another, but also himself: which
kind of hypocrisy was in that Pharisey, who not only deceived other men, but
also himself: for when he was the worst, he would have been thought the best.
Of this hypocrisy the Wiseman speaks; There is a way which seems right
unto a man: Prou. 14.
but the end thereof are the ways of death. And in another place among the
four kinds of evils, he reckons up this also, saying; There is a generation
that curses their father, Prou. 30.
and does not bless their mother. There is a generation that think themselves
clean, and yet is not cleansed from their filthiness. There is a generation that
has a proud look, and does cast up their eye lids. There is a generation
whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives, to devour the poor from
of the earth, and the needy from among men. Solomon here rehearses these four
conditions of men, as the most perverse and pernicious of all, that are in the
world: and amongst them he also puts in this hypocrisy, of which we now
speak, that is, when as most impure men, as this Pharisey was, would be deemed
pure and holy. The state of that man, that is entangled with this vice, is most
dangerous. Certainly the evil is lesser, if a man be evil, and would not be
accounted good, then if he be unjust, and would be esteemed just. For be it
that a man be wicked, yet the knowledge of himself will be the beginning of
his salvation. But when his wickedness is not known, and he although sick,
would be accounted sound and in health, what remedy or what medicine shall be
applied to him? Therefore our Sauionr says to the Phariseis; The Publicanes and
harlots shall enter into the kingdom of heaven before you. Math. 21.
For Shall enter, the Greeks read, Do enter in the present tense; and so that
is more expressly declared, which we would say. The same thing also those
terrible and fearful words of the Lord in the Revelation do most manifestly
testify; Apoc. 3.
I would thou were hot or cold: but because thou art luke warm, and ney^ther
cold not hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. What means this? Why does God
wish that man were cold, and says that luke warm is in worser estate, then
cold, seeing that luke warm is nearer unto hot? I will tell thee what is the
reason of this. who is hot, cold, and luke warm
He is hot, who by the fire of his charity, which he has in himself,
possesses all virtues, as well internal as external: as we have said before.
On the contrary part he is cold, who by reason of the absence and want of
charity, has neither internal nor external virtues. He is luke warm, who
has some external virtues, but not any internal, no not a spark of charity.
Therefore the Lord signifies here, that he that is luke warm is in much worser
estate, then he that is cold: not because he is burdened with more sins, but
because he is more hardly delivered from them. For he is so much the more
farther of from remedy, by how much he thinks himself more secure and freer
from all evil: for from this superficial righteousness (if I may so call it)
which he has, he takes an occasion to believe that he is some body, when in
truth he is no body. Wherefore the Lord expounding whom he had termed luke
warm, adds; Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing: and know not how that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Do not these words lively and in
orient colors depaynt the image of the Pharisie, that said; God I thank thee
that I am not as other men are? Surely they do, for he thought in his heart that
he was wealthy in spiritual riches; and therefore he gave thanks to God: but
without doubt he was poor, blind, and naked: for he did not know his own
faults.

Now therefore we have declared that there are two kinds of righteousness, one
true, and the other false and counterfeit; and how noble the excellency of the
true is; and how the false is exposed to many and great dangers. Let no man
think that the labor and time, which we have bestowed upon this
demonstration, to have been ill spent. For the holy Gospel, the purest
doctrine of all the divine Scriptures, and the most excellent, which as a
glass represents the form and rule of our life, very often reprehendeth
this false and counterfeit righteousness, and so do the Prophets, as before we
have showed. Therefore it was not meet, that we should cursorily run over
it, which so often is beat upon in the Scriptures: especially seeing that all
men for the most part, do shun manifest dangers; as Mariners, do Rocks that
show themselves; A similitude.
and here where there is such euidencie, less admonition will serve, but where
the Rocks lie hid under the water, there is greater heed to be taken; and
therefore they are marked in the Maps and Sea-cards of Sailers, that they may
not rush upon them at unawares. Let no man deceive himself in this, saying
that then this doctrine was more copiously to be discoursed of, when this vice
did reign more spaciously and largely in the world: but now there is no need
of it, because this sin is unusual, and unfrequented. For I think that the
world has continued always in the same estate: The world has alwais been set
upon mischief.
for there are, and always have been, men of the same nature, and of the same
inclination, conceived in the same original sin, which is the fountain of
all sins, and therefore always produces like effects.

And because there is so great likeness and similitude in the causes of evils,
it follows of necessary consequence, that the like should be in the effects.
Therefore the same vices, which were then in the men of this and that
condition, are now also, although perhaps the names be somewhat changed: as
the Comedies of Plautus and Terence, are at this day the very same Comedies, A
similitude.
which they were a thousand years ago, albeit, the persons, that then acted
them, be changed. Therefore, as that rude and carnal people, did think that
then they did especially please GOD, when they did offer such sacrifices, and
did fast after that manner, and did celebrate such feasts according to the
letter, and not according to the spirit: so also now in our time, there are
many Christians, which every Sabbath, and at all occasions frequent the Church,
who are called very good Churchmen, and do run from sermon to sermon, and
perform such like things, and that well. But in the meane-time their desires
are so full of vainglory, they so gape after honors and riches; and are so
desirous of revenge, as any other that never observes any such thing. They
remember not what their profession requires, they have no care of their
neighbors good, they persevere in hatred, and passions, they maintain their
honor with tooth and nail, they will not humble themselves, to give reverence
and place unto others, no not for the rule of the whole world.

Moreover, there are others that disdain to confer and enter talk with their
neighbor, for every small trifling cause: and there are others, that either
do not, or very unwillingly and grudgingly do satisfy their Creditors: much
less pay the wages due unto their painful servants and hirelings: and if
perhaps they be wronged in the least title of their honor, or riches, or such
like things, good Lord, what hurly burleys do they raise? Many of the^ that
are most liberal in pouring forth long prayers, and very prodigal in
discoursing Scripture matters, oftentimes are exceeding miserable and very
niggards in giving alms, and helping their needy neighbors. Many of them hold
up their hands to heaven, and in the villainy of their deceitful hypocrisy,
turn up the white of their eyes in their prayers, as though they were ravished
with the heauenlinesse of their meditations, when their hearts are set upon
mischief, being full of hatred, bitterness, and selfe-conceited singularity.
There are others that will not eat flesh in Lent, and upon days prohibited,
not for any thing, no not for a thousand pound: nevertheless, they mutter,
murmurre, and repine without any fear of GOD, and most cruelly cut the
throats of their neighbors, by enhancing of rents, by taking unmerciful
fines, and by other extortions, so that they grind their faces, and make their
life's irksome unto them. So that there be some that count it a religion, and
make very holy of it to eat the flesh of creatures permitted of God for the
food of man; but they make no bones of it to eat up and devour the flesh of
men, and to rid them, like cruel Caniballs, out of their life's; then the
which thing I know not whether any thing is more strictly forbidden of God. And
yet the welfare of our neighbor, the tendering of his fame and honor, are one
of the especial matters, of which we shall render an exact account unto God,
of which those men are not much careful, which greatly account of others
things, which in the truth of the matter are much less.

There is not any body that can deny, but that these and such like things, do
daily reign among Clergy and Laiety, among all sorts of people. Therefore,
seeing that this evil is so universal, it were needful that we should
deliver men from so great errors, by propounding unto them sound instructions,
and by prescribing wholesome admonitions; especially seeing that they whose duty
and function it is, do it not. But that the Christian Reader may hence suck
greater commodity, and that he may not swallow poison in stead of a medicine,
it is needful before all things, that he know the pulse and vain of his own
disposition and inclination, that he know of what spirit he is, that he may
learn what his mind is most chiefly bent and inclined to. For there are
certain general doctrines, which are profitable for all in general, and for
every one in particular; as are the precepts of Charity, Humility, Patience,
and such like. There are others more special, which do so profit some, that
they are not fit for all. For example: There is one very scrupulous, his
conscience is to be enlarged. On the otherside, there is another, whose
conscience retcheth like Cheuerill, that has a large conscience, his is to be
restrained and brideled: to those that are faynt-harted and do despair, the
divine mercy is to be preached: but to those, that be headstrong, stifenecked,
secure and presumptuous, the divine justice is to be denounced, and so we may
say of the rest, according to the counsel of Ecclesiasticus, saying; With a
man irreligious, talk of religion, with an unjust man of justice: Ecclus, 37,
and with a woman of those she is jealous of: with a fearful man of war,
with an envious man of thanksgiving, with a wicked man of godliness, and with
an dishonest man of honesty, etc.

Seeing therefore that there are two kinds of men, certain of which do more
apply themselves to inward virtues, never caring for the outward, nor much
esteeming them: others so love the outward, and are so studious of them, that
they neglect the inward: therefore these are to be persuaded unto them, and the
other unto others, that by this means their humors may be reduced to a due
proportion. For which cause we also have so tempered our style, that we have
seated every one in his due place: by extolling the greater without prejudice
of the lesser, and by depressing the lesser, that they may not prejudice the
greater: that by this means we may be altogether secure and safe from those
two most dangerous Rocks, being by great industry taught and warned, how we
may eschew them: one of these is, so much to esteem internal exercises, that
we neglect external: the other is, so to account of external, that we omit
the internal: especial, the fear of the Lord, and hatred of sin. Therefore
the sum of this whole business is, to have deep rooting in the fear of the
Lord, so that we fear at the only name of sin. He that has this firm and
steadfast root fixed in his soul, he may be called happy, and upon this
foundation he may build what he will. But he that is easily induced to commit
sin, let him assuredly know, that he is most miserable, blind, and most
unhappy, although he has all the colorable paintings of sanctity, that are
in the world.

The second admonition, wherein is handled the diversity of estates, and sundry
manners of livings in the Church. CHAP. XX.
This second admonition teaches, that one should not judge another in the
manner of his living. For we must know, that seeing there are many virtues,
which are required, that a man may live christianly, some are given to this
man, others to that, which direct a man to God, and bring him unto him; the
greater part of which pertain to a contemplative life: by some a man is taught
his duty to his neighbor, which pertain to an active life, and some there
are, which respect a man's self, Diverse means to obtain grace.
which especially belong unto a private life. Furthermore, seeing that all
virtues are as certain means, by which the grace of the holy Ghost is
obtained, some endeavor to obtain it by this means, others by that. Some
seek for the dew of grace, and a blessing to be poured upon their souls by
fasting, discipline, and austerenes of life; some by alms and the works of
mercy; others by prayers and continual meditations: in which last mean there
is as great variety, as there are prayers and meditations. For this form and
manner of prayer and meditation likes this man, and that another: and as there
are many things to meditate on, so are there sundry kinds of meditations;
amongst which that is the best, whatsoever it be, in which a man finds
greater devotion, and more profit. But we must observe here; Every one likes
his own way best.
that oftentimes it comes to pass, that an error meets with the lovers of
virtue; for there are some when they have found some profit by this or that
mean, and by the benefit of it have somewhat profited in the way of the Lord,
forthwith they persuade themselves, that there is no other means to serve God,
and please him, besides that, which they use, and in which they are conversant:
they would have all men to follow that, and they think that they that enter not
into this way, and walk not in this path, shall not come unto life.

They that deuote themselves wholly unto Prayer think that prayer is the only
way to salvation: they that wholly apply themselves unto fasting, think that
all things besides fasting are in vain: they that bestow themselves upon the
contemplative life, think that they that are not contemplative, are in very
great danger: and they are so in love with this their opinion, that they reject
the active life as altogether unprofitable. Contrarily they that give
themselves to an active life, because they never tried, what sweetness passes
between God and the soul in holy contemplation and meditation; and seeing the
manifest and visible profit that redoundeth of an active life, they so
extenuate the contemplative life, that scarce they allow of a pure
contemplative, unless it have some of the active joined and mingled with it;
but they so judge of it, as if it were in every ones power to be right
excellent in that kind. In like manner they that have wholly devoted and
consecrated themselves unto prayer, they think that every ones prayers besides
theirs are unfruitful; and he that bestows his pains upon vocal and lip
prayer, says that it is more laborious then the other, and therefore of
greater acceptance.

After this manner every Merchant, as it is in the Proverb, prayseth his own
wares: and so by a close and secret manner of pride, not knowing what he does,
prayseth himself: extolling that, he himself does, because in it he feels
greater commodity. Therefore it happens in virtues, as in sciences, every one
of which is commended to the skies of him, Every one prayseth that science
wherein he excell^th.
that excels in it; of whom also in like manner all other are contemned as
unprofitable. The Orator says that in the world there is not any thing more
noble then eloquence. The Astrologer affirms, that Astrology carries the
bell from all other Arts, because it is conversant about the heavens and the
stars. The same the Philosopher says of Philosophy. The School Divine not
knowing to keep a mean, condemns all other sciences, and places his throne
above them all. Neither are likely reasons wanting to any of them, to prove
their sciences and faculties to be better, more profitable, and more necessary
then other. Therefore that which is openly and notoriously known in sciences,
is found also in virtues; but somewhat more obscurely. For every one that
desires virtue, in one respect coueteth to choose that which is the best, and
in another respect which is more agreeable to his nature: and therefore he
supposes, that to be conducent to all, which is convenient for him; and that
the shoes that fit his feet, are fit for all other.

Hence arise rash judgments of other men's life's; hence spring contentions, and
spiritual schisms among brethren: for one embraces what another condemns,
while all do not follow one way. In this error lived the Corinthians, who
when they had received of God many and sundry gifts, every one judged his own
more excellent then the rest: and therefore one would be preferred before
another: for some said that the grace of tongues was nobler then the rest;
others the gift of Prophecy; some s^^d the interpretation of the Scriptures
was to be preferred, others affirmed the gift of miracles was the excellentest
of all other: others also defended the excellency and prerogative of their
own gifts. Against this error and abuse, there is no remedy more profitable,
or more effectual the^ that, which Saint Paul uses, in his former Epistle
sent unto the^: in which, first he reduces all graces to their beginning,
saying that all graces are rivers of one fountain, that is, of the holy Ghost:
and that therefore they all participate of one equality in their cause,
although they be diverse and sundry among themselves. Even as the members of one
body of any King are all members of the King, A similitude.
being derived from one royal blood, although they be diverse among themselves:
so says the Apostle; By one spirit we are baptized into one body: 1, Cor. 12.
that we may be members of one body. And therefore we all participate of one
and the self same dignity and glory, seeing that we are all members of the
same head. Wherefore the Apostleforth-with adds; If the foot would say,
Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the
body? And if the ear would say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the
body, is it therefore not of the body? We all therefore are made equal, that
among all there might be unity and brotherhood, albeit there is some diversity
between us. This arises partly of nature, and partly of grace. We say partly
of nature; for although grace is the beginning of all our spiritual Being; A
similitude.
yet grace, as water received into diverse vessels, does put on diverse figures
and shapes, according to the disposition and nature of every one. For there are
some men by nature modest, mild, The vari^ty of grace by nature.
and quiet, and therefore very fit for a contemplative life. Others are
choleric, and delighted in practice and action, and therefore more fit for an
active life; others are strong and of a sound and healthful constitution, who
do not much tender and affect themselves, and these are meet for greater
austerity of life. In this the goodness and mercy of God shines after a
singular manner, who willing to divide and communicate himself unto all, he
would not do it only after one manner, but after many and diverse, according
to the variety of man's condition, that the man that is not fit for some one
mean and gift, might be fit for another.

The other reason is, this diversity is grace: for the holy Spirit the Author
of it, would that among his there should be variety, to the greater perfection
and beauty of the Church. Variety by grace, and why God would have variety of
gifts in his Church.
For even as diverse members and diverse senses are required to the perfection
and beauty of the body: so also it is required for the perfection and beauty of
the Church, that there should be diverse virtues and graces. For if all the
faithful were of one and the self same condition, how should they be called a
body? If the whole body were an eye, 1, Corin, 12
says Paul, where were the hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the
smelling? But now has God disposed the members, every one of them in the body
at his own pleasure. But God would that there should be many members, and yet
one body, that when there were a multitude conjoined in unity, there might be a
proportion and an harmonious concord of many in one: and hence arises the
perfection and beauty of the Church. Such a like thing we see in Music, where
it behooves that there be diversity and multitude of voces with unity and
agreeablenes of consent in tune: A similitude,
so that there may be sweetness and melody in it. If all the voices were of one
quality and stamp, they should all be either Baces or Means, which would
make neither music nor harmony.

In natural things also it is admirable to see so great diversity of things,
as that high and almighty Work-maister has made, who has divided and bestowed
beauty and perfection upon all creatures in that order, that although every
one of them have somewhat in themselves in which they excel the rest, yet
there is no envy amongst the^: because every one of them has some prerogative,
There is a certain diversity in yc creatures.
which in others is not the same. The Peacocke is very beautiful to the sight,
but makes a rank and an unpleasant noise. The Nightingale sings sweetly;
but is not so fair to the sight. An Horse is good for the race, and profitable
for war; but not good for food, or fit for the table. The Ox is profitable
for the table and the plough, but unprofitable for other things. Fruitful
trees do serve for the nourishment of men, but are unfit for building:
contrarily, wild and barren trees are fit for building, but unapt to serve for
food. Therefore amongst all things, there is both a certain unity and a
division, neither in one thing are all things found, that by this means the
variety and beauty of the Universe, and the form and shapes of things might be
preserved; that one may love and embrace another, for that need which one
stands of another.

The same beauty and order, which GOD has ordained and appointed in the works
of nature, he would that it should be also in the works of grace: and therefore
he has disposed by his Spirit, that there should be a thousand kind of
virtues and graces in Church, that of all them there might arise one most sweet
harmony, one perfect world, and one beautiful body, compounded of diverse and
sundry members. Hence it is that in the Church some are given to a
contemplative life, some to an active: one is famous and excellent in the works
of obedience, another in prayer. Some in singing, others in studying do
exercise their gifts, that they may help and further others: some attend upon
the weak, and receive strangers, who divide their goods to the poor, and many
other such kind of virtuous exercises there be. Therefore there be many
members in one body, and many voices in one music, that by this means there
may be comlines, consonancie, and proportion in the Church: and therefore in
one Harp there are many strings, and in one Organ many pipes: that by this
means there may be a consonancie and an harmony of many tunes. This is that
garment which the Patriarch Jacob commanded to be made for his son Joseph,
Gene, 37,
of diverse colors. These are those Curtains, which by the commandment of
God were made for the use of the Tabernacle of wonderful variety and beauty.
That the same should be done, both the order and beauty of the Church required.
Therefore why should one eat up another? Why should one judge and condemn
another, saying: Why is it not lawful for one to do that another does? I know
not what other thing this is, then to go about to destroy the body of the
Church, and to tear in pieces Joseph's beauteous garment, and to disturb this
heavenly music and harmony: that is, to make all the members of the Church,
feet, or hands, or eyes, etc. which certainly were monstrous beyond measure.

It is an evil thing to envy our neighbor. A similitude.
By this it manifestly appears, how great wickedness it is to speak ill of, or
envy our neighbor: because he has, that I have not, or because he is not apt
for that function I am. Surely the body should be in ill case, if the eyes
should contemn the feet because they see not: and the feet should murmr
against the eyes, because they walk not, and should oppose themselves against
the whole body, because the burden of the body is imposed upon them. It is
altogether necessary, that the feet should be weary with going, but that the
eyes should rest; that the feet should be polluted with dirt and mire, but
that the eyes should be kept clean and pure from all dust and moates: neither
do the eyes less in being at rest, then the feet in walking: neither does
the Pilot less sitting, and holding the stern in his hand, A similitude.
neither is less necessary for the ship, then all the other Mariners, which
either climb the mast, or hoyse up the sails, or labor at the pumpe: yea
albeit he seems to do the least of all, yet he does the most of all; for
the excellency of a thing is not to be esteemed by labors, but by the profit
and necessity: unless we will say that an husbandman, who diggeth and tylleth
the ground, is of better esteem in a Commonwealth, then a vvise-man, that
governs the Commonwealth by his advice and wisdom. He therefore that well
considers these things, will leave his vocation and calling to every man:
that is, that a foot may continue a foot, and a hand a hand: neither will
the foot desire that all the members might be feet; neither the hand, that
all should be hands. This is that, which in that most large disputation the
Apostle would teach in the Epistle cited a little before; the same thing he
also admonishes when he says; Let not him that eats, Rom, 14,
despise him that eats not, and let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats. For he that eats, perhaps has need to eat: yet he may be endued
with more excellent virtues, then he that fasteth. For even as in song, the
notes in the space are are valuable, A similitude,
as those in the line: so in the harmony of the spiritual music of the
Church, he is no less valuable that eats, then he that eats not: and he
that is at quiet and rest, no less acceptable then he that is occupied, or he
that in his leisure labors to edify his neighbor. The same thing with
great vehemency S. Bernard teaches, commanding that no man should curiously
look into or search their life's, who are placed in offices to censure and try
others, or do execute functions of Judges and Rulers: neither that any man
should judge of another man's life, or compare his life with another.

The third admonition is of the care and watch, which a religious man ought to
have over his actions. CHAP. XXI.
LEt this be the third admonition; Seeing that in this rule sundry kinds of
virtues and instructions are to be remembered, which pertain to the right
ordering and framing of the life; and our understanding being not capable to
entertayne all together and at once, I think that I shall not do amiss, if I
now join to the former a certain general virtue, which contains all the
rest, and which, as much as may be, supplieth the place of all the rest. This
is a continual care and a watch, and perpetual examining of those things,
Continual care, a general virtue.
which are to be done or spoken, that all things may be directed by the
guydance of reason. That as an Ambassador being to speak in the assembly of an
honorable Senate, at one and the selfsame time stands carefully thinking
of the matters he is to speak of: A similitude.
and of the words by which he is to utter them; and of the order which he is
to observe in speaking, and also of the gesture of his body, and of other
things necessary for this action: so the servant of God, ought diligently,
carefully, and circumspectly to watch over him self, and over all his actions
in speaking, in silence, in demanding, in aunswering, in trafficking, in
sitting at table, in the market, in the Church, in the house, and without the
house, as holding a compass in his hand, measuring and moderating all his
actions, works and thoughts: that he may proceed in all things according to the
prescript of the divine law, according to the rule of reason, and the decency
of his person. For albeit there is very great difference between good and
evil, yet God has infused and imprinted a certain light and knowledge of
either in our souls: so that a man can scarcely be found, albeit he be rude
and simple, who if he diligently attend that he does, but he may understand,
what he ought to do in every thing. And this care and consideration is
profitable to all the documents and instructions of this rule, and of many
other. This care is that, which is commended of the holy Ghost, when he says;
Keep therefore your souls carefully and diligently. And this is that third
part of righteousness and justice, Deuteronomy. 4.
which the Prophet Micheas insinuates, saying; Walk humbly, carefully, and
circumspectly with thy God. Mich. 6.
This is nothing else, then a perpetual care and a continual thought, that
thou do not any thing, which is contrary to the Divine will. This is that,
which that multitude of eyes in those mystical creatures of Ezechiell do
signify, which intimates unto us the greatness of attention and
circumspection, which a Christian Soldier ought to have against so many and so
terrible enemies, with which he is to fight. The same thing those threescore
strong and valiant men of Israel do signify, who compass the bed of
Solomon, Cant. 3.
who al handle the sword, and are expert in war. For in this the same care
and vigilance is signified, in which an armed man ought to be, who is compassed
and cirkled about with the troops of so many enemies, and endangered with hands
of so great cruelty. The cause of this care, besides many other dangers, is the
greatness and weight of this business, especial in them that aspire to the
perfection of a spiritual life. For to live and converse worthily with God, is
to keep himself clean and pure from all the spots of this world; to live in
this flesh without any sign of carnal work or affection; and to walk
without offense until the day of the Lord, as the Apostle says. These things
are so hard and so supernatural, that all things are required here, Phil. 1.
yea, God himself, with his grace and help. Behold the care and
circumspection, which a man has, when he does any special piece of work: but
much greater is the work of salvation. Therefore what care is here required?
Consider with what great care a man bears any vessel brim full of precious
liquor or oil, A similitude.
least it should be spilld: Consider with what great care a man goes over any
narrow piece of timber, or some old and ruinous bridge, under which a very
deep and a swift river runs, least he should fall into it, and be devoured
of the water: To be brief, consider what great warines they use that go upon
ropes, least they declining to this hand or that fall down. In the beginning
of our conversion we must walk warily and circumspectly.
With the same care and warines thou ought to walk, especially in the
beginning of thy conversion, that a good habit may be formed and framed in
thee, with a thought and an intent so exact, that thou speak not a word, nor
think any thing, as much as is possible, which any whit strayeth from the path
of virtue. Certain counsels. Seneca.
For this Seneca gives us excellent counsel, and that which is familier,
saying: let a man that is virtuous, or that would live uprightly, imagine, that
he does always stand and walk in the presence of some man of great authority
and account: and who is worthy to be reverenced of all men: this imagination
being presupposed, let him speak and do all things none otherwise, then he
would do and speak, if he stood in his presence. Besides this advice, there
is another, no less convenient nor less profitable then the former: let a man
think that this is the last day of his life, and therefore that all things are
to be done, no otherwise, then if that day or that night following he were to
stand before the Divine tribunal, to render an account of his life. There is
yet another counsel much more excellent: Always so to be conversant (as much
as is possible) in the sight of the Lord, and to have him before his eyes, as
if he were present visibly and corporally, as in truth he is ^^uisibly present
in all places: and therefore to do all things no otherwise then he that has
God his witness and his Judge seeing all things: and let him always desire of
God grace so to be conversant, that he may not be unworthy the sight and
presence of so great a Majesty. So that this care and watch, which we now
speak of has two proposed scopes; one, to look upon God with our hearts, to
have them lifted up unto him, that we may stand before him with great
reverence, by worshipping him, by praising, by reuerencing, by loving him, by
yielding thanks unto him, and without intermission by offering unto him the
sacrifices of devotion, upon the alters of our hearts. The other scope is a
diligent observation of all our actions; that we do and speak all things with
that warines, that we do not stray in the least from the tract and path of
virtue. So that with one eye we always behold God, by requesting grace of him;
and with the other looking to that, which is conducent for our life, that it
may be well ordered: and after this manner we shall very well bestow that
light, which God has given unto us, as well in Divine things, as in humane.
Therefore we shall stand partly attending on God, and partly on that thing
which we are to do. The which thing although it cannot always be done, yet
let us do this, that at the least we may then proceed after this manner, when
our intent is not hindered by corporal exercises, yea, our heart is free, and
may steal somewhat from exterior businesses, and hide it self in the wounds
of Christ. I thought it very convenient to handle this instruction here,
because it is very profitable.

The fourth admonition of the fortitude, which is necessary for them, that
aspire unto virtue. CHAP. XXII.
THE precedent admonition has opened our eyes, that we are now able to see,
what we are to do: but this will reach us an arm; that is, fortitude and
courage, that we may be strengthened and enabled to do that, which the eyes
behold. For seeing that in Virtue there be two difficulties; Two difficulties
in virtue.
one that we may well distinguish good from evil, and separate this from that;
the other that we may conquer the one, and proceed in the other: in that we
have need of wisdom and vigilancie, in this of fortitude and diligence: so
that either of these failing, the business of Virtue remains imperfect. For
there will be blindness, if vigilance and foresight be wanting: and if
fortitude and courage fail, man being lame and feeble shall not be able to
work. This fortitude which we here speak of, is not that, which as a mean
tempereth and moderateth audaciousnes and fear, (for that is one among the
four cardinal virtues) but it is a certain general force and power,
profitable to overcome all difficulties, which hinder the use of Virtue: and
therefore it always walks in the company and fellowship of the virtues,
having as it were a sword in her hand, that she may open and prepare the way
for them, which way so ever they go. For Virtue (as the Philosophers say) is a
thing hard and difficult; and therefore it is needful, that this fortitude
always march in the vauntgard of the virtues, that she may lay to her helping
hand to overcome and conquer this difficulty. A similitude.
Therefore as a stone-cutter ought always to have his mallet in his hand, by
reason of the hard matter which he labors in; so a spiritual man of
necessity ought always to have in a readiness this fortitude, as a spiritual
mallet, to tame and overcome this difficulty, which meets with us in the way
of virtue. And as the stone-cutter shall do nothing to any purpose, unless he
has his mallet: so also the lover of Virtue without this fortitude shall sweat
in vain. Virtue is hard and difficult.
Tell me what instance of any virtue can thou give, which has not some
particular difficulty joined unto it? Consider of them severally, if it please
thee. Look into Prayer, fasting, obedience, temperance, poorenes of spirit,
patience, chastity, and humility. These and all other are always joined with
some difficulty, which comes either through our own self-love, or the malice
of the devil, or the crosnes and repugnacy of the world. Wherefore if thou
take away this fortitude, what can naked and unarmed Virtue do? and therefore
all other virtues do seem as it were bound hand and foot, neither can they
perform any thing. Wherefore, my brother, if thou desire to war in the
tents of Virtue, and to bring forth fruit in them, imagine that the Captain
and Emperor of Virtue does say unto thee, as he said in times past unto Moses,
although in another sense: Take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shall
do miracles, Exodus, 4.
and bring my people out of Egypt. Trust, doubt not, as that rod was the worker
of these miracles which effected so blessed and joyful a work; so also it is
the rod of fortitude, which will conquer and overcome all difficulties, which
may be procured and objected either of self-love, or of any other enemies, and
it will strengthen and enable thee to bring the wished victory from this war.
Therefore see that thou have it always in thine hand, for thou can do no
admirable thing without it.

The error of them which forthwith in the beginning of their conversion do
seek for peace.
In this place in my judgment they, that are newly inaugurated into Gods
Church, are to be admonished of a notable error, which oftentimes happen unto
them. Who perchance reading in some spiritual book of the greatness of the
sweetness and consolations of the holy Ghost, and how great the pleasant
allurements and enticements of charity be, forthwith they suppose that this
whole way is plain, full of deliciousnes, and that no labor nor trouble is to
be found in it: wherefore they prepare themselves to walk in this way, as to an
easy and delectable matter, neither do they arm themselves as those, who go
to war, but they put on a soft and a delicate robe, as if they were to go to
a marriage or a banquet. They do not consider, that although the love of God is
sweet and pleasant in it self and of it own nature, yet that the way unto it
is straight and bitter. For it is needful above all things to conquer and
overcome self-love, and to strive always against thy self: which fight is
greater then any other. Both of them that Evangelical Prophet insinuates,
Esaias, 58,
when he says; O Jerusalem shake off the dust, arise, and sit down. It is
certain that in sitting there is neither labor nor difficulty: but it is
labor to shake off the dust of earthly and carnal affections, and to arise
from the sin, in which we sleep: which is necessary to do, before we come
to that sitting and rest, It is true, that God bestows many and wonderful
comforts upon them, that faithfully labor; and in like manner upon them, who
now desire to change the delights ofthe world for the pleasures of heaven: yet
if this change be not made, and if a man will not leave the pray he has taken;
believe me, this refreshing and comfort shall not be given him: as neither
Manna was given to the children of Israel in the wilderness, before the dowe
was spent, which they brought with them out of Egypt.

Returning therefore to our purpose, I say, let those seek for rest as long as
they will, who are not armed with this fortitude, and let them know, that
unless they first change their minds and purpose, they shall not find it.
Let them know and assuredly believe, that quietness is not purchased but by
labor; that a crown is obtained by fighting; that joy is atchiued by
sorrowing, and that the most sweet love of God, is procured by hatred of our
selves. For this cause this idleness is so often reprehended in the Proverbs,
but fortitude and diligence commended: because the holy Spirit, the Author of
this doctrine, knew very well, that virtues are very much hindered by la^nes,
but aided and perfitted by fortitude and diligence.

Of the means by which this fortitude is obtained.
PErhaps some man will ask, by what means this fortitude may be procured and
atchiued, seeing that it is no less difficult, then the other virtues?
Wherefore not without cause the Wiseman thus begins his Alphabet full of
spiritual instructions; Who shall find a strong and a valiant woman? for her
price is far above the pearls. Prou, 31,
As if he should say, she is more precious then all the treasure and Iems,
which may be brought out of all the Coasts of the world. How then may we
compass a thing of so great price and value? We shall compass it, first, if
diligently we consider the dignity and excellency of it: for that ought to be
in great account with us, The sluggard flies from virtue by reason of the
difficulty.
which opens unto us the treasuries of all virtues. If it be otherwise, tell
me, why the lovers of this world do after that manner fly from virtue? Not
for any other cause, but because it is hard and difficult, which difficulty
sluggards do shun and fly. The slothful man says, (as the Wiseman
speaks,) Prou, 26,
A Lion is in the way, and a Lioness in the streets, in the midst of the way
she will devour me. And in another place; Ecclus, 4,
The fool foldeth his hands, and eats up his own flesh, saying: Better is
a handful with quietness, then two handfulls with labor and vexation of spirit.

Seeing therefore that there is no other thing that hinders us from coming
unto virtue, but this only difficulty; if we will embrace this fortitude to
overcome it, we have already obtained the kingdom of virtue, together with the
kingdom of heaven: to which no man shall come, but he that is valiant,
strong, and undaunted. In like manner, by this fortitude the love of our selves
is cast under foot, with the whole Army of her accomplices and confederats;
which enemy, when it is overthrown and cast forth, behold presently enters
in the love of God, or, if you had rather, God himself. For as Saint John
says; 1, John, 4,
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

The manifold examples of the servants of God do much avail and profit us,
whom we see here in the world poor, naked, bare-foote, and bare-legged,
leave, hungry, restless, having not where to lay their heads, and wanting all
those things, which are requisite for the maintenance of this life. The
seruent desire of some to serve God.
Some of them do so hasten to labors, and austerenes of life, where they may
live religiously and strictly, and not be entangled with the pleasures of this
life, as a Merchant to some rich mart, or a student of the liberal Sciences to
some famous University. What I pray thee, can be more contrary to the custom
of this world, and to the desires of her lovers, then that a man should seek
out those places, where his body may be pinched, his soul made heavy, and his
life exposed to many greeuances and troubles? These are assuredly most contrary
to flesh and blood, but very agreeable unto the Spirit of GOD. But yet more
especially our pleasures are condemned by the example of the Martyrs, who have
entered into the kingdom of heaven, by so many and so cruel torments.

Consider, The sundry and manifold trials and torments of Martyrs.
how one of them was roasted; another had his skin pulld over his ears, the
third, drowned in the water, the fourth, cast headlong from a steep Rock: a
fifth laid on a piece of vvood with a sharp ridge, his flesh being scraped and
rent of with a ragged tormenting Curry-combe, and his bowels being slitte out,
yielded up the ghost: a sixth has so many Darts sticking in him, that he is
liker an Hedg-hog then a man: the seventh is fried in a frying pan, or boiled
in scalding lead: others tormented with other extreme tortures. Consider how
many of them have been tormented, not with one kind of punishment, but with
all kind of torments, which humane nature has been capable of, and so have
passed to death. For some have been taken from the filthiness and uncleanness
of the prison to be whipped and scourged; from whipping and scourging to be
singed with burning coals; from burning coals to the bastinado; from the
bastinado to iron combs; then to the sword, which alone had been sufficient
to take away the life of the Martyrs; but not to make them shipwreck their
faith or constancy.

But what shall I speak of the arts, and inventions, which that ingenious and
witty cruelty (I say not of men but of devils) has devised, to ouer-throw and
confound with corporal tortures, faith, courage, and fortitude? Some of them,
after they were most cruelly martyred, and their flesh all to be-torne and
rent, were cast upon a floare all set with goades and pricks; that their
bodies all at once might be goared and (...) with a thousand wounds: and that
they might feel a general grief throughout all their members, that their
intolerable pain, might strive for victory with their faith.

Others being condemned, were commanded to walk upon hot burning coals
with their naked feet. Others being tied to the tails of horses, were drawn
over thorns and briars, and rough places. Others were condemned to wheels
stuck all round about with sharp knives, that their bodies being put upon
them, whilst they turned about might be cut small pieces. Others were
stretched upon Racks, and their bodies being harrowed and furrowed from top to
toe with iron crookes and peircers, did openly show their naked bowels, the
flesh being pulled of, and their ribs lying bare.

What shall I say more? seeing that the barbarous and more then beastly cruelty
of Tyrants, not being contented with these torments, By this kind of death
religious and constant Corona ended her life.
has found out a certain new kind of cruelty. With certain instruments they
so brought together two high sturdie trees, that their tops touched one the
other; to one of these tops they bound the right foot of the Martyr, to the
other the left. Then losing the Trees to their old scope, they carried the body
with them, and violently tare it in pieces, and each tree carried with it his
part into the air. In Nicomedia, among other innumerable Martyrs, one was
beaten so long, till his white ribbs appeared through his bloody wounds, An
horrible kind of mar tyrdome.
for the scourges and whippings had peece-meale pulled away the flesh; then they
washed his whole body with most strong vinegar, and after vinegar stuffed all
his wounds full of salt. The Tyrants not yet satisfied with these dire
discruciatements, and extreme tortures, when they saw that the Martyr yet
breathed, they cast his half dead body upon a gridyron, under which they made
a fierce scorching fire, haling the gridyron this way and that with their iron
hooks, until the body being fully roasted, the sanctified and pure-purged
soul, passed to the Lord. And thus those most barbarous and inhumane butcherly
murderers, invented tortures more cruel the^ death, which notwithstanding was
wont to be termed the terriblest of all dreadful things. For they sought not so
much to kill, as to slay with unheard of torments, without any deadly wound, by
a lingering death, and with intolerable greatness of dolours and sorrows.

Surely these Martyrs had not bodies unlike to ours, or which were of another
substance: their flesh was as our flesh; and their complexion was the same with
ours: neither had they another God for their helper, besides our God: neither
did look for another glory, then that we look for. Proceed therefore, if
they have obtained eternal life by so violent death, why should we fear for
the same cause at the least to mortify the evil concupiscences of our flesh?
If they died through hunger, wilt not thou fast one day? If they with their
mangled bodies perseuered in prayer, why wilt not thou being sound and in
health with bended knees continue a little in prayer? If they were so patient,
that without resisting or contradiction they suffered their members to be
maimed and detruncate, and their flesh to be torn in pieces, why wilt not thou
abide that thine appetites and thine unruly affections should be circumcised
and mortified? If they many years and many months sat imprisoned in dark
dungeons, why wilt not thou a little be contained and shut up in thy chamber?
If they have not refused to have their shoulders furrowed and mangled with
whips and scourges, why wilt not thou chastise thine?

If these examples do not suffice thee, lift up thine eyes to the Cross of
Christ, and behold who is he, that hanging upon it suffered so great and so
cruel things for the love of thee. The Apostle says: Consider him that
endured such speaking against of sinners, Heb. 12.
least ye should be wearied and faint in your minds. This is a fearful and a
dreadful example, what way so ever thou shall consider of it. For if thou
look upon the torments, there can be no greater. If thou respectest the
person, who suffers, a more excellent cannot be given. If thou examinest the
cause for which he suffers, not for his own offense, for he is innocence it
self; neither suffers he of compulsion, for he is the Creator and Lord of
all creatures: but of his mere goodness, and free love. Yet for all this he
suffered so great torments, not only in his body, but also in his soul, that
the torments of all Martyrs, and of all men that ever have been in the world,
are not to be compared with these. This was such a spectacle, that the heavens
were astonished; the earth trembled, rocks claue in sunder, and all the
insencible creatures felt the indignity of the thing. How therefore comes it
to pass, that man should be so insencible and blockish, that he should not
feel that, which the brute elements have felt? with what face can he be so
ungrateful, that he should not study somewhat to imitate him, who has done
and suffered so great things, that he might leave us an example? Luke. 24.
For even so, as the Lord himself affirms, Christ ought to have suffered,
and so to enter into his glory. For seeing that he came into the world, that he
might teach that heaven is not to be compassed by any other way then by the
Cross, it was necessary that the Lord himself should first be crucified, that
a courage might be put into his Soldiers, seeing their Captain to be so
cruelly and inhumanely handled and entreated. Who then will be so ungrateful,
wicked, proud, and impudent, who seeing the Lord of Majesty, with all his
friends and chosen ones to walk such difficult ways, and yet he himself will
be carried in an Horse-litter, and on a bed of Down, and led his life in
deliciousnes? King David commanded Vrias, whom he had called from war, to
go into his own house, to sup and sleep with his wife: 2, Kings. 11.
but the good servant answered; The Arc, and Israel and Judah dwell in tents:
and my Lord Ioab and the servants of my Lord abide in the open fields: shall I
then go into mine house to eat and drink, and lie with my wife? by thy life,
and by the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing. O good and faithful
servant; who by so much is worthier of praise, by how much he is vnworthier of
death. And thou o Christian, seeing thy Lord lying upon an hard Cross, have
thou no respect of him, neither do thou yield honor, and reverence unto
him? The Ark of God made of incorruptible Ceder wood suffers griefs and
dolours, and undergoes most bitter death, and do thou seek for pleasures
and delicacies? The Arc in which Manna was put (that is the food of Angels)
for the love of thee tasted gall and vinegar, and do thou long and hunt
after sweet and delicious meats? The Arc in which the two tables of the law
were (that is all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God) is
mocked, and derided as foolish, and will thou be smoothed and praised, and
do thou gape after honors and preferments?

But if the example of this mystical Arc be not sufficient to confound thee,
let the afflictions of the servants of God, which abide and remain upon the
face of the earth be joined unto it: that is, the examples, and passions of all
the Saints, Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, who with so many and so
great tribulations have sailed over the huge and turbulent Sea of this world.
Heb. 11.
Whereupon one of them says; The Saints have been tried by mockings and
scurgings, yea, moreover by bonds and prisoment. They were stoned, they were
hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they
wandered up and down in sheeps skins, and in goats skins being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented: who^ the world was not worthy of: they wandered in
wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth. And these all
through faith obtained good report: And among so many tribulations were found
faithful unto God.

If therefore the life of the Saints was such yea, if the life of the Holy of
Holies was such, surely I know not by what title, privilege, or immunity some
do think, to enter by the pleasures and delights of this world into that
place, where these do now joy, and for ever shall rejoice. Wherefore, my
brother, if thou desire to reign with them, learn to imitate them, learn
to bear and suffer the troubles and discommodities of this life.

This exhortation will be profitable unto thee, to kindle and inflame thee with
the love of this virtue and fortitude, and that thou seek for it and after it
so long, until at the length thou come to the perfection of that soul, of
who^ it is read, that she girded her loins with strength, Prou. 31.
and strengthened her arms. And that this chapter may simbolize and agree with
the whole doctrine of this second Book, I will use that most excellent and
noble sentence of our Savior: If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross daily, Luke. 9.
and follow me. In which words this heavenly Teacher has comprehended the sum
of the whole doctrine of the Gospel, which is for this end ordained, that it
might make a man Evangelical and perfect: who deriuing the original of his
inward man from heaven, in his outward might take up the Cross: and through
the sweetness of the one might willingly embrace all the afflictions of the
other.

The end of the second Book of the Sinners Guide. LAVS TRI-VNI DEO.

A necessary Table, directing the Reader to every Chapter in this Book, and to
every particular Argument handled in each Chapter.
THE Prologue of the first book. Matters handled in the prologue. page, 1. The
division of the book. Two things required unto piety. page, 2. Whence the
division of the book grows. Ibidem. The Argument of the first book. page,
7. In the first book, is contained a large and copious exhortation to keep
Gods commandments. page, 9.
The Chapters of the first part of the first Book.
The first Chapter.
The first Title. That man is bound to seek after Virtue, and to serve GOD:
and of the excellency of the divine perfection. page. 9.
The several matters handled in this Chapter.
Honesty and profit are to be considered of in every action. ibidem. GOD is
that he is. page, 10 The Epicures teach that God is to be served. ibidem. The
kingdom of God is not by succession. page, 11, Why men are less moved with
the perfection of God. 12, In the co^templation of God, we must turn our eyes
from all creatures. ibid. Three things are to be marked in every thing, the
Being, the Ability, and the Work. page, 17
The second Chapter.
The second Title. Of the bond in which we are bound to Virtue, and to attend
upon God, by reason of the benefit of our creation. page, 21
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Honor is due to God, because he is our Father. page, 22, By the consideration
of the creation, man does come to the knowledge of his Creator. ibidem God
requires of us gratefulnes and thanksgiving. page, 24, That the benefits of
Nature are of GOD. page, 25, Another reason, why we are bound to serve God our
Lord, because he is our Creator. page 26, All things that are borne, are not by
and by perfect. ibidem All things without God, are nothing. page, 28
The third Chapter.
The third Title. How we are bound to the Lord God, by reason of the benefit of
preservation and governing. page, 29,
The matters handled in this Chapter.
All things are created for the use of man, page, 30, The expostulation of the
elements with man, page, 31, The creatures do call upon us with three words,
32, That it may be gathered of these aforesaid, how unworthy and how vild a
thing it is, not to serve the Lord God. page, 33, Men like unto Swine. page,
34, The ingratitude of men is convinced, by the gratitude of Lions, page, 34,
35, 36. Of Horses, page, 36. Of dogs, page, 36, 37. Diverse degrees of
ingratitude, page 38, Men do abuse the gyfts of God to the injury of the
gyuer. ibid.
The fourth Chapter.
The fourth Title. That we are bound unto Virtue by reason of the inestimable
benefit of our Redemption. page, 40.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The beginning of man's perdition. page, 41, The admirable mystery of the
incarnation. 42 We are bound to God, not only for our redemption, but for the
manner of it. page, 43, The means by which we are redeemed, 44 The Angels were
astonished at the passion of our Lord. 45, The Lord suffered not only for all
in general, but also for every one in particular. page, 47, Of this aforesaid
is gathered, how great an offense it is to offend our Savior. ibidem. For
three things man owes himself unto God. ibidem The hardness of man's heart.
ibidem All things are given unto us of God. page, 49, By how many ways God is
ours, ibidem A dog bewrays a murderer, page, 50, Our sins nailed the
Lord to the Cross. ibidem,
The fifth Chapter.
The fifth Title. How we are bound to follow Virtue, by reason of our
justification. page, 51,
The matters handled in this Chapter.
What justification is. page, 52 No man can be justified by his own strength,
ibidem What great blessings justification brings with it. page, 53, It
reconcileth man to God. ibidem It makes us the sons of God, ibidem By
Justification man is freed from eternal punishment. page, 54, Justification
does renew a man. page, 55 What mischief sins work to the soul. ibidem.
The beauty of a justified soul. page, 56, By justification God dwells in us,
page, 57 Justification does make us the lively members of Christ, ibidem.
Confidence in prayer. page, 58, Christ is honored, when a righteous man is
honored. ibid. By justification, eternal life is given. ibidem Justification
is of greater value then creation, 59, How to know whether we be justified or
not. ibidem Of many effects which the holy Ghost works in a justified soul.
60, Graces waiting upon the holy Ghost. ibidem. After what manner the holy
Ghost sits in the soul of a righteous man, and what he does there. ibidem,
The holy Ghost is fire, a dove, a cloud, a wind. ibidem, and page, 61.
The sixth Chapter.
The sixth Title. That the inestimable benefit of the Divine predestination does
bind us unto Virtue. page, 63.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Election is the foundation of all benefits, page, 64. Perseverance in goodness
is a sign of election, ibidem. The circumstances in election are to be
considered. page, 65. An Apostrophe to a beggar but elected. page, 67.
The seventh Chapter.
The seventh Title. That man is bound to follow and embrace Virtue, by reason
of the first of those four last things, which happen unto him, which is death.
page, 69.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
A rehearsal of the four last things, that happen unto man; to wit: Death,
Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, Ibidem, A terrible and fearful history out of
Climacus, 70, Death certain, but the hour of death uncertain, 71, The danger
in which he that dies is, 74, Fear the mightiest perturbation of the mind,
75, The Sun goes down at noone to the wicked, ibidem, The things that
before seemed pleasant, in death are bitter, ibidem, The accout that shall be
required of us. 76. The history of Arsenius out of the life's of the Fathers,
77, The history of Agathon, out of the same book, ibidem, A fearful example
of one Stephanus, that led a solitary life out of Climacus. ibidem, Why the
Saints do fear in death, 79. Nothing is of force in the hour of death, 80,
The lamentation of a sinner at the hour of death, page, 81,
The eight Chapter.
The eight Title. That man is bound to desire Virtue, by reason of that second
last thing that happens unto him; which is the last judgment, page, 82,
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The shame of sinners in the last judgment, page, 84, How fearful the
sentence of the Judge is, ibidem, The pains of the damned, 85, The blasphemies
of the damned, ibidem, For what sins men are damned, 88, Certain excellent
comparisons, that agrauate the pains of the damned, and the terror of the
last judgment, page, 90, Repentance too late, ibidem, Our accusers in the last
judgment, ibidem,
The ninth Chapter.
The ninth Title. That man is bound to the exercise of Virtue, by reason of the
third last thing that happens unto him, which is the glory of heaven. page,
91,
The matters handled in this Chapter.
What things are handled in this Chapter; to wit, the reward of the virtuous,
which is, the glory of heaven, in which two things are to be looked unto; the
beauty of the place, and the dignity of the King, ibidem. The beauty of heaven
is gathered by conjectures, ibidem, The first conjecture is from the end why
heaven was made, 92, The second conjecture, that it was not only made for Gods
honor, but also for the honor of his elect, page, 93. The third conjecture;
the price by which it was purchased; by the death of God. page, 95 The fourth
conjecture; the situation and height of the place, 97 The fifth conjecture; the
proportion of the three kind of places, 98. The sixth conjecture; the
inhabitants dwelling in heaven, 99, The power of the Lord. page, 92, Reasons
why Heaven should be absolute and perfect. 93 All things obey the righteous,
even in this world. ibid. Christ gave more to his Saints then he used himself,
page, 94 The price that must be given for the celestial glory, 95 The
quantity and quality of the glory of heaven, is argued by the greatness of the
place. page, 97 The beauty of the earth. ibidem Three kind of places appointed
to men of God, 98 From the noblenes of the inhabitants, we may guess of the
glory of heaven. page, 99, Essential glory. ibidem God is the perfection of
all things. 100 God is all in all. ibidem The mystery of Circumcision, 101 All
things are to be suffered for the heavenly glory. 102
The tenth Chapter.
The tenth Title. That the last of those four last things, that happen unto
us, that is Hellfire, does bind us to seek after Virtue. 104
The matters handled in this Chapter.
There are but two ways. ibidem The greatness of the punishment in hell, by
reason of the greatness of God. page, 105. The greatness of the justice of God.
107 The greatness of the punishmens of hell, is gathered by the punishments of
this life. ibidem Of the mercy of God the greatness of the punishment is
gathered. 108 The two commings of Christ compared. 109 The punishment ought to
be like to the sin. page, 111 From the person of the executioner, that is, of
the devil, the greatness of the punishment is gathered. page, 112, A
fearful and horrible example of one Theodorus, out of S. Gregory's Dialogues.
ibidem A description of the devils power, page, 114, The Conclusion. page, 115,
Of the eternity of these punishments. 116, A fearful saying, of the eternity
of the punishments in hell. ibid. A notable Allegory of the Furnace, which King
Nabuchodonozer commanded to be heat in Babylon. 118
The second part of the first book.
In this second part are handle^ the temporal and spiritual blessings, which
in this life are promised to Virtue; and more particularly the twelve more
notable and famous privileges and prerogatives, which are found in Virtue.
page, 120
The Chapters of the second part of the first book.
The eleventh Chapter.
The eleventh Title. That we are bound unto Virtue, by reason of the
inestimable blessings, which are promised in this present life. ibid.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
It is a wonder that among Christians so many men are found wicked and vicious.
ibidem Whence this negligence of men is. page, 121 All things happen a like to
the good and evil. ibidem. Men are ignorant of those good things that are in
Virtue. page, 123 Virtue like unto Christ. ibidem Helps of God, by which we
overcome the difficulty of Virtue. 124 Virtue is an habit. ibidem A comparison
of the life of good men, and ill men. 125 Divine blandishments, with which the
righteous are cherished 126 Good men are truly rich. 127 All this afore-sayd,
is explaned by a notable sentence of the Gospel. ibid. What Christ means by
the hundredth fold in the tenth of Mark. 128 What goods be those that God
bestows upon the good. ibidem To the virtuous those things are unpleasant
which before did please. 129 A notable example of a noble Knight called
Arnulphus, taken out of the Book, called the book of famous and illustrious
men. ibidem The righteous have comfort and a sweet taste, yea in their greatest
griefs and sorrows. page, 130
The twelfth Chapter.
The twelfth Title. That the first privilege or prerogative of Virtue, does
bind us unto her, which is the special Providence, by which God directs all
good men to all good, and chastises the iniquity of the wicked. page, 132
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The providence of God is the fountain of all good things. ibidem Two things
are to be considered of in every place of Scripture, the Commandment and the
Promise. ibidem Testimonies of the divine providence. 133 The Angels do keep
us. page, 134 God turns evils into good to those, whom he loves. 135 God is
not only good and gracious to the righteous, but also to their family. 136
God blesses a wicked Master, for the sake of a good servant. ibidem Of the
names that are attributed unto the Lord in the holy Scripture, by reason of
this providence. ibid. God is called a Father. ibidem God is more then a
Mother. page, 137 We are the sons of God, and so are we called. 138 God is a
Pastor or a Shepherd. ibidem Diverse names of God. 139. God is called a
Bridegroom. 140 God is all in all. ibidem How pleasant the promises of the
Divine providence be unto a righteous soul. 141 The providence of GOD does
yield great matter of rejoicing to the good. ibidem An expostulation of God
with man. 142
The thirteenth Chapter.
Of that manner of providence, by which God esp^eth out the wicked, to
chastise their maliciousnes. 143
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The wicked are neglected of the Lord. ibidem How dangerous a thing it is to
live in this world without the divine help. 144 God does not only permit
evils, but also he sends them, 145 A fearful place in the ninth of Amos
ibidem In how great danger a man lives, having God his enemy, and angry with
him. page, 146 What the soul is without God. 147
The fourteenth Chapter.
Of the second privilege or prerogative of Virtue: that is, of the grace of
the holy Ghost, which is given to the virtuous. 147.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
After the divine providence, the grace of the holy Ghost is the beginning of
all blessings. 148 What the grace of the holy Ghost is. ibidem Grace does
deifie. ibidem Grace is a supernatural form. ibidem Two souls of man. ibidem
Grace is a spiritual ornament. page, 149 The work of grace makes a man
acceptable to God. ibidem Grace strengthens man. ibidem Grace makes our
works acceptable unto God 150 Grace adopteth us to be the sons of God ibidem
The forest of the effects of grace. ibidem Grace makes our souls the
dwelling and Temple of God. 151
The fifteenth Chapter.
Of the third privilege of Virtue, which is a light, and a certain
supernatural knowledge, which our Lord gives to them, who seek after Virtue.
page, 151
The matters handled in this Chapter.
This supernatural knowledge does proceed from grace. ibidem It is a property
of grace to illuminate the understanding ibidem Four gyfts of the holy Ghost
belong to the understanding 152 Grace why it is called an unction. ibidem The
will is a blind faculty 153 God is the glass of a purified soul. ibid. God
has given knowledge to beasts, to fly hurtful things, and to embrace
wholesome. page, 154 What this supernatural knowledge is. ibid. Testimonies of
the Scripture as concerning this knowledge. 155 The dignity of this doctrine.
157 For what this wisdom is profitable 158 The dignity of this wisdom. 159
The understanding of the righteous increases. ibidem. The darkness of the
wicked. ibidem Other men's sentences and judgments are to be heard. 160
The sixteenth chapter.
Of the fourth privilege of Virtue, that is, of the consolations and comforts
of the holy Ghost, which the righteous enjoy in this world, and which they joy
in. page, 161
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Evil men think that there is no pleasure in Virtue. 162 The flesh also of
the righteous rejoices. 163 How great the spiritual joy is. 164 God as he is
great in justice, so is he great in mercy. ibidem. How great the force is of
the sweenes of the heavenly wine. 165 Spiritual languorment. page, 166
Conjectures of the greatness of the spiritual delights ibidem Virtue has her
delights, 167 How the righteous are refreshed in their prayers, after a
singular manner, with these divine consolations. page, 168 The pleasure of the
righteous is felt in their prayers, ibidem Of the chaste wedlock of the Word,
and of the soul. 169 The change of the righteous. 170 How a long night is to
be passed. ibidem Of their comforts and consolations, who first begin to serve
God, and are Punies and Nouices in his school. 171 The entrance and beginnings
of conversion have their pleasures. 172 In the beginning, and in the end of the
conversion there is a soleme feast. page, 173 Whence joy and cheerefulnes
arises in the nouices of Christ, 174. Why the wicked do not feel the
sweetness of God, page, 175, Blessedness twofold, 176. Time is very precious,
ibidem.
The 17, Chapter.
Of the fifth privilege of Virtue, which is the tranquillity and peace of a good
conscience, which the righteous enjoy; and of the torment and inward biting,
with which the wicked and ungodly are tortured. 177,
The matters handled in this Chapter.
In what thing consists the perfection of man, ibidem, The conscience is the
master and teacher of good men, but a tormenter and torturer of the wicked,
178, The first thorn of the conscience is the filthiness of sin: The second
thorn is an inimy done to another: The third thorn is infan^y which follows
sin, 179, Certain other thorns. ibidem. The fear of an evil conscience,
ibidem. All disordered things are evil, page, 180. Of the joy of a good
conscience, with which the righteous are greatly delighted, page, 182, A
peaceable and a quiet conscience is a Paradise, 183, The testimony of a good
conscience has fear mingled with it, 185,
The eyghteenth Chapter.
Of the fixed privilege of Virtue, which is the confidence and hope of the
Divine mercy, which the righteous rejoice in; and of the miserable and vain
trust and repose, in which the wicked live, 186.
The matters contained in this Chapter.
Hope twofold. ibidem. The effects of true hope, 187, A Catalogue of the
effects of hope. 190, Hope makes men omnipotent, 181, Of the vain hope of the
wicked, 192, The hope of the righteous is spirit, but of the wicked flesh, 193,
To him that trusts in the Creator all things happen succesfully and
prosperously: but to him that trusts in the creatures all things fall out
unluckily, 194. Where the world is planted, ibidem, How unhappy the estate of
them is, who have not their trust in God. 195, Only hope is left unto man,
ibidem, Man cannot live without a God, ibidem. How necessary Hope is for man,
196, The punishment of fruitless and vain hope, ibidem, The difference of the
providence of God, and of hope or trust. 197,
The ninteenth Chapter.
Of the seventh privilege of Virtue, that is, of the true liberty, which the
righteous have and rejoice in: and of the misery and unknown servitude and
bondage, in which sinners live. 197.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Whence this liberty springs, ibidem, One kind of liberty true, another
false, 198, Why the liberty of the soul is the true liberty. ibidem, Of the
servitude in which wicked ^en live, ibidem, Sin is a cruel tyrant. ibidem,
Whose servant a sinner is. page, 199, The flesh is sin and a nourisher of
sin, ibidem, Fleshly desire or sensual appetite is the cause of
perturbations, ibidem, The soul has two parts, the superior part, and the
inferior part. 201. The appetite ought to be governed, and not to govern,
ibidem, What it is to obey the appetite. 202. A carnal lover is a servant,
ibidem, Why vicious men are not avoided, 203. How great the force is of
perturbations and affections. ibidem, The servitude of impure and unchaste love*
page, 204, Luxury is not satisfied with the thing desired, 205. The servitude
of ambition, 207, The punishment of a certain ambitious man, 208, The
servitude of covetousness, ibidem, A covetous man is the servant and slave of
his money 208, A sinner is not bound with one chain alone, 209, Of the liberty
in which the righteous live, 210. By the grace of God we are delivered from the
servitude of sin, 211, Men through grace reign over the devil, ibidem, The
devil is covetous and niggardly toward his, 212, Causes from whence this
liberty arises, ibidem, The first cause is the Divine grace, ibidem, The
second cause is the sweetness of spiritual consolations, 214. The third cause
is daily use, and continual diligence, 215, The affections are taught of the
Lord, and do work good unto man, 216, A Caution, ibidem, The yoke of sinners,
page, 217,
The twenteth Chapter.
Of the eight privilege of Virtue, that is; of the blessed peace, and inward
quietness, which the righteous enjoy: and of the wretched war, and continual
trouble and terror, with which the wicked are shaken and smitten in their
souls, page, 218,
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Three kinds of peace; one with God, another with our neighbor, and the third
with our selves, ibidem, Of the continual war, and inward trouble of wicked
men, 219, The two daughters of our appetite; Necessity, and Greedines, ibidem,
The thirst of the wicked, 222* Biting of conscience is the companion of carnal
pleasure. ibidem, The impatience of the appetite. 223, Whence the unquietness of
the mind arises, ibidem, A little misery does sour and disturb a great deal
of felicity, 224, Appetites fight one against another, 225 Of the peace, and
inward rest, in which the righteous live, 226. The change of the inward man,
227 The presence of the holy Ghost is known and discerned by the peace and
tranquillity of the mind, page, 228 The seven first privileges and
prerogatives of Virtue are the first cause of this peace, ibidem, The second
cause of this peace arises from the liberty of the subdued passions, 229, The
third cause of this peace springs from the greatness of spiritual
consolations, ibidem. The fourth cause proceeds from the testimony, and
inward joy of a good conscience, 230, The fifth and last cause is engendered of
Hope, ibidem.
The 21. Chapter.
Of the ninth privilege of Virtue: that God hears the prayers of the
righteous, and rejects the prayers of the wicked, 230.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
A double deluge; the one material, the other spiritual, ibidem Man is more
miserable then any living creature. 231. A saying of Silenus taken Captive of
Mydas, out of the eleventh book of Ouids Metamorp: page, 232. Prayer the only
remedy of man, ibidem. How sure a remedy our prayer is, 233. How far prayer
extends it self, 234. What great things the Saints have done by prayer.
page, 235.
The 22. Chapter.
Of the tenth privilege of Virtue: which is the help and favor of God, which
the righteous feel and taste of in their tribulations; and of the impatience
and torment of the wicked in carrying theirs. 236
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Our life is a Sea stormy and tempestuous. ibidem. God does temper and
proportionate the tribulations according to the strength and ability of men.
237. Tribulation is profitable, ibidem. God is present with the righteous in
tribulation, ibidem, All virtues help the afflicted, 239. Hope is an Anchor.
241, Wherein true Christianity consists, ibidem. Of the impatience and fury
of the wicked in tribulations. 242, The wicked are unfit to bear tribulations,
ibidem. The force of impatience, 243. Miseries are doubled upon the impatient.
244. Mourning does nothing profit the impatient, ibidem One and the self same
tribulation does profit the righteous, and hurt the wi^ked. 245. Constancy in
affliction is not to be sought in Philosophy. 246.
The 23. Chapter.
Of the eleventh privilege of Virtue, that is, that the Lord does provide
temporal blessings for the lovers and embracers of Virtue, 246
The matters handled in this Chapter.
God does not suffer his to be hunger-starued. 247. The temporal promises of
the old Testament, after some manner do also pertain unto the righteous of
the new Testamen^. 248. In the keeping of the law all good things are found,
249. To him that keeps the law of the Lord all things succeed and prosper
well, ibidem Of the scarcity and poverty of the wicked, 250. The curses set
down in the 28, of Deuteronomy. are proved by examples. 253, The curses in the 28. of
Deuteronomy. pertain not only to the Jewish Nation, but also to Christians. ibidem.
The 25. Chapter.
Of the twelueth privilege of Virtue: that is, of the quiet, peaceable, and
joyful death of the Righteous, and contrarily, of the wretched, miserable,
painful, disquiet and grievous death of sinners. 254.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The accidents of death. 255. A wonderful and excellent saying of Petrus
Damianus of the hour of death. 256 Nothing avails in death but Virtue, page,
258 Of the death of the (...), ibidem The righteous fears not in the hour of
death, page, 249 In death prosperity does nothing profit, nor adversity hurt.
260 The conclusion of those things, which have been spoken of in this second
part of the first book. 261 Virtue has but one inconvenience; that is, that
it is not well known, 262
The third part of the first Book.
In which, answer is made to all those excuses, by which those men are wont
to excuse and defend themselves, who will not embrace Virtue. page, 265
The Chapters of the third part.
The 25. Chapter.
Against the first excuse of those, who defer and put of from day to day the
amendment of their life's, and the embracing of Virtue, ibidem
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Diverse refuges and euasions of sinners, ibidem Against them that defer their
repentance, 266 The state of the question handled in this Chapter, 267 The just
judgment of God. 268 Causes from whence the difficulty of conversion arises,
ibidem The first cause is an evil habit, and a naughty custom of a life
wickedly and ungraciously led. ibidem The second cause is the power of the
devil, 269 The third cause, by reason God is far of from a soul polluted
with the filth of sin. ibidem The fourth cause, is the corruption of the
powers of our soul, ibidem Whether now or hereafter it is more easy to turn
unto God. ibidem The force of evil custom, 272 The Allegory of Lazarus being
four days dead. 273 The loss of time ibid. The sins which we commit, we
shall hereafter deplore and lament in vain. 274 The relics of sin remain
after the sin is committed. 27^ How absurd a thing it is to reserve
repentance for old age. ibidem The greatness of the satisfaction that God
requires of sinners. 276 Deferring of repentance is a certain infidelity,
ibidem Repentance is not to be deferred in regard of benefits received at Gods
hand. ibidem Repentance is not be deferred in regard of predestination. 277. We
offer the best part of our life to the world, and the worst to God. ibid. What
we owe unto God in respect of our redemption. 278 An excellent exposition of a
place in the twelueth of Ecclesiastes. ibidem The conclusion of the first
objection. 279
The 26. Chapter.
Against them that defer their repentance to the hour of death. 280
The matters handled in this Chapter.
It is dangerous to dispute of final repentance. ibidem Authorities of
certain Fathers concerning final repentance. 281 To be converted what it is,
ibidem To dye well is an Art, which ought to be learned all the life long. 285
The authority of School Doctors concerning final repentance 286 The
conclusion of Scotus; that repentance made at the point of death, and in
extremity, is sildome true, which he proves by four reasons or arguments.
ibidem The first reason of the Shoole-man is the great perturbations, which
arise out of the greatness of griefs, sickness, and the presence of death.
ibidem The evil disposition and temperature of the body is an impediment of
contemplation. 287 The second reason of the Schoole-man is, that such
repentance seems to be brought forth not of will, but of compulsion, whereas
repentance ought to be voluntary. ibidem The third reason of the Schoole-man is
drawn from the custom of sinning. 289 His fourth reason is founded in the
quality of the valor of the works, which are commonly done at the hour of
death. 290 Certain authorities of the holy Scripture confirming the precedent
sentences of the Doctors. 291 Aunswers to certain objections. 294 Many
miraculous and wonderful things reserved to the coming of Christ; among which
the saving of the thief on the Cross was one. ibidem The judgments of God.
295 An objection of the repentance of the Ninevites, with an answer to it.
page, 296 The conclusion of the former disputation. ibidem
The 27. chapter.
Against them that through the hope of the divine mercy, do continue and
persevere in their sins. page, 298.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The difference between the true Prophets, and the false. 299 Whence the
Divine justice is known. 300 All men ought to fear. ibidem Whence fear is
engendered. 301 Of the works of the Divine justice, whereof mention is made in
the holy Scripture. ibidem The beginning of the ways of the Lord. ibid. The
fall of devils. ibid. The fall of Adam. ibidem The hidden and secret
judgments of God. page, 103 Of the works of the Divine justice, which are
seen in this world. 304 The great infidelity of men. 305 What it is to trust
in God. 312 The conclusion of all those things, which have been spoken in this
chapter. ibidem The promises of God belong to the righteous, and the
threatenings to the unrighteous. ibidem
The 28. chapter.
Against them that excuse themselves, saying, that the way of Virtue is rough,
sharp, and difficult. page, 314
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Virtue is a friend unto reason. ibidem How the grace given us by Christ, does
make the way of Virtue easy and pleasant. 315 From whence the difficulty of
Virtue arises. 317 An answer to certain objections. 319 For what end the
relics of sins and evil appetites remain in us. ibid. Another objection,
with the answer. 320 Spiritual circumcision. 321 The commandments of God are
not impossible. 322 How charity makes the way easy and pleasant, which
leads unto heaven. 323 The cheerefulnes of Saint Laurence in his martyrdom.
page, 324 Those things which are unclean to the world, are clean to the
righteous. ibidem. Of other things which make the way of salvation easy and
sweet. 325. The way of the wicked is hard and difficult. 326 All the precedent
matters are proved by examples to be true. 328 The great changes and
alterations, which the hand of the highest works. 329 The disciples of
Christ were on a sudden made learned. ibidem The conversion of Saint Cyprian.
330 The conversion of Saint Augustine. 331
The 29. Chapter.
Against them that fear to enter into the way of Virtue for the love of this
world. page, 335.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
What evils are in the world. ibidem How short the felicity of this world is.
336 No felicity of the world is lasting. ibidem Of the great miseries, that are
mingled with worldly felicities. 337 Some myseries are common both to the good
and bad, some proper only to the wicked. 338 Evils of God. page, 339,
Punishments are inflicted upon the wicked by the Ministers of God, 340 The
evils that passions and affections bring. ibidem Of the multitude of the snares
and dangers of this world. ibidem Of the blindness and darkness of this world,
page, 342 The blindness of men. 342 Of the multitude of sins that are in this
world. page, 343 How deceaucable the felitie of the world is. 345 The
conclusion of all this aforesaid. 348 What the world is. ibidem The world is a
hell. 349 That true rest and tranquillity, is found in God alone. 349 Obiectiue
beatitude. ibidem Only God can satisfy the heart of man. page, 350 The nature
of the Sea-mans Needle. ibidem Saint Gregory deplored the loss of his quiet
and sweet solitary life. 351. Those things which have been spoken, are proved
by examples. ibid. No man happy in this world. 353 The world is an hypocrite.
354 The conclusion of the first Book. 356 In Virtue all perfections are found.
357 Virtue is loved in an enemy. ibidem.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THE Prologue of the second Book. page, 365, Matters handled in the Prologue.
The division of the second book into two parts. ibidem
The Chapters of the second Book.
In the second book, doctrine appertayning unto Virtue is handled, and diverse
instructions are set down, which teach how a man at the length may come unto
Virtue. 366
The first Chapter.
The first advice and instruction, which is very necessary for that man that
desires to serve God. ibidem
The second Chapter.
Of the second instruction and advice, which that man must follow, who will
come to the service of God. 367
Matters handled in this Chapter.
Evil custom. page, 368, The world, ibidem. The devil. ibidem. More for us
then against us. 369
The first part of the second Book:
Which entreats of vices and their remedies. 370
The third Chapter.
Of the firm and resolute purpose, which a Christian ought to have, that he
may not do any thing hereafter, which is sin. ibidem
The matters handled in this Chapter.
A firm resolution is to be planted in the soul. ibidem The proposition of
the second Book. page, 374
The fourth chapter.
Of the remedies against Pride. 375
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The definition of Pride. 376 The saying of Tigranes, King of the Armenians,
concerning a diadem. page, 379 Other remedies against Pride, more particular.
381
The fifth chapter.
Of the remedies against Covetousness. 384
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Christ an example of poverty. ibidem How unworthy and how vild a thing it is
to lose thy soul for gold. 385 Riches bring many evils and inconveniences
with them. ibidem Riches do not satisfy the appetite. 386 Riches are not
safe. ibidem Riches profit nothing in death. 387 Riches are remedies and
releefes of man's misery, and not instruments of pleasure. page, 388 Rich men
may be saved. 389 That no man ought to detain goods that are not his own,
their Lord and Master being either against it, or not knowing of it. ibid.
Hyrelings are not to be defrauded of their wages. 390 Wills and testaments are
speedily to be discharged. ibidem. It is a joyful and a pleasant thing, not to
be endangered or indebted to others. 391
The sixth chapter.
Remedies against Luxury. page, 391
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The combat of Chastity is difficult. ibidem Luxury polluteth the lively
Temple of God. page, 392 The beginning of Luxury is pleasant, but the end is
bitter. ibidem Mischiefs joined to this vice. 393 The chaste begin an Angels
life in this life. 394 Other kind of remedies against Luxury. page, 395 The
outward senses are to be kept. page, 396 The presence of God, of thy Angel,
and of the devil, is to be thought upon. ibidem It is dangerous for a man
alone, to speak with a woman alone. 397
The seventh Chapter.
Remedies against envy. page, 398
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Envy is familiar with every age and person. ibidem Envious men are like unto
the devil. 400 We must not envy the virtues of our neighbor. ibidem By
charity other men's good things are made ours. 401 The mischiefs of envy.
ibidem Envy is a just sin; and how it is meant. ibidem An objection with the
answer. 402
The eight Chapter.
Of the remedies against Gluttony. 403
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Gluttony the cause of death. ibidem The Abstinence of Christ. ibidem The
Abstinence of the holy Fathers. 404 The delight of gluttony is very short,
ibidem We must be wary in the refection of our bodies 405 How man is reformed.
406
The ninth Chapter.
Remedies against anger, hatred, and emnities, which arise of anger and wrath.
406
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Man is more wrathful then beasts. 407 Man has no weapons given him of
nature. ibidem The anger of a certain Lion, out of Elianus ibidem We must
forbear and pardon after the example of Christ. 408 An angry man is without
the grace and favor of God. ibidem How we must revenge, 409 Self-love is to
be pulled up by the roots. 410 We must do nothing in our anger. ibidem The
counsel of Athenodorus the Philosopher, unto Augustus the Emperor how to
avoid anger, ibidem In the time of anger we must decree of nothing. ibidem
Another advice how to avoid anger. 411
The tenth Chapter.
Remedies against Idleness. 411
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The labors of Christ. 412 The labors of the Saints. ibidem Nothing created
to be idle. ibidem Great repentance is required for sins. 413 The saying of a
godly man as concerning time misspent. ibidem Without perseverance there is no
salvation. 414 Very good and wholesome counsel. ibidem After victory a new
war approaches. ibidem How temptation is to be turned into good. 415
The eleventh Chapter.
Of other kinds of sins; which a good Christian ought to eschew. 416
The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must not swear by the life of another. 417 Of murmuring, detraction, and
rash judgment, ibidem Three evils spring from murmuring. 418 The first evil
is detraction and backbiting. ibidem The second evil is, that it hurts three;
the speaker, the hearer, and him, whom the words are spoken of. ibidem The
third evil, it makes the murmurer execrable and infamous among men. 419 The
greatest sovereignty is, to be able to rule thy tongue. 420 Murmurers and
detracters are not to be heard. ibidem How a back-biter and a detracter is to
be reproved. 421 Scandal that comes by detraction. ibidem Against Iesters and
Iibers. 422 Of rash judgment; and of the precepts of the Church. ibidem Four
precepts of the Church. ibidem Householders ought to look that their families
keep the Sabbath. 423 Of other kind of sins, which because they seem small,
therefore the world makes no account to commit them. ibidem The hurt that the
sins bring to the soul, which we make so small account of. 424 In what
things these sins are committed. ibidem
The twelueth Chapter.
Of other shorter remedies against all kind of sins, but most especially
against the seven capital sins. 424
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Pride obiecteth; True humility answers. 426 Vayne-glory obiecteth; The fear
of the Lord answers. ibidem Counterfeit Religion obiecteth; True Religion
answers. 427 Disobedience obiecteth; Blessed subjection answers. ibidem
Envy obiecteth; Congratulation for thy brothers good answers. ibidem Hatred
obiecteth; True Charity answers. 428 Detraction obiecteth; The liberty of
just and upright correction answers. ibidem Anger obiecteth; Patience
answers. 429 Frowardnes and malapertnes obiecteth; Meekenes and gentleness
answers. 430 Swelling loftines obiecteth; Humble satisfaction, which would
content all, answers. ibidem Sorrowfulnes obiecteth; Spiritual joy
answers. ibidem Drowsines and Idleness obiecteth; The exercise of Virtue
answers. 431 Dissolute wandering obiecteth; Firm stability answers, ibidem
Desperation obiecteth: The assurance of Hope answers. 432 Covetousness
obiecteth; The contempt of the world answers. 433 Gluttony obiecteth;
Temperance answers. ibidem Vain foolish mirth obiecteth; Moderate sadness
answers. ibidem Many words and much babbling obiecteth; Discrete taciturnity
answers. 434 Luxury obiecteth; Undefiled Chastity answers. ibidem
Spiritual fornication obiecteth: Cleanenes and purity of heart answers.
ibidem The love of this world obiecteth; The love of the heavenly Country
answers. 435 The conclusion of the first part of the second book. 426
The second part of the second Book:
In which we entreat of the exercise of virtues. 437
The thirteenth chapter.
Of the three kind of virtues, in which the whole sum of Christian
righteousness is contained. ibidem
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The duties of justice; to wit, toward our selves, toward our neighbor, and
toward God. ibidem
The fourteenth chapter.
Of the bond and duty of man toward himself. 438
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The parts to be reformed in man. ibidem Of the reforming of the body. ibidem
What manner of conversation man ought to have. ibidem A Caution. 439 The three
fruits of modesty. 440 Of the virtue of Abstinence. 441 The body ought to be
handled austerely. ibidem Rules to be observed in eating. ibidem Gluttony is a
deceitful pretender of that which is not. 443 The touch and the taste are the
ignoblest senses. ibidem The pleasure of the taste is short. 444 Wine
immoderatly taken how dangerous. ibidem The Vine brings forth three kind of
Grapes. 445 Wine is a very bad counsayler. ibidem Much talk is to be avoided.
ibidem Saint Augustines Distichon, written in his dining chamber. 446 Of the
keeping of the senses. 447 At the time of prayer the eyes are especially to be
kept. ibidem The ears are to be kept. ibidem The smelling is to be ordered,
448 The taste is to be moderated. ibidem Of the keeping of the tongue. ibidem
Four things are to be observed in speaking; the matter, the manner, the time,
and the intent. ibidem Of the mortification of the affections. 450 The evils
and mischiefs of our own will. ibidem The inferior part of the soul is to
be watched and kept. ibidem The difference between the sons of God, and the
children of the world. 451 With what affections we are especially to war. 452
Of the reforming of the Will. ibidem How the superior part of the soul is to
be reformed. ibidem The poverty of the spirit. 453 Of the reforming of the
Imagination. 454 The Imagination is a wanderer and a fugitive. 155 Of the
reforming of the understanding, and of the duties of wisdom. 456 The duty and
office of wisdom. ibidem Wisdom is the Captain and guide of other virtues.
ibidem No man hurts more, then he that hurts under the show of piety. 459
Of the wisdom which concerns the practice and effecting of things. 460 What
things are required for this wisdom. ibidem Four step-dames of wisdom. 461
Virtue hates extremes. ibidem Antiquity does not patronize nor uphold sin.
ibidem Apparences of things do often deceive us. ibidem In what a man ought to
be circumspect. ibidem Of certain means by which wisdom is gotten. 462
Every opinion is not to be followed. ibidem
The fifteenth chapter.
Of that which man owes unto his neighbor. 463
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The second part of justice. ibidem Of the duties of Charity. 465 Charity is
not a naked and a bare affection. ibidem Six duties of Charity. ibidem The
negative duties of Charity. 466 We must have the heart of a mother toward our
neighbor. ibidem How such an heart is to be purchased. 467 All things common to
us with our neighbor. 468
The sixteenth chapter.
Of that which man owes unto God. 469
The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must have such an heart toward God, as a son has toward his parents.
ibidem Nine virtues are required to prepare and furnish such an heart. 470 1.
The love of God. ibidem 2. Fear and reverence ibidem How fear is bred in us.
page, 471 3. Trust and confidence. ibidem The merits of Christ. 473 4. The
zeal of Gods honor. ibidem 5. The purity of the intent. 474 The intent
approves and commends the work. 475 With what intent good is to be done.
ibidem A pure intent is to be craved of God. 476 6. Prayer. ibidem 7.
Thanksgiving. ibidem 8. Obedience. 477 Of the four degrees of obedience.
ibidem 9. Patience. 480 Of patience in adversity. ibidem A man must be armed
against all evils that may betide him. 483 Three degrees of patience. 484
The seventeenth chapter.
Of the bond and duty of diverse estates. 486
The matters handled in this Chapter.
What is meet for Rulers and Ouer-seers. ibidem The duty of a subject. ibidem
Three degrees of this obedience. 487 The duty of a good Matrone. ibidem The
duty of a Master of a family. 488
The eyghteenth chapter.
The first admonition, in what esteem and price virtues are to be had, that
this rule may be better understood. 489
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The twofold order of virtues. 490 The internal virtues are more excellent
then the external. ibidem The affection of devotion how tender and delicate it
is. 493 The difference between the outward virtues and the inward. 494 Two
extremes in the estimation of virtues. 495
The ninteenth chapter.
Four very profitable instructions, which are derived out of the precedent
doctrine. 496
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The external virtues are to be joined to the internal. ibidem Internal
virtues are less known then external. 497 A twofold righteousness. 499 What
evils do arise from false righteousness. 501 Two kinds of hypocrisy. 502 Who
is hot, cold, and luke warm. 503 The reason, why the luke warm are in worser
estate then the cold. ibidem The world has always been set upon mischief.
504
The twenteth chapter.
The second admonition, wherein is handled the diversity of estates, and sundry
manners of living in the church. 507
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Diverse means to obtain grace. page, 508 Every one likes his own way best.
ibidem Every one prayseth that Science wherein he excels. 509 The variety of
grace by nature. 510 Variety of nature by grace, and why God would ha^^ variety
of gifts in his Church. 511 There is a certain diversity in the creatures. 511
It is an evil thing to envy our neighbor. 512
The 21. chapter.
The third admonition is of the care and watch, which a religious man ought to
have over his actions. 514
The matters handled in this Chapter.
Continual care is a general virtue. ibidem In the beginning of our
conversion we must walk warily and circumspectly. 515 Certain counsels. 516
The 22. chapter.
The fourth admonition of the fortitude, which is necessary for them, that
aspire unto Virtue. 517
The matter's handled in this Chapter.
Two cifficulties in Virtue. ibidem Virtue is hard and difficult. 518 The error
of them which forthwith in the beginning of their conversion do seek for
peace. ibidem Of the means by which this fortitude is obtained. 519 The
sluggard flies from Virtue by reason of the difficulty. 520 The fervent desire
of some to serve God. ibidem The sundry and manifold trials and torments of
Martyrs. 521 The cruel Martyrdom of constant and religious Corona. 522 An
horrible kind of Martyrdom in Nicomedia. ibidem.
FINIS.

