A SPIRITVAL DOCTRINE, CONTAINING A RVLE To live well, with diverse Prayers and
Meditations. ABRIDGED BY THE REVEREND FAther Lewis de Granada of the holy
order of Preachers. AND DIVIDED INTO SIX TREAtises, as is to be seen after
the prefaces. Nevvlie translated out of Spanish into English.

Psalm. 118. v. 35. Dedue me in semita mandatorum tuorum.

Lead me (O Lord) in the path of thy commandments.

AT LOVAN, Imprinted by Laurence Kellam 1599.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM STANLEY Knight, Coronel of the English Reg^ment.
etc.
HONORABLE Sir, having lately translated this little volume out of Spanish
into English, I began to think, to what person of our nation I might dedicate
the same, that not only would gratefully accept of so small a trauail, but
also were able to judge, as well of the translation, as also of the fruit
which may be derived to such, as shall list to read it. At the length
amongst all others, your honorable person seemed to me most fit, for all the
respects before mentioned. For if I regard your courtisie to all sorts of men,
and your special good will and affection to those of mic coat in general
(to say nothing of mie self in particular;) I may with great reason be
esteemed very indiscreet, if I should think, that you would take this poor
offer otherwise, then your Nobility and courtisie requires. Also if I
consider either your knowledge in both languages English and Spanish, or your
experience, and vvounderful good affection to all sorts of spiritual, and
Godly Treatises, joined with your Devotion, Piety and Zeal in the service
of God; I can not but esteem you to be a sufficient Judge as well of the
translation, as also of the profit, that many may take by this little
work. Accept then, Honorable good Sir, the same, as the first fruits, and
token of mie good will toward you; accept it, I say, until I have put some
other thing in order, which may further the spiritual auancement of devout
persons, and be more vvorth your reading; and accept therevvithall mie sincere
affection, wholy addicted to pray for your long life, and prosperity,
which God grant you, and preserve the same to his greater honor and glory,
and to your own salvation and best contentment. Christ JESUS be alvvaies in
your safeguard.

From our college of the Society of JESUS in Louan this 19. of March 1599.
being the feast of S. Joseph. Yours most humble affectionate. Rich. Gibbons.

THE TRANSLATOVR to the gentle Reader.
IT has seemed good to me, Gentle Reader, to let thee understand in the
beginning of this little book, that some years past, a vvorthie and virtuous
Gentleman of our nation, had begone to translate out of Spainish into English,
the Memorial, and other spiritual books, of that famous and Religious father
Lewis de Granada, of S. Dominicks order. Of all which, some have been put in
print, some others, I know not upon what occasion, a^ not yet com forth. But
whatsoever the cause may be, certain it is that in the mean time, the same
Religious father being very desirous, that all sort of men should take the
profit of such spiritual works, as he with so great pains had uttered to
the vvoorld, for their souls good, and auancement in the service of God, did,
not long before his death, dravve out an Abridgment of his forsaid books,
moved thereunto for the reasons, which he him self has set down in his
preface to the Reader, as it goes here in the beginning of this little
volume. Which vvoork, when I had read and perused the same, liked me so much,
that I resolved with mie self to put it in English, esteeming that as all the
other spiritual vvoorks of this devout father, ar of great comfort and
consolation, to all the servants of Almighty God, so this would be of no
less furtherance in spirit, to such as would endeavor to use the same.
Especially considering, that all that is contained in this little book, is
matter apperteining rather to practice of devotion, and to kendle our affection
in the love of our svveete Savior, then to frame great discourses, and
illuminate our understanding; albeit this part be also to be found here, as
much as it makes to the benifit of the other, and stands with the
briefenes, which the Author now pretended.

This being so, it remains Gentel Reader, vvhoesoeuer, and of whatsoever
Religion thou be, that thou endeavor to peruse this book, to the end, for
which it was first written, and is now translated into English, that is to
thine own good and salvation. Which thing thou shall easily perform, if
thou procure, as near as God shall aforde thee grace, to read and weigh that
which is here contained, with a reposed and quiet spirit, with a meek and
humble spirit, with a spirit of patience and long animitie, with a spirit
altogether determined and resolved, to seek sincerely and purelie, not so
much thine own interest and contentment, as the honor and glory of God, and
to know his good will and pleasure, and with all thy power to put the same
in execution. Neither must thou be ouercurious, or hasty to pass on in
reading the contents thereof, but rather endeavor to stay thie self some space
of time, in considering with much attention that, which thou have read, and
by this consideration to stir up, and provoke thy will and affection, to
practice and excute that, which thou shall understand to be the best pleasure
of almighty God, and most profitable to thine own salvation. This is that
which thou must do, if thou pretend to take any comfort or commodity, by
reading of spiritual and devout books.

Now then, dear Reader, having nothing else whereof to admonish thee, I vvil
end this mie preface, and remitte thee to the Author him self of this little
work, desiring thee, for mie small pains bestovved in the translation, to
be mindful of me in thie prayers. Christ JESUS direct thee.

At Louan the 25. of March, 1599. Thy hearty vvellvviller and servant in Christ
JESUS. Rich. Gibbons.

THE AVTHOR TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IT is a thing notorious, good Christian reader, that the bread, which we
daily eat, is not so necessary for the maintenance of our natural life, as
is the doctrine of the word of God, for the conservation of our spiritual
life. This doctrine teaches us two principal things, to prate, and to
work; unto which two, be reduced al others vvhat-soeuer. Of these two
things infinite books have been written. But for as much as this doctrine is so
neceessarie at every foote-steppe that we make (by reason of the continual
dangers, and temptations of our life) I have determined to resume here in fevv
words (gathered out of al mie books) that which has seemed to me most fit
for this purpose; Six treatises of this book.
to the end thou may easily bear about with the in thie bosom, that which
ought to be alvva^s written in thie heart. And therefore I have here gathered
and put together Six brief treatises; Mental prayer, taken ovvt of mie book
of Prayer and Meditation, with all the fourteen meditations abbreuiated,
which were there set down. And this treatise I have put in the first place,
because these meditations, besides that they give us abundant matter whereof
to meditate, be also the best persuasions and motives that can be found, to
bring men to live well and virtuously. So that if they serve not in the
beginning for the exercise of meditation, yet they vvil serve for persvvasion
to induce men to the fear of God, and changement of life. But because al men
do not so much give them selves to th'exercise of meditation, either for their
diverse affairs, or for other reasons which they may have; therefore that these
also want not the succor and help of prayer, I have added an other treatise
of vocal prayer,

Truly al holy scripture does every where declare unto us, the need which
we have of these two exercises, because they be the weapons, which we have
most ready and at hand against our enemies, by whom we be alvvais
environed; and therefore we must go well armed with them, as long as our life
lasts. Heerehence it is that our Savior the night of his passion armed his
disciples with prayer, Matthew. 26.41.
saying unto them; vvatch ye and pray that ye enter not into tentation: and
David armed him self with meditation when he said; Psalm. 118.29.
were it not (o lord) that thy law is my meditation, I had then peradventure
perished in my humility: that is, I was then very likely to have fallen
when tribulation came upon me. Seeing therefore that these two weapons be so
assured and proved for our warfare, it seemed to me convenient to put them in
this brife manual, that by such means they might be alvvais at hand.

Now for so much as in the beginning we divided the whole sum of Christian
doctrine into these two things, prayer, and work; having spoken already of
prayer as well Mental as Vocal, of vvoork, the instruction and order of our
life, having chiefly regard of such as nevvlie begin to serve our Lord. And
because of those some there be, that begin this life remainning still in the
vvoorld, some others entering into Religion; for these last also I have laid
down an other treatise, in which the thorns and brambles of our evil
inclinations and passions be rooted out, and in their place ar set the plants
of virtues, which do order and perfectionate our sovvles. And albeit these
two last treatises may seem to be different in the titles, nevertheless the
documents contained in them both (especially those which concern virtues)
serve no less for the one treatise, then for the other: because such as desire
to be saved, have no other way for the same, but to go from virtue to virtue,
Psalm. ^^.8.
until they see the God of Gods in Sion, that is in the glory which is to com.

Besides this, to the end there want nothing for the daily instruction of our
life. I have put here also tvvoe other little treatises, whereof the one is
of Penance and Confession: of preparation for receiving the blessed Sacrament
of the altar.

And this may suffice for the preface of this little book.
A SPIRITVAL DOCTRINE Divided into six treatises.
The First Treatise is, of Mental Prayer. The Second Treatise is, of Vocal
Prater. The Third Treatise is, A Rule of good life for all sorts of men. The
Fourth Treatise is, A Rule of good life for Religious men. The Fifth Treatise
is, of The Sacrament of Penance. The Sixth Treatise is, of receiving the blessed
Sacrament, with a profession of the Catholic faith, according to the holy
Council of Trent.
THE FIRST TREATISE OF MENTAL PRAYER.
THE FIRST PART WHEREIN IS treated of Meditation.
OF THE FRVITE WHICH WE reap by Prayer and Meditation. CHAP. I
FOR so much as this little treatise speaks of Prayer and Meditation, it shall
be good, in the beginning thereof, to lay down in fevv words the fruit
which is reaped by this holy exercise, to the end that men may with a more
frank and free heart give them selves to the same.

It is a thing most evident, that one of the greatest impediments and letts,
which man has to hinder him from his last felicity and bliss, is the evil
inclination of his soul, and the difficulty and tediousnes which he feels
in doing good: in so much that, if this difficulty were not, it should be a
most easy thing for him to run the way of virtues, and to obtain the end
for which he was created. Romans 7.22
And therefore the Apostle said. I am delighted with the law of God according
to the inward man: but I see an other law in my members, repugning to the
law of my mind, and captiuing me in the law of sin. This is then the most
general reason that can be given of all our evil.

But now to quite our selus of this tediousnes and difficulty, and to make
this affair most easy, one of the things that most helps and furthereth is
devotion. (...) 2. q. 82. ar. 1.
For, as S. Thomas says devotion is no thing else, but a promptnes and readiness
to work well, which quiteth our soul of all this difficulty and
tediousnes, and makes us quick and nimble to all good. For devotion is a
spiritual refection, a ref^esshing and dew of heaven, a blast and breathing of
the holy Ghost, and a supernatural affection, which so comforts, forces,
and transformeth or changes a man's heart, that it gives him a new taste and
desire of spiritual things: and a new disgust and hatred of things that be
sensual. And this daily experience teaches us: for when a spiritual person
comes from any deep and deuou^ prayer, it is then that all his good
purposes and desires be renewed: then be al his feruors and determinations to
do good: then he desires to please and love so good and so svveete a lord,
as God there shevved him self to be: and to endure new labors and pains,
and, that which is more, to spend his blood for him: and then finally is
renewed and florisheth the fireshnes of our soul.

And if thou ask me, by what means we com to obtain this so mighty and
noble affection of devotion: to this answers the same holy Doctor
aforenamed saying, that it is atteined by meditation and co^templation of
heavenly things, for that from the deep meditation and consideration of them,
rises and springs up this affection and feeling in the vvil, which we call
devotion, and which inciteth and moves us to all good. And therefore is this
holy and religious exercise so highly praised, and commended of al Saints,
because it is a mean to obtain denotion, which, although it be but one
virtue, makes us fit and moves us to al other virtues, and is as it were a
general spur for them all. And if thou desire to see how true this is,
consider how plainly S. Bonauenture lays it down in these words
following.

If thou vvilt suffer with patience what soever adversities and miseries of
this life be a man of prayer. lib. medit. vitae Christic. 37.
If thou vvilt obtain force and strength to ouercom the tentations of the
enemy, be a man of prayer. If thou vvilt mortify thine own vvil, vvith^her
evil appetites and passions, be a man of prayer. If thou vvilt thoroughly know
the vvilines and subtlety of the diule, and keep thy self from his snares and
deceits, be a man of prayer. If thou vvilt live merely in the service of God
and pass on the way of labor and affliction with svveetenes and
contentement of mind, be a man of prayer. If thou vvilt exercise thy self in a
spiritual kind of life, Re^. 13.14
and not make provision for the flesh in co^cupiscences, be a man of prayer. If
thou vvilt drive ovvt of thy mind th'importunat flies of vain cares and
thoughts, be a man of prayer. If thou vvilt nourish thy soul with the fatnes
and marovv of devotion, and have it alvvais full of good cogitations and holy
desires, be a man of prayer. If thou vvilt fortify thy heart, in the good
pleasure of God, with a stout courage and steadfast purpose, be a man of
prayer. Finally, If thou vvilt root out al vices of thy soul, and set
virtues in their places, be a man of prayer, because in it is received the
unction of the holy Ghost, which teaches our soul al things that be
needful. Moreover if thou vvilt mount up to the height and top of
contemplation, and enjoy the svveete embracings of the spovvse, exercise thy
self in prayer, because this is the way by which the soul climmeth up to
the contemplation and taste of celestial things. Thou seeest then of what force
and virtue prayer is. And for the greater proof of all that has been said,
setting aside the testimony of holy scripture, let this suffice for the
present, that we have heard and seen, and see daily by experience many
simple and unlearned persons, who by the virtue of prayer have obtained all the forsaid things, and many greater also. Hitherto be the words of S.
Bonauenture. What treasure then, I pray you, can be found more rich, or
what merchants shop better furnished with al sort of goods, then this? But
hearken what an other holy and religious Doctor Laurentius Iustinianus says
to this purpose, speaking of the self same matter.

By reason of unspotted prayer (says he) the soul is cleansed from sin; the
affection is comforted; lib. de caslo co^nub. verbi and animae c. 22.
Charity is nourished; the appetite of love is increased; Faith is certified;
Hope is strengthened; the spirit reioiceth; the bowels tremble; the heart is
pacified; fiar is kindled; truth is discovered; tentatio^ is put to slight;
heaviness is cast of; the senses ar renewed; the strength which was weakened,
is repaired; feruor is stirred up; luke vvarmnes is abandoned; the rustines of
vices is consumed; and in the same exercise the lively sparcles of heavenly
desires do shine brightlie, and the flame of godly love grows up more and
more. For the undefiled prayer of the soul is borne up with many
prerogatives of merits, and is adorned with the beauty of many spiritual
privileges, and with other principal virtues. In so much that the heavens
stand alvvais open to prayer: to it be discovered and reueiled secrets: and
the hearing of God is at all times attentive to the same. This therefore may be
sufficient for the present to make us in some manner to see the fruit of this
holy exercise.

OF THE MATTER REQVISITE to be used in meditation. CHAP. II.
HAVING hitherto seen of how great fruit Prayer and Meditation is, let us
now consider what those things be of which we ought to meditate. To which
point I answer, that for so much as this holy exercise is principally
ordained to breed in our hearts the love and fear of God, and th'obseruatio^
of his commandments: therefore the matter, most convenient of this exercise,
shall be that which most makes to this purpose. And although it be true that
all things created, and al holy scripture incite and move us to this,
nevertheless, speaking generally, the mysteries of our faith which be
contained in the Symbol named Creed, be most effectual and profitable for
this end: because in the same is treated of the benifits of God: of the final
judgment, of the pains of hell, and of the glory of heaven, which be vehement
motives to stir up in our hearts the love and fear of God: and in it also is
comprehended the life and passion of our Savior Christ, in which consists
al our good. Wherefore with great reason it may be avouched that the most fit
and propre matter of this exercise is the Symbol: al^hough that also that may
be good for each one in particular, which shall most move his heart to the
love and fear of God.

Now according to this, for th'instruction of those that be nouices and
beginners in this way, to whom it is expedient to give meat as it were
chevved and digested before I vvil set down here breeflie two sorts of
meditations for all the days of the week, one for night, and the other for
morning, drawn, for the most part, our of the mysteries of our faith: to the
end that as we give daily to our body two refections, so likewise we give
to our soul, whose food is the meditation and consideration of heavenly
things. Of these meditations some appertain to the mysteries of the sacred
passion and resurrection of Christ: some others to the other mysteries of which
we have spoken heretofore. And if peradventure any body should not have so
much time as to recollect him self twice a day, at the least he may meditate
one part of these mysteries in one week, and the other in an other, or else
entertain him self in those only of the passion and life of Christ, which be
the most principal; albeit the others must not be left, especially in the
beginning of any man's conversion, because they be most convenient for that
time, in which the fear of God, together with sorrow and detestation of our
sins, is principally required.

HERE FOLLOW THE FIRST SEVEN MEDITAtions for the days of the week.
Mondaie night. Of the knowledge of thy sins and thy self.
THIS day thou may attend to the knowledge of thy sins, and to the
knowledge of thy self, that in the one thou see how many evils thou have,
and in the other thou understand that thou have no good which comes not from
God, which is the way to obtain Humility mother of all virtues.

For this thou must first think upon the number of the sins of thie life
past, commit in the time when thou had least knowledge of God. For if thou
can well vevv them, thou shall find that they have exceeded in number the
very hairs of thy head, and that thou did live at that time as a heathen
that knovveth not what God is.

After this run over breeflie the ten commandments, and the seven deadly
sins, and thou shall see that there is no one of them al, in which thou have
not oftentimes offended in vvoork, word, or thought.

Secondly, touching but in delices and sensual pleasures.

What profit have thou taken by the holy Sacraments, which God ordained for
thy remedy? what thanks have thou given him for his benefits? How have thou
ansvvered to his inspirations? wherein have thou spent thy health, and the
strength and habilities of nature, and the goods which ar named of fortune,
and the means and opportunities to live well? what care have thou had of thy
neighbors, which God has commended unto thee, and of those vvoorks of
mercy, which he appointed thee to use toward them? Think then, what
answer vvilt thou make at the day of accoumpt, when God shall say unto
thee. Give me an accoumpt of thy stevvard-shippe, and of al my goods committed
to thy charge, for the time is now expired, and thou shall have no more to
do with them.

O dry and withered tree, ready for everlasting torments! what vvilt thou
answer at that day, wen they shall ask thee an accoumpt of all the time of
thy life, and of all the minutes and moments of the same?

Thirdly think upon the sins which thou have committed, that yet still the
old Adam lives in thee with many of his old roots and customs. Consider
then how vnreuerent thou have ben, and yet art toward God, how unthankful
for his benefits, how rebellious and stif necked to his inspirations, how
slovvthul in things apparteining to his service: which thou never do with
such readiness and diligence, nor with such pure intention as thou ought,
but for some other respects and commodities of the world.

Consider also how severe and hard thou art with thy neighbor, and how
pitiful and favorable toward thy self, what a frind of thine own vvil, of
thy flesh, of thy estimation, and of al other thy commodities. Behold how
thou art alvvaies provvde, ambitious, angry, rash, vainglorious, envious,
malicious, delicate, inconstant, light, sensual, a frind of thy pastimes, of
pleasant companies, of laughing, jesting, and babbling.

Consider likewise how changeable thou art in thy good purposes, how
unadvised in thy words, how headlong in thy deeds, how covvardous and
faint hearted in what soever matters of weight and importance.

Fourthlie when thou have considered in this order the multitude of thy
sins, forthwith their greeuousnes, that thou may so perceive how thy
myseries be increased on every side: to which purpose thou must vevv well
these three circumstances in the sins of thy life past; to wit against
whom thou have sinned; for what cause thou have sinned; and in what manner
thou have sinned. If thou consider against whom thou have sinned, thou shall
find that thou have sinned against God, whose goodness and majesty is
infinite; whose benefits and mercies toward mankind do exceed even the
sands of the sea; in whom be al titles of excellency and honor that can be
imagined; and to whom al duty and homage is due even in the highest degree of
bounden duty. If thou consider the cause for which thou have sinned, it was
but for a point of estimation, for a beastle delight, for a trifle of
commodity, and oftentimes without any commodity at al, only for custom and
contempt of God. But now after what manner have thou sinned? Suerlie with
such facility, with such boldness, so without scruple and remorse of
conscience, so without fear, yea for the most part with such easines and
contentment, as if thou had sinned against a God of straw, that nether
knevv nor savve what passes in the world. Is this then the honor due to so
high a majesty? Is this the thankse-geuing for so many benifits? Is this the
recompense vvorthie to be made for his precious blood shed upon the Cross?
and for those stripes and buffets which he suffered for thy sake? O miserable
and vvretched creature that thou art! miserable, for that which thou have
lost; more miserable, for that which thou have committed; and most miserable
of al, if yet thou see not thine own perdition.

After all this, Nature, as also those of Grace, which be the greatest, be all
and wholy his and from him. For his is the grace of Predestination, which is
the fountain of al other graces, his is the grace of Vocation, his the grace
Concomitant, which assisteth thee in doing all good, his the grace of
Perseverance, and finally his the grace of Everlasting life. This being so,
what have thou of thy self, vvherof to glory and vaunt, but nothing and sin?
Repose then a little in the consideration of this thy nothing, esteeming this
only to be thine own riches, and all the rest that thou have, to be of the
law of God: to the end thou may see cleerelie, and as it vveere feel with
thy hands what thou art, and what God is, how poor thou art, and how rich
he is: Consequently how little thou ought to trust and esteem thy self,
and how much to trust in God, to love him, and to glory in him.

When thou have well considered al these things before said, think then of thy
self as baselie as thou possibly can. Think that thou art a place where
reeds grow, which be changed with every vvinde, without weight,
vvithoutforce, without firmnes, without stay, and without any manner of
being. Think that thou art a lazarus lying sour days dead, that thou art a
stinking and abominable carcas, so full of worms, and of so vile a stentch,
that so many as pass by thee, do stop their noses, and shut their eyes
that they may not see thee. Think that in this sort thou do stink in the
sight of God and of his Angels, and esteem thy self unworthy to lift up they
eyes toward heaven, unworthy that the earth should bear thee, unworthy
that any creatures should serve thee, unworthy of the bread thou eatest, and
unworthy of the light and air that thou receauest.

Cast thy selfdovvne prostrate with that public woman sinner at our
Saviors feet, Luc. 7.37.
and covering thy face for very shame and confusion, with the like shame that
a vvoma^ would appear before her husband, when she has committed treason
and adultery against him, and with great sorrow and repentance of heart,
desire him to pardon thy sins and offenses, and that of his infinite pirie
and mercy it vvil please him to receive thee again into his house.

Tevvsday night. Of the misertes of man's life.
THIS day thou have to meditate upon the miseries of man's life, that by them
thou may see how vain the glory of this vvoorld is, and how little to be
accoumpted of, seeing it is built upon so vveake a foundation as this
miserable life of ours is. And albeit the distresses and miseries of this life
be almost innumerable, yet may thou, for the present, consider cheeflie these
seven.

First consider how short this lise is, and ten, or fovverscore years: for
all the rest, Psalm. 89.11.
if yet be any thing prolonged, as the Prophet says, is but labor and
sorrow. And if thou take out of this the time of thy infancy, which is rather
a life of beasts then of men, and that which is spent in sleeping, when we
do use neither sense, nor reason which makes us men, thou shall find it to
be a great deal shorter, then it seems unto thee. Besides all this, if thou
compare the present life with th'eternitie of the life to com, it vvil scarsly
seem unto thee so much as a minute, whereby thou shall easily perceive how
far out of the right way those persons be, who to enjoy the little blast of
so short a life, do put them selves in hazard to loose the quiet rest of the
life, that shall endure for ever.

Secondly consider how uncertain this life is, in the very blossom of their
youth? Mart. 13.35.
Ye know not (says our Savior) when the lord of the house comes; at even,
or at midnight, or at the cock crovving, or in the morning.

And the better to understand this, and to have some feeling of the matter, as
in deed it passes, it shall be a good help unto thee to call to mind the death
of many persons which thou have known in this world, especially of thy
frinds and acquaintance, and of some worshipful and famous persons, whom
death has assaulted in diverse ages, and utterly beguiled of al their fond
designments and vain hopes.

Thirdly consider how frail and brickle this life is, and thou shall find,

Fovverthlie consider how mutable this life is, never remain in one state of
health and disposition; and much more the mutations and changements of our
minds, which be alvvais altered, as the sea, with diverse winds and waves
of passions, appetites, and cares, which trouble and disquiet us every
hour; and finally the varieties, which they term of fortune, which never
suffers the affairs of man's life to persevere in the self same state, and in
the same prosperity and contentment, but alvvais turns her wheel, and
roleth up and down from one place to an other. And above all this consider
how continual the moving of our life is, seeing it never rests day nor
night, but goes shortening from time to time. Now according to this reckning
what is our life, but a candle that still consumes and the more it burns
and gives light, the more it vvasteth away? what is our life but a flower
that opens in the morning, that at noonetide fades away and at evening is
cleene dried up?

In respect of this continual mutation and changement, God said by the Prophet
Isaie. Al flesh is hay, Isaia 40.6.
and all the glory thereof is as the flovver of the feeld. Upon which words
S. Hierom says. Tru^t whosoever vvil consider the frailty of our fleash, and
how in all minutes and moments of times we grow and wax away and never
abide in one state, and how even this, in which we speak, copy and write,
is so much past of our life; he vvil nothing dout to call our flesh hay, and all the glory of the same as the flovver of hay, or as the^nedovves of the feelds.
He that was an infant, becomes a child; he that was a child, waxes
suddenly a young man; and by uncertain spaces of time is changed to be old
and aged, and does before marvel to see him self aged, then he vvondereth
that he is not young. The beavvtiful woman which did dravv after her so many
companies of foolish young men, shows her vvrinckled forhead, and she that
before was so greatly loved, is afterward utterly contemned.

Fiftlie consider how deceitful our life is,

Sixtlie consider how besides this that our life is so short, as has been
said, yet that little time we have to live is so subject to so mani^ miseries
both of the soul and body, that all it laid together is nothing else but a
vale of tears, and a maine sea of infinite miseries. Saint Hierom vvriteth,
tom. 1. epistol. 3. cap. 11.
that Xerxes that most mighty king, who threvv down mountains and dried up
the seas, as on a time he went up to the top of a high hill, to take a view
of his huge army, which he had gathered together of infinite people, after he
had vvelseene them, it is said that he wept. And being demanded the cause
wherefore he wept? he ansvvered and said; I weep because within these
hundred years, there shall not one of all this huge army, which I see here
present before me, be left alive.

O that we might, says S. Hierom. ascend up to the top of some high place,
that we might see from thence all the whole earth underneath our feet. From
thence should thou see the ruins and miseries of the whole world, and
nations destroyed by nations, and kingdoms by kingdoms. Thou should see how
some were tormented, some murdered, some drowned in the sea, some others lead
away captives. In one place thou should see marriages and mirth, in an
other doleful mourning and lamentatio^, here some borne, there some others die,
some flowing in riches, and others begging from door to door. To be short thou
should see not only the huge army of Xerxes, but also al those in the
world that be now alive, within these fevv days to end their lives.

Run over all the diseases and pains of a man's body; and all the afflictions
and cares of the mind: and all the perils and dangers which be incident as
well to al estates, as to al ages of men, and thou shall see yet more
evidently how manifold the miseries of this life be: for by seeing how
little a thing all that is, which the world can aford thee, thou shall com
more easily to despise and contemn whatsoever the same has in it.

Finally after al these miseries,

All this vvil make thee understand how brief and miserable the glory of the
world is, for as much as the life of worldlings, upon which it is founded,
is such as we have here laid down: and consequently how the same
deserves to be abhorred, despised, contemned.

VVensdaie night. Of the hour of death.
THIS day thou must meditate upon the hour of death, which is one of the
most profitable considerations that may be, as well for the obteining of true
wisdom, and eschevving of sin, as also for beginning to prepare thy self for
the hour of accoumpt.

Consider then first of al how uncertain that hour is in which death vvil
assault thee,

Secondly consider the separation which shall be at that time, how much more
grievous then shall that universal banishment be from al things that we have,
from our houses, from our goods, from our frinds, from our father, from our
mother, from our children, from this light and common air, and finally from
al things of this world. If an ox make so great a bellovving when he is
separated from an other ox with whom he did dravve the plovve; what a
bellovving vvil thie heart then make, when thou shall be separated from al
those, in whose company thou have carried the yoke and burdens of this life?

Consider also the pain which a man shall then receive, of these two lottes,
being so far different as they are, shall fall unto their share.

After this angvvish there follows an other no less then this, Prou. 23.
Regard not the wine when it is redd, and when it shows his color in
the glass; for although at the time of drinking it seem delectable, yet at
the end it vvil bite like a serpent, and poison like a cocatrice. These be the
dregs of that poisoned cup of the enemy. These be the leauings of the
cup of Babylon so gylted without. At that time a miserable man, seeing him
self environed with so many accusers, begins to fear the thread of this
judgment, and to say with him self. O miserable wretch that I am who have
lived so deceived, and have vvalked such ways! what shall become now of me
in this judgment? If S. Galat. 6.^
Paul say that What things a man does sovv, those also shall he reap. I that
have sown no other thing but works of flesh, what hope I to reap thereof
but corruption? if S. Apoc. 21.
John say that no polluted thing shall enter into that sovereign City which
is al of pure gold, what hope may I have who have lived so abominablie and
so filthilie?

After this there follow the Sacraments of Confession, of the Altar, God, when
the pains and increasing of his sickness vvil scarcely permit him to do it.

Consider also those last accidents and pangs of sickness,

But abo^eal,

Now when the soul is departed from the body, there remain yet two vvais
to go: the one is to accompaine the body unto the sepulcher; the other is to
follow the soul until her cause be determined: and thou must view what
shall befall to each of these parts.

Consider then in what sort the body remains after his soul has forsaken
it,

When thou have left the body in the grave follow forthwith the soul, we
have made of the most precious blood of our Savior, and of the use of his
sacraments. And there shall every one be judged according to the accoumpt he
shall make of that, which he has received.

Thursdaie night. Of the date of judgment.
THIS day thou shall meditate upon the day of the general judgment, that by
means of this consideration, those two principal affections may be stirred
up in thy soul, which every faith full Christian ought to have, to wit the
fear of God, and abhorring of sin.

Consider first what a terrible day that shall be, and wrath, as there have been sins committed since the creation of the world.

Secondly consider the fearful signs which shall go before that day: Luc.
^1.
for as our Savior says, before the coming of this day, there shall be signs
in the sun, in the moon and in the stars, and finally in all the
creatures of heaven and earth, for they all shall have as it were a feeling of
their end, before they end in deed; and shall tremble and begin to fall,
before they fall in deed. But men (says he) shall go dried up and withered
for fear of death, hearing the terrible rorings of the sea, and seeing the
great waves and tempests which shall rise in it, and foreseeing by this the
great calamities and miseries which such fearful signs do threaten to the
world. And so shall they go astonished and amazed, their faces pale and
disfigured, them selves dead before death, and condemned before sentence be
given; measuring the perils imminent, by their own present fears, and every
one so occupied with his own affairs, that none shall think of others, no not
the father of his son. None shall then have to do with any, or for any,
because none shall be sufficient for him self alone.

Thirdly consider that universal flood of fire that shall com before the judge,
dreadful sovvnd of the trompet which the A changel shall blovv to sommon and
call all the generations of the world to assemble together in one place, and to
be present at there judgment, and above all that dreadful majesty with
which the judge shall com.

After this consider the straight accoump: which shall there be required of
every man. Truly (says Job) I know it is so, Job 9.
and that no man can beiustified, if he be compared with God. If he vvil
conted with him (in judgment) of a thousand things (that he shall charge him
vvithal) he shall not be able to answer unto one. What then shall every
wicked person think at that time when God shall enter with him into this
examination, and shall there within his own conscience say thus unto him.
Com hither thou wicked fellow, what have thou seen in me that thou should
thus despise me, and go to mine enemies side? I have created thee to my image
and likeness: I have given thee the light of faith and made thee a Christian,
and redeemed thee with mine own propre blood, for thee have I fasted,
traueilled from place to place, vvatched, labored and sweat drops of blood,
for thee have I fusfred persecutions, scoutgings, blasphemies, reproaches,
buffetings, dishonours, torments, and the Cross. Witness be this Cross and
nails which appear here. Witness be these vvounds of my hands and feere
which remain in mie body. Witness be heaven and earth before whom I
suffered. Now what have thou done with this thy soul which I with my
blood purchased to be mine? In whose service have thou employed that which I
bought so dearly? O foolish and adulterous generation! Why would thou
rather serve this thy enemy with pain, then me thy Creator and Redeemer
with joy? I called you often times, and ye would not answer me; I knocked
at your gates, and ye would not awake; I stretched out my hands on the
cross, and ye would not behold them. Ye have despised my counsels with al my
promises and threatenings: wherefore speak now o ye Angels, judge ye other
judges betwixt me and my viniard, what could I have done more for it then I
have done?

Now what answer can the wicked make here? such as scoff at holy
things? such as mock virtue? such as contemn simplicity? such as have made
more accoumpt of the laws of the world then of the laws of God? such as
have been deaffe at al his callings, insensible to all his inspirations,
rebellious against his commandments, obdurate and unthankful for all his
chastisements and benefits? what vvil those answer who have lived, as if
they had believed that there were no God; and such as have made accoumpt of no
law, but only of their own interest and commodity? VVat vvil ye do
(says the Prophet Isaie) in the day of visitation and calamity which
comes from afar? Isai. 30.27.
Unto whom vvil ye fly for succor and help, and where vvil you leave your
glory; that ye be not carried away prisoners, and fall with those that at
dead?

Fiftlie consider after all this that terrible sentence which the judge shall
thunder out against the wicked; Isai. 10.3.
His lips (says the Prophet Isaie) ar full of indignation, and his tongue like
a consuming fiar. What fiar shall burn so hot as these words; Math. 25.41.
Depart from me ye wicked and cursed into everlasting fiar, which is prepared
for the devil and his Angels; In which words and each of them thou have much
to feel and think of as of that doleful departing; of that malediction and
curse; of that fiar; of that company of devils and wicked spirits; and that
which is above al, of that eternity which shall never end.

Fridaie night of the pains of hell.
THIS day thou shall meditate upon the pains of hell, that with this
consideration also, thy soul may be the more confirmed in the fear of God,
and abhorring of sin.

These pains, says Saint Bonauenture, Bonauent. in fascioulario c. 3.
as the Saints have taught us. Wherefore it shall be a thing very convenient to
imagine the place of hell (as the same doctor says) to be as it were an
obscure and dark lake under the earth; or as a most deep pit full of fire;
or as a horrible and dark City wholy burning with fierce flames of fire:
in which none other noise were to be heard, but the hovvlings and
lamentations of hellish tormentors, and tormented persons, with continual
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Now in this unfortunate place the damned suffer two principal sorts of
pains, paenam sensus, a sensible pain; the other paenam damni, a pain of
loss. As tovvching the first pain, to vv^t of the sense, consider that thon,
there shall be no sense at all, neither within, nor without the soul, which
shall not suffer his propre torment. For like as the wicked offended God with
al their members and senses, and made armor of them al to serve sin, even
so vvil he ordain that each one of them shall be there tormented with his
peculiar torment and pay according to his desert. There shall the vvanton and
lecherous eyes be tormented with the ugly sight of devils. There shall the
ears which were accustomed to hear lies and filthy talk, hear perpetual
blasphemies and lamentations. There the nostrels, which so much loved perfumes
and sensual smells, shall be filled with intolerable stench. There the taste,
which was cheris head with so diverse kinds of meats and delicacies, shall be
tormented with ravenous hunger and thirst. There the tongue, so much given to
murmuring and blaspheming, shall be ex^reme bitter with gall of serpents. There
the touching, so great a frind of delicate and soft things, shall svvimme as it
were in the cold yse of the river Cocytus, and betwixt the extreme heates and
flames of fiar. There the imagination shall suffer with the apprehension of
greefes present; the memory by calling to mind the pleasures past; the
understanding with the representation of evils that are to com; and the vvil
with the extreme anger and fury which the wicked have in that place against
God. Finally there shall be heaped together all the miseries and torments that
possibly can be imagined. For as S. Gregory says, Gregor.
there shall be cold intolerable: fiar unquenchable, the worm of conscience
immortal, stenche insupportable; darkness palpable: vvhippes of tormentours:
vision of devils: confusion of finnes: and desperation of al goodness. Now rel
me, if it seem a thing intolierable to suffer the lest of al these pains that
we endure in this world though it were but for a small time, what shall it
be to suffer there at one time all this multitude of torments, in all the members
and senses both inward and ovvtvvard? and that not for the space of one night
alone, nor of a thousand nights, but for the space of an infinite eternity.
What understanding, what words, what judgment is there in the vvoorld,
that is able to conceive and express this matter as it is in deed?

And yet this is not the greatest pain that is there to be suffered: paenam
damni, the pain of damnation or loss: which is to be deprived for ever of
the sight of God, and of his glorious company. For so much greater is a^ie
pain, by how much it depriueth us of agreater good: and because God is the
greatest good of al goods, so to want him shall be the greatest evil of all
evils, which in deed is this.

These ar the pains that generally appertain to all the damned:

Unto all these pains there is added an eternity, them, nor he that suffers
them shall finish and have an end, but to be as it were a perpetual
banishment, and an infamy never to beremitted; this is a matter able to make
any man besides him self, that should consider it deeply and with due
attention.

This is then the greatest pain that of all others is to be suffered in that
unfortunate place: for if these pains were to be endured but for some certain
time, although it were a thousand or a hundred thousand years, or, as a
certain doctor says, if there were any hope that they should end in so
much time, as all the maine occea^ sea should be consumed drop by drop, taking
out of it every thousand year but one drop only, yet this vvoold be some kind
of comfort and consolation. But it passes not so in this case, for the pains
shall becorrespondent to the eternity of almighty God, and the continuing of
this misery, to the perpetuity of his divine glory. So long as God shall
live, so long shall they die, and when God shall be no more that which he is
now, then shall they also cease to be that which they are. Novvin this
duratio^, in this eternity, I vvish thee good brother, to settel and rest for
some time thy consideration, and as a cleene beast to r^minate this passage now
with thie self, for as much as the eternal, and everlasting truth cries,
Matthae. 14.35.
and auovvcheth saying. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my vvord^s shall not
pass.

Saturdaie night. Of the glory of heaven.
THIS day thou shall meditate of the glory of those that be blessed and
happy in heaven, thereby to move thy heart to the contempt of the world, and
to an earnest desire to be in the company of celestial citizens.

To the end therefore that thou may in some sort understand somvvhat of this
felicity, thou have to consider, a mong other things, these five that are in
it. The excellency of the place; the joy of the company; the vision of God;
the glory of the bodies; and finally the sacietie, and perfect store of al
good things which is there.

First then consider th'excellencie of the place, heaven, and seeeth in the
same such a number of stars, and so many void spaces, where many more
stars might be set, when he seeeth this, I say, how can he but vvoonder?
how can he but be astonished and as it were besides him self, considering the
passing greatness of that place, and much more of that Souerain lord that
created the same?

Now as for the beavvtie of that place, it is a thing that cannot be expressed
with words; for if God has created so wonderful and so bevvtiful things in
this vale of tears, what has he created (trow ye) in that place, which is
the seat of his glory, the throne of his statelines, the palace of his
majesty, the house of his elect, and the paradise of all delights?

After the excellency of the place consider the worthiness of the dvvellers in
it, Apocal. 7.9.
S. Dionisius says, Caelest. Hierar. c. 14.
that the Angels ar so many, that they exceed without comparison al corporal
and material creatures upon the earth. p. q. ^^. ar. 3.
S. Thomas agreeing with this opinion, says, that like as the heavens in
greatness exceed the earth without any proportion: so does the multitude of
those glorious spirits exceed the nombre of all corporal things that are in
this vvoorld with like advantage and proportion. Now what thing can be
imagined more vvoonderfull then this? Certainly this is such a thing, that if
it were well considered, it were sufficient to make al men astonished. And if
each one of those blessed spirits (yea though it be the very least among
them) be more beautiful to behold, then all this visible vvoorld, what a sight
shall it be, to behold such a number of beautiful spirits, and to see the
perfections and offices of euerieone of them? There the Angels be sent in
ambassages; The Archangels ministre and serve; the Principalities triumph; The
Powers rejoice; The Dominations govern; The Virtues shine; The Thrones
glister; The Cherubines give light. The Seraphines burn in love; and al sing
lavvdes and praises to God. Now if the company and mutual conversation of
good and virtuous persons, be a thing so svveete and so amiable as we daily
prove; what a thing shall it be to converse there with so many blessed
Saints, to talk with the Apostles, to deal with the Prophets, to
communicate with the Martyrs, and to have a perpetual familiarity with all the elect?

More if it shall be so great a glory to enjoy the company of the good;
Blessed ar the men, 2. Regu. 10.8.
and blessed ar these thy servants, that stand in thy presence and hear thy
wisdom: What shall it be to behold that most high Salomo^? that eternal
vvlsdom? that infinite greatness? that inestimable bevvtie? that exceeding
goodness, and to enioie the same for ever and ever? This is the essential glory
of the Saints: this is the last end and harborough of our desires.

Afther this contemplate the glory of the bodies, which shall be endued with
those four singular qualities and dovvries, to wit with Subtilitie,
Svviftnes, Impassibilitie and Cleerenes: which Cleerenes shall be so great, that
each one of the Saints bodies shall shine like the sun in the kingdom of their
father. Now if the sun which stands in the midst of the heavens being
but one, be yet sufficient to give light and comfort to all this world, what a
light shall so many suns and lamps make, as shall shine togetherin that place?

But what shall I say now of all the other goods which are there? August.
There (as S. Augustine says) shall be true glory: for none shall be praised by
error or flattery. There shall be true honor: for it shall nether be denied o
such as deserve it, nor given to such as merit it not. There shall be true
peace: for no man shall be molested either by him self, or by others. The revvard
of true virtue, shall be even he that gave the virtue, and has promised himself
for a revvard of the same; whom we shall see without ceasing, love without
lothsomnes, and praise without vvearines. There the place is large, beutiful,
bright, and secure, the company very good, and pleasant; the time alvvaies
after one manner; not divided into evening and morning, but continued with one
simple eternity. There shall be a pepetual springtime, which shall flourish
foreue more with the freshnes and svveete breathing of the holy Ghost. There
al shall rejoice, al sing, and give continual praise to that high giver of al
things, through whose bountiful goodness they live and reign for ever. O
heavenly city! secure dwelling place! country where al pleasant things at
to be found! people without grudging and murmuring! quiet neighbors! and men
without any want or necessity. O that the strife and contention of this
present state were ended! O that the days of my banishment were once
finisshed! when shall this day com? when shall I com, and appear before the
face of my svveete lord and Savior?

Sundaie night, of the benifits of almighty God.
THIS day thou shall meditate upon the benifits of God, therebie to give him
thanks for them, and to enkendle in thy self a more fervent love of him who
has been so bountiful toward thee. And although these benifits be
innumerable, yet may thou at the least consider these five most principal: to
wit, the benifits of Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Vocation, and other
particular and Secret benifits.

And first of al, Creation, consider with great attention what thou vvast
before thou were created, and what God did for thee, and bestovved upon
thee, before thou did merit or deserve any thing; to wit he gave thee
thy body with al thy members and senses: and thy soul of so great
excellency, endued with those three noble powers, which be Understanding,
Memory, and Will. And consider well, that to give thee this soul, was to
give thee al things, for so much as there is no perfection in any creature,
which a man has not in him in his manner. Whereby it appears that to give
us this thing alone, was to give us at once al things together.

As concerning the benifit of Conservation,

Touching the benifit of Redemption, principal circumstances in the mystery
of his sacred Passion; to wit, who is he that suffers; what he suffers;
of whom; and to what end he suffers. Who is he then that suffers? God.
What suffers he? The greatest torments and dishonor, that ever were
suffered. Of whom does he suffer? Of hellish and abominable creatures, who in
their vvoorks ar like even to the devils them selves. To what end does he
suffer? not for any commodity of him self, or any merit of our part, but
only for the bowels of his infinite charity and mercy.

As concerning the benifit of Vocation, days of thy life, as he has done to
diverse others that were in the same state? and last of al to call thee with
so mighty a vocation, that thou might rise up again from death to life,
and open thine eyes to the eternal light? what mercy was it also, after thou
vvast converted, to give the grace not to return unto deadly sin again,
but to vanquish thine enemy, and to persevere in good life?

These ar the public and known benifits; but there be other secret
benifits, every one of us that which he said to S. Lu^. 22.31.
Peeter. Behold Satan has required to have you for to sift as wheat: but I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Now who knovveth these
secrets but only God? The positive benifits be such as a man may sometimes
understand and know them: but privative benifits which consist not in doing
us good, but in delivering us from evils, who is able to understand?
Wherefore as well for these, as for the others, it is reason we should
alvvais be thankful to our lord, and understand how far in arrerages we be
in our reckoning with him, and how much more we be indetted unto him, then
we ar able to pay, seeing we ar yet not able to understand them.

But that thou in some sort know better the greatness of these benefits which
God has bestovved upon thee,

As touching the first circumstance think well with thy self, how great he
is that bestows these benefits upon thee, seeing he is God; consider the
greatenes of his omnipotency, which is declared unto us sufficiently by the
vvoork-manship of this vvoorld, with the whole university of creatures
contained therein. Consider also the greatenes of his wisdom, which is
known by the order, agreement, and maruailous providence which we see in all things. For if thou meditate well upon this circumstance, thou shall com to
understand, that not only the aforesaid benifits, but also the least thing
that may be, as for example an apple, or nut, sent thee by this so great and
vvorthie a king, ought to be highly esteemed of thee, for the worthiness of
him that gives it.

The greatenes also of these benifits is no les to be esteemed in respect of
the second circumstance, that is of the baseness of him that receaueth them,
then in respect of the excellency of him that gives them. And therefore the
Prophet David said. O lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, Psalm. 8.5.
or the son of man that thou visitest him? for if all the whole vvoorld be
scarce as much as an emmot or ant in comparison of the majesty of almighty
God; what then may man be in respect of him, who is but so small a portion
of the whole vvoorld? And therefore how can it be but great mercy and
maruail, that so high and Sovereign a Lord should have so particular and
special care to do so much good to so little an emmot?

But now what vvilt thou say, if thou consider the cause of these benefits,
that is, wherefore they be given thee? It is evident that no man does good to
an other, nor makes as much as one step for him, without some hope or
pretense of interest. Only this our lord bestows al these benifits upon us,
without any pretense or hope, that we of our part may do any thing
redounding to his commodity and profit. In so much that whatsoever he does
for us, he does it of pure favor and grace, moved thereunto by his only
goodness and love. And if thou think otherwise, tell me, I pray thee, if thou
be predestined, wherefore else did he predestinate thee? wherefore
afterward create thee? redeem thee? make thee a Christian? and call thee to
serve him? what might there be here, that might move him to bestovv such
exceeding great benifits upon thee, other then his only goodness, and love
toward thee?

Neither is it a thing of les importance for this purpose, to consider the
means and the manner, with which he does us so much good, that is the heart
and will with which he does it: for that all the good the which he has
done unto us in time, he determined from al eternity to do it. And so from
al eternity he has loved us with perpetual charity; and for this charity
and love toward us he determined to do us all this good, and to have an
especial care of our salvation: to which he still attends with such
providence and oversight, as if void of al other affairs, he had nothing else
vvhereto to attend, but to the salvation of each one in particular. Here then
has every deuovvt soul where upon to ruminate and consider as a clean
beast, night and day, and where she shall find most abundant and svveete
pasture for all her life.

OF THE TIME AND FRVITE OF the foresaid meditations. CHAP. III.
THESE be the seven first meditations, good Christian reader, upon which thou
may discourse and occupy thy thought all the days of the week; not that
thou may not think also as well of some other things, and in other days
besides these; for, as has been said in the beginning, what soever thing
induces our heart to the love and fear of God, and to the observation of his
commaundments, is fit matter for meditation Neuer-theles the aforesaid passages
and considerations have been here set down for two causes: the first
whereof is, because they be the principal mysteries of our faith, and such as
of them selves, move us more to that which we said, to wit to the love and
fear of God. The second is, that young beginners, who have need of milk,
may find here chevved and digested those things, of which they are to
meditate, to the end they go not, as pylgrims in a strange country, vvandring
up and down through unknown places, and taking some things, and leaving
others, without having any stabilitie or stedfastnes in any.

It is also to be noted that the meditations of this vvecke ar most fit, as
has been said, for the beginning of a man's conversion, that is when a man
nevvlie turns him self to God; for that then it behooves to begin with those
things, which may move us to sorrow and detestation of sin, to the fear of
God and contempt of the vvoorld, which be the first entries of this way, and
therefore those that begin must persevere for some space of time in the
consideration of these things, that they may by the^, be better founded in the
virtues and affects before mentioned.

OF THE OTHER SEVEN MEDITATIONS OF THE SACRED Passion, and of the manner which
we must observe in them.
AFTER the meditations, which before we have laid down, there follovv other
seven meditations of the holy Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus
Christ, to which also may be annexed and joined the other principal passages
of his most blessed life.

But here we must understand, that there be six things to be chiefly
considered in the Passion of our Savior Christ; to wit. The greatenes of his
pains: that we may take compassion of them. The grieuousnes of our sins;
which was cause of his pains, that we may abhor them. The excellency of
the benifit: that we may be thankful for it. The magnificencie of the
goodness, and charity of almighty God which is here discovered: that we
may heartily love the same. The conueniencie of this mystery: that we may
admire it. And the multitude of the virtues of our Savior Christ which do
shine here so brightlie that we may be provoked thereby to imitate them.

Now according to this, when we go to meditate the Passion, we must
endeavor to incline our heart some times to have compassion of the pains of our
Savior Christ, for that they were the greatest that ever were suffered in
this world, as well for the tenderness of his complexion, as for the greatenes
of his charity, and also for that he suffered without any manner of
consolation, as in an other place is declared.

Some other times we must procure to dravv out of this holy passion motives of
sorrow for our sins, considering that they were the very cause, why our
Savior suffered such and so grievous pains, as in deed he suffered.

Some other times we must take from hence motives of love and thanksgiving;
considering the greatenes of the love, which our Savior by this mean
discovered unto us; and the greatenes of the benifit which he bestovved upon
us, redeeming us so liberally with so great cost of his, and so great
commodity of ours.

At other times we must lift up our eyes to consider the conueniencie of the
manner of this mystery which almighty God did choose to heal and cure our
misery; that is to satisfy for our debts; to succor our necessities; to
merit for us his grace; to beat down our pride; and to induce us to the
contempt of the world; to the love of the Cross; of Poverty; of Asperitie;
of Injuries; and of all other virtuous and laudable labors.

Some other times we must fix our eyes in the examples of the virtues, which
shine in the most holy life and death of our Savior: in his Meekenes,
Patience, Obedience, Mercy, Poverty, Charity, Humility, Benignity,
Modesty, and in all the other virtues, which in all his vvoorks and words
shine more brightlie, then the stars in heaven; to the intent we may
imitate somvvhat of that which we see in him, and that we receive not in
vain the spirit and grace, which he has given us for this end, but that we
endeavor to go to him by him. This is the highest and most profitable manner
of meditating the passion of our Savior Christ, which is by way of
imitation, for that by imitation we com to be transformed, and so to sai^
with the Apostle, I live, now not I, Galat^ 2.20.
but Christ lives in me.

Beside that which we have hitherto said, it is very expedient in the
mysteries of the holy passion to have Christ as it were present before our
eyes, and to make account that we see him before us when he suffers, and to
have an eye not only to the history of the sacred passion, but also to all the
circumstances of the same, and especially to these four as we have touched
before: that is, who suffers; for vvhorne he suffers; how he suffers;
and for what cause. Who suffers? Almighty God, who is infinite, immense
etc. For whom suffers he? for the most ungrateful and unmindful creature in
the world. How suffers he? with exceeding great humility, charity,
benignity, meekenes, mercy, patience, modesty etc. For what cause suffers
he? not for any, commodity of his own, nor any merit of ours, but only
for the bowels of his infinite pity and mercy.

Moreover we must not be content, to consider that only which our blessed
Savior suffered outvvardlie in his body, but much more that which he endured
inward lie, because we have much more whereof to contemplate in the soul
of Christ, then in the body of Christ; and this as vvelin the feeling and
compassion of his pains, as also in other affections and considerations which
were in him.

Now this little preambule or preface being thus presupposed, let us begin to
separate and put in order the mysteries of this most sacred and holy passion.

HERE FOLLOW THE OTHER SEVEN MEDItations of the holy Passion.
Mondaie morning. Of our Saviors entering into Jerusalem; vvasshing his
Apostles seete; and institution of the most blessed Sacrament.
THIS day when thou have made the sign of the cross, with such preparation
as afterward shall be declared, thou have to meditate upon the entering of our
Savior into Jerusalem with boughs; upon the vvasshing his Apostles feet;
and upon the Institution of the most blessed Sacrament of the altar.

Of our Saviors entering into Jerusalem.
WHEN the lamb without spot had finished his sermons and preaching of the
ghospel, be known with how great charity and joy of mind he went to
drink this chalice for us, he would be received this day with great triumph,
the people going forth to meet him with great acclamations and praises,
with boughs of olive trees and palms in their hands, and many spreding
their garments in the way underneath him, and crying with one voice, Matthew.
2.9.
and saying. Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Hosanna in the
highest. Join then also, my dear brother, thie cries with their cries, and
thy praises with their praises, and give thanks to our Lord for this so great
a benifit, which he now bestows upon thee, and for the love with which
he bestows it. For albeit thou owe him much for that which he suffered for
thee, yet thou ouest him much more for the love with which he suffered it. And
a^ though the torments of his passion were exceeding great, yet greater was
the love o^ his heart; and so he loved much more then h^ suffered; and would
also have suffered much more, if it had been necessary for us.

Go forth afterward into the way, upon the grovvnd to celebrate this feast
of his entering. The acclamations of praises, be prayer and thanksgiving. The
olive bovvghs, be vvoorks of mercy; and the palms be mortification and
victory over our passions: and the spreading of garments in the way, is the
chastising and hard using of the body. Persevere then in prayer, thereby to
glorify almighty God: use mercy also, thereby to succor thy neighbors
necessities; and with this mortfie thy passions, and chastise thy flesh, and
in such manner thou shall receive in thy self the son of God.

Thou have also here a great argument and motive to despise the glory of the
world, holy of holies, to morrow esteems him to be the vvoorst of all men,
and more unworthy to live then Barabbas. Now what example can be more
evident, thereby to see what the glory of the vvoorld is, and what account
ought to be made of the judgments of men? what thing can there be more light,
more vvilfull, more blind, more disloyal, and more inconstant in his opinions,
then the judgment of this vvoorld? To day he affirms, to morovv he denies:
to day he praises, to morovv he blasphemeth: to day with much inconstancy
and lightness he sets you above the skies, to morovv with more lightness he
throvveth you down to the very depth: to day he says that you ar the son
of God; and to morovv he says that you ar vvoorse then Barabbas. Such is the
judgment of this beast of many heads, and of this deceitful monster, which
keeps no faith, lealtie, or truth to any body, nether measures virtue or
valor but by his own interest. None is good, but he that is prodigal with
him, yea although he be a panime and infidel; and none is evil, but he that
uses him as he deserves, yea albeit he vvoork miracles; and this because he
has no other weight vvherby to weigh virtue, but his own interest and
commodity.

Now what shall I saieof his lies and deceits? with whom has he ever
faithfully kept his word? To whom has he given that which he promised?
with whom has he had perpetual frindship? To whom has he assured for
long time that, which he gave him? To whom has he ever sold wine which he
gave not througlie watered? He has only this of faithful, that he is
faithful to none. This is that false Judas which kissing his frinds,
delivers them to death: This is that traitor Ioab, 2. Regu. 3.27.
which embracing him whom he saluted as a frind, secreatlie thrust his
dagger thorough his body. He cries wine, and sells vinagre; he promises
peace, and secreatlie denounces war. He is evil to be kept; vvoorse to be
gotten; daungerons to be holden; and very hard to be left and forsaken. O
perverse vvoorld! false promiser, assured deceiuer, fained frind, true enemy,
common liar, secreat traitor, svveete in the beginning, bitter in the end,
fair faced, cruel handed, scarce in gifts, prodigal in grifes, in ovvtvvard
show something, invvardlie void and nothing, in appearence flourishing, but
under thy flovvres full of thorns.

Of the vvasshing of feet.
TOuching this mystery contemplate, Jesus. Behold this wonderful example of
inestimable humility, which he here shows unto thee, rising from the
table, and vvasshing his disciples feet. O good Jesus, what is this that thou
do? O svveete Jesus, wherefore does thy majesty so abase it self? what
would thou have thought, o my soul, if thou had there seen God him
self kneeling before the feet of men, yea even before the feet of Judas? O
cruel Judas, why does not this so great humility mollify thy heart? why
does not this so wonderful meekenes cause even thy very bowels to burst and
riue in sunder? Is it possible that thou have conspired to betray this most
mild and gentel lamb? Is it possible that thou have no remorse and compunction
in beholding this example? O be^^iful hands, how could ye touch such lothsom
and abominable feet? O most pure and clean hands, why disdain ye not to
vvash those feet so mired and durted in foul ways vvhiles they sought to
shead your blovvd? O ye blessed Apostles, how tremble ye not seeing this so
great humility? Peter what do thou? vvilt thou consent that the lord of
majesty shall vvash thy feet?

Saint Peter when he savv our Savior kneeling before him,

Consider also how after our Savior had vvashed their feet, Now what is
more filthy then man conceived in sin? and what is more clean and
bevvtiful, then our Savior Christ conceived of the holy Ghost? Cantic. 5.10.
My well-beloved is white and well colored (says the spovvse) and chosen out
among thovvsands. This most svveete and loving lord then so fair and so
clean, was content to receive into him self all the spots and filthiness of our
sovvles, and leaving them clean and free from those spots, he him self
remained (as thou seeest him upon the cross) all bespotted and defiled with
the same.

After this consider those words with which our Savior ended this history
saying. Joan. 13.15.
I have given you an example, that as I have done to you, so you do also.
Which words ar to be referred not only to this passage and president of
humility; but also to all the other vvoorks and life of Jesus Christ: for so
much as his whole life is a most perfect pattern of al al virtues, especially
of those which be in this place represented unto us, to wit of humility and
Charity.

Of the institution of the most blessed Sacrament.
THAT we may understand somvvhat of this mystery, it is to be presupposed,
that no tongue created is able to express the passing great love, which our
Savior Christ bears toward the Catholic Church his spovvse; and
consequently unto every one of those sovvles which be in state of grace, for
so much as every such soul is also his spovvse.

Wherefore when this our most svveete bridegroom minded to depart out of this
life,

Moreover this bridegroom in his long absence was desirous to leave some
company to his spovvse,

At the same time also he would go to suffer death for his spovvse, and to
redeem, blood: and that she might, as often as she would, enjoy this
treasure, he left her the keys thereof in this most blessed Sacrament. For as
S. Chrysostom says: So often as we com to receive the most blessed
Sacrament, we must make account that we com to lay our mouths to Christ's
very side, to drink of his most precious blovvd, and to be partakers of this
sovereign and divine mystery.

This heavenly bridegroom desired likewise to be loved of his spovvse with
an exceeding great love,

Besides this our Savior would assure his spovvse, where she shalliue in
spirit, seeing he denies not him self unto her in this vale of tears, where
she lives in fleash.

Moreover our Savior purposed at the hour of his death to make his
testament,

To conclude,

Tevvsdaie morning. Of our Saviors prayer in the garden; his apprehension, and
presentation before Annas.
THIS day thou have to meditate upon the prayer of our Savior in the garden;
upon his apprehension; and upon his presentation and evil usage in the house
of Annas.

Consider here first how after that this supper,

To accompany him in this way our Savior took with him those three of his
best beloved disciples, from that glorious shape, wherein he had shevved him
self unto them, at his transfiguration. And because they should understand,
that the inward troubles of his soul were no less, then began to be
discovered outvvardlie, he spoke unto them those sorovvfulvvoords. Matthew. 26.38.
Mie soul is heavy even to death; stay here, and vvatch with me.

Our Savior when he had spoken these words, O father if it be posstble, let
this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I vvil, but as thou. And having
made this prayer three times, at the third time he was in such a great agony,
that he began to svveateuen dropps of blood, which ran down al along his
sacred body, and trickled down to the grovvnd.

Consider now our Savior in this dolovvrous case, and vvithall the great
unthankfulness, and ingratitude of so many sovvles, as he knevv would never
acknovvledge this benifit, nor profit them selves of this so great, and so
precious remedy: his soul was vexed in such sort, and his senses, and most
tender flesh were so troubled, that all the forces and elements of his body
were distempered, and his blessed flesh was opened on every side, and gave
place to the blood, that it might pass, and distill throvvgh all the same in
great abundance, and stream even down to the grovvnd. Now if the flesh
suffered these grievous pains with only remembrance, and was in so piteous a
case, in what a doleful state then, trow ye, was the soul that suffered
those pains directly in it self?

Consider moreover how when our Savior had finished his prayer,

At the same time our Savior said unto them that came to lay hands upon him:
Tovv ar com ovvt as it were to a these, Matthew. 26.55.
with swords and clubbes to apprehend me: I sat daily with you teaching in
the temple, and you laid no hands on me. But this is your hour, Luc. 22.53.
and the power of darkness. This is a mystery of great admiration. For what
thing is more to be vvoondered at, then to see the son of God, to take upon
him the shape, and image not only of a sinner, but even also of a condemned
person? This, says he, Luc. 22.53.
is your hour and the power of darkness. By which words is understood,
that, from that time, that most innocent lamb was given up into the power of
the Princes of darkness, which be the diules, that by means of their ministres
they might execute upon him all the cruelties and torments they could devise.

Think thou then, o my soul, how much that divine highness abased it self for
thee, sithence it arrived to the last extremity of al miseries, which is, to
be given up to the power of devils. And because this was the pain, which
was due to thy sins, it pleased him to put him self to this pain, that thou
might remain quite from the same.

So soon as these words were spoken, foorthvvith all that hellish rovvte and
malicious rabble of ravenous vvoolues assaulted this most meek and innocent
lamb, some haled him this way, some that way, each one to the uttermost of his
power. O how vngentellie did they handle him? how discourteouslie did they
speak unto him? how many blows and buffets did they give him? what crying
and shovvting made they over him? even as conquerours use to do, when they
have obtained their pray? They lay hold upon those holy hands, which a
little before had wrought so many miracles, and do bind them very
straightly with rovvgh and knottie cords, in such sort that they gavvle the
skin of his arms, and make the very blood to spring out of them: and in
this manner they lead him openly throvvgh the common streates with great
despite and ignominy.

Consider now well our Savior how he goes in this way abandoned of his
disciples, which in the midst of all the discourtesies in the vvoorld could
never be obscured.

Forthwith accompany thy Savior to the house of Annas, Joan. 18.19.
that the high priest made unto him concerning his disciples and doctrine, one
of those wicked caitifes that stood there by gave him a great blow upon
the face saying. Joan. 18.22.
Ansvverest thou the high priest so? Unto whom our Savior avvnsvvered very
gentellie. If I have spoken ill, Joan. 18.23.
give testimony of evil; but if well, why strikest thou me?

Consider then here, o my soul,

VVensdaie morning. Of the presentation of our Savior before the high priest
Cayphas: of the injuries he received that night; of Saint Peter's denial; and of
his whipping at the pillar.
THIS day thou have to meditate upon the presentation of our Savior before
the high priest Cayphas; upon the injuries he received that night; upon Saint
Peter's denial of his master; and upon his whipping and scourging at the
pillar.

First consider how from the first house of Annas, Petr. 1.12.
and that Divine face, which the Angels desire to behold, al defiled with
spittel most irreverently. For when our Savior being coniured in the name of
the father, to tell them what he was, avvnsvvered to this demand, as it was
meet he should: those wicked men, so vnvvoorthie to hear such an excellent
and high avvnsvvere, and blinded with the brightness of so great a light,
assaulted him like mad dogs, and disgorged upon him al their malice and
fury. There each one to the uttermost of his power gives him buffers and
strokes. There they bespit that divine face with their diuilish mouths. There
they blindfold his eyes and strike him in the face, and jest at him saying.
Prophecy unto us, o Christ, Matt. 26.68.
who is he that struck thee? O marvelous humility, and patience of the
son of God! O bevvtie of the Angels! was this a face to spit upon! men use,
when they must spit, to turn their face to the fovvlest corner of the
house: and was there not to be found in all that palace, a fovvler place to
spit in, then thy face, o svveete Jesus? O earth and ashes, why do thou not
humble thy self at this so wonderful example?

After this consider what trovvbles, Luc. 22.65.
to pass away the sleepines of the night, to scoff and jest at the Lord of
majesty. Consider now, o my soul, how thy most svveete spouse is set here
as a mark, to all the arrovvs of the strokes and b^ffets they could give him
there. O cruel night! O unquiet night! in which thou, o my good Jesus, tookest
no repose at al, neither did those rest, who accounted it a pastime to vex
and torment thee. The night was ordained for this end, that therein al
creatures should take their rest, and that the senses, and members vveried
with toils and labors of the day might be refresshed; and these wicked men
use it as a fit time to torment al thy members and senses, stryking thy body,
afflicting thy soul, bynding thy hands, buffetting thy cheeks, spitting in
thy face, and lugging thee by the ears, that thereby at such time as all the
members ar wont to take their rest, they al in thee might be trovvbled and
payned. O how far do these mattins differ from those, which at the same time
the quiars of Angels soung to thee in heaven? There thy sing holy, holy; but
here these caitifes cry: Put him to death; put him to death: Crucify him;
crucify him. O ye Angels of paradise that heard both these voices, what
thought ye, when ye savv him so spitefully contemned in earth, whom you
with so great reverence do honor in heaven? what thought ye, when you savv
God himself to suffer such despites, even for those that did such villainies
unto him? who has ever heard of such a kind of charity, that one would
suffer death, to deliver from death the very same persons, that procured and
practiced his death?

But above al, the pains and turmoiles of this trovvblesom night were
increased far more by the denial of S. Peter. For that familiar frind of our
Savior; he that was elected and chosen to see the glory of his
transfiguration; he who above all the rest was honored with the
principality and chief rule of the Christian Church; he, I say, first
before al others, not once, but three several times together, even in the very
presence of his lord and master, svveareth and forsvveareth that he knovveth
him not, and that he wist not who he is. O Peter is he that stands there
by thee so wicked a man, that thou accomptest it so great a shame only to
have known him? Consider that this is a condemnation of him by thee, before
he be condemned by the high priests: sithence thou give to the vvoorld to
understand by this thy denial, that he is such a manner of man, that even thou
thy self do account it as a great reproach and dishonor unto thee, to have
as much as known him. Now what greater injury could be done then this?

Our Savior then hearing this denial, turned back, and beheld Peter, and cast
his eyes upon that sheep, which there was lost from him. O look of
marvelous force and virtue! O silent and still look, but greatly misterious
and significatiue! Peter understood right well the language, and voice of this
look: for so much as the crovving of the cock was not able to avvake^ him,
but this was able. In deed the eyes of our Savior do not only speak, but
also vvoork, as it appears by the tears of S. Peter, which yet gushed not
so much from the eyes of Peter, as they proceeded from the eyes of Christ.

After al these injuries consider vvhar scourgings, discurtisies as they there
used toward him.

Consider also what have they make to bind that holy body to a pillar,

After this behold how our Savior, relief as arvvont to be aforded to those
that be so vvounded. Al these things no doubt ar vvorthie of great feeling,
thankfulness and consideration.

Thursdaie morning. Of our Saviors Coronation with thorns; of the words,
Ecce Homo; and bearing of the cross upon his shouldres.
THIS day thou have to think upon the crovvning of our Savior with thorns,
how Pilate said of him, Ecce Homo; behold the man; and how he bare the cross
upon his shoulders,

To the consideration of these most doleful passages, the spovvse in the book
of Canticles inuiteth us saying. Cautic. 3.11.
Go forth, o ye daughters of Syon, and behold king Solomon with the crown,
with which his mother crowned him in the day of his espovvsels, and in the
day of the joyfulness of his heart. O my soul what do thou? o my heart
what think thou? O my tou^ge how is it that thou art become domme? O my
most svvete Savior, when I open mine eyes, and behold this dolorous image,
which is set before me, my heart does even cleave and rent in sunder for very
grief. How happens this O Lord? what? did not the vvhippings which thou
suffredst, and the death which ensues, and so great quantity of blood
alredie shed, suffice; but that now also the sharp thorns must, perforce, let
out the blo^d of thy head, which the vvhippes and scourges before had pardoned?

Wherefore, o my soul, heart pierced through, and through with sorovvs, his
body full of wounds, forsaken of his disciples, persecuted of the Jews,
scorned of the soldiars, contemned of the high priests, baselie rejected of the
wicked king, accused unjustly, and utterly destitute of the favor of all
men.

Think also upon this,

When they had thus crowned, Ecce homo. Behold the man, as much as if he
said. If for envy you sought his death, behold him here in such sort, that he
is not to be envied at, but rather to be pitied. Were you afraied lest he
would have made him self aching? behold him here so disfigured, that he
scarcely seems to be a man. Of these hands so fast bound, what fear you?
of this man so vvhipped and scourged, what demand you more? By this thou
may understand, o my soul, in what sort our Savior came then forth,
seeing the Judge believed, that the pitiful plight in which he was, might
suffice to break the hearts of such cruel enemies. Whereby thou may well
perceive how unseemly a thing it is, that a Christian man have no compassion
of the pains and sorovvs of our Savior Christ, seeing they were such as
were sufficient, as the Judge was fully persuaded, to mollify those so
fierce and savage hearts.

But when Pilate savv that those punishments executed upon that most holy
and innocent lamb, published, the enemies added thereunto an other cruelty,
which was to charge upon those shouldres, so rent and torn with whips and
scourges received before, the heavy tree of the Cross. Al which
notvvithstanding, our merciful Savior refused not to carry this burden
whereupon were laid al our sins, but embraced the same with singular
charity and obedience for the love he bare unto us.

After this the innocent Isaac went to the place of sacrifice with that so
heavy burden upon his vveake shoulders,

In the mean season, of the blessed virgin, and when thou art com thither,
casting thy self down at her feet, begin to speak to her with a doleful
voice saying. O lady of Angels, O Queen of heaven, Gate of paradise,
Aduocatrice of the world, Refuge of sinners, Health of just parsons, Joy of
Saints, Mistres of virtues, Mirror of cleanenes, Title of chastity, Pattern
of patience, and Example of al perfection: vvoe to me, o blessed lady, that
have lived to see this present hour. How can I live having seen with mine
eyes that which I have seen? what need more words? I have left thy only
begotten son, and my lord in the hands of his enemies with a Cross upon
his shoulders, to be crucified upon the same.

What understanding is able to comprehend, how deeply this sorrow pierced
the blessed virgins heart? Her soul began here to wax faint, and her face,
and all the parts of her virginlie body, were covered over with a deadly
sweat, which was sufficient to have ended her life, if the divine
dispensation had not resecuted her for greater pains, and for a greater crown.

Now the holy virgen goes to seek her son, the great desire which she
has to see him, testoring unto her again the st ength which sorrow had taken
from her. She hears a far of the classhing of armor, the trovvpes of people,
and the ovvtcries which by his enemies were thundered against him.
Incontinently also she sees the glistering spears and halbards, which were
holden up a loft. She approaches nearer and nearer unto her dearly beloved
son, and opens her eyes, which were dimmed with sorrow, to see, if she
possibly might, him whom her soul so exceedingly loved. O love and fear of
this blessed virgin Mary's heart! On one side she desired to see him, on the
other she was unwilling to see him so miserably disfigured. At the length,
when she was corn where she might see him, then those two lights of heaven
did behold one an other, and their hearts where pierced through with their
eyes, and they vvounded with their mutual sight their pitiful sovvles. Their
toungs were become domme, and yet the heart of that most svveete son spoke to
the heart of his mother, and said unto her, wherefore came thou hither my
dove, my beloved, and my svveete mother? Thy sorrow increases mine, and thy
torments be a torment to me, depart my dear mother and return home: it is not
decent for thy virginlie shame-fastnes and purity, to be in company of
murderers and thieves.

These and otherlike words full of compassion and pity, were spoken in those
pitiful hearts, and in this manner they passed over that irksom, and paineful
way even unto the place of the Cross.

Fridaie morning. Of the Cross, and the seven words which our Savior spoke
upon the same.
THIS day thou have to meditate upon the mystery of the Cross, and upon the
seven words which our Savior spoke.

Awake now, o my soul, speaking any word against them that used him in
such sort; but rather with a good vvil consented to be spoiled of his
garments, and with shame remain naked, that by the merit of this nakedness,
and with the same, the nakedness in which we were fallen throvvgh sin,
might be far better covered, then with the leaves of the fig tree.

Some holy fathers report that the torme^tors to pluck of our Saviors
garments, in such rueful wise: that that great vvound of his shoulders
distilled blood on al parts.

Consider now here, o my soul,

Consider after this how our Savior was nayld upon the Cross, members. For
certainly those hammers and nails passed through the hands of the son but
they vvounded and pierced the very heart of the mother.

Consider how forthwith they hoysed up the Cross on high,

Now then o my svveete Savior and Redeemer, what heart may be so stony hard
that vvil not riue a sunder for grief, since this day the very stones them
selves were ryuen considering that which thou suffredst upon the Cross? The
sorous of death, o Lord, have environed thee; and the waves of the sea have
overwhelmed thee. Thou art mired in the depth of the bottomless goulfes, and
find nothing where upon to stay thy self. Thy father has forsaken thee;
what hope may thou have of men? Thy enemies cry out against thee, thy
frinds break thy heart, thy soul is afflicted, and for the love thou bear
to me, thou admittest no comfort. Mie sins, o Lord, were undoubtedly very
great, and thy penance well declares it. I see thee, o my king fastened to a
tree, and there is nothing to sustain thy body but three iron nails: of
those thy sacred body hangs without any other stay or comfort. When the
weight of thy body staieth upon thy feet, then ar the vvounds of thy feet
more vvydened, and torn with the nayls vvherevvith they are pierced. And when
the svvaie of thy body staieth upon thy hands, then ar the vvounds of thy
hands more rent with the poise of thy body. Now thy holy head tormented,
and weakened with the crown of thorns, what pillovv has it to rest
upon? O how well might thy arms (most blessed and excellent virgin) be here
employed to supply this office! But alas, thy arms may not serve for this
present, but the arms of the Cross. Upon them must that sacred head recline
it self when it vvil repose, and yet the ease he shall receive thereby, shall be
but only to drive and stick those thorns more fast into his brain.

The sorovvs of the son were much increased by the presence of his mother,
crosses be here prepared for thee, o good JESUS, this day; the one for thy
body, and the other for thy soul. The one is of passion, the other of
compassion. The one pearceth thy body with nails of iron, the other pearceth
thy most holy soul with nails of sorrow; who is able to declare o^ good
JESUS, what grief it was to thee when thou did consider the great
anguishes of the most holy soul of thy mother, which thou knevvest so
certainly was there crucified with thee? when thou savvest that pitiful
heart of her pierced, and thrust through with the svvoord of sorrow? when thou
did open thy blovvdie eyes, and beheldest her divine face, wholy over
cast with palenes and vvannes of death; and those angvvishes of her soul,
which caused not her death, and yet were greater to her then death it self;
and those rivers of tears which gusshed out from her most clear eyes, and
heardest those deep sighs and sobbes, which burst out of her sacred breast,
being enforced with the vehemency of grief and sorrow?

Now what breast (says S. Bernard) may be so of iron, what bowels so hard,
that they be not moved to compassion, o most svveete mother, considering the
tears and pains which thou did endure at the foot of the Cross, when
thou savvest thy most dear son suffer so grievous, so long, and so
opprobrious and shameful torments? what heart can think, what tongue can
express thy sorrovv, thy tears, thy sighs, and the cleaving a sunder of thy
heart, when standing in this place, thou savvest thy beloved son used in such
cruel sort, and yet could not help him? when thou beheldest him naked, and
could not clothe him; parched up with thirst, and could not give him to
drink; iniuried, and could not defend him; diffamed as a malefactor, and
could not answer for him; his face so defiled with spittel, and could
not make it clean; finally his eyes gushing out tears, and could not dry
them, nor receive that last gasp which came out from his sacred breast, nor
join thy face with, his so known and so beloved, and in such manner dye
embraced with him. In this time thou did well prove in thy self, that the
prophetie was fulfilled, which that holy old Simeon had foretold thee,
before he died, saying, that a svvord of sorrow should pearce thy heart.

But o^ most pitiful virgen, wherefore would thou, o blessed lady,
increase thy sorrow with the sight of thine own eyes? wherefore would
thou find thy self present this day in this place? It is not a thing decent
for one so retired, as thou art wont to be, to appear in common places; It
becomes not a motherlie heart to see her children dye, although it stood
with their honor and reputation, and they dyed in their bead; and come thou
then to see thy son die by justice, and amongst thieves upon a cross? But
now seeing thou have resolved to surpass and ouercom al motherlie affection,
and that thou vvilt honor this mystery of the cross, wherefore do thou
approach so near unto the same, that thou must carry away in thie mantle, a
perpetual memory and remembrance of this thy sorrow? Thou can not aford thy
son any comfort or remedy, but well thou may with thy presence increase
and augment his torment.

In deed this only vvanted to the increase of his sorovvs, that in the time
of his agony, in the last instant and conflict of his death, even when the
last sighs raised up his tormented breast, he should then cast down his eyes
altogether dazeled and dimmed, and should behold thee standing at the foot of
the cross. And because he being near to the end of his life had his senses so
weakened and feebled, and his eyes so obscured with the shadovv of death,
that he could not see a far of, thou made thy self so near, to the end he
might know thee, and see those arms, in which he had been received and carried
into Egypt, so faint and broken; and those virginal breasts, with whose milk
he had been nourisshed, become even a sea of sorrovv. Behold o ye Angels these
two figures, if peradventure you may know them. Behold o ye heavens this
cruelty, and cover your self with mourning for the death of your Lord: let
the clear air become obscure and dark, that the vvoorld see not the naked
body of your Creator. Cast with your darkness a mantel upon his body, that
profane eyes behold not the ark of the testament uncovered. O ye heavens which
were created so bright and fair! o thou earth clothed with such variety and
beavvtie! if you did hide your glory in this so great pain; if you that be
insensible, did after your manner feel the same, what then did the bowels
and virginal breast of the blessed mother? O al you, says she, that pass by
the way, consider and behold if there be any sorrow like unto mie sorrow.
Truly there is no sorrow like unto thie sorrow, because in all the creature; of
the vvoorld there is no love like unto thy love.

After this thou may consider those seven words, Mar. 23.34. Mar. 23.43.
Joan. 19.27. Joan. 19.28. Matt. 27.46. Joan. 19.30. Mar. 23.46.
of which the first was. Father pardon them, for they know not what they
do. The second was to the good thief: This day shall thou be with me in
paradise. The third was to his most blessed mother; Woman behold thy son.
The fourth was: I am a thirst. The fifth was: My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me? The sixth was: It is finished. The seventh was: Father into thy
hands I commit my spirit.

Consider now, o my soul, with how great charity he commended in these
words his enemies unto his father; with how great mercy he received the
thife which confessed him; with what bowels he commended his pitiful mother
to the beloved disciple; with how great thirst and drith he shevved how
much he desired the salvation of men; with how lamentable a voice he povvred
out his prayer, and uttered his tribulation before the face of almighty God;
how he performed so perfectly, even to the very end, the obedience of his
father; and how finally he commended unto him his spirit, and resigned him
self wholy into his most blessed hands.

Here hence it appears, hou in each one of these words, remains enclosed
some singular document, and instruction of virtue. In the first, is commended
unto us Charity toward our enemies. In the second, pity and mercy toward
sinners. In the third duty and reverence toward our parents. In the fouerth,
zeal and desire of our neighbors salvation. In the fifth, prayer in time of
tribulations, and when we seem to be forsaken of God. In the sixth, the
virtue of Obedience and Perseverance. And in the seventh a perfect resignation
into the hands of God, which is the sum and principal of al our perfection.

Satturdaie morning. Of the pearcing our Saviors side; of his taking down
from the cross; of the pitiful bevvailing of our lady, and of Christ's burial.
THIS day thou have to meditate upon the pearcing of our Saviors side with
a spea^e; of his taking down from the cross; together with the lamentation
of our lady, and the office of the burial.

Consider then, their desire, which longed so much to see him dead, yet with
all this the flame of their fury was not quenched: because that,
notvvithstanding such things as had past, they resolved to revenge and flesh
them selves more upon those holy relics which remained, parting and
casting lottes upon his garments, and pearcing his sacred breast with a cruel
spear.

O ye cruel ministres! O ye hearts of iron! Seemed that so litel to you which
his body suffered being alive, that ye would not pardon it even after it was
dead? what rage of enmity is there so great, but that it is appeased, when
it sees his enemy dead before him? Lift up a little those cruel eyes of yours
and behold that deadly face, those dim eyes, that falling countenance, that
palenes and shadovv of death: for although you be more hard then either iron or
adamant stone, yea though ye be more hard then your own selves, yet in
beholding him you vvil be pacified.

After this comes the minister with a spear in his hand, vvherevvith ar
healed the sins of the world. O river that runnest out of paradise, and
vvaterest with thy streams all the whole face of the earth! O vvound of this
precious side, made rather with fervent love toward mankind, then with the
sharp iron of the cruel spear! O gate of heaven! vvindovve of paradise! place
of refuge! tovver of strength! sanctuary of just persons! sepulcher of
pilgrims! nest of clean doves, and flourishing bed of the spovvse of Solomon.
Al hail o vvound of this precious side, that vvoundest al devout hearts; stroke
that strikest the sovvles of the just; rose of unspeakable bevvtie; rubie of
inestimable price; entrance into the heart of Christ; testimony of his love;
and pledge of everlasting life.

Next to this consider, arms. And so she requesteth with great humility of
those noble men, that for so much as she had taken no leave of her son, nor
received the last embracings of him upon the cross, at the time of his
departure, they would now suffer her to approach near unto him, and not
increase her discomfort on every side, if, as the enemies had before taken her
son from her, being yet alive, so her frinds would take him from her being
now dead.

Now when the blessed virgin had him in her arms, with so great glory,
and broughtest forth with so great joy? what is now become of thy former
joys? vvhither is thy wonted gladness gone? where is that mirror of bevvtie,
in which thou did behold thy self?

Al those that were present,

The holy Evangelist also wept, and embracing the body of his master said:
O my good lord and master, who shall be my teacher from this time forwards?
To whom shall I resort with my doutes? upon whose breast shall I rest mie
self? who shall impart to me the secreats of heaven? what strange change and
alteration is this? The lasteuening thou sufferedst me to rest upon thy holy
breast, giving me joy of life; and now do I recompense that so great
benifit, with holding thee dead on my breast. Is this the face, which I savve
transsigured upon the mount Thabor? Is this that figure, which was more
clear then the son at middaie?

Likewise that holy sinner Marie Magdalen wept, and embracing the feet of
our Savior said. O light of mine eyes and remedy of my soul, if I shall see
my self vvearied with sins, who shall receive me? who shall cure my
vvounds? who shall answer for me? who shall defend me against the
Pharisees? O how far otherwise held I these feet, and vvass head them, when
thou receauedst me? O my svveete hart-roote, who could bring to pass that I
might now die with thee? O life of my soul how can I say that I love
thee, seeing that I remain alive, when I have thee dead before mine eyes?

In like manner did all that holy company weep and lament, watering and
washing that holy body with tears. But now when the hour of his burial
was com, they vvynd his holy body in a clean linen sheet: they bind his
face with a napkin; and laying the body upon a beer, they go to the place
of the monument, and there they lay in that precious treasure. The sepulcher
was covered with a stone, and the heart of the blessed mother with a clovvde
of heaviness and sorrow. There once again she takes leave of her son. There
she begins a fresh to feel her heavy solitarines. There she sees her
self now dispossessed of al her good. Finally there her heart remains
buried, where her treasure was left.

Sonnedaie morning. Of the descending of our Savior into Limbus, of his
appearing to our lady, to S. Marie Magdalen, to the disciples; and of his
Ascension.
THIS day thou may meditate upon the descending of our Savior to Limbus;
of his appearing to our blessed lady, to S. Marie Magdalen, to the disciples;
and of his glorious Ascension.

First of al consider, years, work in those that were to receive so great
salvation, and to take haven in the land of such as live for ever?

Consider likewise the joy,

Now what inward comfort had she, when before her, she beheld her son
alive and glorious, accompanied with all those holy fathers which were
risen with him? what did she? what said she? of what manner were her
embracings? her kisses? the tears of her pitiful eyes? and her desires to be
alvvais with him, if it might be graunred her?

Consider the joy of those holy Mary's, and most carefully sought him;
thereby to make thee know for certain, that thou shall also find God, if thou
seek him with the self same tears and diligence.

Consider after what sort he appeared to the disciples, which went toward
Emaus,

Touching the mystery of the Ascension; kingdom of God. In such manner that he
would not ascend up into heaven, nor depart from them, until he had left them
such, as they might be able with spirit, to ascend into heaven with him.
Whereby thou may understand, that oftentimes the corporal presence of Christ
(that is the sensible consolation of devotion) leaves those, that be now able
with spirit to fly on high, and be more secure and free from peril and
danger. In which thing the providence of almighty God marvelously
discovers it self, and the manner which he observes in dealing with his at
sundry times: that is, he cherishes the vveake and feeble; he exercises the
valiant and strong; he gives milk to the little ones: he vveaneth such as be
great; he comfort some; he proves others; and so deals with each one,
according to the degree of his profit, and advancement. Whereof it follows,
that neither he which is favored, has cause to become presumptuous; seeing
that cherishing is an argument of weakness; nor he which is left
discomforted, to be dismayed; seeing this is oftentimes a sign of strength.

In the presence of his disciples, mysteries: and none can better bear
witness of the vvoorks of God, then he which knovveth them by experience. If
thou earnestly desire to know how good almighty God is, how svveete, and
how pleasant toward his, how great the virtue and efficacy of his grace
is, of his love, of his providence, and of his consolations, enquire of those
that have proved it, and they vvil give sufficient testimony of it.

He was also desirous that they should see him go up into heaven, that
thereby they might follow him with their eyes and with their spirit, that
they might feel his absence, that his departure might make them retired and
solitary, which was a most fit preparation to receive his grace. 4. Reg. 2.
Heliseus requested Helias to give him his spirit; and the good master
ansvvered him. If thou can see me, when I depart from thee, thou shall
obtain thy demand. So they in deed shall be heirs of the spirit of Christ,
whom force of love shall make to feel the absence of Christ: they which shall
feel his departure, and remaining in this banishment, shall co^tinuallie sigh
for his presence. So felt that holy man, this absence, who said. Thou
departedst from me, o my comforter, and thou tookest not thy leave of me. Going
on thy way, thou did give thy blessing to thine, and I savve it not. The
Angels promised that thou would return, and I hard it not.

Now what solitarines, what feeling, what cries, what tears were those
of the most blessed virgin, of the beloved disciple, of S. Marie Magdalen, and
of all the Apostles when they savv him go from them, and depart out of their
sight who had stolen from them their hearts? Luc. 24.52.
yet, notvvithstanding all this, it is written, that they went back into
lerusalem with great joy, because they loved him exceedingly. For the self
same love, which made them feel so much his departure, made them on the other
side rejoice of his glory; and true love seeks not so much it self, as that
which it loves.

It remains to consider, above all, and to sit at the right hand of God the
father? All this deserves to be duly considered, that we may understand,
and see how well our labors be employed for the love of God; and how he,
which humbled him self, and suffered more then all other creatures, is now
advanced, and exalted above them all: that here hence the lovers of true
glory, may know the way which they must follovv to obtain the same,
which is to descend, thereby to ascend; and to put them selves under the feet
of all others, thereby to be exalted above all.

OF SIX THINGS THAT MAY concur in the exercise of prayer. CHAP. IV.
THESE be, good Christian reader, the meditations in which thou may exercise
thy self, in all the days of the week, that so thou want not matter,
whereof to think. Bud here it is to be noted, that some things may go
before this meditation, and some others follovv after it, which be annexed unto
the former, and as it were neighbors unto them.

For first, before we enter into meditation, it is requisite that we prepare
our heart unto this holy exercise, which is as to tune a vial, before we
play upon it.

After preparation follows the reading of that matter, which we be to
meditate upon that day, according to the distribution of the days of the
week, as has been said before. Which reading is vndovvtedlie necessary for
such, as ar beginners, until a man do know, what he ovvght to meditate
upon. After he may proceed unto meditation.

Next to meditation there may follow out of hand a devout giving of thanks
for the benifits which we have received, with an offering up of al our life,
and of the life of our Savior Christ, The last part is the Petition which is
properly called prayer, in which we demand all that, which is behoueful as
well for the salvation of our selus, as of our neighbors, and of all the whole
Catholic church.

These six things may be exercised in prayer, which things, among other
commodities and porfits, bring this also, that they yield unto a man more
plenty of matter, where upon to meditate, setting before him all these
diversities of meats, that in case he can not eat of one, he may eat of an
other, and that when he has made an end of meditation in one matter, he may
enter into an other; and there find other matter, wherein to continue his
meditation.

I know right well, that nether all these parts, nor this order is alvvaies
necessary, yet this manner vvil serve for nouices, and young beginners; that
so they may have some order, and direction vvherby to govern them selves at the
beginning. And therefore of any thing that shall be here treated, I would not
that any man should make a perpetual, or general rule: because my intent is
not to make any law, but to show an introduction, thereby to direct nouices
and beginners, and to put them in this way: in which course after that they
shall be once entered, then the very use and experience, and much more the holy
ghost vvil teach them the rest, that they have to do herein.

OF PREPARATION WHICH IS requifite before prayer. CHAP. V.
IT shall now be requisite forvs, to treat particularly of every one of
these parts aforesaid, and first of the Preparation, which goes before the
others.

Being in the place of prayer, kneeling or standing, thy arms stretched out in
manner of a crucifixe, or prostrate upon the grovvnd, or sitting (if thou
can not settel thie self in any other sort) after thou have made the sign
of the Cross, thou must recollect thie imagination, and withdraw the same
from all things of this life, and lift up thy mind to heaven, considering that
our Lord beholds, and looks upon thee. Thou must also stand there with
such attention and reverence, as if thou had God there reallie present before
thine eyes, and with a general repentance of thy sins (if thie prayer be in
the morning) thou may sale the general confession Confiteor Deo, etc. or (if
thy meditation be in the evening) thou may examine thy conscience, touching
all that which, thou have thought, spoken, or done, or heard in that day, as
also, how forgetful thou have ben of our lord; and repenting thy self of all
the defects committed that day and of al those of thy life past, and humbling
thy self before the majesty of almighty God, in whose sight thou stand,
thou may utter these words of the holy Patriarch.

I vvil speak to my lord, Genes. 18.27.
although I be but dust and as hes: and with the substance and matter of these
fevv words, thou may, for some little time, entertain thy self, considering
well what thou art, and what God is, that so thou may with more reverence,
humble thy self before so great a majesty, as is that of almighty God. For
thou art a bottomless depth of infinite sins and miseries: and God is an
infinite deepenes of al riches and greatness: and being in this consideration,
thou must do him al due reverence, and humble thy self before his supreme
majesty.

With this also, thou must humbly beseech this lord to give thee grace, that
thou may stand there with such attention and devotion, with such in ward
recollection, and with such fear and reverence, as it behooves thee to have
before so sovereign a majesty, and that thou may so pass over this time of
prayer, that thou may com from the same with new desires and force, to do
al such things as appertain to his service. For the prayer, which yields
not this fruit, is to be esteemed very imperfect and of small value.

OF READING. CHAP. VI.
AFTER the preparation is ended, there follows Reading of that thing, where
upon thou art to meditate in time of prayer. Which Reading ought not be
done lightly and hastily, but with deliberation and attention, applying
thereunto not only thy understanding, to conceive such things as thou read,
but much more thy vvil, to taste those things that thou understand. And when
thou f^ndest any devout passage, stay somvvhat longer upon it, thereby to
have some greaterfeeling of that, which thou have read.

Let not the Reading be ouer-long, that so thou may have more time for
meditation, which is of so much more profit, by how much more it vvaigheth,
and enters into the consideration of things, with more leisure and affection.
Nevertheless, when thou find thy heart so distracted, that it cannot enter
into prayer, then thou may stay somvvhat the longer in Reading, or join
Reading and meditation together, by reading first one point, and meditating
upon it, and then an other, and an other in like sort. For in so doing, when
the understanding is once bound to the words of the reading, it has not
occasion to wander abrede so easily, into diverse thoughts and imaginations,
as when it goes free and at liberty. And yet better it were to strive in
casting of such thoughts, and to persevere and vvrastle against them (as the
Patriarche Jacob did all the night long) continuing in the work of prayer:
that in the end, when the vvrastling is done, we may obtain the victory,
our lord giving us devotion, or some other greater grace, which is never denied
to those, that labor and fight faithfully.

OF MEDITATION. CHAP. VII.
STRAIT after reading follows meditation upon the point which we have
read. And this meditation is sometimes upon things, which may be sigured with
the Imagination; as at all the passages of the life and passion of our Savior
Christ; of the last judgment; of hell; or of Paradise. Some other times it is of
things, which do apperteine rather to the understanding, then to the
imagination; as is the consideration of the benifits of almighty God: of his
goodness and mercy, or of any other his perfections. This kind of meditation
is called Intellectual, and the other Imaginary. And we ar wont to use both
the one. (...) the other manner in these exercises, according as the matter of
the things does requi^e.

Now when the med tation is Imaginary, we must then figure, and represent
every one of these things, in such wise as it is, or in such wise as it
might perhaps pass, and make accounte, that in the very same place where we
be, all the same passes in our presence, that by means of such a
representation of thefethings, the consideration and feeling of them may be
more lively in us. But to go and meditate such things, as passed, each in
his oune place, is a thing which does co^monlie weaken, and hurt the head.

And for this very cause likewise, a man must not fix his imagination over
much upon the things, of which he meditateth, that so he vvearie not is head.

But for as much as the principal matter of meditation, is the holy passion
of our Savior Jesus Christ, it is to be v^destoode, that in this mystery may
be considered sieve principal points, or cire m^tance;, which concur in the
same: to wit, who he is that suffers: what he suffers; for whom he
suffers; in what manner he suffers: And for what end he suffers.

Touching the first point, which was, who he is that suffe^et^: I
aunsvvere that he which suffers is; the Creator of heaven and earth; the
only son of God; the highest goodness, and wisdom that can be imagined; the
most innocent and most hol^e son of the blessed virgin Marie.

Concerning the second point, to wit what he suffers: I aunsvvere that he
suffers most grievous pains, as well in his soul as in his body. For in his
soul he suffered so great angvvish and affliction, as no heart is able to
comprehend it; considering the ingratitude of men, toward this so singular
and high a benifit: The compassion of his most innocent and blessed mother: The
sins of the world that were present, past, and to com, for all which he
suffered. And in his body he endured cold, heat, hunger, vvearines,
watchings, injuries, betraying, he was sold of his disciple, he did sweat
drops of blood, he was spitte upon, buffeted, so ofrentimes bound, forsaken,
evil spoken of, falsely accused, vvhipped, scorned, appareled as if he had been
a fool, crowned with thorns, less esteemed then Barabbas, unjustly
condemned, he carried his own cross upon his shoulders, he was crucified
between tvvoe thieves, he did drink easell and gall, and finally he died a
most opprobrious, and reprocheful death upon the mount Caluarie, in time of
greatest solemnity.

The third point to be considered, is for whom he suffered: and evident it
is, that he suffered for mankind disobedient and ungrateful, created of nothing,
who of him self can do nothing, knovveth nothing, nor is ame thing vvorth:
for a creature of whom he ne uer had, nor never was to have any need. For
a creature which had offended, and was to offend and disobey him so
manietimes.

The fourth point to be considered, is in what manner he suffered: where we
shall see, that he suffered with such great patience and meekenes, that he was
never offended nor angry with any body: with so great humility, that he
made choice of the most contemptible death that was used in those days: with
so great readiness and alacrit^e, that he went forth to meet his enemies;
with so great charity, that he called his frind him, that betrayed and sold
him; healed his ear that took him; regarded with eyes of mercy him, that
had denied him; and prayed for those that crucified him.

The fifth point to be considered, is wherefore and to what end he suffers:
where it is manifest that he suffered to satisfy the justice of almighty
God, and to appease the wrath of his father; to accomplish the predictions and
propheties of the Patriarchs and Prophets: to deliver us from the thraldom of
hell, and to make us capable of heaven; to show us the way to heaven with
his perfect Obedience: and to confound the diules, who by reason of their
pride have lost that, which men do gain through their humility.

OF THANK ESGIVING. CHAP. VIII.
AFTER meditation follows thankesgeuing, of which a man must take occasion
of the meditation past, and give thanks unto our lord, for the benifit he has
done unto him in the same; as for example, if the meditation was of the
passion, he must thank our lord that he has redeemed us with so great
pains. And if it were of our sins; for that he has expected us so long
time to do penance; if it were of the miseries of this life, for that he
has delivered us from so many of them; if of the departing out of this
vvoorld, and of the hour of our death; for that he has delivered us from the
dangers of it, and expected us, and given us life to do penance; and if it
were of the glory of paradise, for that he has created us to be partakers of
so great a felicity: and so like wise we may do in the rest.

And with these benifits thou mustioine all the other beneifits, of which we
have spoken before, which be the b^ni^it of Creation, Conservation,
Redemption, Vocation, and Glorification: and so tho (...) give thanks to our
lo^d, for that he ^ach made thee to his I kenes and image, and has given the
memory, to remember him; understanding, to knovv^him, and evil to love him;
and for that he has given he an angel, to keep thee from so (...) angers and
peril^, and from so many mortal sins, and also from death, thou being in
sin, which was no less benefit, then to deliver thee from erlast
ng^dea^h: and forthat he made thee to be borne of Christian parents, and gave
thee holy baptism, and the ein his grace, and promised thee his glory, and
received thee for his child.

Also with these benifit^, thou mustioine other general and particular
benifits, which thou know to have received of our lord; and for these and
al others, as well public as private, thou must yield him as hearty thanks
as possibly thou may, and inuit al creatures, as well in heaven as in
earth, that they assist and help thee, to do thy duty in this, and with
this spirit and desire thou may say sometimes that Canticle: Benedicite
omnia opera Do^^ti Domino, or else the psalm: Benedic anima mea Domi^o, and
omnia quae intra me sunt nomini sancto eius. Benedic anima mea Domino, and noli
ohliuisci onmes retributiones eius. Qui propitiatur omnibus iniquita^^bus tuis,
qui sanat omnes infirmitates tuas. Qui redimit de interitu vitam tuam, qui
coronat te in mis^ricordia and miserationibus.

OF OFFERING. CHAP. IX.
THIS being done, that is, when a man has given thanks to our lord with al
his heart for all these benisits, then foorthvvith the heart naturally breaks
out into that affect of the Prophet David saying; Psalm. 515.12.
What shall I yield unto our Lord for all those things which he has
bestovved upon me? And this desire a man in some sort satisfies, when he
gives, and offers up to almighty God that, which of his part he has, and
is able to give him.

And for this end, he ought first to offer up him self to God, for his
perpetual sklaue, resigning and laying him self wholy in his hands, that his
divine majesty do with him, as it shall best please him: and jointly he
must offer up to him all his words, his vvoorks, his thoughts, and his
pains, that is, whatsoever he does and suffers, that so al may be to the
glory and honor of his holy name.

Secondly, he must offer up to God the father, the merits and works of his
son, and all the pains, which in this vvoorld he suffered for obedience of
him, even from the manger until the cross; for so much as they al be our
substance, and heritage which he left us in the new testament, by which he
made us his heirs of al these so great treasures. And in like manner as that
which is given me, is no less mine, then that which I have gotten by mine
own pains and labor; so the merits of Christ, and the right which he has
given me, ar no less mine, then if I had sweat and labored for them my
self. And therefore a man may with as much right, offer this second present
as the first, laying down by order al our Saviors vvoorks and pains, and all the virtues of his most holy life, his Obedience, his Patience, his Humility,
his Charity, with all the rest; because this is the most rich, and most
precious offer that may be offered.

OF PETITION. CHAP. X.
Immediately after that we have offered up unto almighty God, this so rich a
present, we may then with great security, in virtue of the same, de(...)
what soever favors and grace. And first ^er us demand with great affection
of Charity, and with desire of the glory of God, that al nations and people
of the world may know, p^aise and adore him, as ^heire only true God, and
lord, saying, even from the bottom of our heart, these words of the Prophet.
Psalm. 66.4.
Let all people confess thee, o God, let all people confess thee.

Let us pray also for the Catholic Church, and for all the Prelates of the
same, such as be the Pope, Cardinals, Bisshops, and other inferior ministres
and Prelates; that our lord vvil govern them, and give them light, in such
sort, that they may bring all men to the knowledge, and obedience of the^^e
Creator. We must likewise pr^^e (as S. Paul counseleth us) for kings, Timoth.
2.2.
and for all those that be in dignity, that (thorough their providence) we
may live (...) quiet and peaceable li^e, in all p^ritie and chastity, because
(...) is acceptable before God our Savior, (...) desires that all men be
saved, and com to the knowledge of the truth.

Let us also pray our lord foral the members of his mistical body; for the
just, that he vvil conserve them in their goodness; for sin^ers, that it may
please him to con^ert them; for the dead, that he vvil mercifellie deliver
them, out of the great pains of purgatory, and bring them to the rest of
everlasting life. Let us pray also for all such as be poor, sick, in prison,
in captivity etc. that God, through the merits of his son, vvil help and
^eliuer them.

After that we have thus demanded for our neighbors, let us forth with
ask for our selves. Now what we ought to desire for our selves, the
particular need of each one vvil teach him, if yet he know him self. Let us
also with this demand pardon, and amendment of our sins, by the merits and
pains of our Savior; and especially let us request his aid, and assistance
against al those passions and vices, to which we feel our selves most
inclined, and of which we be most tempted; and let us discover al these our
vvounds to this heavenly physician, that by this means he vvil vouchsase to
heal, and cure them with the ointment of his grace.

After this make an end, with demanding the love of God; and in this demand
stay, and occupy thy self for the most part of the time, desiring ourlord
with most hearty affection and desire, to grant thee this virtue, for so much
as in it consists al our good, and so thou may say as follows.

AN ESPECIAL PETITION OF THE love of God.
AECVE all this give me, O lord thy grace, that I may love thee with all my
heart, with all my soul, with all my forces, and with all my entrails,
even in such sort, as thou desire. O all mie hope, all mie glory, al mie
refuge, and al mie joy! O the most beloved of beloue^s, O flourishing spovvse,
O svvee^e spovvse, O honisvveere spovvse! O comfort of my heart, O life of my
soul, and the pleasant repose of my spirit!

Prepare o my God, prepare, o mie lord, in me an acceptable dwelling place for
thie self, that according to the promise of thie holy word, thou com ^o me,
and repose in me; mortify in me, what soever displeases thy sight, and make
me a man according to thie heart; vvound, o lord, the most inward part of my
soul, with the darts of thie love, and make me drunk with the wine of
thy perfect charity.

O when shall this be? when shall I please thee in all things? when shall all that die in me, which is contrary to thee? when shall I be altogether
thine? when shall I leave to be mine own? when shall nothing else live in
me, but thou? when shall I love thee most fervently? when shall the flame of
thie love wholy burn me? when shall I be altogether melted, and pierced
through with the vvoonderful efficacy of thy svveetenes? when vvilt thou
take me hence by force, and drown me, transport me and hide me in thy self,
where I may never more be seen? when vvilt thou free me from all these
impediments and distractions, and make me one spirit with thee, that I may
not any more depart from thee?

O deerebeloued, deer^beloued, deerebeloued of my soul, o svveetenes of my
heart; hear me, o lord, not for my merits and deserts, but for thy infinite
goodness and mercy. Teach me, lighten me, direct me, and assist me in all
things, that I may do nothing, nor say nothing, but that which is
agreeable to thie sight. O mie God, mie well-beloved, mie dearest heart, and the
very good of mie soul! O mie svveere love, o my great delight, o mie
strength! help me, o mie light, and guide (...) thee.

O God of mie bowels, wherefore gi^est not thou th^e self to thie poor
creature? (...) the heavens and the earth, and leauest thou mie ha^t empty and
void? Seeing thou clo^hest the lilies of the field, (...) to the little birds,
and seedest the (...) of the earth, wherefore do thou forger me, who have
forgoten all others for thie sake? To late have I known thee, o infinite
goodness! To late have I loved thee, o bevvtie so ancient, and so new. VVooe
to the time, that I loved thee not: vvooe to me, since I knevv thee not.
Blind was I, that I savve he not. Thou vvast within me, and I went seeking
thee abroad. But now, although I have found thee late, suffer not, olord, for
thie divine mercy, that I ever leave he.

And beea s^ one of the things, which most pleases thee, and most vvoun death
thy heart, is that a man have eyes where with to behold thee, give me, o lord,
those eyes, with which I may see thee; to wit, eyes simple of a dove; eyes
chaste and shamefast, eyes humble and loving; eyes devout, and given to tears;
eyes attentive, and discreet to know thy will, and fulfill the same; that
when I look upon thee with these eyes, I may be seen of thee with those
eyes, with which thou did view S. Peeter, when thou made him to
bewail his sin; with which thou did behold that prodigal child, when
thou receauedst him, and gave him a kiss, of peace; with which thou did
behold the publicone, when he durst not lift up his eyes to heaven; with
which thou did behold Marie Magdalen, when she vvashed thy feet with
the tears of her eyes; finally with those eyes, with which thou did
behold the spouse in the Canticles, when thou saidest unto her. How bevvtiful
art thou, o mie dearling, Cantic. 4.1.
how bevvt^ful art thou? Thie eyes ar as the eyes of doves; that pleasing thee
with the eyes and beutie of mie soul, thou give them those pledges of
virtues and graces, with which they may appear alvvaies fair, and
bevvtiful in thie presence.

O most high, most merciful, most gracious Trinity the father, the son and
the holy Ghost, one only true God, teach me, direct me, and help me, O lord,
in all things. O almighty father, for the greatness of thy infinite power
fasten, and establish my memory upon thee, and fill the same with holy and
devout desires. O most holy Son, for thy everlasting wisdom clarify, and
illuminate my understanding, and bevvtifie the same with knowledge of the
highest verity, and of mine own extreme baseness. O holy Ghost, the love of
the father and the son, for thy inco^prehensible goodness ground in me thy
will, and kiudle the same with so great fiar of love, that no waters may be
able to quench it. O most blessed Trinity, my only God, and al my good! o
that I were able to praise thee, and love thee, as all the angels do praise
and love thee! O that I had in me the love of all the creatutes in the vvoorld,
with how good a vvil would I aford it thee, and power it out into thee?
albeit neither this were sufficient to love thee in such wise, as thou
deseruest. Thou only can love thy self vvoorthilie, and vvoorthilie praise
thy self; because thou alone do comprehend thy incomprehensible goodness,
and so thou only can love the same as it deserves: so that only in that
divine breast of thy most gracious majesty, the justice and law of true love
is en^irelie observed.

O virgin Marie! virgin Marie! virgin Marie! most holy virgin, mother of God,
Queen of heaven, lady of the whole vvoorld, vestrie of the holy Ghost,
lilie of purity, rose of patience, paradise of delites, mirror of chastity,
pattern of innocence, pray for me poor banished creature and pilgrim, and
make me partaker of thy most abundant charity. O al ye happy Saints, and ye
other blessed spirits, that do so burn in the love of your Creator, and in
particular ye Seraphines, who inflame the heavens, and the ear the with your
love, abandon not this my poor and miserable heart, but rather purge the same,
as the lips of Esaie, from al sort of sin, and burn it with the flame of
your most fervent love, that it may love this only lord, seek him only,
make his abode and repose in him only, and this for ever and ever. Amen.

OF CERTAIN ADVISES, WHICH at to be observed in this holy exercise. CHAP. XI.
ALL that which hitherto has been said, serves to yield us matter of
consideration, which is one of the principal parts of this spiritual
affair, considering that such, as have sufficient matter of consideration, be
but the lest number of so many people; and so for want of matter, vvhereupon
to meditate, many there be, that abandon this kind of exercise. Now we vvil
set down breefelie somvvhat touching the manner, and form which in it may
be observed. And albeit the chief master of this vvoork, be the holy Ghost,
yet experience has tavvght us, that some aduises be requisite and necessary in
this part: because the way to go toward God is hard, and has need of a
guide, without which very many go long time lost and a stray.

The first advise.
LET then the first advise be this, that when ve set our selves to consider
any of the a foresaid things, in their times and exercises appointed, we
must not so bind our selves unto it, that we esteem it ill done, to go
from that to some other thing, when we find therein more devotion, more taste,
and more profit. For as in conclusion all this serves for denotion, so that
which makes most to this purpose, is to be taken for the best. Howbeit a man
ought not to do this upon very light occasions, but when he perceives
evident commodity to com thereby.

The second advise.
THE second advise is, that a man labor to eschew, in this exercise,
superfluous speculation of the understanding, and procure to handle this
affair rather with affections, and feelings of the vvil, then with
discourses and speculations of the vvitte. Wherefore they vndovvtedlie take
not the right course, who in time of prayer, give them selves to meditate
upon divine mysteries, in such wise, as if they studied to preach them:
which manner is rather to make our spirit to wander more abroad, then to
recollect it; and to go more out of it self, then to be in it self. Therefore
who minds to do vvelin this matter, let him com with the heart as it
were of an old woman ignorant, and humble, and rather with a vvil disposed
and prepared to feel, and to be affected toward the things of God, then
with an understanding purified, and attentive to search and examine them;
because this is a thing proper to those, that study to get knowledge, and not
to those, that pray and think upon God, thereby to lament and moorne.

The third advise.
THE former advise teaches us how we ought to quiet our understanding, and
commit all this business to our vvil; but this present advise prescribes
bounds, and limits to the same vvil, that it be not to excessive, nor to
vehement in her exercise. Wherefore it is to be understood, that the devotion
which we seek to obtain, is not a thing that may be gotten by force of arms
(as some parsons think, who by eccessiue sighings, and enforced sobbings,
procure to wring out tears and compassion, when they think upon the passion
of our Savior) for such force dries up the heart, and makes the same more
unable to receive our lords visitation, as Cassianus affirms. Moreover, those
things ar wont to prejudice, and hurt the health of the body, yea sometimes
they leave the soul so astonished, and aghast by reason of the litell taste she
has there received, that she is loath to return again to this exercise, as to
a thing, which she has tried by experience to have been very paineful, and
ircksome unto her.

Let a man therefore content him self, with doing sincerely what lies in
him, that is, that he esteem him self to be present at that, which our
Savior has suffered, beholding (with a sincere and quiet eye, with a tender
and compassionate heart, and prepared for what soever feeling it shall please
our lord to give him) that which he suffered for him, and so dispose him self
rather to receive such affections, as the mercy of God shall aford him, then
to wring them out with tears. And when he has done this, let him not vex
him self any more for any other thing, though it be not granted him as he
desires.

The fourth advise.
OF all these aduises a foresaid, we may gather what manner of attention we
ought to have in prayer, for that in this exercise, it is chiefly expedient,
to have our heart not heavy, nor dull, but lively, attent, and lifted up on
high. But as it is here necessary on the one side, to have attention and
recollection of heart, so it behooves on the other side, that this attention be
tempered and moderated, that it neither hurt our health, nor hinder our
devotion. For some there be, that do vvearie their head with over much
violence, which they use to be attentive unto those things, whereupon they
meditate, as we have said before. And again there be others, who to avoid
this in conuenience, ar in their meditation very flack and negligent, and
very easy to be carried away with every vvinde. Now to eschew these two
extremities, it is exped^ent that we use such a mean, that we do neither
with overmuch attention vvearie our head, nor with to much carelesnes and
negligence suffer our thoughts to go wandering vvhither soever they vvil. So
that like as we are wont to say to him that rides upon a froward kicking
horse, that he hold the reins of his bridle as he ought, that is neither to
hard, neither to stacke, that the horse neither turn backwards, nor run to
headlong forvvard; even so must we endeavor that our attention in our prayer
be moderate, not forced with carefulnes, nor with violent labor and traueil.

But now especially we must be well wary, that in the beginning of
meditation we do not trouble, and vvearie our head with to much a tention:
for when we do so, our forces commonly want us to go forwards therein,
as it happens to atraueller, when he makes to great have in going, at the
beginning of his iourneye.

The fifte advise.
BUT among al these aduises the principallest is, that he that prays be not
dismayed, nor give over his exercise, when he feels not forth with that
svveetenes of devotion, which he desires. It is requisite to expect the
coming of our lord, with long animitie and perseverance; for that it greatly
appertains to the glory of his majesty, to the baseness of our condition,
and to the importance of the affair which we have in hand, that oftentimes
we attend, and watch at the gates of his sacred palaice.

Now, when thou have after this sort expected for a certain time, in case
our lord shall then com unto thee, give him most hearty thanks for his coming;
and if it seem unto thee that he com not, humble thy self then before him, and
acknovvledge, that thou art not vvoorthie to receive that thing, which is not
given thee; and be content that thou have there made a sacrifice of thy self,
denied thine own vvil, crucified thy appetite, striued with thy self, and
done at the least what thou could of thine own part.

And in case thou have not adored our lord with sensible adoration, according
to thy desire, it is sufficient that thou have adored him in spirit and in
truth, according as his vvil is to be adored. And trust me assuredly, that
this is the most dangerous passage of all this navigations, and the place where
true devout persons ar proved and tried, and that if thou escape well out of
this danger, thou shall have prosperous success in all the rest.

The sixte advise.
THIS advise is not much differing from the a foresaid, nor of less necessity
then it; and it is, that the seruante of God do not content him self, with
what soever little taste he finds in his prayer, as some use to do, who
when they shedd a feavve tears, or feel a little tenderness of heart,
persuade them selves, that then they have accomplished and performed their
exercise. But this is not enough for the obteining of that thing, which here
we seek for. For like as a little dew or sprinkling of water, is not
sufficient to cause the earth to bring forth fruit (which does no more but
only alay the dust, and wet the uppermost part of the grovvnd) but it is
needeful to have so much water, that it may enter into the innermost part of
the earth, and there soke, and water through the same: even so is it requisite
to have here abundance of this dew, and water of heaven, to bring forth the
fruit of good works.

And therefore we ar counseled, not without great reason, that we take as
long time for this holy exercise, as we may. And better it is to have one
long time for the same, then two short times: for if the time be short, al is
spent almost in settling the imagination, and in quieting the mind: and then
when we have quieted the same, we rise from our exercise, even when we
should begin it. And descending more in particular to limite this time, I am of
opinion, that what soever is less than one hour and a half, or two
hovvres, is to short a time for prayer: because that oftentimes there is spent
more than half an hour, in tempering our instrument, that is, as I said
before, in quieting our imagination: and so all the rest of the time is
requisite for the enjoying of the fruit of prayer. True it is, that when we
go to this exercise of prayer, after some other holy exercises, our heart is
then better disposed for this affair; and so, like dry wood, is very apt
to conceive more quickly in it self this heavenly fiar.

Likewise early in the morning our meditation may be the longer, because then
our heart is much better disposed for this exercise, then at any other time.
Howbeit in case that a man have little time, by reason of his manifold
business, yet let him not omit to offer up his mite with the poor widow in
the temple: for if he fail not of his devvtie herein, throvvghe his own
negligence, he that provides for all creatures according to their necessity,
vvil not want to provide likewise for him.

The seventh advise.
ACording unto this foresaid advise, we vvil give an other very like, which
is; that when our soul is visited either in prayer, or out of prayer, with
any special visitation of our Lord, we suffer it not to pass away in
vain, but take the commodity and benefit of that occasion, that is offered
unto us. For certain it is, that with this vvinde, a man shall sail more in
one hour, than without it in many days.

And so we read that the holy father S. Francis did, of whom S. Bonauen
ture vvriteth, that he had such a special care in this point, that in case our
lord did visit him with any special visitation, while he was traueiling
by the way, he caused his companions to go before, and he stayed alone
behind, until he had made an end of chevving, and digesting that svveete
morsel, which was there sent unto him from heaven. Whosoever they be that
do not so, ar wont co^monlie to be chastifed with this punishment, that
theye find not almighty God, when they seek him; because he found not them,
when he sought for them.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS FIRST TREATISE, WHICH SPEAKS OF devotion.
WHAT THING DEVOtion is. CHAP. I.
THE greatest labor, that such persons endure as give them selus to prayer, is
the want of devotion, which oftentimes they feel in the same; for when this
fails not, there is nothing more svveete, nor easy then to pray. For this
cause, seeing we have already treated of the matter of prayer, and of the
manner which may be observed therein; it shall be expedient that we treat
now of such things, as help and further us to devotion, and also of those that
hinder us, and of the remptations which be most common to devout persons, and
of certain aduises, which be very necessary for this exercise. But first it
shall be much to the purpose, to declare what thing devotion is, that so we
may understand before, how great a ievvel that is, for which we traueill.

Saint Thomas says that devotion is a certain virtue, which makes a man
quick and ready to al virtue, and vvakeneth him, and disposes him to do
good woorks with facility and easines. Which definition of devotion,
shows manifestly the great necessity and profit of this virtue, because in
the same is contained much more, then many can think of. Wherefore it is to
be understood, that the greatest hinderance which we have to live well, is
the corruption of our nature, which came unto us by sin, from which
proceeds a great inclination that we have to do ^ll. And these two things
make the way of virtue difficultous, and hard unto us, where as virtue, of
her own nature, is the most svveete, bevvtiful, and amiable thing that is in
the vvoorld.

Now against this difficulty and heaviness, the divine vvisdome of almighty
God has provided a most fit, and convenient remedy, to wit the virtue and
aid of devotion. For even as the north-vvinde scatters and dissolueth the
clovvdes, and leaves the air bright and clear; so true devotion shakes of
from our soul all this heaviness and difficulty, and leaves her afterward
disposed, and ready to do al good: because this virtue is in such manner
virtue, that it is also a special gift of the holy ghost, a dew of heaven, a
succor and visitation of God, obtained by the means of prayer, whose
condition is to fight against this difficulty, to shift of this sluggishnes,
to give this readiness, to illuminate the understanding, to force the will, to
kindle the love of God, to quench the flames of ill desires, to breed
lothsomnes of the vvoorld, and hatred of sin, and then to give a man new
feruor, a new spirit, a new force, and breath to do good works.

In such sort that like as Sampson, Iudic. 16.
when he had his hair, had more strength then all the men of the vvoorld, and
when he had his hair cut of, became feeble and vveake, as other men ar: so is
also the soul of a Christian man passing strong, when he has devotion, but
when devotion fails, she becomes exceeding vveake. And so this is the
greatest commendation that may be given to this virtue, that she being but
only one, is as it were a prick and spur to all others. And therefore
vvhoesoeuer earnestly desires to walk in the way of virtues, let him not
go without these spurs; for he shall never be able, without them, to get
his evil beast out of the mire.

Of that which has been said, it seems manifest, what thing true and
substantial devotion is. For in deed devotion is not that tenderness of heart,
nor consolation, which those do sometimes feel, that exercise prayer; but it
is this readiness, and corrage to do good vvoorks; whereof it often
follows, that the one is found to be in us, without the other, when it
pleases God to prove such as be his. True it is, that this d^uotion and
readiness, does oftentimes merit and deserve to have that consolation; as on
the other side, the self same consolation and spiritual gust, increases
substantial devotion. And for this cause, the servants of God maievvith much
reason desire, and ask these comfortes and consolations, not for the
svveetenes which they feel in them, but in this respect, that they be cause
of the increasing of this devotion, which makes us so fit to work well, as
the Pophet says. Psalm. 11^.32.
I have run (o lord) the vvate of thy commandments, when thou did^est
enlarge my heart, to wit, with the comfort or thy consolation, which was
cause of this my svviftnes. Now, here we mind to treat of the means, by
which we may obtain this devotion: and because this virtue is the spur of
al other virtues, therefore to treat of the means, by which devotion is
gotten, is to treat of the means, by which we obtain all other virtues.

OF NINE THINGS, WHICH help us greatly to atteine unto devotion. CHAP. II.
BUT now, the things, which help us to obtain douotion, be many. For first,
it makes much to the purpose, to take these holy exercises very earnestly
and heartily, with a determined, and resolved mind to do all that, which is
necessary for the obteining of so precious a ievvel, be it never so
difficultous or hard: for it is most certain, that there is nothing of
importance, which has not his difficulty: and so likewise it happens in
this affair, at the lest to such as be nouices and young beginners.

Secondly, it helps also much to keep the heart from all kind of idle and
vain thoughts, from al strange affections and inordinate desires, from all
disturbance, and passionate motions, for so much as it is evident, that each
one of these things lets devotion, and that it is no less requisite, to
keep the heart well tempered for prayer, than to keep an instrument vvil tuned
for playing on it.

Thirdly, it helps also greatly, to keep our senses recollected,
specially our eyes, our ears, our tongue: because that by our tongue we
pour out our heart, and by our eyes and ears, we fill the same with diverse
imaginations of things, which trovvble the peace and quietness of the soul.
Wherefore it is said with great reason, that a man given to contemplation,
must be deaf, blind, and dumme, for that how much less he is occupied in
ovvtvvard affairs, the more shall he be recollected within him self.

Fourthlie, Solitarines helps also to denotion, for so much as the same does
not ^nlie take away occasions of distractions from our senses, and from our
heart the occasions of sins, but also it inuiteth a man to abide within him
self, and to deal with God, and with him self alone, being moved thereunto
through the opportunity of the place, which admits no other company but
this.

Fiftlie, sometimes the reading of spiritual and devout books helps much,
because they give us matter of consideration, they recollect the heart, they
avvaken devotion, and make a man willingly to think of that, which he found
to be so svveete: and moreover that is alvvaies represented to the memory,
that abounds in the heart.

Sixtelie, it much helps to have a continual memory of almighty God, to be
alvvaies in his presence, and to use those short prayers, which S. Augustine
calls iaculatorie, or in manner of darts, for that these prayers keep the
house of the heart, and maintain the feruor of devotion, as has been said
before: and so a man sinde^h him self at al times ready, and in order to
pray. This is one of the cheifest documents of spiritual life, and one of the
greatest remedies for such, as have not time, nor place to give them selus to
prayer: and whosoever shall have alvvaies this care, he shall profit much in
little time.

Se^enthlie, it helps to be continual, and to persevere in good exercises, at
the times and places ordained, especially at night, or in the morning, which
be the times most convenient for prayer, as al holy scripture teaches us.

Eightlie, austeritie and abstinence of the body, sober diet, lying hard,
hearcloth, discipline or whipping, and such like things help also much,
because al such things, as they rise out of devotion, so likewise they
avvaken, maintain, and nurrishe the root from whence they first grevv,
which is devotion.

Finally, the works of mercy help much, because they give us hope to
present our selves before God; they accompany our prayers with our service,
so that our prayers be not dry demands; and deserve that the prayer be
mercifully heard, which proceeds from a merciful heart.

OF NINE THINGS THAT hinder prayer. CHAP. III.
AS there be some things that help and further devotion, so likewise some others
there be that hinder the same, emongst which the first is our sins, not
only those that be mortal, but also venial sins, because these, albeit they
do not extinguish charity in us, yet do they slack and make cold the
feruor of Charity, which is as it were devotion it self; and therefore it is
reason to avoid them with al care and diligence, if not for that they do us
harm, at the lest because they hinder us from doing good.

Secondly, the remorse of conscience, which proceeds of the self same
sins, is a great let, when it is ouergreat, because it makes the soul
unquiet, heavy, dismayed, and vveake to do any good exercise.

Thirdly, whatsoever grief or disgust of mind, or inordinate afflection
does also hinder; because the taste and svveetenes of a good conscience, and of
spiritual comfort, can not stand together with such things.

Fourthlie, too many cares at a great let, which be those flies of Egypt,
that disquiet our soul, and do not suffer her to take that spiritual sleep,
which is wont to be taken in prayer, but there, more then at any other time,
do disturb her, and turn her from her exercise.

Fiftlie, ouermanie affairs be also a great hinderance, for that they take
away the time, and choke the spirit, and so leave a man without heart, to
attend to almighty God.

Sixtlie, pleasures and sensual consolations do likewise hinder, because
they make spiritual exercises to seem unsavory. And moreover, he that is much
delited with the consolations of the vvoorld, deserves not those of the holy
Ghost, as S. Bernard says.

Seuenthlie, the pleasure in too much eating and drinking, and much more in
sumptuous bankets, ar no small let, because these be an evil disposition for
spiritual exercises, and holy vigils; for when the body is heavy and charged
with to much meat; the soul is very ill disposed to fly on high.

Eightlie, the vice of curiosity, as well of our senses, as of our
understanding, that is, a desire to hear, see, and understand novelties, is
also a hinderance, because al these things rob time, disquiet the soul, and
distract her diverse ways, and so be a let to devotion.

Finally, the interruption and breaking of these holy exercises, is an other
hinderance, I mean, when they be not left for some holy cause, or just
necessity, for so much as the spirit of denotion is very delicate, which,
when it is once departed either it turns no more, or at the lest with great
difficulty. And therefore, even as young plants require their ordinary
watering, which if they want, they forthwith fade and dry up, so likewise
falls it out in devotion, when it wants the watering of devout
consideration.

All this has been here spoken of so breefly, to the end it might better be kept
in memory; the declaration whereof, every one, that vvil, may see by
practice and long evperience.

OF THE MOST COMMON TENtations, which be wont to vvearie such as give them
selves to prayer; and of their remedies. CHAP. IV.
IT shall not be amiss now to treat of the tentations, most common to such
persons, as give them selus to prayer, and of their remedies; which
tentations be for the most part these that follow. The want of spiritual
consolations. The war of importunate thoughts. The thoughts of blasphemy
and infidelity. The mistrust of going forvvard. The presumption of having
greatly profited. These be the most common tentations that are in this vaie,
the remedies of which be those that follow.

The first remedy, against want of spiritual consolations.
FIRST, the remedy for him that wants spiritual consolations, is, that for
this he leave not the exercise of his accustomed prayer, although it seem unto
him unsavory, and of small fruit, but rather put him self in the presence of
almighty God as guilty and culpable, and examining his conscience, search
vvhither peradventure he lost this favor through his own fault: and pray
our lord with great considence that he pardon him, and show him the
inestimable riches of his patience and mercy, in suffering and forgeuing one,
that can do nothing else but offend him.

In this fashion shall he dravv profit of his drynes, taking occasion to humble
him self the more, when he sees how much he offends, and to love God the
more, considering how much he forgiueth him. And albeit he find not taste in
these exercises, let him not forsake them; because it is not requisite that
that thing be alvvaies sauourous, which must be profitable: at the lest wise
this we find by experience, that as often as a man perseuereth in prayer,
with some litel attention and care, doing in this the best that he is able, at
the end he comes from thence comforted and joyful, when he sees, that of
his part, he did what lay in him. It is not much to continue much in prayer,
when there is much consolation. Much it is, that when there is small devotion,
our prayer then be much, and much more the humility, and patience, and
perseverance in doing well.

It is also requisite at such times, to behave our selves with more
solicitude and carefulnes, then at other times, watching upon the guard of
our selves, and examining with good attention our thoughts, words and
deeds. For seeing that in this time we want spiritual joy and comfort,
which is the principal oar to row in this navigations, it is needeful to
supply with care and diligence, that which wants of grace. And when thou
see thy self in this case, thou must make accoumpt (as S. Bernard says) that
the watches that guarded thee, ar asleep, and that the wales that defended
thee, ar fallen down. And therefore al hope of thy salvation consists now
in weapons, seeing that the vvalls can no more defend thee, but the svvoord
and dexterity in fighting. O how great is the glory of the soul, that
sighteth in this sort, that without a shield, defends her self, without
weapons, fights, without strength, is strong, and finding her self alone in
the combat, takes courage and a good heart for her companions?

This is the principal tovvch-stone, with which the finenes of frinds is
voont to be proved, whether they be true or not.

The second remedy, against importunate thoughts.
AGAINST the tentation of importunate thoughts, which ar wont to molest us
in the time of prayer, the remedy is to fight against them manfully, and
with perseverance, albeit this resistance must not be with too much labor,
and anxietie of spirit, because this affair consists not so much in force,
as it does in grace and humility. And therefore, when a man finds him self
in this sort, he ought, without anxietie (because this is no fault, or else
very light) to turn him self to God, and with al humility and devotion say
to him in this manner.

Thou see here, o lord, what a one I am; and what could be expected of
this dungehill, but such evil sent? what could be looked for of this ground,
which thou had cursed, but thistles and brambles! This is the fruit which
it can yield, if thou, O lord, make it not cl^^ne. And having said thus, let
him turn to go forwards, as he had begone, and look with patience for the
visitation of our lord, which never wants to those that be humble. But if
notvvithstanding all this, these thoughts unquiet thee, and thou nevertheless
with perseverance do resist them, and do what lies in thee, thou must
think for certain, that thou shall win much more by this manner of
resistance, then if thou did enioie God with all contentment.

The third remedy against tentations of blasphemy.
FOR remedy of tentation of blasphemy, it is to be noted, that as noe kind of
tentation is more combresom then this, so none is less dangerous; and so the
remedy is to make no account of these tentations, for so much as sin
consists not in feeling of any thing, but in consenting thereunto, and in
taking pleasure of it, which here we see is not, but rather the contrary,
and therefore this may rather be called a pain then a fault: because the
farther of that a man is, to receive joy of these tentations, the farther of
also he is, to commit any fault in them. And therefore the remedy, as I said,
is to make no accoumpt of them, neither to fear them: for when we have to
much fear of them, the fear it self avvakeneth them and stirs them up.

The fourth remedy against tentations of Infidelity.
AGAINST tentations of Infidelity the remedy is, that a man calling to mind
on the one side his own baseness, and on the other the greatenes of almighty
God, he think of that which God has commanded him, and be not curious in
sear^hing his vvoorks, forasmuch as we see, that many of them exceed our
vnderstan^ing. And therefore he, that desires to enter into this sanctuary of
Gods vvoorks, must enter with much humility and reverence, and carry with
him the eyes of a simple dove, not of a malicious serpent; and the heart of an
humble scholar, not of a rash judge. Let him become as a little child, for to
such God does reuele his secrets. Let him not be careful to know the
vvheresore, that is the reason of Gods vvoorks; let him shut the ey of his
understanding, and have open only the ey of faith, because this is the
instrument, with which we ought to feel the vvoorks of God. To know the
vvoorks of men, the ey of humane understanding and wisdom, is in deed very
good, but to understand the vvoorks of God, there is nothing more
improportionate then is that eye. And because this tentation is ordinarily
very noisome, therefore the remedy of it, is the same of the former tentation,
which is, not to esteem of it, for so much as this tentation is rather a
pain, then a fault, for in that thing there can be no fault, in which the
vvil takes no pleasure, but is contrary unto it, as before has been declared.

The fifth remedy, against tentations of diffidence and presumption.
AGAINST the tentations of diffidence and presumption, which be contrary
vices, it behooves us to have diverse remedies. For diffidence or mistrust the
remedy is to consider, that this gift of prayer is not to be obtained, only
by thine own strength and force, but by the grace of God, which is gotten so
much the sooner, by how much a man more mistrusteth his own propre forces,
and trusts only in the goodness of God, by which all things are possible.

For presumption the remedy is to consider, that there is no more evident
token, that a man is far of from all goodness, then to think that he is very
near it. Behold thy self also, as in a glass, in the life of those that be
Saints, and of other excellent and virtuous persons, that yet live in this
vvoorld, and thou shall easily see, that in comparison of them, thou art no
other then a little dvvarfe, in comparison of a mighty great giant; and so if
thou be not senseles thou vvilt not presume of thy self.

The sixt^emedie, against excessive desire of spiritual taste and consolation;
and against the contempt of such as have them not.
AN other tentation is, an ouergreedie desire to have consolations and
spiritual feelings; and a contempt of others, that have them not. And so for
remedy of this tentation, I mind to set down, what end every one ought to
have in these spiritual exetcises. To which purpose it is to be known, that
forasmuch as this communication with God is so svveete and delectable, as the
wise man says, herehence it rises that many persons drawn by the force of
this vvoonderful svveetenes, which is far surpassing whatsoever can be said
of it, com by this means to God, and give them selves to spiritual exercises,
as well of reading, as also of prayer, and often use of the Sacraments, for the
great taste which they feel in these things: in such sort, that the principal
end, which moves them to this, is the desire of this marvelous svveetenes.
This in deed is a great, and universal deceit, wherein many fall:
sorvvhereas the principal, and chief end of al our vvoorks, ought to be to
love and seek almighrie God, this is rather to love, and seek a man's own
self, to wit his own taste and contentement, then God.

And that which is more, of this deceit there follows an other, no less
then it, which is, that a man judges of him self and others, according to
these gustes and feelings, and esteems that every one has so much less, or
more perfection, how much more, or less gust he has of God, which is an
exceeding great deceit.

Now, against these two deceipts, let this advise and general rule be
observed, to wit, that every one know and understand, that the end of al
these exercises, and of al spiritual life, is the obedience of Gods
commandments, and the fulfilling of his divine vvil and pleasure, for the
which it is necessary, that our own vvil die, to the end that so the vvil
of God may live and reign in us, seeing the one is so contrary to the other.

But for so much as so great a victory, as this, can not be gotten without
great fanours, and comforts of God; therefore principally it behooves us to
exercise prayer, that by it we may obtain these favors, and feel these
comforts, and so bring this affair to a good end. And in this sort, and to
this effect we may demand, and procure those pleasures of prayer, as we said
before, as David demanded them when he said. Psalm. 51.34.
Restore unto me the gladness of thy salvation, and confirm me with the
prencipall spirit.

Now, according to this, a man may easily understand, what ought to be
the end, that he must have in these exercises; and heerehence likewise he shall
know, by what he must esteem, and measure as well his own forvvardnes and
profit, as also that of others; which is, not by the feelings, that he has
received of God, but by that which for Gods sake he has endured, as well in
doing the will of God, as in denying his own will. In so much that the
Saints say right well, that the true proof of a man, is not the gust of
prayer, but the patience of tribulation, the denying of him self, and the
fulfilling of the will of God, albeit for this end, as well prayer greatly
helps, as also the feelings and consolations that be geauen in the same.

Now, conformablie to this, he that desires to see, how much he has
profited in this way of God, let him consider, how much he grows every
day in inward, and ovvtvvard humility; how he supporteth the injuries,
done to him by others: how he bears other men's weakness; how he succoreth
the necessities of his neighbors; how he has compassion, and is not offended
at other men's defects; how he finds him self to hope in God in time of
trioulation; how he rules his tongue: how he keeps his heart; how he
dounteth his body, with all the appetites and senses thereor; how he
supporteth him self in prosperities and adversities: how he helps and
provides for him self in all things, with maturitie and discretion. And above
all this, let him consider, if he be dead to the love of honor, of pleasure,
and of the vvoorld; and according to that, which he has profited in this, or
disprofited, so let himiudge him self, and not according to that, which he
feels, or feels not of God. And therefore he ought alvvaies to have an eye,
and this also the cheifest, to mortification, and an other to prayer, because
this very same mortification, cannot be perfectly obtained, but by the help
of prayer.

THE SECOND TREATISE OF VOCAL PRAYER.
OF THE UTILITY AND necessity of vocal prayer. CHAP. I.
ALBEIT vocal prayer be in deed of great fruit, and profit at all times,
and for all kind of states and persons, yet particularly it serves for such,
as do not geeue them selus well to th'exercise of meditation, whereof we
have written in the former treatise. For to such, as has been alredie said,
vocal prayers do serve very much, and more particularly for those, that
do not understand laten. For whom this treatise shalserue as a
deuocionarie, in which they may exercise and stir up their devotion. And
for this also, the doctrine of the former treatise maieserue, in which those
things, arhandled, that help devotion, and those also, that hinder the same;
that by this means a man may procure the one, and quite him self of the
others that be contrary, and so with the one and other treatise, further and
augment his devotion.

And after that he shall have some days continued these prayers, if he find
convenient time, he may exercise him self in mental prayer, that is in those
considerations, which have been set down in the meditations of the former
treatise; that in this manner we may go by little, and little mounting up
from that which is easy, to that which is more difficultous and hard.

This little preamble then presupposed, we vvil begin to lay down here
certain prayers, amongst which these seven, that follow, shall have the first
place, and each of them serves to obtain some particular virtue, and grace of
our lord, as by them shall appear. And these seven prayer; may be divided,
according to the seven days of the week, that is, to each day his prayer;
and after that these be ended, a man may exercise him self in others, as his
devotion shall require.

A PREAMBLE TO THE PRAYERS that follow, treating of the preparation, and mind,
with which they must be made. CHAP. II.
WHEN thou shall sit (says the wise man) to eat with a Prince, Prou. 23.1
consider diligently those things, that are set before thy face: that thereby
thou may know what thou ought to prepare for thy part. And conformablie
to this document, let him that comes to treat with almighty God in prayer,
first of al fix his eyes upon our lord, with whom he gooth to treat, and
consider with great attention, what, and who he is; because such a one as
he is, whom he represents to him self, such a heart and affects it behooves
that he have toward him. Let him then lift up his eyes on high with al
humility, and behold God sitting in the throne of his majesty, above
alvvhatsoeuer is created, and let him consider how this is he, Apocal. 19.16.
who has written in his garment, and in his thigh, king of kings, and lord
of lords, and also how he is infinitely perfect, beautiful, glorious, good,
merciful, just, terrible, and admirable; likewise how he is a most kind
father, a most liberal benefactor, and a most gentell Redeemer and Savior.
And after that he has considered him in this sort, let him forthwith think
with what virtues, and affects he ought of his part to be answerable to
these titles; and he shall find, that for as much as he is God, he deserves to
be adored; because he is infinitely perfect and glorious, to be praised;
because he is good and beautiful, to be beloved; because he is terrible and
just, to be feared; because he is lord and king of all things, to be obeyed; in
respect of his benifits, he deserves infinite benedictions, and thanks;
because he is our Creator and Redeemer, he deserves that we offer him all that
we ar, seeing all is his: and because he is our helper and Savior, it
behooves that of him only we seek remedy for all our necessities.

These and such other like acts of virtues, owes a reasonable Creature to
those titles, and greatenes of his Creator. These be the virtues, and these the
assects, with which we must of our part be answerable, and honor this
lord, who as he is all things, so will he be worshipped and respected with
all these affects and feelings; which, although they be vertuallie exercised,
and found in all those vvoorks, which be done for his love, yet more
excellently they be exercised in prayer.

And this is one of the greatest prerogatives that prayer has, being made as
it ought to be, that in the same be found the acts of al these most noble
virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, Religion, Fear of God, and other
such, as we shall evidently see in the prayers following, which contain all
this; and therefore it behooves, that they be greatly esteemed of, and
exercised with much devotion and repose of mind.

THE FIRST PRAYER, FOR THE first day of the week, which serves to stir
up in our soul a holy fear of God, by considering those things that induce
us thereunto. CHAP. III.
IF that publican of the ghosple, Luc. 18.13.
was not so bold as to lift up his eyes to heaven, but standing a far of, did
strike his breast and said, God be merciful to me a sinner: and if that holy
woman a sinner, Luc. 7.37.
was not so hardy as to present her self before the face of our lord, but
going behind him, did cast her self down at his feet, and with the tears
of her eyes, obtained pardon of her sins; and if the holy Patriarch Abraham,
Genes. 18.27.
desyring to speak unto thee, said, I vvil speak unto my lord, albeit I be
dust and ashes: if these, I say, were so lovvlie and humble, when they
presented them selves before thy majesty, being yet such persons as they
were, what shall one so poor and miserable a sinner, as I am, do? what
shall dirt and as hes do? what shall the bottomless deepnes of all sins and
miseries do?

But because I am not able, o lord, to obtain that fear and reverence, which
is due unto thy majesty, without casting mine eyes upon the same; give me
leave that I may be so bold as to lift up mie bleare eyes, in such sort, that
the brightness of thy glory, do not dasel the weakness of my sight. And for
so much as the beginning of true vvisdome, is the fear of thy holy name, with
this, o lord, have I a desire to begin now.

Give me then grace, o my lord, my God, and vouchsafe to power into my soul
the gift of fear, by the means of thy holy spirit; for without it, all the
considerations, that I am able to allege here, vvil little avail me; because
to this fear thou did exhort us, Luc. 12.4
when thou did say. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
this have no more to do. But I vvil show you whom ye shall fear: fear him
who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, yea I say to you,
fear him. This self same the holy Church teaches us, In festo S. Michaelis.
when she says. Be not asraid in the presence of nations. But adore and fear
ye God in your hearts, because his Angel is with you to deliver you. Let my
soul then, o lord, and my heart fear thee, seeing in thee, who art al
things, there is no les reason wherefore to fear thee, then to love thee. For
as thou art in deed infinitely merciful, so art thou infinite lie just; and
as the vvoorks of thy mercy be innumerable, so be also the vvoorks of thy
justice, and, that which is much more to be feared, the vessels of wrath be
without comparison more, then the vessels of mercy; for so much as those that
be damned, ar so many; and those that be saved, so fevve. Let me then, o lord,
fear thee, for the greatness of thy justice, for the deepenes of thy judgments,
and for the highness of thy majesty, for the immensitie of thy greatness, for
the number of my sins and offenses, and above al, for the continual
resistance against thy holy inspirations. Let me fear thee, and tremble before
thee, before whose face the powers do tremble, the pillars of heaven, yea
and all the whole compass of the earth do quake. Who then, O king of
nations, vvil not fear thee? who vvil not tremble at those words, which
thou thy self have spoken by thy Prophet. VVil you not then sear me, Ierem.
5.22.
and before mie face vvil you not be sorovvsul? who have set the sands a
bound to the sea, and an eternal commandment which he shall not pass? and
they shall be moved and shall not be able, and his waves shall svvelle, and
shall not pass over it. If then all the creatures of heaven and earth, do in
this manner obey and fear thee, for the greatness of thie majesty, what shall
I do, most vile sinner, dust and ashes? if the Angels tremble, when they
adore thee, and sing thie praises, wherefore do not mie lips and mie heart
tremble, when I am so bold as to do this office? O miserable wretch that I
am! how is mie soul become so hard? how ar the fountains of mine eyes dried
up, that they power not out abundance of tears, when the servant speaks
with his lord, the creature with his Creator, man with God, he that was
made of slime and cley, with him that made al of nothing? more I would say,
but I am not able, because I can not do all that I desire. Thou, Psalm. 118.120.
o lord, fasten with thie fear mie flesh; let mie heart rejoice, that it may
fear thy holy name.

Let me also fear thee, o lord, for the greatness of thie judgments, which
thou have shevved from the beginning of the vvoorld until this day. A great
judgment was the fall of that Angel, Isai. 14.2. Petr. 2. Genesis 3.
so principal and so beautiful. A great judgment was the fall of all
mankind, for the fault committed by one. Genesis 7.
A great judgment was the punishment of the whole vvoorld, by the waters of
the diluge. A great judgment was the election of Jacob, and the reprobation
of Esau; the forsaking of Judas, and the vocation of S. Paul; the reprobation
of the Jews, and the election of the Gentiles; with other such like
vvounders, which daily pass over men's heads and yet ar unknown to us. And
above all this, a most dreadful judgment it is, to see so many nations upon
the face of the earth, to be in the country and shadovv of death, and in the
darkness of infidelity, going from one darkness to an other, and from temporal
pains to eternal torments. Let me then fear thee, o lord, for the greatness of
these judgments, seeing I know not, as yet, vvhither I shall be one of these
forsaken, Petr. 4.18.
or not. For if the just shall scarce be saved, the sinner and wicked where
shall he appear? if that innocent man Job, trembled at the fury of thie
wrath, as at the violence of the sourging waves, how shall not he be afraid
and tremble, that sees him self so far of from this innocence? if the Prophet
Jeremy trembled being sanctified in the womb, and found no corner were to
hide him self, because he was full of the fear of thie anger, what shall he
do, that came from his mothers womb with sin, and has since that time
committed so many, and so gteat sins? Let me fear thee also, o lord, for
the innumerable multitude of mie sins, with which I must appear before thy
judgment, when before thie face there shall com that burning fiar, and round
about thee a boisterous tempest; when thou shall assemble heaven and earth
together, to judge thy people. There, then, before so many thovvsands of
nations, shall be discovered my wickedness; before so many quiars of Angels,
shall be diuulged my sins, not only those committed by words and vvoorks,
but those also committed by thoughts. Where I shall have as many for my
judges, as have gone before me by example of good works; and so many shall
be vvitnesses against me, as have given me presidents of virtues. And yet
expecting this judgment, I cease not to give bridell to my vices, but rather
more and more I lie rotting, and corrupting in the dregs of my sins; still
glutonie makes me vile, pride makes me vain, covetousness makes me niggesh,
envy consumes me, murmuration teareth me in pieces, ambition puffs me up,
anger trovvbleth me, lightness of ma^ners draws me out of my self,
sluggishnes benu^meth me, heaviness casts me down, and favor lifts me up.
Thou see here the companions, with which I have lived from the day of mie
childhood, until this present time; these be the frinds, with whom I have
co^uersed; these the masters, that I have obeyed; these the lords, which I
have served, Enter not therefore, o lord, Psalm. 142.2.
into judgment with thy servant, because no man living shall be justified
before thee: for who is he that shall be found just, if thou would judge
him without pity? for this then, o lord, prostrating my self at thy feet,
with an humble and contrite spirit, I vvil weep with the Prophet, and
say. Psalm. 6.
Lord rebuke me not in thy fury; nor chasten me in thy wrath. Have mer^e
upon me, lord, because I am vveake; heal me, lord, because mie bones ar
trovvbled. And mie soul is very much trovvbl^d; but thou, lord, how long?
Be thou converted, lord, and deliver my soul; save me for thy mercy. Because
there is none in death, that is mindful of thee; and in hell, who will
confess unto thee? I have labored in my sigh, I shall every night vvash mie
bed; with my tears shall I vveat mie couche. Mine eye is troubled with
fury, I am vvaxen old among al mine enemies. Glory be to the father, and to
the son, and to the holy ghost; As it was in the beginning, and now, and
ever, and vvoorld without end. Amen.

THE SECOND PRAYER; FOR THE second day, of the praises of God. CHAP. IIII.
IN this exercise of fear and penance, it behooved me, o lord, to spend all mie
life; seeing I have so just cause wherefore to fear, and wherefore to lament.
Yet notvvithstanding all this, as the greatness of thie glory obliges us, to
vvoorship and reverence thee; so likewise does it bind us to praise and
glorify thee, because to thee only is due a hymn, and praise in Sion, thou
being in deed, as thou art, a passing great deepenes of al perfections, and a
maine sea of wisdom, of omnipotency, of bevvtie, of riches, of greatness, of
svveetenes, of majesty; in whom be all the perfections, and bevvties of all
creatures in heaven and in earth, and those also all in the highest degree of
perfection. In comparison of which, al bevvtie, is foulnes; all riches, at
pouretie; al power, is weakness; al wisdom, is ignorance; all svveetenes, is
bitterness; and finally all, whatsoever we see in heaven and in earth, is
much les before thee, then is a little candel, in comparison of the sun.

Thou art without deformity, perfect; without quantity, great; without
quality, good; without weakness, strong; without place, al wheresoever thou
vvilt; in virtue, omnipotent; in goodness, highest; in wisdom, inestimable; in
thy counsels, terrible; in thy judgments, just; in thy thoughts, most secreat;
in thy words, true; in thy vvoorks, holy; in thy mercies, abundant; with
sinners, most patient; and with those that be penitent, most pitiful.
Therefore, o lord, for such a one I do confess, and acknovvledge thee; for
such a one I do praise thee, and glorify thy holy name. Give thou me light
in my heart, and words in my mouth, that my heart may think of thy ^^rie; and
my mouth be full of thy praises. But for so much as praise is not beautiful in
the mouth of a sinner, Eccl. 15.9.
I request all the Angels of heaven, and all the creatures of the vvoorld, that
they together with me praise thee, and supply in this behalf my faults;
inuiting them to this, with that glorious canticle, which those holy children
did sing unto thee, amiddest the flames of fiar in the furnace of Babylon
saying. Blessed art thou, Daniel. 7.
o lord god of our fathers, and praised, and superexalted for ever. And blessed
is the holy name of thie glory, and praised, and superexalted for ever.
Blessed art thou in the holy temple of thie glory, and superpraised, and
superglorious for ever. Blessed art thou in the throne of thie kingdom, and
superpraised, and superexalted for ever. Blessed art thou that beholdest the
deapths, and sit upon the Cherubines, and praised, and superexalted for
ever. Blessed art thou in the firmament of he auen and raised, and glorious for
ever. All the vvoorks of our lord, bless our lord, praise and exalt him for
ever. Angels of our lord, bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Heavens bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. All waters that
be above the heavens, bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. All
virtues of our lord, bless our lord praise and superexalt him for ever. Sun
and moon bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. Stars of heaven
bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. All rain and dew bless
our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. Al spirits of God bless our lord
praise and superexalt him for ever. Fiar and heat bless our lord, praise and
superexalt him for ever. VVinter and summer bless our lord, praise and
superexalt him for ever. Moisti^res and hoar frost bless our lord, praise and
superexalt him for ever. Frost and cold bless our lord, praise and superexalt
him for ever. Yse and snow bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for
ever. Nights and days bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Light and darkness bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Lightnings and clovvdes bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Let the earth bless our lord, let it praise and superexalt him for ever.
Mountains and hillocks bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
All things that spring upon the earth bless our lord, praise and superexalt
him for ever. Welles bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. Seas
and rivers bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. Whales, and
all things that be moved in the waters, bless our lord, praise and superexalt
him for ever. All byrds of the atre bless our lord, praise and superexalt him
for ever. Children of men bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Let I srael bless our lord, let him praise and superexalt him for ever.
Priests of our lord, bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Servants of our lord, bless our lord, praise and superexalt him for ever.
Spirits and sovvles of just men, bless our lord, praise and superexalt him
for ever. Holy and humble of heart, bless our lord, praise and superexalt him
for ever. Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost: as
it was in the beginning, and now, and ever, and vvoorld without end, Amen.

THE THIRD PRAYER, FOR THE third day, to give thanks to God for his benifits.
CHAP. V.
I LIKE-vvise give thee thanks, o lord, for all the benifits and favors,
which I have received of thee, since the time that I was conceived, until
this present day, and for the love, which from al eternity thou have borne
me, when even from the same, thou did determine to create me, to redeem me,
to make me thine, and to give me all that, which hitherto thou have geauen me,
for so much as all that I have, or may hope to have, is thine. Thine is my body,
with all the parts and senses of the same; thine is my soul, with al her
habilities and powers; thine be all the hours and minutes, that hitherto I
have lived; thine is the streangth and health, which thou have geauen me;
thine is heaven, and the earth which susteineth me; thine is the sun and the
moon, the stars and the feelds, the fowls and the fishes, the beasts and al
other creatures, which at thy commandment serve me. All this, o my lord, is
thine, and for the same I geaue thee as many thanks, as I am able to give
thee. Nevertheless, much greater thanks I yield thee, that thou thie self have
vouchsafed to become mine, seeing that for my remedy, thou have offered and
geauen all thie self; in so much that for me thou vvast clothed with fleash;
for me thou vvast borne in a stall; for me thou vvast reclined in a manger; for
me thou vvast svvadled in poor cloutes; for me thou vvast circumcised the
eight day: for me thou did fly into Egypt; for me thou vvast in so diverse
sorts tempted, persecuted, ill used, scourged, crowned with thorns,
dishonored, judged to death, and nailed upon a cross; for me thou did
fast, pray, vvatch, weep, and suffer the greatest torments and outrages,
that ever were suffered. For me thou did ordeine, and dress the medicines of
thy sacraments, with the liquor of thie precious blovvd, and principally the
cheifest of all the Sacraments, which is that of thie most sacred body
(wherein thou, o mie God, art contained) for mie reparation, for mie
maintenance, for mie strength, for mie delices, for a pledge of mie hope, and
for a testimony of thie love. For all this I yield thee as great, and as many
thanks as I can give thee, saying, from the bottom of mie heart, with the
Prophet David, Psalm. 102.
Bless o mie soul our lord, and al those things that are within me, his
holy name. Bless o mie soul our lord, and forget not all his favors. Who
has pity of all thy iniquities, and heals all thy diseases. Who
delivers from death thy life, who crovvneth the in mercy and compasstons.
Who fills thy desire in goods, thy youth shall be renewed as that of an
eagle. Our lord is doing mercy, and judgment to all that suffer injury. He
made his ways known to Moises, to the children of Israel his wills. Our
lord is merciful and pitiful, long-suffering, and very merciful. He vvil not
be angry for ever, neither for ever vvil he threaten. He has not dealt with
us according to our sins, neither according to our iniquities has he
revvarded us. Because according to the height of heaven from earth, has he
confirmed his mercy upon those that fear him. As far as the east is distant
from the vveast, has he made far from us our iniquities. Even as a father has
compassion of his sons, our lord has had compassion of such as sear him,
because he knovveth our vvoorkmanshippe. He remembered that we ar dust; a man
as the grass, so ar his days, as the flouer of the filde, so shall he fade.
Because his spirit shall pass away in him, and shall not remain, and shall
not know any more his place. But the mercy of our lord from ever, and even
for ever upon those that fear him. And his justice upon the sons of
sons, to those that keep his testament. And ar mindful of his comandements,
to fulfill them. Our lord has prepared his seat in heaven, and his kingdom
shall ouerrule all. All Angels bless our lord, that be mighty of power, and
do his word, to obey the voice o^ his speeches. Bless ye our lord al his
virtues; you his ministres that do his will. Bless our lord all his
vvoorks, and in every place of his sovereignty, bless thou, o mie soul,
our lord. Glory be to the father, and to the son etc.

THE FOVVERTH PRAYER, FOR the fouerth day, of the love of God. CHAP. VI.
AND if we be so greatly bound to our benefactours by reason of their
benifits, if every benefit be as it were a fiarbrand, and a prouokement to
love, and if according to the great quantity of wood, the fiar is also great
that is kindled in it; how great then should the fiar of love be, that ought
to burn in my heart, seeing the wood of thy benifits is so great, and so
many the prouokements that I have of love? if all this world visible and
invisible be for me; ought not, by all reason, the flame, of love that should
rise thereof, to be as great as it? And specially I ought to love thee,
because in thee only; ar to be found all the reasons and causes of love, that
be in all creatures, and those also in the highest degree of perfection. For if
we speak of goodness, who is more good then thou? if of beauty, who is
more beautiful then thou? if of sweetness and benignity, who is more svveete
and bening then thou? if of riches and vvisdome, who is more rich and more
wise then thou? if of love, who has ever loved more, then he that so much
suffered for our sakes? if of benifits, whose is all that we have, but thine?
if of hope, of whom do we hope to have whatsoever we need, if not of
thie mercy? if to our parents we naturally ought to bear great love, Math.
23.9.
who is more our father, then he that says. Call none father to your self
upon earth, for one is your father, he that is in heaven? If the bridegromes
ar beloved with so great love, who is the bridegroom of my soul, but
thou; and who fills the bosom of my heart, and of my desires but thou? if
the last end, as the Philosophers say, is beloved with infinite love; who is
my beginning, and my last end but thou? vvhe^ce came I, and vvhither go I to
repose, but to thee? whose is that which I have, and of whom must I receive
that which I need, but of thee? finally if likeness be cause of love, to
whose image and resemblance was mie soul created, but to thine? This is
evidently known by her manner of operation, for where there is like manner
of operation, there is also like manner of being: and this, o lord, is so
betwixt thee and man; for no other thing is that which the Philosophers say,
that art does imitate nature, and nature art, but to say that man does vvoork
as God, and God as man. Where then there is so great likelihood in vvoorking,
there is also in being. If therefore this title, and each one of the rest by it
self, be so sufficient a motive of love; what a motive behooves that to be,
that proceeds of all these titles together? Truly that vantage which the
whole maine sea has, in respect of each one of those rivers that enter into
it, the same it behooved also that this love should have, in respect of al other
loves.

If then, o mie lord and mie God, I have so many causes to love thee,
wherefore shall I not love thee with all my heart, and with all my bowels? O
all my hope! o the most beloved of all beloueds! O flourishing spovvse! svveete
spovvse! honie-svveete spovvse! O my loving beginning, and my highest
sufficiency, when shall I love thee with al my forces, and with all my
soul? when shall I be agreeable to thee in all things? when shall all that
die, which in me is contrary to thee? when shall I be wholy thine? when
shall I leave to be mine own? when shall nothing beside thee live in me? when
shall all the flame of thy love burn me? when vvilt thou ravish, drown, and
transport me into thee? when vvilt thou take away all impediments and
disturbance, and make me one spirit with thee, in such sort, that I may never
more depart from thee? Ah good Lord, what does it cost thee to do me so great
good? what do thou quite of thy house? what do thou lose of thy
substance? wherefore then, o lord, thou being a sea of infinite liberality and
clemency, do thou retain in thine anger thy mercies toward me?
wherefore shall my wickedness ouercom thy goodness? wherefore shall my faults be a
grea ter occasion to condemn me, then thy goodness to save me? if in steed of
sorrow and penance, it please thee to accept of it, I am so much discontented
to have offended thee, that I would rather have endured a thousand deaths,
then have committed any one offense against thee. If in steed of satisfaction
thou please to take it, behold here this my miserable body; execute, o lord,
upon it all the fury of thy wrath, with this condition, that thou do not
deprive me of thie love. I request not at thie hands gold nor silver, I demand
not of thee heaven nor earth, nor any other thing created, because all this
can not satiate me without thee, and all to me is but poverty, without thie
love. Love I desire, love I request at thie hands, love I demand thee, for thie
love do I suspire, grant me thie love, and it suffiseth me. Wherefore, o
lord, do thou so much differ me this favor? wherefore do thou see me
languish day and night, and do not succor me? How long o lord vvilt thou
forget me? how long vvilt thou turn thie face away from me? how long shall
mie soul go wavering with so great anxietie and desire? Behold me, o mie
lord, and have mercy upon me. I demand not of thee that copious portion,
which is given to children; I vvil content mie self with one only little
crumbe of those, that come from thie table. Here then I present mie self as a
poor, and hungry little vvhelp before thy rich table; here I stand
beholding thee in the face, and considering how thou do eat, and do
give to eat to thy children, with the repast of thy glory. Here I stand
changing a thousand forms, and figures in my heart, and this to bend down
thy heart, that thou take compassion of me. The things of this vvoorld, o lord,
do not fill me, thee only I long for, thee I seek, thy face, o lord, I
desire, and thy love vvil I alvvaies demand, and sing with thy Prophet. Psalm.
17.
I vvil love thee o lord my fortitude; our lord is mie stay, and my refuge,
and he that delivers me. My God, my helper, and I vvil hope in him; my
protector, and the horn of my salvation, and my receauer. Praising I vvil call
upon our lord, and from my enemies I shall be safe. Glory be to the father and
to the son, etc.

THE FIFTH PRAYER, FOR THE fifth day, of hope in God. CHAP. VII.
NETHER does all this, only bind me to love thee, but also to put all my hope
in thee alone, for in whom ought I to have hope, if not in one that so much
loves me, and in one that has done me so much good, and in one that has
suffered so much for me, and in one that has so oftentimes called me, expected
me, tolerated me, forgeauen me, and delivered me from so many evils? In whom
ought I to hope, but in him that is infinitely merciful, pitiful, loving,
gentle, suffering and pardoning? In whom ought I to hope, but in him that is
my father, and my father almighty, father to love me, and almighty to remedy
me; father to vvish me well, and almighty to do me good; who has more care
and providence of his spiritual children, then any carnal father of his
natural children. Finally in whom ought I to hope, but in him, that almost
in all his holy scriptures, repeateth nothing more, then commanding me that I
approach to him, and hope in him, and promises me a thousand favors and
rewards if I do so; geauing me for paune of all this his verity and his
word, his benifits bestovved vpdon me, his torments endured for me, and his
blood which he has shed in confirmation of this truth, what is there then,
that I may not hope of so good a God, and so true; of a God that has so much
loved me, that he vouchsafed to be clod with fleash for me; and suffered
scourging pinching, and buffeting for me; and finally of a God, that did let
him self die upon a Cross for me; and enclosed him self in a sacred host for
me? How can he fly from me, when I seek him, who has so sought me, when
I fled from him? How can he deny me pardon, when I seek it at his hands,
who has commanded me that I request it of him? How can he deny me
remedy, which now costeth him nothing, who procured me the same, when it
did cost him so dearly? for althese reasons then, I vvil confidentlie hope in
him, and with the holy Prophet, in all my tribulations and necessities I vvil
heartily sing. Our lord is mie light, Psalm. 26.
and mie salvation, whom shall I fear? Our lord is the protector of mie life,
at whom shall I tremble? if armies shall stand against me, my heart, shall not
fear. If war shall rise against me, in him will hope. Glory be to the
father, and to the son, etc.

THE SIXTH PRAYER FOR THE SIXTH day, of Obedience. CHAP. VIII.
BUT for as much as hope is not secure without Obedience (according to that
which the Psalmist says, Sacrifice ye sacrifice of justice, Psalm. 4.6.
and hopeye in our lord) give thou me, o my God, that with this hope in thy
mercy, I join the obedience of thy holy commandments, seeing that I no
less owe thee this Obedience, then all other whatsoever virtuous affects;
because thou art my king, my lord, my Emperor, to whom the heaven, the
earth, the sea and alcreatures obey, whose commandments and laws they have
hitherto kept, and vvil observe for ever. Let me then, o lord, obey thee more
then they al, for so much as I am more obliged thereunto then they. Let me obey
thee, o my king, and observe entirely all thy most holy laws. Reign thou
in me, o lord, and let not the vvoorld reign in me any more, nor the Prince
of the vvoorld, nor mie flesh, nor mine own propre will but thine. Let all
these tyrans depart out of me, that be usurpers of thy seat, thieves of thy
glory, corrupters of thy justice, and do thou only, o lord, command and
ordeine, and let only thou, and thysceptre be acknowledged, and obeyed: that
so thy vvil may be done in earth, as it is fulfilled in heaven. O when shall
this day be! O when shall I see my self free from these tyrans! O when shall
there be heard in my soul none other voice, but thine! O when shall the
forces, and pykes of mie enemies be so subjected, that I find no contradiction
in my self, to fulfill thy holy vvil and pleasure! O when shall this boistrous
and tempestuous sea be so calm, when shall this heaven be so fair and
vnclovvdie, when shall mie passions be so quiet and mortified, that there be
neither vvaue, nor clovvde; nor noise, nor any other perturbation, that may
alter, and change this peace and obedience, and hinder this thie kingdom in
me? Give thou me, o lord this obedience, or to say better, this sovereignty
over mie heart, that in such sort it may obey me, that in all things I may
subject the same to thee: and being in this subjection, I may say with al
mie heart as the Prophet said. Psalm. 118.^3.
Set me o lord for alavv, the way of thy iustifications, and I vvil search it
out alvvaies. Give me understanding, and I vvil seek thie law, and vvil keep
it with al mie heart. Guide me in the pathe of thy commandments, because
Thaue desired the same. Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to avarice.
Turn away mine eyes that they see not vanity, in thy way quicken me. Glory
be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost, etc.

THE SEVENTH PRAYER, FOR THE seventh day, in which a man offers him self,
and al things that he has, to God. CHAP. IX.
EVEN so as I am bound, o lord, to obey thee, am I also bound to resign, and
offer my self into thy hands, because I am altogether thine, and thine by so
many, and so just titles. Thine, because thou have created me, and given me
this being that I have: thine, because thou do maintain me in this being,
with so many benifits and favors of thy providence: thine, because thou have
redeemed me out of captivity, and have bought me, not with gold nor silver,
but with thine own blood; and thine, because so many other times thou have
redeemed me, how many times thou have drawn me out of sin. If then by so
many titles and claims I be thine, and if thou for so many respects be mie
king, mie lord, mie Redeemer, and mie deliverer, here I turn to resign into
thie hands thie substance, which I my self am; here I offer mie self to be
thie sclaue and captive; here I give up the kaies and omage of mie will, to
the end that henceforvvard I be no more mine own, nor of any other, but
thine; that I live not, but for thee; nor do no more mine own will, but
thine, in such sort, that I nether eat, nor drink, norsleepe, nor do any
other thing, which is not according to thee, and for thee. Here do I present
mie self to thee, that thou dispose of me, as of thine own substance, as it
best pleases thee. If it like thee that I live, that I dye, that I be in
health, that I be sick, that I be rich, that I be poor, that I be honored,
that I be dishonored, to all I offer mie self, and resign my self into thie
hands, and I dispossess me of mie self, that I be now no more mine own, but
thine, in so much, that what is thine by justice and right, be also thine by
mie will. But who, o lord, can do any of these things without thee? who
can make as much as one step without thee? Give me therefore grace o lord, to
do that which thou commaundest, and command whatsoever it pleases thee.
Remember, o lord, that thou thy self have commanded us most instantly, that
we should ask thee, saying: Ask, and it shall be given you; Matthew. 7.7.
seek and you shall find; knock and it shall be opened to you. Thou also thie
self have said by thy Prophet. Isaiae. 45.21.
A God just, and saving there is not besides me. Be converted to me, and you
shall be saved, all the ends of the earth. If then thou thy self, o lord, do
call us, d^est inuit us, and do hold open thine arms, to the end that we
com to thee, wherefore should we not hope, that thou vvvilt receive us in
them? Thou art not, o lord, as men ar, who become poor by giving, and
therefore ar so troubled, when ought is demanded of them. Thou art not so,
because as thou becommest not poor in the one, thou art not offended in
the other; and therefore to ask of thee, is not to importunate thee, but to obey
thee (seeing thou have commanded us to ask of thee) to honor thee, and to
glotifie thee: for by doing this, we protest that thou art God, and the
universal lord, and giver of althings; of whom we ought to demau^dal, seeing
that of thee depends al whatsoever. And hence it is, that thou thy self
do demand us this sort of sacrifice, above al others saying. Psalm. 49.15.
Call upon me in the day of tribulation, I vvil deliver thee, and thou shall
honor me. I then being moved through this thy gracious commandment, do com
to thee, and beseech thee, that thou vvilt vouchsafe to give all this, that I
owe unto thee; to wit that I may so adore thee, so fear and reverence thee,
so praise thee, so give thee thanks for althy benifits, so love thee with al
my ha^t, so settle al mie hope and confidence in thee, so obey thy holy
commandments, so offer and resign mie self into thy hands, and so understand
how to request thee other favors, as it behooves me to do for thy glory,
and for my salvation. I beseech thee also, o lord, to grant me pardon of my
sins, and true contrition and confession of them al, and to give me grace,
that I may no more offend thee in them, nor in any other; and chiefly I
demand of thee strength and virtue to chasten mie flesh, to refrain my tongue
to mortify the appetites of my heart, and to recollect the thoughts of my
imagination, that I, being altogether so renewed and reformed, may deserve to be
a living temple, and thy abode. Give me likewise, o lord, al those virtues, by
which this thy dwelling place mare be not only p^rified and cleansed, but
also adorned and decked, such as be the fear of thy holy name; a most
steadfast hope; a most profound humility; most perfect patience; a clear
discretion: pouretie of spirit; perfect Obedience; continual strength and
diligence in all trauails, apperteining to thy holy service; and above al, a
most inflamed charity toward my neighbors, and toward thee. And for
as much as I deserve none of al these things, be mindful, o lord, of thy mercy,
which presupposes our misery, to be put in execution. Be mindful, Ezech.
33.11.
that thou desi^est not the death of a sinner, as thy self have said, but that
he be converted and live. Be mindful, that thy only begoten son came not
into this vvoorld, as he him self said, to seek those that be just, but
sinners. Math. 9.13.
Be mindful, that whatsoever he did, and suffered in this vvoorld, from the
day that he was borne, until he gave up the ghost upon the Cross, he
suffered it not for him self, but for me; which all, I offer up to thee in
sacrifice, for my necessities and offenses; and for his sake, and not for mine
own, do I beseech thee of mercy. And for as much as of thee it is said,
that thou vvilt honor the father in his sons, honor him, by doing good to
me. Be mindful, that I have recourse to thee, that I enter through thy gates,
and that to thee, as to a true physician and lord, I present my necessities,
and vvounds; and so with this spirit will I call upon thee, with that p^aie
which the Prophet David made, saying. Incline, Psalm. 85.
o lord, thine ear, and hear me; because I am needy and poor. Keep my
soul, because I am holy; save, o my God, thy servant, that hops in thee.
Have mercy upon me, o lord, because to thee have I cried all the day; make
glad the soul of thy servant, because to thee, o lord, have I lifted up my
soul. Because thou, o lord, art svveete and mild and of much mercy to all
those that call upon thee, Understand, o lord, with thy ears my prayer; and
listen to the voice of my request. In the day of my tribulation have I cried
unto thee; because thou have heard me. There is none like to thee amongst the
Gods, o Lord; and there is none according to thy works. All the nations that
thou have made shall com and adore before thee, o lord; and shall glorify thy
name. Because thou art great, and doing vvoonders, thou only art God. Guide
me, o lord, in thy way and I will walk in thy verity, let my heart rejoice
that it may fear thy name. I vvil confess to thee o lord my God, in all my
heart, and I vvil glorify thy name for ever. Because thy mercy is great upon
me; and thou have delivered my soul, out of the deepest hell. Glory be to
the father, and to the son. etc.

A PRAYER TO THE HOLY GHOST CHAP. X.
O HOLY Ghost, the comforter, that in the holy day of Pentecost did com
down upon the Apostles, and fill their holy breasts with charity, grace,
and wisdom: I beseech thee, o lord, for this unspeakable liberality and
mercy, that thou vvilt fill my soul with thy grace, and all mie entrails
with the unspeakable svveetenes of thy love. Com, o most holy Spirit, and
send us from heaven some one beam of thy light. Com, o father of the poor, o
giver of gifts, o light of hearts. Com, o best comforter, svveete ghest of
sovvles, and their svveete refreshing. Com to me, o cleanser of sins, and
physician of diseases. Com, o strength of vveakelings, and remedy of those
that are fallen. Com, o master of the humble, and destroier of the proud. Com,
o singular glory of those that live, and only salvation of those that die. Com,
o my God, and prepare me for thee, with the riches of thy gifts and mercies.
Make me drunk, with the gift of wisdom; inlighten me, with the gift of
understanding; govern me, with the gift of counsel; encourage me, with the
gift of strength; teach me, with the gift of science; vvound me, with the
gift of piety; and pearse my heart, with the gift of fear.

O most svveete lover of those that be clean of heart, kendle and burn al my
bowels, with that most svveete fiar of thy love, that they al being so
burned, may be ravished and drawn to thee, which art my last end, and the
depth of all goodness. O most svveete lover of clean souls, for so much as
thou know, that I of my self am able to do nothing, extend thy pitiful
hand upon me, and make me leave my self, that so I may be able to pass unto
thee. And to this end, o lord, beat down, mortify, annihil, and undo in me
whatsoever it shall please thee, that thou make me wholy according to thy
vvil, that so al my life be a perfect sacrifice, to be altogether consumed in
the fiar of thy love. O that some one could aford me this, that thou would
admit me to so great good! Behold, that this thy poor and miserable creature,
day and night suspireth to thee. My soul has thirsted after the living God,
when shall I com and appear before the face of al graces? when shall I enter
into the place of that wonderful tabernacle, even to the face of my God? when
vvilt thou fill my soul, with the joy of thy divine countenance? when shall
she be satiated with thy divine presence? O fountain of eternal brightness,
turn to enclose me in that depth, whence I proceeded, where I may know
thee, as thou did know me, and love thee, as thou did love me, and see
thee for ever, in the company of al Saints. Amen.

A PRAYER VVHILES WE HEAR mass, or at any other time, taken out of diverse
places of S. Austen. CHAP. XI.
O MOST merciful, and supreme creator of heaven and earth, I the most vile of
al sinners, together with thy holy Church, offer up to thee this most precious
sacrifice, of thy only begoten son, for all the sins of the vvoorld.
Behold, o most merciful king, him that suffers, and gentellie remember for
whom he suffere h. Is not this peradventure, o lord, thy son, whom thou
did deliver to death, for the remedy of an ungrateful servant?

Is not this peradventure the author of life, which being lead as a sheep to
the slaughter, disdeigned not to suffer such a cruel kind of death? Turn, o
lord my God, the eyes of thy majesty, upon this vvoork of unspeakable piety.
Consider thy svveete son, stredched out upon the wood of the Cross, and
his most innocent hands gushing out blood, and be thou content to pardon those
evils, which my hands have committed. Consider his naked breast, pierced with
that cruel iron of the spear; and renew me with that sacred fountain,
which I believe to have run from thence. Behold those most holy feet,
which never past through the way of sins, now pierced with those hard
nails, and let it please thee to direct my feet, in the way of thy holy
commandments. Do not thou perchance, o most pitiful father, consider the
head of thy most loving son fallen down, and his white neck bovved down
with the presence of death? Consider, o most merciful Creator, in what plight
the body of thy beloue I son emaineth, and have mercy upon the servant,
which he has redeemed. Behold how his naked breast remains all white; how
his bloody side remains all read: how his bowels extended remain dry;
how his bevvtiful eyes remain dim, how his kingly presence and figure
remains pall and vvanne; how his arms stretched out remain stiff; how
his knees like alabastre remain hanging, and how the streams of that divine
blood vvash his pierced feet. Behold, o glorious father, the mangled members
of thy most loving son, and remember the miseries of thy poor servant.
Behold the torments and pains of our Redeemer, and forgive the offenses of the
redeemed. This is our faithful Advocate before thee, o father almighty. This
is that high priest, which has no need to be sanctified with other blood,
seeing he shines embr^ed with his own. This is the holy sacrifice agreeable
and present, offered and recea^ed in the savor of svveetenes. This is the lamb
without spotte, which heald his peace before those, that did sheare him;
which being charged with stripes, defiled with spittle, and iniuried with
reproaches, did not open his mouth. This is he, which having committed no sin
suffered for our sins, and cured our vvounds with his vvounds.

Now what have thou done, o most svveete Lord, that thou vvast so judged?
what have thou committed, o most innocent lamb, that thou vvast so dealed
vvithail? what were thy faults, and what the cause of thy condemnation?
Truly, o lord, I am the vvound of thy pain, I am the occasion of thy death,
and the cause of thy condemnation. O marvelous dispensation of God! He sins
that is evil, and he is punished that is good: he offends that is g^iltie,
and he is vvounded that is innocent: the servant commits the fault, and the
lord paieth for it. How far, o son of God, how far has thy humility
abased it self? how far has thy charity extended it self? how far has thy
love proceeded? How far has thy compassion arrived? I have committed the
offense, and thou endurest the punishment. I have done the sins, and thou
suffrest the torments. I am he that waxed provvd, and thou art humbled. I am
the disobedient, and thou art become obedient, even to death, and so paiest the
fault of my disobedience. Behold here, o king of glory, behold here thy
piety, and my impiety; thy justice, and my wickedness. Consider the fore
now, o ete nall father, how thou ought to have mercy upon me, seeing
that I have offered thee so devoutly, the most precious offer that could be
offered thee. I have presented to thee thy most loving son, and set betwixt
thee and me this faithful advocate. Receive with a cheerful countenance the
good pastor, and consider the straied sheep, which he bears upon his
shoulders. I beseech thee, o king of kings, by this holy of holies, that I
may be united to him in spirit, seeing he disdained not, to bevnited to me in
flesh: and I humbly request thee, that by the means of this prayer, I may
deserve to have him for my helper, for so much as of thy mere grace, without
that I deserved it at thy hands, thou have given me him for my Redeemer.

A DEVOVT PRAYER TO OUR blessed Lady. CHAP. XII.
O GLORIOUS and happy virgin, more pure then the Angels, more bright then the
startes, how shall my prayer appear before thee, seeing the grace that I
merited through the passion of him which redeemed me, I have lost it thorough
the wickedness of mine own fault? But yet, although I be so great a sinner,
knovving my request to be just, I vvil make bold to beseech thee, that thou
vvilt hear me. O my Queen and Lady, I humbly request thee to pray thy
sacred son, that for his infinite goodness and mercy, he pardon me
whatsoever I have done against his will and commandment. And if this may
not be granted me, in respect of my vnvvorthines, yet let me obtain it, to
the end that that perish not, which he has created to his Image and likeness.
Thou art the light of darkness. Thou art the mirror of Saints. Thou art the
hope of sinners. All generations praise thee; all those that be afflicted call
upon thee; all those that be good behold thee; all creatures rejoice in thee;
the Angels in heaven with thy presence; the sovvles in purgatory with thy
comfort; the men upon earth with thy hope. All call upon thee, and thou
do avvnsvvere to all, and pray for all. Now what shall I do, unworthy
sinner that I am, to obtain thy favor, for so much as my sin troubles me,
my demerite afflicts me, and my malice makes me speachles. I beseech thee,
o most precious virgin, for that thy so grievous and mortal sorrow, which
thou did feel, seeing thy beloved son going with the Cross upon his
shoulders, to the place of his death, that thou vvilt morti^ie all my passions
and tentations, that I lose not thorough mie wickedness, that which he
redeemed with his blood. Put alvvaies in my thought those pitiful tears,
which thou did ^est shed, when thou did see the vvounds, and the blood
of thy blessed son; that thorough the contemplation of them, there run such
quantity of tears out of mine eyes, that they may be sufficient, to vvash
away all the spots of my sins. For what sinner will be so bold, as to
appear without thee before that eternal Judge, who although though he be
mild in his suffering, yet is he just in his punishment; for so much as neither
revvard is denied for doing good, nor pain eschevved for doing evil. Who
then shall be so just, that in this judgment he shall not have need of thy
help? what shall become of me, o blessed virgen, if I vvin not by thy
intercession that, which I have lost thorough mine own sin? I demand a
great thing of thee, according to my faults but in deed very little according
to thy power. All that I can request thee is nothing, in respect of that
which thou art able to give me. O Queen of the Angels, amend my life, and
dispose all my works in such manner, that albeit I be but evil, yet I may
deserve to be heard of thee with pity. Show, o Lady, thy mercy in afording
me remedy, that by this means those that be good, may praise thee, and those
that be evil, may hope in thee. Let the sorrows, which thou did endure
in the passion of thy most loving son, and my Redeemer Jesus Christ, be
alvvaies before mine eyes, and let thy pains be the food of my heart. Let not
thy succor forsake me, let not thy pity leave me, let not thy memory forget
me. If thou, o Lady, abandon me, who shall uphold me? if thou forget me, who
shall be myndful of me? if thou, that art the star of the sea, and the guide
of thos^ that err out of the way, do not lighten me, what shall become of me?
Suffer me not to be tempted by the enemy; and if he tempt me, suffer me not to
fall; and if I fall, help me to rise up again. Who, o Lady, has called
upon thee, and was not heard of thee? who has ever served thee, that was
not revvarded with much magnificencie? Make, o most glorious virgin, that my
heart may feel that pearsing grief which thou did suffer, when, after that
thy most precious son was taken down from the Cross, thou did dest
receive him into thine arms, and vvast not able any more to weep, beholding
that most precious image adored of the Angels, but at that time defiled with
the spittle of so vile, and unworthy persons; and seeing the cruelty so
strange, with which the innocence of the just, paid for the disobedience
of the sinner. I do contemplate with my self, o my worthy Queen, in what
sort thou did remain at that time, with thine arms open; thine eyes
dim; thy head hanging down; without color in thy face: and feeling in the
same more torment, then any other could endure in his own body. Let those
sorovvful words alvvaies sound in mine ears, which thou did speak at
that time to those, that did behold thee saying; O you that pass by the way,
behold if there be any sorrow like to mine; that by those words I may
deserve to be heard of thee. Fasten, o Lady, in my soul, that svvord of
sorrow, which passed thorough thy soul, when thou did lay in the
sepulcher that dismembered body of thy most precious son, that I may remember
how I am of earth, and how in the end, I must yield to the earth that, which
thence I received; that so the perishing glory of this vvoorld do not deceive
me. Make me, o Lady, remember how often times thou did turn to behold the
sepulcher, where thou had left so great good enclosed, that I may thereby
deserve so much favor at thy hands, that thou vouchsafe to turn and regard
my petition. Let my company be that solitariness, in which thou did
remain^al that doleful night, when thou had nothing more lively before
thine eyes, then thy pains and sorovvs; when thou did drink the water of
thy pitiful tears, and eat the bread of thy heavy contemplations: that I
bevvailing the anguish, and distress which thou did suffer here in
earth, may, by thy means, atteine to see the glory, which thou have merited
in heaven. Amen.

A PRAYER OF S. THOMAS OF Aquine to demand al virtues. CHAP. XIII.
O Almighty, and most merciful Lord God, grant me grace, that such things as
be acceptable to thee, I fervently desire them, vviselie seek them, truly
know them, and perfectly fulfill them, to the praise ad glory of thy holy
name. Ordain the state of my life, and give me light to know that, which
thou co^maundest me to do, and forces to put it in execution, as I ought, and
as it is requisite for the salvation of my soul. Let the way, o lord, which
leads to thee, be to me secure, right, and perfect, and such, that I fail
not betwixt the properities and adue^sities of this life, but that in
prosperities I praise thee, and in adversities be not dismayed; in prosperities
I become not lofty and proud, neither wax disconfident in adversities.

Let me take heaviness or joy of nothing, but only of that, which may join me
with thee, or separate me from thee. Let me desire to content no body but
thee, neither to discontent any body but thee. Let all transitory things be
vile unto me for the love of thee, and most dear and precious al things
apperteining to thee, and thou, o mie God, above them all. Let al joy be
yrksom to me without thee, and let me not desire any thing besides thee. Let
al trauail be pleasant unto me for thee, and noisome whatsoever repos^ I take
without thee.

Grant that I may oftentimes lift up my heart to thee, and if at any time I
fail to do this, that I recompense mie fault with thinking of the same, and
purposing to amend it. Make me, o my lord God, obedient without contradiction,
poor without lack, chaste without corruption, patient without murmuring,
humble without fayning, merry without dissolution, sad without deiection,
grave without heaviness, quick without lightness, fearful without
desperation, true without doubleness, doing good without presumption, to
amend my neighbor without loftiness, and to edify him in words and
vvoorks without dissimulation.

Give me, o my most svveete God, a very vvatchful heart, that no curious
cogitation may withdraw it from thee. Give me a noble heart, that noe
unworthy affection may dravv it dounevvards. Give me a right heart, that noe
sinistrous intention may turn it avvrye. Give me an invincible heart, that noe
tribulation may break it. Give me a free heart, that no perverse and violent
affection may constrain it. Give me, o most svveete and pleasant lord,
understanding to know thee, diligence to seek thee, wisdom to find thee,
conversation that may please thee, perseverance to faithfully expect thee,
and hope to finally embrace thee. Grant that I may deserve to be nailed
upon the Cross with thee by penance, to use thy benifits in this vvoorld by
grace, and to enioie thy felicity in heaven by glory: who, with the father
and the holy Ghost, live and raignest God, vvoorld without end, Amen.

THE THIRD TREATISE, WHICH CONTAINS AN INSTRVCTION. AND RVLE TO LIVE WELL,
General to all sort of Christians.
THE greatest, and most important affair of all that be in ths world (for
which only man was created, and for which were created all things else
that be in the vvoorld, and for which the Creator, and lord of al things came
him self into the vvoorld, preached, and died in the same) is the salvation and
sanctification of man. He then that earnestly, and with al his heart desires
to take in hand this so great an enterprise (in comparison of which, all that
is under heaven, is to be esteemed as nothing) the sum of all that he ought to
do, consists in one only thing, to wit, that a man have in his mind a most
steadfast, and determinate purpose, never to commit any mortal sin, for any
thing in the world, be it goods, be it honor, be it life, or any like thing
whatsoever. In such sort, that even as a faithful wife, and a faithful
captain be resolved to dye, rather then to commit any treason, the one against
her husband, and the other against his king; so likewise a good Christian man
ought to have this determination, to never commit this kind of treason against
God, which is done by one mortal sin. And by mortal sin we understand
here breeflie, whatsoever thing is done against any of the commandments
of God, or our holy mother the Catholic Church.

But albeit there be diverse sorts of these sins, yet the most ordinary in
which men ar wont most to fall, be five; to wit, Hatreds, Carnalities,
Oaths in vain, Theftdoms, and Detraction or diffaming of our neighbors, and
other such like. He that shall with dravve him self from these, shall easily
avoid all the other sorts of sins. This is the abridgment of all that, which
a good Christian ought to do, comp^ehended in fevve words, and this is
sufficient for his salvation. Yet because to accumplish this obligation, is a
thing that has great difficulty, in respect of the great snares, and
dangers of the vvoorld, and of the evil inclination of our fleash, and of the
continual combats of the enemy; therefore a man must help him self with al
such things, as may further him to this purpose, and in this poinct consists
the kaye of this affair.

The first Remedy.
NOW amongst those things, the first is to consider deeply, how great an
evil one mortal sin is, that so a man may provoke him self to the abhorring,
and detesting of it: and for this end he must consider tvvoe things, amongst
many others. The first is, God, the entertainment and cherishing of children,
and the fatherly providence, which almighty God has of those, whom he
takes to be his children. There is lost also the fruit and merit of all
those good vvoorks, which a man has done from the time that he was borne,
even until that present hour. There is likewise lost the participation, and
communication of such good vvoorks, as a man does at that present; and
finally by sin is lost God him self (who is infinite goodness) and is
gotten hell (which is infinite evil) seeing it depriueth us of God, and dureth
for ever. Heerehence it ensues, that the soul, which before was the living
temple of God, and the spovvse of the holy Ghost, remains the slave of the
diule, and the den of Satan. And this in brief is that, which is lost by
sin.

But now, how much almighty God abhors sin, we may understand by the
terrible punishments, that he has used against it, even from the beginning of
the world: especially by the punishment of that great Angel: and of that
first man; Isai. 14. Genesis 3. Genesis 7. Genesis 19.
and of all the universal world with the waters of the diluge; and of those
five cities, which were burned with flames of fiar from heaven; and of the
destruction of Jerusalem and Babylon; and of many other cities, kingdoms and
empires; and above all, by the punishment which is given in hell to sin, and
much more by that so vvonderfull, and terrible punishment and sacrifice, which
was done upon the shoulders of Christ, whom God would have to die, by
this means to destroy, and banish out of the world a thing, which he so
greatly abhorred, as is sin. He that shall deeply and with attention
consider these things, can not but remain astonished, to see the facility,
with which men at this time commit sin. This is then the first thing,
which helps exceeding much to eschew and abhor sin.

The second Remedy.
THE second helps also heereunto, which is to avoid the occasions of sins
with vvisdome, such as be gamings, naughty companies, conuersations of men
with women, and principally the dangerous sight of our eyes, and other such
like things. For if man be become so frail through sin, that of him self he
falls from his own proper state, and sins. what vvil he do, when
occasion shall pluck him by the sleeue, alluring him with the presence of the
thing set before his eyes, and with the opportunity and facility to sin?
much more since that is true which is commonly said, that the just man
sins by reason of the coffer set open before him.

The third Remedy.
THE third thing that helps also for this purpose, is to resist in the
beginning of temptation with great speed and diligence, and to quench the
sparkle of evil thoughts, before it be kindled in the heart: for in this sort a
man resists with great facility and merit. But in case he make delaie,
then is the labor in resistance much increased, and he commits thereby a
new sin which at the least is venial, and sometimes deadly. Now the manner
of refisting evil thoughts, is to se^liuelie before the eyes of our soul, the
image of our Savior Christ crucified, with all the angvvishes and painful
passion, which he suffered to destroy sin, and by the same to demand his
assistance. Sometimes likewise it is very good, to make with great speed the
sign of the Cross upon our heart, thereby to drive away more easily, the
naughty inward thought, with this external sign.

The fourth Remedy.
IT helps also very much for this, that a man examine his conscience every
night, before he go to sleep, and see vvherin he has sinned that day, and
accuse him self thereof in the presence of almighty God, requesting pardon, and
grace to amend the same. Let him also, in the morning when he rises, arm and
fortify him self with prayer, and with a new determination against such a
sin, or such sins, to which he seeeth him self most inclined; and let, him
there use more diligence and circumspection, where he feels more danger.

The fist Remedy.
IT helps likewise very much to eschew, so much as may be, venial sins,
because they do dispose us to mortal sins. For even as those that do
greatly fear death, do provide, as much as is possible, to escape those
diseases, that do dispose to that end; so also ought they, that desire to
escape mortal sins (which be the death of the soul) to eschevve likewise,
with all possible diligence, venial sins, which ar the diseases that do
dispose us to deadly sins.

Moreover he that is careful and faithful in a little, it is to be esteemed
that he vvil be faithful likewise in much; and that he, that uses diligence
to eschew the lesser evils, shall be the more secure from the greater. And by
venial sins we understand in this place, idle talk, inordinate lavvghing,
eating, drinking, and sleeping more then is necessary, time evil spent, light
lies, and others the like, which although they do not deprive us of Charity;
yet do they quench the fervor of the same.

The sixth Remedy.
WE ar also much helped hereunto by the seue^e, and sharp treating of our
flesh, as well in eating and drinking, as also in sleeping and clothing, and in all the rest: which flesh being a fountain, and prouoker of sins, the more
feeble and vveake it is, the more feeble and vveake shall the passions, and
appetites also be, which shall proceed of it. Forlike as the dry and barren
ground brings fourth plants vveake, and of small substance; but
contrari-vvise the batteful and fertile grovvnd, especially that which is
well watered and dounged, brings foo^th trees very green, and very
mighty: so likewise it fares with our body, as much as concerns the
passions, which doeproceede from the same, according as it is better, or
vvoorse dealt vvithall, or more, or less subdued. True it is, that all this
must be done with discretion and moderation, although this counsel, as the
vvoorld goes now a days, be needeful to fevv. Yet to obtain this, a man
must, as often as he goes to table not only bless the same, but also lift up
his heart to God, and demand this temperancie, and procure, vvhiles he eats,
to observe it.

The seventh Remedy.
IT helps also much for this purpose, to take diligent and strait account of
our tongue, because this is the part of our body, with which we offend God
more easily, and often; for the tongue is a very slippery membre, which
slippeth very quickly into maine kinds of silthie, colerick, boasting, and
vain words, and sometimes also into lyeing, swearing, cursing, murmuring,
slaundering, flattering, and the like. For which cause the vvise-man says,
In much speech there shall not want offense. Prou. 10.19. Prou. 18.21.
And again, Death and life ar in the power of the tongue. And therefore it is
very good counsel, that as many times as thou shall have occasion to talk of
such matters, and with such persons, by which thou may doubt of some
peril, either of murmuring, bragging, lyeing, or of vainglory etc. thou do
first lift up thy eyes to God, and commend thy self unto him, and say with
the Prophet. Pone Domine custodiam ori meo, Psalm. 140.3.
and ostium circumstantiae labijs meis, That is to say. Apoint, O lord, a
custody or guard to my mouth, and a door of circumstance unto my lips. And
with this also, vvhilest thou art in communication, be well advised in thy
words (as he that passes over a river upon some stones, that lie
ouerthvvarte the same) that thou slip not into any of these perils.

The eight Remedy.
IT helps also very much to this end, not to entangle thy heart with too
excessive love of any visible thing, vvhither it he honor, goods, children or
any other temporal thing; for so much as this love is a great occasion, in a
manner of all the sins, cares, fantasies, vexations, passions, and disquietnes
that be in the world. For which cause the Apostle says, Timoth. 6.
that Covetousness (which is the ouergreedie affection of temporal things) is
the root of all evils. And therefore a man must live alvvaies with attention,
and carefulnes, that he suffer not his heart to cleave overmuch to these
temporal things; but rather pluck it back alvvaies, with the bridle, when he
perceives that it rangeth abroad fantasticallie, and not desire things more
then they deserve to be desired: that is to say, as things of small account,
as frail, uncertain, and such as pass away in a moment, vvithdravving his
heart from them, and fixing it wholy upon that cheifest, only and true
felicity.

He that shall love temporal things after this manner, vvil never despair for
them, when he wants them, neither vvil he be dismayed, when they are taken
from him, neither vvil he commit infinite sorts of sins, which the lovers of
these things do commit, either to obtain them, or to increase them, or else to
defend them. Herein consists the keye of all this busimes: for vndoutedlie he
that has so moderated this love, is now become lord of the world and of sin.

The ninth Remedy.
TO this likewise helps exceeding much, the virtue of almes-deedes and of
mercy, by which a man deserves to obtain mercy at Gods hands; and this is
one of the strongest weapons, that a man has against sin, for which cause
the Ecclesiasticus says. Water quenches the burning fiar, Eccles. 3.33.
Eccles. 29.16.
and Almesdeedes do resist sins. And again in an other place. The alms of
a man is a pouche with him, and it shall keep the grace of a man, as the apple
of the eye; and afterward it shall rise again, and yield them retribution, to
every one upon their head: it shall fight against thine enemy, more then
the shield of astrong man, and more then the spear. Let a man also remember,
that all the foundation of Christian life, is Charity, and that it is the
mark, by which we must be known to be the disciples of Christ; and that
the sign of this Charity is Alms, and mercy tovvard such as besicke, poor,
afflicted, in prison, and toward alother mise^able persons, whom we ought
to help and succor, according to our possibility, with vvoorks of mercy,
with comfortable speeches, and with devout prayers, beseeching God for them,
and releeuing them with such things as we have.

The tenth Remedy.
THE reading of good books, is also a great help unto this; as the reading
of naughty books, is a great hinderance and impediment: for the word of
God is our light, our medicine, our food, our master, our guide, our
weapons, and all our good; seeing it is it that fills our understanding
with light, and ou^e soul and vvil with good desires, and thereby helps
us to recollect our heart, when it is most distracted, and to stir up our
devotion, when it is most sluggish and drovvsie. True it is, that this reading
(if we mind to take profit thereof) must not be a sleightie, or negligent
careless running over of books, without due vveighing of the same, and much
less for only curiosity sake, but contrariwise, it must be joined with
humility, and a desire to take profit thereby.

The eleventh Remedy.
IT is likewise a great help for this purpose, to walk so, a though we
were alvvaies in the presence of God, and to have him as present before our
eyes, as much as is possible, as a witness of our doings, a judge of our life,
and a helper of our vveake nes, desyring him alvvaies, as such a one, with
devout and humble prayers, to help and succor us with his grace. But this
continual attention ought to be had, not only unto God, but also to the
ordering and government of our life; in such sort, that we have alvvaies one
eye fixed upon him, for to reverence him, and desire him of his grace; and the
other upon that which we have to do, to the end that in nothing we pass
the compass of reason. And this sort of attention and vvatchfulnes, is the
principal stern of our life; which manner of attention, if we can not
continue alvvaies toward God, let us yet at the least procure, to lift up our
heart to him oftentimes, betwixt day and night, with some brief prayers,
which we must alvvaies have ready for this purpose. And amongst these is
greatly commended by Cassianus that verse of king David which says. Deus in
adiutorium meum intend: Psalm. 69.2.
Domine ad adiuuandum me festina. That is, O God, bend thy self to mie help: o
lord, make have to succor me: or other such like as these be, which ar
easily to be found in the same Prophet, almost in every place. When we go
to bed, S. John Climacus says, that we must put our selus in such sort, as if
we were to lie in a sepulcher, that by this manner of lying, we may be
moved to think of the hour of death which we expect. And it shall not be
amiss, that a man, to this end, say over him self a responsorie, such as is
wont to be said over a dead body. When in the night we awake out of
sleep, let us say, Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritus sancto, or some such
good and devout words. And in the morning, when we open our eyes, Psalm.
62.2. Psalm. 17.2.
let us say: Deus, Deus meus ad te deluce vigilo. That is, O God, my God,
early do I vvatch unto me. or else, Diligam to Domine fortitudo mea; dominus
firmamentum meum, and refugium meum, and liberator meus. I will love thee o
lord my strength; our lord is my fortress, and my refuge, and my redeemer. Or
some v^ hat like this. As often as the clock strikes, let us say. Blessed be
the time, in which my lord Jesus Christ was borne, and died for me: be
mindful, o mie lord, of me in the hour of mie death. And let us then think,
that we have one hour less of life, and that by little and littel, this day
vvil be ended. When we go to table, let us think how God is he that gives
us to eat, and that made al things for our use; and let us thank him for the
food which he gives us, and consider how many there be that want that,
which to us is superfluous, and how easily we possess that, which others
have gotten with so great trauail and dangers. When we be tempted of the
enemy, the greatest remedy is to run with al speed to the Cross, and
there to behold Christ dismembered and disfigured, out of whom issue streams
of blood, and so to call to mind, that the principal cause, wherefore he put
him self there, was to destroy sin, and to pray him with all devotion,
that he suffer not, that so abominable a thing reign in our hearts, which he
with so great pains endeavored to destroy. And so we must say with all
our heart. O mie lord, who have put thie self upon the Cross, to the end
that I offend the not, may it be that this is not sufficient to make me
withdraw mie self from sinning! permit not this, o lord, I beseech thee, for
these thy most holy wounds; forsake me not, o my God, seeing I com to thee,
or else show me some other better harborough, where I may have mie refuge. If
thou, o lord, leave me, what shall become of me? who shall defend me? Help
me, o lord my God, and defend me from this dragon, seeing I can not defend my
self without thee. It shall be also very good, to make some times with speed
the sign of the Cross upon our heart, if we be in place, where we may do
it, so that we be not noted of others. And in this manner, temptations, vvil
be to us an occasion of a greater croune, as also to make us lift up our heart
to God more often: and in such sort the diule who came, as they say, for
wool, vvil go back shorn.

The twelfth Remedy.
AN other remedy is to frequent the Sacraments, vhich be certain heaueulie
medicines that God has ordained against sin, as remedies of our frailty,
prouokers of our love, stirrers up of our devotion, forvvarders of our hope,
releeuers of our misery, treasures of the grace of God, paunes of his glory,
and testimonies of his love. And therefore the servants of God ought alvvaies to
give him thanks for this benifit, and to help them selves with this so great
remedy, using it in due times, some more, some less, according as they seele
devotion, and according to the fruit of their auauncement, and the counsel
of their ghostly fathers.

The thirtenth Remedy.
AN other remedy is prayer, which has for office to ask grace at Gods hands,
as the Sacraments have for office to give the same grace, and so the revvard
correspondent to prayer, is to obtain grace, when it is made as it ought to
be. And therefore let a man with prayer, amongst all other his petitions,
principally demand this of our Lord, that he will deliver him from the
snares of his enemy, and never permit that he fall into any mortal sin.

These be the principal remedies, that we have against all kind of vices; to
which I vvil add here briefly other three, no less profitable the^ many
of the former. Amongst these the first is to fly idleness, which is as it
were the root of al vices, for, as it is written, Eccles. 33.26.
Idleness has tougth much evil. The ground that is not labou^ed, becomes full
of thorns, and the water that stands still, is filled with toades, and
other silthines: so likewise the soul of one that is idle, is filled with
vices, and is made a framer and inuentour of new evils.

The second remedy is Solitarines, which is the mother and guard of
innocence, for so much as it cutteth of from us at one blow, the occasions of
all sins. This is a kind of remedy, which was sent from heaven to the
blessed father Arsenius, who heard from a-boue a voice, that said unto him. O
Arsenius fly, keep silence, and be quiet. Therefore the servant of God must
cast of, and forsake, as much as is possible, al visitations, conuersations and
compliments of the world; for that ordinarily these ar never without
murmuring, scoffing, malice, fables, and such like things. And if any should
complain of this, let him suffer their sayings for the love of virtue: for it
is less inconvenience, that men should complain of him, then that God should
be angry with him.

The third remedy, which is very profitable as well for this, as for many
other things, is to break with the world, not forcing what shall be spoken
of him, as long as he gives no active scandal. For if all these fears and
respects be well examined, and weighed in equal balance, they vvil be in the
end but blastes of vvind, and buggebeares to fear children, which ar afraid
of every shadovve. To conclude, he that makes any great account of the
world, Gal. 1.10.
can not be the true servant of God. If I should please men, says the Apostle,
I should not be the servant of Christ.

THE FOVERTH TREATISE, CONTAINING AN INSTRVCTION OR RVLE OF GOOD LIFE,
ESPECIALLY FOR THOSE, THAT begin to serve God in Religion.
TO THE READER.
ALBEIT the treatise that here ensues, serve principally for such, as begin
to serve God in Religion, yet nevertheless all the contents thereof, se^^e as
well also for all those, that truly and with al their heart give them selves
to the service of our Lord, as in the beginning of this book was mentioned.
But that which ought here to be advertised is, that the end of Christian
life, to which ar ordained al Gods commaundments and counsels, and al statutes
and voues of Religion, is, as the Apostle says, Charity. Which although it
be so, yet do we not, in the beginning of this treatise, strait ways
speak of this end, but of that, which apperteineth to him, who takes upon
him to instruct a nouice, nevvlie com out of the world, with such
inclinations and wicked customs, as he brings from the same. For he that
has this office, must chiefly at end to destroy and mortify such evil
habites, and inclinations; and to plant in their place al those virtues that
be contrary to them.

For even as the Carpenter, which pretends to furnish the timber, for
building of a palace of some great lord, first of al cutteth away the barks of
such trees, as be brought from the wood, and then does savve, square, and
polish them, until they be fit for his purpose; so likewise the good master
of nouices, and he that desires to become the temple and dwelling place of
God, must understand, that first he must cast out of his soul, all the wicked
and perverse customs which he brings from the world, and then must adorn
and beutifie the same, with the vvoorks of virtues. And this thing which is
the end of him that brings up a nouice, is also a means to obtain the true
end of the law, which is Charity, as before has been said. For when the
passions be once mortified, and virtues planted in their place; Charity
remains as the lady and Queen of a man: for as our soul is a spiritual
substance, so is she a frind of spiritual things. Nevertheless the affections of
this life dravve her dovvnevvards, and hinder her from flying up to heaven,
where she has her neast.

Heerehence it is, that as a stone, which by force of some other thing is
holden in a higher place, then his nature requires, as soon as the
impediments, that held it, be taken away, strait vvais falls down to the
center, which is his natural place: in like manner, when the disordred
passions of our soul be once mortified and subdued, which she has to the
things of this world, she sudainlie, being helped with the grace of God,
lifts her self up to heaven, which is the proper place of her abode.

This is then the reason, wherefore so great account is made here of the
mortification of our passions, because these be the chains, which hold our
soul bound, and hinder her from flying vpvvards. Virtues also be necessary
together with this mortification, because they be the instruments, which
Charity uses in alther vvoorks; no otherwise then our soul uses her
faculties, and natural powers in all her functions.

AN INSTRVCTION, OR RVLE OF good life, for those that begin to serve God
especially in Religion.
BEFORE we begin to treat of the exercises and virtues, that he must have,
which begins to serve God in Religion, it is necessary to declare the end
of this affair; because the ignorance of the same, is that which makes many
err out of the right way.

The end then of this entreprise so important, is to correct, and mortify al
evil inclinations, and disordred appetites of nature, and to make a man
spiritual, and virtuous, in such sort that he obtain the end, for which he
was created, which is God. The end is to give the first being to a new man,
not of the earth, but of heaven; not of the flesh, but of the spirit; not
conformable to the image of the earthly Adam, but like to that of the
heavenly; not according to the affections and conditions of the first
generation, which was by nature, but according to the second generation,
which is by grace. Finally the end is to do that, which God commanded the
Prophet Jeremy, Berem. 1.10.
when he said. I have set thee this day over nations and kingdoms, that thou
may root out, and destroy, and disperse, and build up, and plant. Which is
as much as to say; that thou pluck of from the soul all appetitee and
inclinations, that men bring from theirs mothers womb, and the corruption of
sin; and that thou plant in their places the plants of virtues, vhich be
agreeable to the new regeneration, and adoption of the sonns of God.

Heerehence it appears that like as he, who desires to make a pleasant
garden in a hill full of briars, first diggeth up whatsoever hinders him, and
then planteth in the same al such fruteful trees as he desires: so one that
purposes to make his soul a garden shut up and enclosed, and a paradise of
pleasure for almighty God, must first root out all evil herbs, and all the
thorns of vices, and wicked inclinations of nature, and then forthwith set
in their steed, al svveete plants and flovvers of virtues and graces. In like
sort do they that mind to make a fair picture; for first they prepare the
matter, vvhereupon it is to be painted, by plaining and polishing the same, and
taking from it al roughnes: which being done, they dravv in it whatsoever
they please. Now the very like diligence is to be necessarily used in this
state, in which nature remained through sin (which before was needles) to
destroy and abolish the remains of that first generation, and to adorn the
soul with the virtues of the second.

Wherefore, as amongst diverse and sundry kind of fruits, some there be, that are fit to be eaten, as soon as they be gathered of from the trees, and some
others that first must be boiled, or put in conserve many days, to assuage
and temper their natural sharpnes and bitterness, with which they grevv; so
must we understand, Note this
that mankind has had tvvoe states or conditions of being, the one before he
fell, the other after his sin committed: and that in the first he was so
seasoned and ripe, that nothing was to be found in him vvorthie of blame or
amendment; but in the second there is so much to be amended, that scarce he
has any thing, that needs not to pass first through the fiar of the holy
ghost, that so it may lose all the wickedness it has. And this is one of the
chiefest points and aduises of this affair; whence it appears, how great
an error those bringers up of nouices commit, who being entangled and
intricated in other things of less importance, imploie not al their forces in
this labor of mortification: whereof it ensues, that men remain almost as
they were borne, that is in only natural goodness or ill, which is no less
inconvenience, then to place a piece of timber in a gorgeous palaice, no
otherwise prepared, then even as it was brought cut out of the wood; or to
set upon the table in a delicious banquet green olives, in such sort as they
be gathered from the tree.

Seeing then that the end of this entreprise, is to make a man good and
virtuous, that thou be not deceived with whatsoever sort of goodness, thou
must understand that there be tvvoe kinds of goodness; the one is natural, and
is proper to such, as be naturally gentell and well condicioned; the other is
spiritual, proceeding of grace, and of the fear and love of God, which is
propre to those that be just persons. Betwixt these two kinds of goodness
there is so great difference, that with the first, we nether merit grace nor
glory, but with the second we obtain the one and the other. And for this
purpose, the chiefest care of a good master must be, to attend that this
spirit of the fear and love of God, be poured into the soul of his nouice,
procuring the same by all means that may serve to this end, such as ar
Prayer, Meditation, and Use of the Sacraments etc. For otherwise, what soever
he shall do, vvil be a body without soul, an Adam of earth without spirit
of life, which is a thing of small profit for Religion; because by experience
we see, that such, as in religion have nothing else but this natural goodness,
ar no more to be esteemed then seely souls, or folks of good past, that are
led by every man vvhither he vvil, and can not say naie to any body, nor
hold hand in any thing that is commended to them. In so much, that a man
otherwise ill bent by nature, which strives alvvaies through the fear of
God, against his wicked inclinations, is much more vvorth, then is an other,
very well inclined by nature, if he want this fear. For as the wise man
says, Better is a living dog, then a dead lion: Eccles. 9.4.
because without spirit of life, not any one thing, be it never so great,
can be grateful and acceptable to God.

Of that, which hitherto has been said, it is manifest, how that this end, of
which we have spoken, comprehends two things; the one is to drive out of
the soul al kind of vices; the other is to plant in the same al kind of
virtues, seeing the one necessarily goes before the other. For like as in
natural things, there can be no generation without corruption; so virtues can
not be engendered and brought forth in our soul, if our vices be not first
dead: nether can the spirit freely reign and govern, if the flesh be not
before vanquished and ouercom.

These two ends the Apostle had then obtained, when he said, vvriting to the
Galatians, Galat. 2.19.
with Christ I am nailed to the Cross; and I live, now not I, but Christ
lives in me. For by saying that he was nailed to the Cross, and that he
lived not; he gives to understand the death of the old man, with al his
wicked inclinations and appetites, which he had ouercom through the favor of
the Cross of Jesus Christ: and by saying Christ lives in me, he sets
before our eyes the resurrection, and life of the new man, which was not
now conformable to the affections of flesh and blood, but to the virtues and
examples of Christ.

These self same two ends, did our Savior comprehend in those words of
his, saying. Matthew. 16 24.
If any man vvil com after me, let him deny him self, and take up his Cross,
and follovv me. For by saying, let him deny him self, he laid before us the
first and immediate end, which is, that a man deny his own vvil, and
natural inclination, with all the affections and appetites thereof, and that he
have no law with them, nor in any wise acknovvledge them, thereby to follow
and obey them. The second and last end he declared, by saying let him follow
me, that is, let him follow all the pases and examples of my life, and all the
virtues that he shall find in me. And in that which he said, Let him take up
his Cross, to wit of trauail and austeritie, he declared the chiefest mean
and instrument, necessary for the one and the other end: because that neither
rooting out of vices and ouercomming of nature, nether planting of virtues, can
be done without trauail and pain, for so much as there is great difficulty,
as well in the one, as in the other.

By that which has been said, we may plainly gather of what condition
this new warfare is, to which a man is called, and what sort of profession
it is: for he is not called to a delicate and quiet life (as some do imagine)
but to the Cross, to trauail, to sight against his passions, to pou^etie and
nakedness, to the sacrifice of him self, and of his oune vvil, and finally to
that mortification, of which our Savior said; Joan. 12.20.
unless the grain of wheat, falling into the ground, die, it self remains
alone; but if it die, it brings much fruit. He that loves his life, shall
lose it; and he that hates his life in this world, does keep it to life
everlasting. It is no matter of small importance to vvin and subdue nature, and
to make of flesh spirit, of earth heaven, and of a man an Angel. For if in
deed to make of a green herb, fine and delicate linen cloth, there needs
so much mortifying and trauail about the same, by reason of the great
difference there is, betwixt the one and the other; how much more is it
necessary, for the making of this so great a change, of a man into an Agel?
They report, that when a snake vvil change his skin, he enters by a very
narovv and strait hole, that by this means he may shift of his old skin:
he then that minds to strippe him self of the old man, and to put on the
new, how can he bring this to pass, by leading a large and delicate life?
There can be no generation without corruption, nether can a man atteine to be
that, which he is not, if first he leave not to be that, which he is: a thing
that can not be done without great pain and labor.

The life of a Christian man is ordained to a supernatural end, and so
presupposes supernatural forces, and consequently this life it self must be
supernatural, to which thing flesh and blood can not arrive. VVoe to that
Religion, whose manner of life is vvide and large, for in it a man shall go
alvvaies with a vveake and faint stomach, and one liberty vvil ask an other,
one delicacie vvil dravv an other. Religious life ought to be such, that like
as the sea casts from it self all dead bodies, and the pot, that boileth, all
the froth and scume, that is within it; so she should berid her self of all
the scume that she has, and of all the dead carcases which she finds to be
in her. Let the servant of God then force, and do violence to him self; let
him take a great courage, and think that God says unto him, that which the
Angel said to Elias: Rise up, 3. Reg. 19 7.
eat, because there rests yet a great way for the to go.

Now to turn back to our purpose, for so much as there be tvvoe things, which
we must alvvaies have before our eyes in this affair, which be to extirp
vices, and plant virtues: according to these tvvoe ends, shall this present
treatise have also tvvoe parts. The first shall be of the mortification of
vices, and evil inclinations of nature: the second shall be of virtues, and of
all the renewing of the inward man. Not that these tvvoe parts be different
betwixt them selves in practice and use, seeing virtues can not be planted,
unless vices be first rooted out; but only that the matter, of which we
treat, may be the better understood: especially because we know more
evidently the vices that war against us, then we do the virtues, which we
have need of; and so that which we get not by one way, we shall obtain by
an other.

THE FIRST PART OF THIS TREATISE, SPEAKING OF THE MORTIFICATION OF OVER
VICES, AND PASSIONS, AND OF THE means that serve for this purpose.
Following then the order, which we have here set down, the first thing
that we must pretend and seek to bring to pass is, to cast out of this
kingdom all the Iebusites, and to purge this cursed earth from al thistles and
brambles; that is, we must labor to subdue our nature, and to extirp all evil
inclinations and appetites, which partly by the natural condition of each
one, partly also by naughty costom, do stick and cleave unto him.

This being presupposed, the first thing that he ought to do, who desires
to be changed into an other man, is to know the inclinations of the first man;
which is nothing else but to know the enemies, against whom we must alvvaies
have most deadly war. Let him search well all the corners of his conscience;
let him examen all the vices, to which he feels him self most bent, as to
hatred, to wrath, to glottonie, to sloth, to envy, to too much talk, to
lying, to bosting, to vain glory, to lightness and easines of heart, to
pleasure and pampering of the body, to pride, to presumption, to dishonestie,
to pusillanimitie and weakness of mind, to covetousness and pinching, and to
such other vices and defects: and let him determine with him self, to take
this so glorious and vvorthie an enterprise in hand, as is to vanquish and
subdue him self, and cast out of his soul al these monsters, and not to give
over, nor take repose, until he see an end of that, which he pretended. Now
these wicked inclinations and vices he shall never by any means understand
better, then by laboring to obtain virtues, which be contrary unto them:
because when it comes to the point, to embrace virtue earnestly, and as it
behooves us to do, then the contradiction of that vice, which repugneth to
virtue, declares and shows it self; which yet before lay hidden. And to
say the truth, a man never comes to know well his natural imperfections and
vices, until he have a vvil and desire to leave them; no otherwise then the
bird, which is taken in the snare, feels not that he is taken, until that he
seek to get out of the same.

And because there might be much said of this matter, if a man would run
through every particular vice, and inclination of ours, and the breefenes of
this little treatise suffers not that I be ouerlong; I shall be content for
this present, to remit the virtuous and diligent reader, to the springs and
fountains of this matter, that is, to the holy fathers and doctors, that
write of the same.

To this helps very much also, the ordinary examining of a man's own
conscience, which at the lest ought to be done every day once, in which he
must enter into judgment with him self; laying down before him, al his evil
inclinations and affections; and examen al his words, works and thoughts; and
the intention which he has in all his actions; and the feruor and devotion
with which he vvoorketh; and to chasten himself, and do penance for that
which is il done, having alvvaies ready some sorts of penance for this
purpose; and demand instantly, at almighty Gods hands, grace to remain at
the end victorious and triumphant. I know a certain person, who, in the
examen at night, when he found that he had exceeded in any word, was
vvount to byte his tongue in penance of that, which he had mispoken: and an
other that for this was wont to take a discipline, as also for whatsoever
other defects. And so may every one take to him self, some particular manner
of penance, thereby to chasten the faults, which he every day commits.

It avails also much, and is a thing of great profit, to procure earnestly
every week the victory of some particular vices, and to have about a man some
thing, to vvaken him, and put him in mind of this enterprise, as may be to
gird him self with some thing, that causes pain, or some such like: to the end
that this may serve alvvais to admonish, and prick him forwards to that,
which before he had purposed, and make him ad^ised, that he sleep not in this
affair.

It helps also, and that very much, that a man do oftentimes renounce, and
give over his own vvil, even in those things that be lavvfull; that by so
doing, he may be the more prompt and ready, to deny the same in such things,
as be unlawful and forbidden; and that he occupy him self in some labors less
necessary, thereby not to fail in such as be of necessity: in like manner,
as men report, that Socrates the philosopher did, and as they do, which vvil
go to war, who in time of peace do exercise those things, which they
must use in time of war. And let him not cease in this affair, until such
time as his own will be dead and buried (if possible it were) to the end
that there be no hinderance against Gods vvil, nor against the vvil of those
that be in his place.

Now a general mean and instrument, that seems necessary and requisite for
all these exercises, is that general strength, of which we spoke before, to
ouercom therewith all the difficulties, which offer them selves unto us in
this enterprise: For so much as here must be vanquished tvvoe of the most
potent things in the world, which be nature and reason; which can not be
done without this general courage and strength, which we have made mention
of. Heere-hence it is that our Savior said. The kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, Matthew. 11.12.
and the violent bear it away. And therefore as he that labors
yron-vvoorke, must never let go the hammer out of his hands, for the hardness
and resistance of the matter, on which he vvoorketh; so he that labors on
the matter of vices and virtues, must not move one pase without this strength
and constancy, by reason of the perpetual difficulty, which is in this
matter. And let him be assured, that many occasions vvil be offered here, to
make him relent, and be dismayed in the beginning, and that he shall have many
falls, and spend many tears for them, and shall have great coffeehouse and
diffidence of him self. But yet let him understand, that this is the roial and
beaten way of all Saints, and the true proof and exercise of virtue, and the
true penance and file, with which all the rustines of vices is made clean:
and that there is no other way more assured, as well to com to the knowledge
of God, as to the knowledge and contempt of him self. Nether let him be
discouraged, though he fall many times, but rather, if he fell a thousand
times a day, let him a thousand times rise up again, still trusting in the
superabunda^t goodness of God: nether let him be troubled, seeing that he cannot
at every moment ouercom and subdue some of his passions, because eftsoon it
falls out, that that is ouercom after many years, which could not be
ouercom in long time before; that by this means a man may see manifestly of
whom this victory is. And some times it pleases our lord that some Iebusite
remain in our land, as well for the exercise of virtue, as also for the
safeguard of humility.

Above all this, the diligence of a good master vvil help much to this
mortification, for that to him it apperteineth principally, to have knowledge
of the naughty inclinations of his disciple, and to seek alvvais medecines
and remedies for them. Amongst which remedies one of the chiefest is, to rest
the spear, and incountre him in those passions, and inclinations that he has,
setting him a vvoork in base and humble offices, if he be lofty and proud; in
things that be austere and hard, if he be tender and delicate; spoiling him of
that which he has, if he see him bent to propriety; and above al making him
deny his own vvil in diverse things, even in those that be lauful, to the
end that he be more easy, when need shall so require, to deny the same in
things that at forbidden. In such sort, that as he which breaks young
horses, to make them manureable and pliant to the bridle, is not content to
make them run the right race only, but gives them a thousand gire-volts, or
turnings to the one side and the other, that by this means in time of
necessity he may with facility turn him at his pleasure; so likewise the
good master, must so often exercise his scholar in renouncing his own
appetites, that now his vvil being habituated, and made to plie it self, do
not stand stubborn, stiff, and intractable, but be gentle, easy, and
obedient to that, which they shall dispose of her: for otherwise she vvil
become as hard as an oke-tree, when you would bend her any way, such as
was that people, of whom God said by the Prophet Isaie. Isai. 42.4 Ibid. v.
3.
I know that thou art stubborn, and that thie neck is anyron sinevve. And
again. From the womb I have called the a transgressour, to wit of mie
commandments and vvil, to do thine own.

This is then the chiefest point of this instruction, without which all the
rest is nothing vvorth, or of exceeding small value. For to go to the quiar in
time appointed, and to do such offices as all others do, any virtue be it
never so little, is sufficient; nether is there in this any matter whereby to
exercise such virtues as be of importance, to wit Patience, Obedience,
Charity, Humility, Discretion, Subjection and the like; which all ar more
perfectly discovered in labors, in reprehensions, in base offices, in
punishments, and particularly in penances, which be given without sufficient
cause; for in these things we show patience, which is the touchstone of
virtues perfection and sinenes.

And therefore it is a singular kind of probation, to give the nouice oftentimes
this manner of penance, for by this me^^^ is known the valor and virtue of
each one. In this sort those ancient holy fathers were wont to prove, and
exercise their disciples, which they brought up; and if they were brought up
in like manner now, Religious houses would be peopled not with men, but
with so many Angels: because with this kind of flaile, they would easily
separate the straw and chafe from the thressing floare, and the corn would
remain alone. But since the time that this ancient discipline has ceased,
things go as now a days we see.

Now the self same force and severity which the disciple ought to use with
him self, must the master also use with him, chastising severely and
religiously his imperfections, to the end he fear him; and auising and
warning him secretelie, to the end heloue him, taking alvvaies heed, as much
as possibly he may, that he nether have, nor show auersion from any one,
nor utter any angry, or injurious words; because as soon as this shall be
noted in him, the whole enterprise vvil be dissolved and broken of, seeing
that the chiefest means to compass the same, is kindness and love. Nether,
because some be froward and vveake, ought the good master therefore to have
less care of them, but rather (as S. Bernard says) to others he must be as a
companion, to vveakelings only as a father and Superior: having for his
enterprise to be never vvearie, nor to take repose, until such time as he shall
gain them to Christ. And when some times he is forced to chasten and punish,
let him procure to observe diligently that which S. Gregory admonishes,
that his speech besvveete, and his hand severe: and in this sort he shall
easily amend what is amiss, and not scandalize any body. Many other
things might be said to this purpose, but that, which has been hithertooe set
down, surffiseth for the present: and so let us now go forvvard to speak of
that which yet remains.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE WHICH SPEAKS OF virtues.
THE ground of our heart being once cleansed, and also purged from all the
thorns, and naughty vveedes of vices and passions, which were in the same,
it remains that now we set in it diverse flouers and plants of virtues;
that so this garden enclosed, and this paradise of pleasure, in which God him
self minds to dwell, may be brought to an end and perfection.

Of Charity.
THE first plant then, which is as the tree of life, that must be set in the
midst of this paradise, is Charity, whose property is to love, and esteem
God above all things. To this virtue it apperteineth to lay the first stone of
this building, which is a steadfast purpose and determination, not to do any
thing, through which this treasure may be lost, which yet is lost by one
mortal sin. Let this therefore be the first foundation, and dermination of a
Christian man, to esteem, and make such account of God, and to procure so much
to observe this manner of loialtie and fidelity, that he would rather endure
all the torments and pains in the world, even as the holy martyrs suffered
them, then commit but only one mortal sin. This must be alvvaies before his
eyes, this he must fear in all his affairs, this he must demand in all his
prayers, yea this must be the greatest, and the most continual of al his
petitions.

Unto this same Charity it apperteineth to purify the eye of our intention in all our works, pretending in them not our own commeditie and interest, but
the only well pleasing and contentation of God. In such sort that whatsoever
we do, either following our own vvil, o^ the vvil of any other we do it
not for compliment, nor for a bare ceremony, nor for necessity, nor by
constrainte, nor to please the eyes of men, nor for any worldly gain or
profit, but purelie for the love of God: like as an honest woman serves her
husband, not for any commodity that she hops at his hands, but for the love
which she bears unto him. And this intention ought a man to have, not only
in the beginning and end of his works, but also in the time that he does
them, he ought to do them in such manner for God, that in doing them he
actuallie exercise him self in loving of God: so that vvhilest he is in
vvorking, he may seem rather to be loving, then to be vvorking. And after
this sort, he shall not be distracted in the vvoorks that he does. For foe
were the Saints wont to work, and therefore were not distracted. We see
that when a mother, or good wife does any service to her child, or to her
husband, which com from abroad, she does both love them, and serve them
together; deliting her self, and taking great pleasure and contentation in that
service which she does unto them. In like manner ought our heart to be
affected, when it minds to do any service unto his Creator.

To this self same Charity it appertains not only to love God, but also al
things that be his, and especially reasonable creatures, made to his image and
likeness, which be his children, and the members of his mistical body; and so
with one only self habit of Charity, ought we to love both God and them;
God for him self, and them in God, and for him, for whose sake it is reason
that we respect and love them, although of them selves they deserved not to be
beloved. This love requires of us, that we hurt no man, that we speak evil
of no man, that we judge no man, that we keep in great secrecy the good
name and fame of our neighbor, yea and rather to close up our mouths with
seven knottes, then once to touch him in his good name.

Nether is it sufficient only to do no hurt to others, but it is also
requisite to do good to al, to help al, to give counsel to al, to forgive
whosoever has offended thee, to ask pardon of him, whom thou have offended,
and above al to suffer and bear the greeuances, injuries, rudenes,
simplicity, humors, and conditions of al men, according to the saying of the
Apostle. Bear ye one an others burden, Galat. 6.2
and so shall ye fulfill the law of Christ. This is that which Charity
requires, wherein is contained the law and the P^ophets: without which,
he that vvil go about to sound a Religion, shall do as little as he, that
would form a lively body without a soul; which body may well be
straw or stone, but not a living creature.

Of Hope.
THE second virtue sister of Charity, is Hope, unto which it apperteineth to
behold almighty God as a father, bearing toward him the heart of a son:
because that in very deed, as there is no good in this world, that is
vvorthie to be called good, if it be compared with God; so is there no father
in earth, that so tenderly loves those, whom he has accepted for his
sons, as almighty God does. And so; whatsoever shall happen unto a man in
this world, be it prosperity or adversity, let him be well assured, that al
is for his commodity and good, and that al comes from Gods hand, since no one
sparovv falls into the snare without his providence: and in all these things
let him foorthvvith have recourse unto him, with entiere confidence opening
unto him al his troubles, trusting in the passing great bounty of his
liberality, in the fidelity of his promises, in the pledges of the benifits
already received, and above al in the merits of his son, that although he
be a sinner and very miserable, yet vvil God be merciful unto him, and direct
al things for his commodity. And for this purpose let him alvvaies bear in
mind that verse of David, Psalm. 39.18.
I am a beggar and in pouretie, but our lord is careful for me. And if he vvil
regard with attention the scripture of the psalms, of the Prophets, and of
the Evangelists, he shall find it al full of this kind of providence, and hope,
vvherevvith he shall daily take greater encouragement to trust in God. And let
him be assured, that he shall never have true peace, and quietness of mind, until
such time as he has this manner of security and confidence; for without this
confidence, every thing vvil molest, disquiet, and dismaie him. But with this
confidence there is nothing that can trouble him, for so much as he has God
for his father, for his protector and defender (as he is of al those that hope
in him) whose power and strength no arm is able to resist.

Of Humility.
THE third virtue is Humility as well inward as outvvard, which is the root
and foundation of all virtues, and to which it apperteineth, that a man
account him self for one of the most vile, and ungrateful creatures of the
world, most unworthy of the bread that he eats, of the earth which he
treads upon, and of the air vvherevvith he breaths; and that he esteem
him self no better, then a stinking and abominable carcass, stuffed full with
worms, the stenche vvherof he himself can not abide; and for this cause let
him desire to be despised, and dishonored of al creatures, since he has so
dishonored and despised his Creator. Let him love those offices that be most
base and vile, as to vvass he and wipe disshes, to svveepe the house, to vvash
and make clean the necessities of others, as well sick as whole, and let him
esteem this for a most high glory, that he is become as a drudge, and a
scullion of al men for the love of God, since he became, and made him self much
less then any of these things be, when he offended almighty God.

Of Pattence.
THE fouerth virtue is Patience, which as S. James says, Jacob. 1.4. Romans 5.4.
is a work of perfection; and as the Apostle names it, a token of proof,
because this virtue is a great discouerer (as we have said before) of the
finenes of all virtues, but principally and notoriously of prudence and
discretion. This virtue has three degrees. to suffer whatsoever tribulations
or injuries, without murmuring and quarrelling. The second is not only to
bear them patiently, they went from the sight of the Council reioicing,
Actor. 5.41.
because they were accounted vvorthie to suffer reproach for the name of
JESUS. And albeit this be a work of great perfection, yet the nouice, who
in the beginning of his conversion (when the feruors of charity, and the
consolations of the holy Ghost do most abound) arriueth not to this, let him
be well assured, that he is not yet a good nouice, nether has he begun
prosperously to run this race.

Of Poverty.
THE fifth virtue is Poverty of spirit, to which it apperteineth, not only
that a man possess nothing as proper, but also that he despise, and contemn
whatsoever riches for Christ, as things that be the matter and object of
pride, of envy, of covetousness, of wrath, of contention, and of all the cares
and troubles of the world. To this virtue it belongs not only to be poor
in deed, but also to love and affect poverty; nether onlieto love poverty it
self, but also all the companions of pouretie, as hunger, thirst, vvearines, a
poor house, a poor bead, a poor table, poor apparel, poor house hold
stuff, and every one that is poor, thereby to be in some part like to our
Lord, who was borne so poorly, lived so poorly, died so poorly, and
was so poorly buried. And that nouice or religious person, who is not yet
arrived to this term, has not atteined to the perfection of pouretie, nether
to the feruor of spirit, and consequently he shall not find nether in God nor
in him self, that perfect peace and repose which he desires.

Of Chastity.
THE sixth virtue is Chastity; the office whereof is to have a body and mind
even of an Angel if possible it were, and to fly both heaven and earth, from
all communications, sights, familiarities, conuersations, frindships or
acquaintance, that may be any prejudice to the same; yea though it be
sometimes even of spiritual persons. For as S. Thomas says singularly well,
oftentimes the spiritual love comes to be changed into a carnal love, by
reason of the likeness, which is betwixt the one love, and the other. And
therefore let a man endeavor in this point, to be so chaste and faithful to God,
that he would rather pluck out his eyes of his head, if it were possible, then
behold any thing, that might offend the giver of them. And when any occasion
shall be ministered unto him to see any thing, that may move him unto unchaste
thoughts, let him say mildly in his heart. O mie lord, let me not have eyes to
behold any thing, vvherevvith I may offend thine eyes. Let it not please thy
goodness, that, with the eyes which thou have given me, and which thou do
now illuminate with thy light, I make weapons to offend thee. He that shall
have this honest and careful regard in the government of his eyes, may be well
assured that God vvil presetue him, and that thereby he shall escape many
battles and perils, and shall live in great peace and quietness.

Of Mortification.
THE seventh virtue is Mortification, of ovvre appetites and selfvvil, which
is noe particular virtue, but universal and general, that comprehends all
virtues, which have for their office to moderate and subdue the passions of
our heart. To this virtue apperteineth to contradict, and mortify not only
those appetites and desires, which extend them selves to unlawful things, but
also to such as are not forbidden; to the end that by the exercise of the one, a
man may be more ready to the use of the other. And therefore it is in deed a
very commendable exercise, and vvorthie of great praise, that as often as a
man has vvil to eat, to drink, to speak, to recreate him self, to walk
abroad, to see this or that thing; he so often contradict his vvil in these
things, and break his own appetite, that in so doing he may become more fit
to suffer the bridle of reason in other his appetites and desires, which be
less well ordered, as ar those of honor, of interest, of delights, and such
like.

It is also very expedient, that the masters exercise their nouices
oftentimes, and almost alvvaies in these things, as has been said before, that
thereby the natural stubburnnes, and hardness of their own wills may be
broken, and a man may become more obedient and tractable, and not break in
pieces afterward (as dry wood is wont toe do) when he must be plied and
bent. And as often as the servant of God shall ouercom him self in any of these
things, let him esteem that he has vvonne a great croune, and that he has
done God such service, 2. Regum. 23.15.
as was that which David did him, when he would not drink the water of the
cisterne of Beth-lehem, which he had so greathe desired, but resisting his
greedy appetite, did sacrificie the same to almighty God.

Of Austeritie.
THE eight virtue sister of mortification, is Austeritie and rigorousnes of al
things, in the table, bed, disciplines, and all those things, which the
Apostle signified when he said, 2. Corint. 11.27.
In labor and misery, in much watchings, in hunger and thirst, in fastings
often, in could and nakedness, beside all those things which ar outvvardlie. In
all which things this virtue is exceeding profitable for every exercise,
because she punishes the flesh, she lifts up the spirit, she subdueth the
passions, she makes satisfaction for sins, and, that which is most to be
wondered at, she cutteth of the root of al evils, which is covetousness; since
the man that is content with little, has no occasion to desire much.

Neither does this virtue only deliver a man from other evils, but also from
al discourses, cares, and unquietness, to which those ar bound that vvil live
deliciouslie, and use them selves vv^l: and by this means a man remains free
and unoccupied, to give him self wholy to God, for which cause those holy
fathers of Egypt were given so much to this virtue. Neither was S. Francis of
any other spirit, who so highly commended the pouretie of body and mind;
for in the end al comes to one account, to wit the austeritie of the one,
and the pouretie and nakedness of the other.

When this virtue shall want in religious, then shall they fall to ruin and
decaie; because the vice contrary to this virtue, which is to ea^e, drink,
and chearish the body, is not content to break one only law of fasting,
but also al other laws and ordres; for so much as to seek and procure the
pleasures, and delicacies which the belly requires, permits not that any
law of Religion remain entire, and in his due force: especially because one
delicacie requires an other, and one vice draws an other, even as one
virtue brings an other virtue.

Now he that desires to be free from so great evils, let him set tell well in
his heart, those words of the Apostle that says, Many walk, Philip. 3.18
whom often I told you of, and now weeping also I tell you, the ennimies of
the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is the bellye. By
which words thou may understand, that it must be no small evil, which the
Apostel so much bevvaileth.

Of Silence.
THE ninth virtue is Silence which is the keie of devotion, of discretion, of
chastity, of shamefastnes, of innocence, and of al virtues, fith the
vvise-man said. Death and life lie in the hand of the tongue. Pronerb. 18.21.
Whose praises and commendations if any man desire to see, let him read the
book of Sapience, and there shall he find maruailous things touching this
virtue. And therefore let a Christian man alvvaies pray to almighty God for
this virtue, and say with the Prophet David. Pone Domine custodiam orimeo,
Psalm. 140.3.
and ostium circumstantiae labijs meis. Set, o lord, a guard to mie mouth, and
a door of circumstance to mie lips. And let him be assured, that it is no
more possible to keep other virtues without this, then to preserve a great
treasure without keie and lock. Now here it seems convenient to vvarne
those that speak, of the Circumstances which they ought to observe in the
time of speech, to wit who speaks, to whom, when, whereof, to what
end, where, and with what intention he speaks; that by this means he may
keep him self from all the rocks which be in this navigations.

Of Solitarines.
THE tenth virtue sister and Companion of Silence, is Solitarines, which is a
rauelin of Silence; which Solitarines, he must greatly love, and procure
with al diligence, who desires to keep innocence, to conserve peace, to
spend well his time, to enioie the pleasures and comforts of the holy Ghost,
and to mount up, and descend by the deg^ees of that ladder, which S. Bernard
describes vvriting it to Religious folks, which be Reading, Meditation,
Prayer and Contemplation. Bernard. de scala Claustralium.
For the obteining of this virtue it is necessary that a man subdue nature,
and force him self, until he have gotten a custom to fly company, to love
recollection and solitarines, and to lead his life with her: but chiefelie it
is necessary to fly the company of distracted, and light persons, because
this is one of the greatest diseases that the world has, seeing that neither
a mad dog, nor a venomous snake does so much harm, as does evil company;
for it is most certain (as the Apostle says) that Evil speeches corrupt
good manners. Cor. 15.33. Proverb. 13.20.
Moreover let the servant of God write in his heart that saying of the
wise man; He that walks with wise men, shall be wise; the frind of fools
shall be like them. And that also. Ecclesiast. 13.1.
He that touches pitch, shall be defiled therevvith; and he that deals with
proud men, shall put on pride. Now the masters of nouices must be very
zealous of this virtue, if they desire not to lose that in fevv hours, which
has been gotten with great trauail, and diligent bringing up in many years.

Of inward composition.
THE eleventh ver^ue is the measure and Composition of the inward man, to
which virtue apperteineth that saying of S. August. in regula Clericorum
Augustine; In your going, standing, apparel, and in all other your motions, let
nothing be done, that may offend any man's eyes, but that which becomes
your holiness; because the contrary is a token of a light heart, of small
virtue, small substance and small devotion. And therefore one of the chiefest
cares of a good master must be to teach his nouice how to go, how to
speak, how to apparel him self, how to converse with others, how to
dispute, how to laughe, how to use his arms in their gestures, how to
recollect his sight, with other such like things. Also with what temperance
he must behave him self at the table, with what comelines he must lie in his
bed, with what measure and devotion he must be in the Church, with what
inward and outvvard reverence before the altar, and so in all other the like
places.

Likewise when he deals with other men, he ought to converse with them in
such manner, that they remain edified with his good example, and that he be
with al men, and to all an image and pattern of holiness: in such sort, that
as one who touches some things that be odoriferous and svveete, bears and
reteineth with him self the sent of that which he did touch; and as he who
in the old law touched any holy thing, remained halovved therbie, so it is
great reason that he remain in like sort, who has had communication with
any servant of God.

Of inward love to the ceremonies of a man's Religion.
THE twelfth virtue is an inward and hearty love to all the ceremonies and
observations of a man's profession, not only to those that be great and
essential, but also to all the others, how little and small soever they seem:
for in very deed none of those things ought to seem small, which be
ordained to so high an end, as is to love God. Let a man remember well how it
is written, Ecclesiast. 19.1. Luca 16.10.
that he which makes no account of small things, shall fall toe greater: and
that he which is faithful in little, shall be also faithful in more. My meaning
is that he which fears to fall in small things, shall be more secure from
falling in greater. And contrarievvise from small offenses, men com by little
and littel to fall into very great evils. It is a thing well known that
goes in the common proverb, how for a nail we loose a horse-shue, and for
a horseshue a horse, and for a horse the horseman also. In like manner we see,
that for a littel rippe, al a whole garment comes to be rent, and for a
little piece that falls our of a wall, falls afterward a great stone,
and thence goes to decay the whole building. None was ever at the first
leap very evil, but by littel and little men clim as it were, and get up
from small evils to greater. There is nothing in Religion that ought to be
esteemed littel, because, be it never so littel, by reason of the vow that a
Religious person makes, it is now become an act of Religion, and of Obedience,
which be tvvoe most excellent and high vert^es. For Religion is the most
excellent of al moral virtues, and this notvvithstanding, Obedience is such a
virtue that the Prophet said of it, Better is Obedience then Sacrifice. Regum
15.22.
Above all this let him be mindful, that a religious person is bound under pain
of mortal sin, to go forwards in that perfection which he has professed,
and that he who makes noe account of small things, is not far from this
peril and danger.

But albeit all observations and ceremonies, do deserve this estimation and
reverence of which we have spoken, yet more notoriously and vvorthilie those
merit the same, which be joined with difficulty and austeritie: such ar
fasting, silence, abstinence from flesh, watchings at midnight, closure,
disciplines and the like; because these make Religion to be an imitation, and
Cross of Christ, and these principally do single, and make us different from
vvordlie men, these do tame the pride of the flesh, and provoke us to the
exercises of the spirit. Which being so, there is no thing that our nature
refuses more then these austerities; because she is a frind of pleasures, and
an enemy of pains. And therefore it is necessary to make more resistance
here, and to put more strength, where the building is more heavy, as well
for the importance of the affair, as also for the greatness of the danger.

Of Imitating the founders of Religion.
THE thirtenth virtue is the Imitation of the father of that Religion, under
whose sta^dard each one is a soldier, as the Franciscans do imitate S.
Francis; the Dominicans, do follow S. Dominicke. And in these their children
ought to imitate the greatenes of their Charity, their zeal of the
salvation of sovvles, their perseverance in watchings, their continuation in
prayers, their rigor in abstinence, their love of poverty, their going a
foot, their sleeping in their clothes, thereby to rise more speedily at
midnight, and such other like things; which those that be their true children
ought to follow, that so they may resemble the spirit, and fasshions of their
father.

Of Discretion.
THE fourtenth virtue is Discretion, which is as a mistres of all the others,
and as a torche that is carried before, to shevve the way of al other virtues:
of which Discretion the wise man said. Proverb. 4.25.
Let thine eyes behold the things that be right, and let thie eye-liddes go
before thy steps. This Discretion has for her helpers and companions
Gravity, Silence, Secrecy, Counsel, Prayer, Repose and composition both of
the inward and outvvard man, and a profound Consideration of all that, which a
man does or says, to the end that al be measured and compassed with Reason,
al other passions and affections set a side.

Of Obedience.
THE last virtue is Obedience, which I place here in the end, not as the last
of al, but as the abridgment and sum of al virtues, taking the same Obedience
in as much as it is a General virtue, to which it apperteineth, that a man
have his own vvil wholy resigned, and as it were dead (as much as may be
possible) to the end that there be nothing in him, that may resist or
contradict the vvil of almighty God.

In this Obedience there be five degrees, written. He that hears you, hears
me; Lucae 10.16.
and he that despises you, despises me. Now in this fifth degree of
Obedience, there be yet three other degrees.

These be then, most gentle and loving reader, the principal virtues, with
which he must adorn and deck his soul, that defireth to make the same a
living temple of almighty God, and a vessel of election and choice, of which
may be said that which the wise man vvriteth, Ecclesiast. 50.10.
As a massy vessel of gold, beset with al kind of precious stones. Finally
al these things have been treated of here with much breefenes, that so the
dilating and amplifying of them may remain to him, that shall teach this
doctrine which he may accompany with many goodly examples of Saints,
with many goodly testimonies as well of holy scripture as of ancient
fathers, and with what else soever that either reading, or experience, or the
holy Ghost shall teach him.

OF SVCH THINGS AS MAY help us to put in practice all that, which hitherto
has been said.
IT can not be denied, but that there is great labor, and difficulty in all
those things, which hitherto we have treated of, because as well the breaking
of nature and old customs, as also the obreining of virtues, is not without
difficulrie, since this is the common object, and matter of virtue. It therefore
remains now, for the accumplisshing of that which has been said, to
provide some remedies, whereby to make this affair more easy, because
without these remedies, it vvil little avail us to know what is good, if
we want forces to put it in execution: no otherwise then it little
profitteth a sick man to have meat before him, if he have no appetite to eat
the same.

Of Devotion.
NOW for this purpose, one of the chiefest means that we have, is Devotion,
since it apparteineth principally to this virtue, to make a man prompt and
fit to the vvoorks of almighty God: in such sort that other virtues be as it
were the burden and yoke of our lord, but this virtue of devotion, is as the
shoulders and vvings that help to lift and bear it up. For the understanding
of which thing it is to be noted, Note this
that the difficulty which is in this affair, grows not out of the
condition of vice, nor of virtue, (because vice is contrary to nature, and
virtue is conformable to the same, and so by reason there should be difficulty
in vice, and facility in virtue) but it grows of the corrupted subject,
which is the heart of man, corrupted and vitiated through sin. Wherefore as
to a sick man's taste the meat seems unsavory and ungrateful, which to one
that is in good health, is svveete and pleasant; and as to vveake and feeble
eyes the light it self is combre^om, which to such as have good eyes is most
grateful: so virtue seems sour, and vice svveete, not in comparison of them
selves but in respect of the evil disposition of the subject, which is our
corcorrupted heart.

This then being so, it is necessary to provide some kind of plaster and
medicine; to amend this wickedness of our heart, and to put it in such
disposition, that it may love what is good, and abhor the contrary; seeing
that without this it is impossible, either toe shake of vices, or to obtain
virtues. Therefore this is that which most properly apperteineth to devotion,
which is as it were a refreshing and dew of heaven; a breathing of the holy
Chost; an exhalation and issue of his grace; a kendling of Faith, Hope and
Charity; and a maruailous brightness and svvetenes, which rises of the
meditation and consideration of divine and godly things; and so transformeth a
man's heart, that it makes him heavy to al evil, and swift to all good things,
and gives him a taste in those things that belong to almighty God, and a
disgust of those things that be of the world, as S. Augustine declares in the
beginning of the ninth book of his Confessions, where he recounteth of him
self saying, that al vvordlie things gave him coffeehouse, in comparison of
the svveetenes which he found in God, and of the beauty of his house, which
he so greatly loved. This is that which spiritual persons feel every day
by experience, who, at the time that they have any great devotion, find
them selves exceeding prompt and ready to all that, which is good, and very
unwilling to any thing that is evil, and so in the one they find great
contentment, and in the other great displeasure.

So that for this, one of the chiefest cares of him that desires to go
forwards, must be, that he procure to keep, and increase this noble affect of
devotion, by all such means as possibly he may: for so much more easy shall the
chaungement of his heart be unto him, how much more he shall have it devout.
And therefore, as those that mind toe work or print any thing in wax, do
first make it soft and supple betwixt their hands, and then strait give it
the figure that they list: so likewise he that vvil labor his heart, and print
in it the Image of verttue, must endeavor to make it soft with the heat of
devotion, and so shall he do with it, whatsoever he desires. So we see,
that al such as pretend to work any thing, in a matter which is difficult
and hard of it self, do use this manner of proceeding. So those that purpose
to break any hard stone, do first soften it with fiar and vinager, and then
do set upon it with their iron tools, and instruments to break it. Those
also that vvil make right a staff that is crooked, do first make it supple
and pliable at the flame of the fiar, and then bend it as it pleases them.
Moreover, how can a smith work on so hard a metal as iron is, without the
hear of his forge? with this heat he does mollify the hard iron, and so
makes it pliable and obedient, as if it were wax, to the strokes of the
hammer. In so much that the one without the other, would not suffice for his
office, because the hammer without the forge, were, as men say, to strike
upon cold iron; and the forge without the hammer, were to soften the iron,
but not to change the form and figure thereof. And therefore these two things
be, in their manner, necessary to our purpose, that is the hammer of
mortification, to break and make right the evil inclinations of nature, and
the fiar of devotion, to make the heart soft and obedient to the blovvs of the
hammer.

I have laid down these things with so many words and comparisons, because
it seems to me, that herein consists the key of this affair, and
heere-hence is discovered more cleerelie, how great necessity we have of
this devotion, for the chaungment of our life: and consequently how the
bringing up of nouices, and of such as being a new life, is far other then it
ought to be, when we take no care to train them up in those exercises.

OF DIVERSE MEANS WHEREBY to get Devotion; and first of the use of the holy
Sacraments.
IT then remaineh now that we speak of those means, by which we may
obtain this good effect of devotion; amongst which means the first is, the
use of the holy Sacraments, especially of the blessed Communion, because the
proper effect of this most noble Sacrament, is the spiritual refection of the
soul, which is a singular and very excellent denotion: for so much as the
same does cherish and strengthen us, and give us breath for this viage. And
here a good master may take occasion to say much, as well of the inestimable
virtue of the holy Sacraments, as also of the manner, how we ought to
prepare our selves for the receiving of them; because he that approaches to
them as he should, can not but receive most great visitations and
illuminations of almighty God. But chiefly before Communion, and after the
same, it becomes us to have more particular recollection and prayer, because
here is some times received such a svveete and maruailous refection, that it
dureth afterward for many days. And he that has not yet tasted of this
svveetenes, let him believe that he has not arrived to feel the most noble
effect of this Sacrament; since that holding this honey comb and this bred of
Angels in his mouth, he has felt nothing that surpasses nature.

Of the meditation of heavenly things.
THE second means that serves for this, is the Meditation and consideration of
spiritual things, as the holy doctor S. Thomas expressie determines,
especially of almighty Gods benifits, and of the life of our Savior Christ,
etc. Because of this consideration of our mind and understanding, resulteth and
rises in our vvil this good affection and feeling, which we call devotion.
This is then one of the first things, which the master must give the nouice
to do, that by this means devotion may be so printed in his heart, that he
never forget the same at any time: and like as nature begins to fassion the
body of a living creature from he heart, because life does proceed from the
same to all the other members; so must he begin this spiritual life by Prayer
and Consideration, seeing that from hence he shall dravve the spirit of love
and fear of God, with which he must give life to all his works. To this end
he must assign him his times, and manner of exercises, teaching him, and
instructing him in particular, and with good leisure of that, which in this
part he ought to do, and asking him every day account of that, of which
he has prayed and meditated upon, that doing so, he may by littel and
littel teach him this way.

Of Reading spiritual and devout books.
THE third means is the reading of spiritual books, and of such as be
devout, especially if they be read with Attention, and with desire to take
profit by them; because this manner of reading is very like to Meditation,
except that Meditation does stay it self somvvhat more in things, and does
ruminate and digest them more at leisure, which he also may, and ought to do
that reads, for so he shall reap not much less fruit by the one, then by
the other. And the reason is, because that the light which the understanding
receaueth here, descends and is communicated to the will, and to all the
powers of the soul, no otherwise then the virtue and motion of the first
heaven, is communicated to all the other inferior celestial globes and spheres.
And it is an exercise vvorthie to be much commended, to read every day to
the nouices, in common, some spiritual book, containing aduertisements and
documents of good life, such as is the Treatise made by S. Vincent of spiritual
life, and others like: and when Reading is ended, to make some spiritual
speech upon that which has been read.

Of Attention in the time of the divine service.
AN other thing that helps very much to the same devotion, is the divine
service, in which many times the soul is carried away in ecstasie, and
becomes as it were dronk with an extraordinary svveetenes, if she
endeavor to assist there, with such attention and devotion, as is requisite.
And for this purpose, one of the masters cares must be, to explicate and
declare, in what manner the nouice ought to prepare him self by time, to com
to the quiar; and in what sort he must assist there, not as one heavy, cold,
and ready to fall down, but as one that is quick, waking, attent, devout,
and as one that stands amongst the Angels, doing the office and duty that
they do. Because of these tvvoe things depends principally the fruit,
which is gotten by this vvoork; to wit of the manner of preparing our selves
before the divine service, and of the Attention that is to be used in the same.
And here it is requisite to declare the Obligation, which the nouice has, to
say the divine service with Attention, and how there be three sorts of
Attention, one, which is good, to the words; an other, which is better, to
the sense and meaning of the words; and the third, which is best of all, to
God him self, settling our heart in him, and reposing in him. And here the
master may also teach his nouice, to have Attention to diverse mysteries of
the Passion of JESUS Christ, reparting them for the seven Canonical hours,
which is a very good remedy for such, as understand not what they sing or
say.

Of hearing and serving mass.
AN other exercise also is to serve, and assist at mass, considering there the
mystery, which in the same is represented unto us, which is the Sacrifice of
the blessed Passion of our Savior JESUS Christ: in so much that a man serving,
or assisting at mass, does the Office of Angels, who minister and assist
before the divine majesty of almighty God. So likewise as often as he shall
be present, or go before the most blessed Sacrament, let him endeavor to stand
there with such fear and reverence, as is due to so great a majesty: which
is a thing vvorthie to be much accounted of, and to be amended also, because of
the great negligence and carelesnes, that men do use in this affair of so
great importance.

Of daily exercise.
THE morning when he rises out of his bead, let him do these three things
that follow. The first is to give most hearty thanks to our lord, for that he
has given him that night rest and repose, and for all other benifits. The
second is to offer him self, and all the things which that day he shall do or
suffer, to the glory of his holy name. The third is to demand his grace to
emploie, and spend all that day in his service, and particularly to resist
those vices, to which he finds him self most inclined.

Of fridaies exercise.
EVERY fridaie in remembrance of the passion of our Savior JESUS Christ, he
ought to do some particular thing as to fast or to give Alms, or to take some
discipline that may grieve him, or to wear some austere thing upon his
body, for the love of his Savior, that endured so much for him. It is also
reason that he should do the like, the euenings before he go to Communion,
thereby to prepare him self the better to this mystery; and when he takes a
discipline, he must divide the same into three parts, allotting the one for
himself; the other for the sovvles that be in purgatory; and the third for
those that live in mortal sin, that God grant them grace to amend them
selves.

These be the spiritual exercises, which the good master must teach his
disciple, because these be the chief means and instruments, by which the
holy Ghost is wont to make men become spiritual, and to vnflesh them of al
flesh, and to make them fit for all virtue. And it is also a very good mean
for this, to let the nouice be unoccupied, the first days of his conversion,
from al external affairs, as much as may be possible, and to teach him, being
so retired in silence and solitarines, the manner that he must observe in those
exercises, especially in Prayer and Meditation. And every day at a certain
hour, let the master take a reckoning of his nouice, how he has behaved
and found him self in each of these exercises; how in his meditations, and
what he thought of in them; how in the quiar, and at mass time, and in the
examining of his conscience; how in reading spiritual books; how he
recollected him self before, and after the receiving of the blessed Communion,
and what he did rehearce, or meditate at those times; how he did bear him
self touching such thoughts, as came there to his mind; and finally what
patience, and longanimitie he has in expecting the visitation of our Lord, and
the dew of devotion when it is differred, yea when it is wholy denied him.
And so when he gives account of him self in this manner, the master shall com
to know, and understand by little and little, what he has in him, and
consequently how to deal with him, as his office requires.

A BRIEF SVMME OF ALL THAT which hitherto has been said.
BUT now to abbreuiate, and lay down in sevve words all that which
hitherto we have treated of, it remains that there be three things
necessary, for the good order and redressing of our life. One is to mortify,
and cast out of our soul, al our wicked inclinations and vices. An other is
to adoine and beutifie the same with virtues. The third is to procure, by all
the aforesaied means and exercises, the grace of devotion, that through it we
may perform the one and the other. Amongst which things, the two first be
as the ends, the third is as a most principal mean to ob^eine these ends. And
if we do this that has been said, we shall not climme up to heaven without
a ladder, as those do, which pretend to get up to the top of Perfection,
without de^otion.

Of diverse Temptations of those that be new in Religion.
ALBEIT this little book is nothing ^ls but a brief memorial of that, which
a good master must teach his disciple (and therefore it does but only point
those things, which he must treat of) never theles, it has seemed to me
expedient (besides that which has been said) to touch here in the end of
this Rule, with like breefenes, the most ordinary temptations, that are wont
to assault such persons, as begin to serve God in Religion: that by this means
they may at lest know them to be temptations, because this is a very good
way to ouercom and vanquish them.

Wherefore, who soever he be, that does put on his harneis, and arm him self
toe fight in this kind of battle, let him first of all presuppose, that he
must abide great incounters, and many temptations of the enemy. Ecclesiast.
2.1.
For not in vain the vvise-man forevvarened us saying. O mie son, when thou
come to the service of God, stand in justice and fear, and prepare thy
soul to temptation.

Of Temptation in matters of faith.
AMONgst these Temptations the first is in Matters of faith: for where as a
man, until the time of his conversion, remained as it were in a sleep,
touching the consideration of such matters as apperteine to Catholic faith,
now, when he nevvlie begins to open his eyes, and to see the mysteries
thereof, he begins forth-vvith, like a stranger in a foraine country, to
waver in those things, that are laid before him. And this is by reason of the
little light, and small understanding, which he has of them; until that
afterward perceiving by use, to what purpose each thing does se^ue, he
quieteth his mind, and is persuaded that such things be very convenient, as
seemed to him before very strange.

Of Temptation of Blasphemy.
AN other temptation there is, which is of Blasphemy: and this represents
unto a man the shape of certain filthy, and abominable things, when he is
set to meditate upon heavenly things; for as he brings his imagination from
the world, being yet full of the shapes and figures of the same, he can not
suddenly cast out of his mind the figures of such things, as have been by long
continuance imprinted therein: and therefore together with spiritual shapes and
forms, ar also represented unto him certain carnal figures, which do
torment him very much, that is troubled with them. Albeit how much more
trouble they give him, so much they be less dangerous, because he is farther
of from giving any consent to them: and so the best way that may be to
ouercom these temptations, is to make no account of them, for so much as they
be in deed rather a kind of frighting, and fearing of our enemy, then any
true danger.

Of temptation of Scruples.
AN other temptation is of Scruples, which do proceed of the ignorance that
young beginners have of spiritual matters; and therefore they go as a man that
walks in the night, who doubts at every step to fall. This comes to
pass especially, for that they understand not the difference between a
thought, and a consent, and therefore they imagine that they give their consent
in every light motion. But this temptation, with time and understanding of
spiritual matters, is cured by little and little, especially in those that be
humble, and subject them selves to the judgment and direction of others.

Of temptation of Scandales.
AN other temptation is to be quickly scandalized, and offended at every
little trifle, and this by reason of the small experience, which they have of
things. For as they conceived in their minds, that Religion is a most exact
and perfect school of perfection, and a life of Angels, and as yet know not
the greatness of man's frailty, in atteining thereunto; they be easily
scandalized, and vvonder at every thing that they see. These have not yet
atteined unto the understanding of that place of S. Gregory where he says,
Gregor. hom. 34. in c^angel.
that True holiness has compassion, but feined or imperfect holiness is
disdainefull.

To this temptation may be reduced an other, which is, when a Religious
person takes scandale at the laws, and rules of his Religion, making him
self a Judge, and interpreter in the exposition of such things as his Rule
commands, and giving rash censure, vvhither his rule be good or evil. Which
generally is a temptation of provvde and presumptuous vvittes, and of such, as
have more affiance in them selves, then in the experience of their
forefathers, which ordained these Rules. The remedy is, that a man submit him
self to other men's advise and government, and wholy renounce his own
opinion.

Of temptation of overmuch desire of spiritual Consolations.
AN other temptation is to desire overmuch spiritual Consolations, and to be
over heavy, and discomfited, when he wants them, and to esteem him self
better then others, when he has them, measuring perfection by consolation;
whereas in deed this is not the true measure, but the profit in mortification
and virtue, is the touchstone of perfection. Some others there be likewise,
which, when they want spiritual consolations, do seek for sensual
consolations, the which is no less inconvenience then the former.

Of temptation of uttering Gods savors.
AN other temptation is, not to keep secreate such visitations and favors, as
they receive of almighty God, but to publish and disclose that to others,
which they ought to keep secret; and to make them selves preachers, and
doctors before the time, and begin to be masters, before they be good
scholars. And all this they do under a pretense of goodness, and with the
shadovve of virtue, not considering that the fruitful tree must yield his
fruit in time, and that the proper office of a beginner, is to lay his finger
on his mouth, and to keep silence:

Of temptation to flitte from place to place.
AN other temptation, and that very common, is, to be disquieted with the
desires of changing from place to place, seeming to them, that they may be in
some other place much more quiet and devout, or else with greater profit and
more close recollection of their mind. Nether do they consider, that by
changing the place, the air is changed, but not the heart, and that to what
place soever a man goes, he carries him self alvvaies with him; that is to
say a mind rent and torn with sin (which is a continual storehouse of
misery and trovvbles) and that this is not remedied with changing of places,
but with the fiar of mortification, and with the ointment of devotion. Which
devotion (as has been said before) does alter the mind of a man in such sort,
that for the time that it dureth, the stinking filth, which issues from the
sink of our flesh, is not perceived. Wherefore the best remedy, that a man
can take to fly from him self, is to approach near unto almighty God, and to
comunicate with him: for by dwelling in him by actual love, he remains
forthwith separated, and absent from himself.

Of temptation of vndiscretion, and of too much discretion.
AN other temptation is, when men ar in this new taste and fervor of spirit,
to give them selves to indiscreet watchings, prayers, and abstinences,
whereby they com to destroy their sight, their heads, and stomakes, and to
remain in a manner al their life afterward, unable for spiritual exercises,
as I my self have seen in many Religious persons; and others fall thereby
into grievous diseases, and so what with the cherisshing in time of their
sickness, what with want of spiritual exercises, which they omit, enforced
by their disease, their temptations begin to increase in such sort, as that
they may easily cast down virtue, being so abandoned of the aid and
strength of devotion.

Others again being accustomed to delicate cherisshing in their infirmity,
do continue in such evil customs, as they used in the same; and others (as S.
Bonauenture says) do fall by this occasion to love them selves above al
measure, and to live not only more delicatelie then before, but also more
dissolutelie, making their sickness a pretended color, to give license to al
their appetites, and delicate cherisshings.

Some others contrarievvise do offend through overmuch discretion and slacknes,
refusing to do every honest vvoork for fear of peril, saying that it is
sufficient for their salvation, to keep them selves from deadly sins,
albeit other austerities, and small things be not observed. Of these men S.
Bernard. de vita solit. ad frat. de monte Dei.
Bernard says thus. The man who is nevvlie entered into Religion, and being
as yet sensual, is become discreet, and being but a nouice, is become wise, and
being but a beginner, is already prudent, can not possibly persevere any long
time in Religion.

Of temptation of forsaking a man's first vocation.
BUT the most common temptation of young nouices is, to forsake the way, that
they have begone, and to turn back again to the world; to which purpose
the diule uses a thousand devises. For some times with temptations of
pusillanimitie and weakness, he puts into their head, that they shalneuer
be able to endure, and go through with this kind of austere life. Other times
with strong temptations of the flesh, he represents unto them the state of
marriage, as a sure haven, and quiet life, which is nevertheless (to say the
truth) a goolf of continual troubles and torments; alleging for this purpose
the examples of many Patriarchs, who being married were Saints; and
bearing them in hand, that they shall find for that state of life a meet
companion, that shall be of the same intention and mind that they be of, and
that they shall bring up their children in the fear of God. And here he also
represents unto them what alms they may bestow in this state, which
they can not do remaining in Religion, telling them moreover, that this giving
of alms is a great mean, to be assured of the kingdom of heaven, at the day
of judgment.

Other times contrary to this, he goes about to deceive them with higher
imaginations, setting before them other ordres of Religion which be more
strait, and especially that of the Carthusians; the which thing he does, to
once allure and dravv them out of their Religion with this halter, that so
having gotten them out of the bars, in the midst of the tilt he may set
upon them, and carry them away upon his horns.

Some other times he brings them to be in love exceedingly with solitary
life, using thereunto the examples and lives of the holy fathers in the
desert, that by this means having separated them from all company, and led
them through this solitary walk, when they be alone without the shadovve
and counsel of their spiritual fathers, he may the more easily prevail
against them.

Of temptation which is covered with the cloak of virtue.
BUT amongst al these kinds of temptations, the most dangerous ar those, that
com under pretense of goodness, and do bear a show of virtue. For such things
as be openly naught, carry with them their own filthiness and
superscription, by which they be both easily known, and abhorred: but
things, that have some ovvtvvard appearance and show of goodness, ar more
perilous, because with this color and cloak of virtue, they may the more
easily beguile us. And by this way our adversary prevails more, then by
any other, in tempting the servants of God. For vvheras he knovveth right
well, that they be alredie determined to abhor the evil, and to embrace the
good, he procures to give them to drink the poison of sin, mingled with
this deceitful honey of the show of virtue. Wherefore we ought to suspect
every excessive and vehement affection, for so much as the excess in every
thing, is alvvaies to be feared.

These be the most common temptations of such as begin to serve God, for which
the good master must have his medecines, aforehand, well studied and provided
for; and a great part of these medecines consists in this, to know that
the things before mentioned, be in deed temptations: because the chiefest
deceit of the enemy is, to make these young beginners beliue, that
temptations be not temptations but reasons, and those also well grounded, in
their opinion and conceit.

HOW A MAN OUGHT TO BEHAVE him self toward God, toward him self, and
toward his neighbors.
ALBEIT I have sufficiently spoken of virtues in general, yet that every man
that begins to serve God, may more easi^ie put them in practice, I shall
apply all that has been said unto three principal bounden deuties, which be
our devvtie toward God, toward our selves, and toward our neighbors,
which deuties were signified by the Prophet Micheas when he said, Mich. 6.8.
I vvil teach thee, o man, wherein goodness consists: and what our lord
requires of thee, to wit, to do judgment, toward thy self; to love mercy,
toward thy neighbor; and to walk carefully with thy God, which
apperteineth unto the service, honor, and reverence of God.

Of our devvtie toward God.
TO begin with the chiefest of these deuties, it is to be noted, that
amongst virtues some do of their own nature incomparably exceed al others;
such be those virtues, that have their eye to God, and be therefore called
Theological, as Faith, Hope, and Charity, unto which we may adioine the
fear of God, and vvithal Religion, which consists in the honor and service
of God. These be the most principal virtues, and the stirrers up of al others;
and therefore he that desires to atteine to the perfection of Christian life,
must labor to increase and profit especially in the forsaid virtues: for the
more he shall profit in them, the greater shall his perfection be. And for this
cause it is to be thought, that many of those ancient Patriarchs were so
notable in virtue, and so holy men, because they had these most excellent
virtues; as it appeared in the Faith and Obedience of Abraham, and in the love
and confidence which David had in almighty God, in that he had such recourse
to him in all necessities, and did put such trust in him, as a child does in his
father, yea and much more saying. Psalm. 26.10.
My father and my mother have for saken me; but our Lord is careful for me.

Now to obtain these so noble virtues, there is no mean more convenient,
then to persuade our selves with all the hope that is possible, that
almighty God is our true father: for so much as neither in the heart, nor in the
providence, neither yet in the love of a father, there is any comparable unto
him; since none has created us, but he; none desires more our profit, then he.
Let us therefore settle this most steadfastly in our hearts, and endeavor
alvvaies to behold God with such eyes and heart, as a child does his father:
that is with a heart loving, tender, humble, reverent, obedient to his vvil,
full of confidence in all adversities, and covvched under the wings of his
fatherly providence. And because this heart and affection cannot be obtained
with our forces only, therefore a man ought continually to desire the same
of God.

And to speak somvvhat more particularly of this, Note this
the holy father S. Vincentius says that a man ought to have seven sorts of
affections, and virtues toward God in his heart: to wit a most fervent love;
a very great sear; an humble reverence; a most constant zeal; a grateful
giving of thanks; a svveete mouth full of praises; a ready Obedience; and a
pleasant taste of divine svvetenes.

Of our devvtie toward our selves.
A MAN ought also to have toward him self (says the same holy father) seven
other affections and virtues; superfluous, or to little; nor that he exceed, or
want what is necessary.

Of our devvtie toward our neighbors.
IN like manner (as the same Saint teaches us) a man ought to have seven
other special virtues and affections toward his neighbor. (so much as in him
lies, and God shall give him grace) he may say one self same thing, and
agree with al men in opinion, and be persuaded that al men ar even him self.
Seuenthlie he ought to have a mind to offer him self for all men, that is,

THE FYFT TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE.
THE PREFACE.
AMONGST diverse evils that reign in the world, one most to be lamented, is
the manner that many Christians do use in making the Confession of their
sins. For some fevv excepted, the most part do com to this Sacrament without
any repentance, and without any examination of their consciences. Hence it
ensues, that soon after their Confession, they return to their wicked life,
and to the same filth in which they vvallovved before. This is a great
contempt of God, of his ministers, and of his Sacraments; and it seems that
these men com to confession only to dally and mock with almighty God, for
in confession they desire him pardon of their sins, they protest an
amendment of life, and yet out of hand begin a fresh to offend him more then
before.

The punishment that such persons deserve, is such as God for the most part
permits: that is to leave them in this evil state, all the days of their
life, even til the hour of death, when their end vvil be such as was their
life, that is without any fruit. If therefore any one have desire to convert
him self earnestly unto almighty God, and to do true penance, I shall here
declare what he ought to observe concerning this matter. And because the
Sacrament of Penance contains three principal parts, which be Contrition,
Confession and Satisfaction, I vvil breefelie declare what is to be done in
each of these parts.

OF CONTRITION, AND OF THE two parts which it contains. CHAP. I.
WHO soever he be that minds to return to almighty God, and to leave his
evil life, he must understand, that the first gate, by which he must pass, is
Contrition: which is one of the most precious sacrifices, that we are able to
offer unto almighty God, according as the Prophet David says. A sorovvful
mind is a sacrifice to God, Psalm. 50.19.
a contrite and humble heart, thou o Lord vvilt not despise.

This Contrition has tvvoe parts. The one is a repentance for the sins past;
and the other is a steadfast purpose of amendment in time to com. The reason of
this is, because Contrition is a detestation of sin, above al things that
may be hated, in regard that it offends the majesty of almighty God. And
because God is offended as well with those sins that are to com, as with
those that are past; therefore Contrition does include the detestation of the one
and the other; which is as much to say, as that a man must be sorry for his
sins past, and must determine to eschevve such as may com here after. And
heerehence it is, that the first thing in a true penitent, must be to have
sorrow for his sins, not principally for that by them he has deserved hell,
and lost heaven (although to be sorry for this cause be good also) but for that
he has lost God, and most grieuouslie offended his divine majesty. And as God
deserves to be loved above al things, so should we be more grieved for
offending him, then for all other things whatsoever; albeit the mercy of our
lord is such, that though the sorrow be not fully answerable to the sin
committed, yet the virtue of the Sacrament joined therevvith (if there be no
impediment in him that receaueth the same) shall suffice to restore him again
to salvation.

Now here it is to be noted for the scrupulous and vveake persons, that this
sorrow which is required is not so of necessity, that it be alvvaies as other
sensible griefs ar, but that our vvil do detest and abhor sin, above al
things that may be detested, which may be without weeping or ovvtvvard
sorrow.

The second thing requisite to Contrition, which is a most steadfast purpose
never to offend almighty God, must likewise not principally be intended for
heaven, hell, or any other particular interest of our own, but for the love
of God: albeit to fear hell, or to desire heaven, are not to be reproved, but ar
very laudable and profitable, yea and a gift of God also. And as a man must
have a resolute purpose to eschew sins that are to com, so must he leave and
forsake his present sins, otherwise his confession should be no confession,
but a sacrilege. And therefore he that bears any hatred against his
neighbor, must put it out of his mind, yea and speak to him also, if any
scandale should be feared of the contrary. He that vvithholdeth any man's
goods, against the will of the owner, must restore them unto him forvvith, in
case he be able to do it presently, although by this restitution he should
cast him self far behind hand, especially when the dew owner stands in
such, or like necessity of it him self. In like manner ought we to make
Restitution of fame, and of honor, if we have published abroad any
grievous, and secret crime of our neighbor, or done him any injury by
word or deed. And this is that which apperteineth to the tvvoe principal
parts of Contrition.

OF THE MEANS BY WHICH Contrition is obtained. CHAP. II.
HE now that desires to obtain this most precious ievvel of Contrition, must
know that the first mean for the getting of it, is to demand the same of
almighty God, with al humility and instancie that is possible; because the
same is a special grace and gift of almighty God and a work exceeding all the
power and force of man's nature. The reason of this is, for that God created
the nature of man upright, and lifted up unto him self by love, but sin has
crooked it, and inclined it down to her self, that is to the love of visible
things: and therefore as a man borne with a crooked back from his mothers
womb, can not find any natural remedy to restore him to his streightnes; so
we being borne with this kind of spiritual crookednes through original
sin, there is no thing that can streighten us, but only the same lord that
made us. And because this streightnes consists in the love of God above al
things, which no man can have but by God him self; so no man can have sorrow
for sin above al things for the love of him, but by the special love of God
him self, for so much as the one follows of the other. If this then be a
work of God, and so great a work, it follows that we ought to demand
the same of him with al humility and instancie possible.

The second mean to obtain Contrition, is for a man to keep a parliament
within him self, and to consider such things, as may provoke and incline him
to get sorrow for his sins. For the more he shall consider the causes that
may move him thereunto, the more clearelie shall he perceive, how much it
imports him to bewail his miserable state. For he that knovveth how to
consider his sins, as they ought to be considered, knovveth also how to
bewail them, as they ought to be bevvailed. Let a sinner therefore open his
eyes, and fix them first upon the multitude of his sins, and afterward
upon almighty God against whom he has sinned; for each of these
considerations vvil teach him, how good cause he has to bewail his sins.

Now to stir up thy soul to this sorrow, a Law to wit his
Commandments, wherein he should live; and Grace whereby he might observe
his law; and Sacraments by which grace be ministered unto him; and Teachers
that might instruct him therein; and Inspirations that might provoke him
thereunto; and finally him self, to be the price and remedy of al his sins.
Likewise for this end he gave him the gifts of nature, which be Life, Health,
Strength, The powers of the soul, The senses, and members of the body, to
the end that he should apply all these in his service, who had bestovved
them upon him. And for this same end he gave him also the goods, called the
goods of fortune that with them he might sustain his own life, and relieve
the necessity of others, and so merit the kingdom of heaven. These and many
others be the benifits and helps, which God has given us to emploie them in
his service. Let a man therefore consider how he has used these benifits, and
he shall find, that he has made weapons of them to sight against God; and
with what things he was bound to do him greater service, with the same he
has committed greater sins. He then that shall consider this, has he not
good cause to bewail and lament his offenses?

The second mean is to consider what is lost by sin, 236. it shall be
necessary only to advertise every man, that he consider with him self,
whether he has not good cause to be heartily sorry, that has lost so many
benifits as at there mentioned.

The third mean is to consider the greatness of the majesty, greatness of the
majesty of almighty God, the more shall he penetrate the malice of his sin.
Consider then the nobility, the riches, the dignity, the vvisdome, the
beutie, the glory, the goodness, the majesty, the benignity and power of
this Lord, and how al creatures ar bound unto him; and so calling to mind how
thou have offended him, thou shall not only understand the heynousnes of thy
sins, committed against him, but also have good cause to be sorry and to
lament.

The fourth mean is to consider the injury done to almighty God by sin.
unto them, whether they would have Christ or Barrabbas, ansvvered, that they
would rather have Barrabbas then Christ. Which things if a man consider well,
he vvil undoubtedly be ashamed of him self, and moved to sorrow.

The fifth mean is to consider the great hatred, 237. procure by the
consideration thereof, to abhor sin so much as is possible for thee to do,
and pray God to increase in the this hatred of sin, and sorrow for the same,
for therein consists a great part of true penance.

The sixth mean is to call to remembrance the pains of hell, at each man's
death, which things vvil move us to conceive hearty sorrow and fear for our
sins, since that each one of them does threaten such great terrible calamities
to him, that shall be found guilty of any one deadly sin. And therefore
bette it is now for every one, to enter presently into judgment with him
self for his sins, that he be not then judged for them of almighty God;
especially considering that the holy scripture assures us, Cor. 11.31.
that in case we shall judge our selves, we shall not be judged.

The last mean is to consider the multitude of the benifits of almighty God,
pains, sustained so many dishonours, so many in famies, so many, yea and so
great torments? For it is most certain that al these he suffered for thy
sins, as well to satisfy for them, as to make thee understand the hatred he
bears against them, since he took such pains to destroy them. Consider
therefore, whether thou have not good cause to be sorry, and to resolve thy
self wholy into tears.

OF CONFESSION, AND WHAT we ought to observe in the same. CHAP. III.
HAVING treated of the first part of Penance, which is Contrition for our
sins, let us now speak of the second, which is Confession, wherein a man
ought to observe these things that follow.

The first is that he take some time before to examine his conscience,
Confession; in which examination he ought to attend with great diligence and
care, as in a matter of most great importance. This examination is so
necessary, that when it wants (in case the Ghostly father supply not
this want) the Confession is of no effect; even as that Confession should be,
wherein the sinner does willingly leave out of his Confession some deadly
sin unconfessed, and so is bound toe make his Confession again. Therefore to
avoid this inconuemence a man ought to prepare him self, and to examine his
conscience di^igentlie, by pervsing the ten Commandments, and the deadly
sins, which he ought to consider every one, how often he has sinned in
each of them by thought, word, or deed, with all the circumstances that
happened in the sin; when the circumstances be such, as of necessity ought
to be confessed.

The second advise is to declare in Confession the number of the deadly
sins. opportunity was offered, or did some times upon remorse of
conscience refrain him self.

The third is to confess and specify the Circumstances,

The fourth is to confess the kind of the deadly sin, Likewise it is not
necessary to specify in what manner the sin was committed, especially
being a sin of the flesh, but to declare the kind only. And albeit this
matter be very loathsome and filthy, yet it is to be noted, that a dishonest
sin may be committed by thought, by words, or by touching, or by doing the
very deed. If the act be done in deed, it is sufficient to tell the name of
the act, as Adultery, Incest, simple fornication, etc. If it were by
touching, it is sufficient to say, I have touched such a kind of person, unless
there followed some thing that might change the kind of the sin. If it were
by words, it shall suffice to say, I have spoken filthy words, and such as
provoked to sin, or to delight mie self therein; and not to name the words.

The fifth is, Note this well
It is then to be understood, that in an evil thought a man may behave him
self after one of these four ways that folo^. The first is, sin, but a
merit and revvard, and so it requires no Confession. The second is, when he
staieth himself in the evil thought for a short time; and then it is a venial
sin, which is more or less grievous, according as the staying in it was
more or less. The manner to confess it is to say. I accuse mie self to have
had a dishonest thought, or of anger, etc. and have stayed in it longer then I
should have done. The third is, when he gives consent to the evil thought,
and determines to put it in practice, though afterward he do it not in
deed, and it is manifest that this is a deadly sin, and of the same kind,
as if it had been executed in act. The last is, when one continues
willingly, or suffers him self to continue in thinking, and taking delight
in an evil thought, albeit he intend not to put it in execution; and this is
also a deadly sin, called by the learned divines a lingering delight; which
is, as they arvvonte to sa^e. Though I drink not in the tavern, yet I take
delight therein.

Now that we have understood these four differences of thoughts, it shall be
easy to know how to confess them, if the penitent declare whether he
staide him self in the evil thought, or consented thereunto, or whether he had
any lingering delight therein, by continuing willingly in taking delight in the
same evil thought.

The sixte is,

The seventh is,

The last is, out a good physician for his soul, as he would if he were
sick for his body, for this is a matter of more importance: and to seek out
an ignorant ghostly father, is as much to say, as to seek for a certain
guide to bring one to hell: for so much as if the blind lead the blind (as
Christ says) both fall into the diche. Matthew. 15.14.


IN WHAT CASES THE CONFESsion is of no value, but ought to be made again.
CHAP. IV.
TO the end that every one may know of what importance the things before
declared be, I shall here briefly express, in what cases the Confession is
of no effect, but must be made again. he comes thereunto: for in this case
forgetfulness excuses not the penitent, but does rather accuse him the more.

But here it is to be noted, that in every one of these cases, wherein it is
necessary to iterate the confession, if it be done with the self same
ghostly father, it is not needeful to repeat al those sins a fresh, which
he confessed before, in case the ghostly father be mindful of them; but it
shall suffice to say, I accuse mie self of such sins, as at such a time I
confessed to you mie ghostly father, and besides I accuse mie self of such,
and such a deadly sin, for which I am now bound to iterate mie confession.

Now for help of memory it shall do well, that we lay down here a brief
memorial of deadly sins, to the end that the penitent may therebie more
easily examine his conscience, and prepare him self for this sacrament of
penance, which is the first of the aduises that we have before specified.
Howbeit this we vvil do, not by discovering infinite kinds of exquisite
sins, but by laying down the most common sins that are wont to happen, and
leaving the rest to the penitent, and the Ghostly father.

A MEMORIAL OF SINS AS WELL TOUCHING THE TEN COMMAVNDEMENTS, as other matters
wherein a man may sin mortallie.
Of the first commandment. Thou shall honor God above all things.
CONSIDERING that God is honored with the three Theological virtues, Faith,
Hope, and Charity, let the penitent examine him self in these.

As concerning Faith, if he has believed whatsoever the holy Catholic
Roman Church believes, or has doubted, or with words, and outvvarde signs
has made any show of infidelity or heresy. If he has been over curious in
searching the matters of faith. If he has kept books of Heretics, or such
as ar forbidden by the Church. If knovving any man to be infected with
heresy, and incorrigible by other means, he has not detected him to whom
he ought. If he has learned those necessary things, which every Christian
is bound to know, as ar the commandments of God, and the principal
mysteries of our faith. If he has believed in dreams, enchauntments,
deuinings, or any sorts of superstition, or counseled others to credit them.
If he has carried about him superstitious vvritings for having his health, or
for any other end, or induced others to do the like. If he has blasphemed
God or any of his Saints. If he has been angry with almighty God, or
murmured of him, for such adversities and troubles, as he has sent unto him,
as though he were unjust or unmerciful. If in his rage he has desired his
own death, or else vvisshed that God would take him out of this life.

As concerning Hope. If in his troubles he has had such confidence in God, as
he ought. If he has put more confidence in creatures, and in their helps,
then in God. If he has mistrusted to obtain pardon for his sins, or
amendment of life. If hoping to have pardon of his sins, he did persevere in
his evil life, or minded to differ his repentance until he waxed old, or until
the hour of his death.

As concerning Charity. If he has not loved God above al things as he is
bound to do. If he has persecuted, or iniuried with words such devout
persons, as do frequent Confession, Mass, etc. Or if he has mocked and
scoffed at them; and in particular, if he has dissuaded or hindered any from
going into Religion. If he has exposed him self to any danger of mortal
sin, or taken delight of any sin done before.

Of the second commandment. Thou shall not take the name of thie Lord God in
vain.
IF he has sworn falsely, knovving it was false, or doubting it to be so,
or being careless what he swore. If swearing he did promise any lavvful
thing, and not fulfill it, nor has intention to perform it. If he has been
cause that any did swear false, or not keep their lauful oath once made. If
he has sworn in manner of cursing, to wit; if I do not such a thing, let
such evil happen unto me. If he has sworn to do any sin, or evil, or not
to do that which is good. If he has made any vow with a mind of not
fulfilling it. If he have differred the fulfilling of his laufull vow any
long time. If he has vowed to do any wicked act, or not to do any good
deed, or to do a good thing for an evil end, for such vows bind not.

Of the third commandment. Thou shall keep holy the Sabboth-daie.
IF he has not kept the holiedaies, but either has done, or commanded to be
done any servile work upon the same days, unless it were some little thing.
If he has omitted to hear mass throughout every Sondaie and holidaie,
without lauful cause. If being present at mass upon any holidaie, he has been for any notable time voluntarily distracted, by talking, laughing, or
busying him self in impertinent things. If he has not procured that such as be
under his charge, should hear mass upon the holidaies. If he has not gone
to Confession at the lest once a year, or has gone without due examination
of his conscience. If every year at Easter he has received with due
disposition, or rather with a conscience or doubt of mortal sin. If he has
fasted the lent, vigils and Ember days being bound thereunto, or has eaten
forbidden meats. If he has spent all the Holidaies in pastimes, gamemings and
vanities. If being excommunicated he has been present at Catholic divine
service, or received any Sacrament during that time, or has conuersed with
excommunicate persons, or such as were suspected of heresy. If being bound to
say his office, he has omitted or all, or any part thereof, or in the saying
of it has been voluntarily distracted.

Of the fourth commandment. Thou shall honor thy father and thy mother.
IF he has despised or not honored his father and mother, or has offended
them in deeds or words, or not obeyed them in matters that were just, and
such as might result to notable detriment of their family, or of their own
soul. If he has not succored his parents in their necessity when it was
in his power. If he has been ashamed of them, by reason of the baseness of
their family, or poor estate. If he has desired the^re death, to enioie
their lands or goods. If he has performed their testaments and last wills.
If he has so loved them, that for their love, he cared not to offend God. If
he has not observed the just laws, and decrees of his Superiors. If he has
detracted, or spoken evil of Superiors, Ecclesiastical, or Secular, of
Religious persons, or Priests, or Teachers, etc. If he has not succored the
poor, if he could, especially in extreme or grievous necessity, or if he
has been cruel unto them in words or deeds. If those which be fathers and
mothers have cursed: or wished evil unto their children. Also if they have
brought them up as they should, teaching them their prayers. and Christian
doctrine, and reprehending and correcting them, especially in matter of sin,
and occupying them in some honest exercise, to the end they be not idle, and
take some evil course. And that which is said of Children, is to be understood
also of servants, and others of the family, of whom care is to be had, that
they know things which be necessary, and observe the commandments of God,
and of the Church.

Of the fifth Commandment. Thou shall not kill.
IF he have spirituallie slain his neighbor, by pesvvading him to Scisme or
Heresy, or by provoking him, or giving him counsel, or occasion to sin
deadly. If he has carried hatred toward any person, desiring to be
revenged, and how long he has stayed therein. If he has killed, or procured,
or desired the death of his neighbor, or any other great evil or damage, as
well in his body, as in his good name, honor, temporal and spiritual goods,
or given counsel, aid, and favor thereunto. If having offended others by
word, or deed, he has refused to ask pardon or reconciliation, either by
him self, or some other; or has not sufficiently satisfied for the offense; or
has not forgiven such, as have humbly desired pardon of him. If he has been
occasion of factions, or favored them, or threatened any with evil speeches,
not being under his government. If he has refused to speak to any, or to
salute them, and has thereby given scandal, or offense to his neighbor. If
in adversities and misfortunes he has desired death, or with fury strooken
and cursed him self, or mentioned the diule. If he has cursed others either
alive, or dead, and with what intention. If he has sowed discord, or caused
enimitie between others, and what harm has com thereof. If for hatred or
envy, he has been immoderatlie sorry for the good, and prosperity of others,
as well Temporal as Spiritual, or has reioiced at any harm, or notable
damage of his neigbour, manifesting any secret fault of his to discredit him,
or cause him other harm. If he have strooken injuriously any ecclesiastical
person, wherein also there is Excommunication.

Of the sixth and ninth commandment. Thou shall not commit fornication. Thou
shall not desire they neighbors wife.
IF he has had any dishonest and unclean thoughts, and voluntarily has
stayed and taken delight in them, or not resisted them sospeedilie as he ought.
If with deliberate mind he has desired to sin with any man or woman,
which sin is of the same kind, of which the vvoork it self vvoold be. If
with libidinous intent he has beheld women, or other persons. If he has
spoken lascivious and dishonest words, with intention to sin, and to
provoke others; or has willingly and with delight heard such speeches. If he
has actuallie sinned with any woman, and of what quality she was; or
with any person against nature. If he has vncleanlie touched him self or
others, or permitted the same; and whether at that time he thought of any
person with unlawful desire: for in this case there be tvvoe mortal sins. If
with desire of sin, he has sent letters, messagers, orpresents, or has
kissed others; or has been a mean to induce others unto sin, or given
counsel or aid thereunto. If he has gone to any place with evil intention,
or passed by the same, or decked him self to some evil end; where he must tell
of dangers of sin, to which he has exposed him self, and of the occasions
which he has not avoided. If he has had pollution in sleep, or awake, or
has given any cause, or voluntarily taken delight therein: or read any
books that might provoke to fleshly sin. If he has borne carnal love to
any person, with desire of sin, and how long he has perseuered in the
same, and if by his occasion, such persons has been noted with any infamy.
Those that be married must examine them selves in particular, if in their mind
thinking of other persons, or with intention not to beget children, but only
for carnal delight, or with extraordinary touchings and means, they have
sinned against the end, and honesty of marriage.

Of the seventh and tenth commandment. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not
desire they neighbors goods.
IF he has taken any thing belonging to others by deceit or violence,
expressing the quantity of the theft, and if he has taken any sacred thing,
or out of any sacred place. If he has holden ought without the owners
consent, and has not restored it being able. If for not paying of his debts,
his creditours have sustained any damage. If he has not made restitution of
such things as he has found, or came to his hands, knovving them to belong to
others. If buying, or selling he has used any deceit in the vvare, in the
price, measure, or weight. If he has bought of those that could not sell, as
ar slaves, or children under age. If only in respect of selling upon credit,
he has sold above the just price, or bought for less then the just price, in
respect of payment made before hand. If he has had a determinate will to
take, or retain any thing of others, and this by right, or by vvrong. If he
has committed any vsurye, or made any vsurarious contract, or entered into
any unjust traffic of merchandise or partnershippe. If he has retained the
wages due unto others. If hehath played at prohibited games, or in playing
used any deceit, or played with persons which can not alienate, as ar
children under age and the like. If he has defrauded any just impost or
tolles. If he has committed symonie in any sort. If he has not truly paid
his tithes unto the Church. If by unlawful means he have gotten any thing
that was not due unto him; or has unjustly hindered others, from the
obteining any benifit or commodity. If he has given any help or counsel, or
by any other means abetted to such as have taken other men's goods, or (being
able and bound thereunto) has not discovered or hindered any theft.

Of the eight commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness.
IF he has borne any false witness in judgment, or out of judgment, or
induced others to do the like. If he have spoken any untruth, with notable
prejudice or hurt of his neighbor. If he has detracted from the good name of
others, imposing falsely upon them any sin, or exaggeratinge their
defects. If he have murmured against any other man's life and conversation,
especially in naughty matters, and of qualified persons, as Prelates,
Religious, and women of good name. If he has disclosed any grievous and
secret sin of others, vvhere-vppon has insued Infamy: which although it
were true, and not spoken with evil intention, yet is the speaker bound to
restore the good name. If he has uttered any secret which was committed
unto him, or which secretly he came to see or hear, in which case he is
bound to restore all domages, that afterward happen by such revelations. If
he has opened other men's letters vnlavvfullie, or with any evil intention.
If he has rash^^e judged the deeds or speeches of his neighbor, taking in
evil part that, which might have been well interpreted, and condemning him in
his heart of mortal sin. If he has promised any thing with intention to
bind him self; and afterward, without lavvful cause, has omitted to observe
the same; for it is a mortal sin, when the thing which is promised is
notable, or when, for want of performance of the promise, our neighbor has
had any loss, or damage temporal, or spiritual.

Of Pride.
IF that good which he has (be it of the Soul, of the Body, or of fortune)
he has not acknowledged as of God, but presumed to have it of him self, or by
his own industry, or if of God, vet by reason of his own merits. If he
has reputed vainelie to have any virtue, which he has not; or to be that,
which he is not; or gloried in any thing, which is mortal sin. If to be
esteemed for a person of value he has vaunted of any good, or evil, which he
has done, with the injury of God, or his neighbor, and whether truly or
falsely.

Of other mortal sins here is nothing said; because enough has been spoken
alredie in the Commandments. Only such as have any special Office, degree
or charge, must examine them selves of the defects and sins, which in like
Estates and Exercises may particularly happen, according unto the obligation,
which every one has.

A GENERAL ADVERTISMENT to discern, which is a deadly sin, and which a
venial. CHAP. V.
BECAUSE we ar bound of necessity to confess al deadly sins, but not
venial sins unless we vvil; and for so much as this thing, to wit, which is
a deadly, and which a venial sin, can not be well declared in fevv words,
it shall suffice to give some general aduertisment concerning this point, for
which there are wont to be given two Rules.

The first and most general Rule is, Charity, that is to the love of God, and
of our neighbor, is a deadly sin. And so by this Rule, whatsoever is
against the honor of God, or the profit of our neighbor, in any matter of
importance, be it thought, word, or deed, is a deadly sin; for this
quenches Charity, wherein consists the spiritual life of the soul. But
whatsoever is not against Charity, but besides the same, is a venial sin;
as idle words that hurt no man; or some kind of little vain glory, of anger,
of negligence, etc.

The second Rule is more special;

Likewise it is to be considered, that the Commandments be of three kinds.
Some ar negative as Thou shall not kill etc. Which do bind us for ever and
ever, that is in every time, and at all times. Others be affirmative, as to
give alms, to have contrition for our sins, etc, and these do bind us ever,
but not in every time, but in time of necessity, and then we ar bound of
duty to do them. There be other compounded of both, to wit of negatiues, and
affirmatiues, as to restore other men's goods. For this commands to restore,
and also not to vvithhold our neighbors goods. And these commandments do
bind us to observe them, in both manner of ways, to wit ever, and at all
times.

A BRIEF MANNER OF CONFESsion, for such as be wont to confess often. CHAP.
VI.
MANY devout persons be sore vexed and troubled with scruples, because in
examining their consciences, they find not, some times, whereof to make their
Confession. For as on the one side they know, and believe certeinlie that they are not without sins, and on the other side, at the time of confession, they
find them not, they are in great perplexity, and do fully persuade them
selves, that they are never rightly confessed.

Of this we may gather two things. The one is, that it is in deed a very
hard matter for a man to know him self, and to understand thoroughly all the
secret corners of his conscience, in so much that the Prophet said not in
vain, Psalm. 18.13.
who is he that knovveth his sins? deliver me, o Lord, from my secret
offenses. Another is, that the sins of just persons (of whom the wise man
says, Proverb. 24.17.
vhat they fall seven times in the day) ar rather sins of omitting then of
committing; which kind of sins ar hard to be known. For understanding
whereof, it is to be noted, that all sins ar committed by one of these two
ways, to wit, either by way of Committing (that is by doing some wicked
thing, as by robbing, killing etc. or by way of Omitting (that is by leaving
some good thing undone, as for not loving God, not fasting, not praying etc.)
Now of these two kind of sins, the first (because they consist in doing) ar
very sensible and easy to be known; but the second (which consist not in
doing, but in leaving undone) ar much harder to be known; because that
thing, which is not, has no mean to show it self. Wherefore it is not to be
maruailed at, that spiritual persons (especially if they be simple) do not
find, some times, any sins, vvherof to accuse them selves. For as these
persons fall not so often into those sins of Committing, of which we have
spoken, and the others, which be of Omitting, are not so easy to be
understood: hence it comes that they know not vvherof to confess them
selves, and therefore ar so much vexed.

Wherefore, for remedy of this, I have thought good to ordeine this Memorial,
for such persons, wherein is chiefly treated of this kind of sins, which
concern Omitting. And because these sins may be either against God, or
against our selves, or against our neighbors; therefore is this Memorial
divided into three parts, which do treat of these three kinds of
negligences. And for this end we must understand, that there is a difference
betwixt imperfections, and venial sins, vvherof it ensues, that some things
may be imperfections, which be not sins, as it chau^ceth when we leave to
do some good works, which we might have done, to which vvear not alvvaies
bound. For it may be, that one might bestovv more alms, then he does, and
pray more then he prays, and fast more then he fasteth, and so in other
things; and to leave these things is not sin, but it is a fault and
imperfection, because by doing them, a man might auance him self, and profit
much, which he does not in leaving them undone. Yet let no devout person
leave to accuse him self for this of such things, as well because some times
they may be venial sins, as also to acknovvledge his imperfections, and so
to humble him self before the Vicar of God, and to endeavor to get out of them.
Howbeit this is not convenient to be done at al times, but at certain times,
(and especially upon principal feasts) to the end they vvearie not their
ghostly fathers with their superfluous length: but at any other ordinary
times, every one may here take his choice of that, which he shall think
best for the discharge of his conscience.

Of that which goes before Confession.
AT the beginning of his Confession, let a man accuse him self of that which
follows. First, for that he comes not to this Sacrament with such sorrow
and repentance for his sins, and with so sted fast a purpose to forsake
them, as he ought; and that he has not so well examined his conscience, as
reason would he should have done. Let him accuse him self, that the day of
his last Communion, he was not so devout nor recollected, as was necessary
for so sovereign a ghest; and that now he comes not prepared as he ought to
communicate, nether with such fear and reverence, as to so excellent a
Sacrament is required. Also of the small amendment of his life, and that he does
not profit in the service of God more one day then an other.

Toward God.
LET him accuse him self for not loving God with all his heart, with all his
soul, and with al his forces as he was bound. For that he has not given him
thanks for the benifits received, and those which he does daily receive,
especially for having redeemed him, and given him knowledge of himself, as he
was bound. For not doing that which apperteined to his service, with that
purity of intention, nor with that fervor and devotion, which he ought, but
rather sluggishlie and coldlie. For not answering of his part to the good
inspirations of God, and to the holy resolutions which he does send him, and
to the preparations and opportunities, which he gave him to live well; by all
which he might have profited him self much more, if it had not stood by his
own great negligence. For not having assisted at mass, and at the divine
service, and in halovved places in the presence of the most blessed Sacrament,
with such Devotion, Attention, Fear and Reverence, as the presence of so
great a majesty demanded.

Toward him self.
A MAN consists of many parts; for he has a body with al his senses; and
a soul with al her appetites, and a spirit with al his powers, which ar
Understanding, Memory and VVil; and so he may offend against the order,
which he ought to keep in every one of them. Let him then first accuse him
self, for that he has not governed his body with such rigor, and severity
as he should have done, as well in eating, drinking, clothing, and sleeping,
as in all other things. For that he has not his imagination, and other exterior
senses so recollected, as he ought, but has suffered them to range, and wander
abroad, in hearing, seeing, talking and imagining many things which were
idle, and not to the purpose. For that he has not mortified his appetites, and
resisted his own vvil, as he ought to have done. For that he is not so
humble in his heart, and works, as he should be; nor esteemed him self for so
vile, and miserable as he is, nor handled him self as such a one has deserved.
For that he has not procured any little devotion, nor given him self so much
to prayer, nor has been in the same with such closenes of mind, and diligent
attention, as was requisite, but rather has been slow, to rise at dew time
to prayer.

Toward his neighbor.
LET him accuse him self, for that he has not loved his neighbors with such
love, as he would that others should love him, as God has commanded. For
that he has not succored them in their necessities, with the help and
relief that he might, or with the counsel that he ought. For that he has not
had such compassion upon their miseries, and prayed God for them, as he was
bound to do. Of the public Calamities of the Catholic Church, such as be
Heresies, Captiuities and the like; for that he has not had such inward
feeling of them, as reason required, nor so recommended them unto almighty
God, as they deserved to be commended. Such as have Superiors, let them accuse
them selfs, for not having obeyed them, nor borne them such reverence, nor
succored them as in deed they ought. And those that have subjects, children
and servants, for not having taught, and chastised them, and provided for them
such things as were necessary, and ben so careful of them as reason would
they should.

Of sins of Committing.
AFTER that the penitent has so accused him self of the sins of Omitting,
then let him accuse him self of those of Committing, running over the ten
commandments, and seven deadly sins, accusing him self of that in each
one, wherein his conscience shall find remorse. And if he vvil go more
briefly to work, he may examine his thoughts, words, and deeds, wherein
he shall think he has offended, and so accuse him self of the same. After all
this he must accuse him self, of all such sins as apperteine to the state
and office that he is of, declaring wherein he has sinned against the laws
and devvties of his state. As if he be a Religious person, of his three vows,
or any other thing belonging to his Rule. If he be a Judge, Physician, or
merchant, of such things as apperteine to his office. If a Prince, of that
which concerns his government. When he has ended all these accusations,
let him then conclude as follows, saying. Of al these sins, and of all
others wherein I have offended in thought, word, or deed I, grieuouslie
accuse mie self, and do acknovvledge mie fault before God, mie fault, yea mie
most grievous fault, and desire you mie ghostly father to give me penance and
absolution.

OF SATISFACTION THE THIRD part of Penance. CHAP. VII.
SATISFACTION is a full and intiere payment, of that which a man owes for his
sins committed. Now sin brings with it tvvoe evils. The one is the spot
or fault; the other is the pain and punishment due to the fault. In Confession
by the virtue of the blood of Christ, which works in this Sacrament, we ar
cleansed from the spot or filth of sin, and the fault is forgiven us, and so
we ar delivered from everlasting pain, due unto mortal sin. But because all
Temporal pain is not alvvaies released, when the fault is pardoned, therefore
Satisfaction is necessary, which must be made or here, or in the life to
com, in the pains of Purgatory, which (as S. Augustine affirms) ar so
great, that they exceed all the torments, which the holy martyrs suffered
in this life. Now al sorts of Satisfactions ar reduced unto these three
only: Fasting or other corporal austerities, Alms, and Prayer, which be
correspondent to the goods of the Soul, of the Body, and of Fortune; and by
Alms a man offers to God his external goods; by Fasting he makes a
Sacrifice of his proper flesh, and by Prayer he offers to God his mind, and
so consequently does sacrifice to God him self, and all that which he has.

And although this Satisfaction may be made in tvvoe manner of ways; as
first when a sinner voluntarily, and of his own devotion does any of these
works; or secondly when he does the same being enioined him by his ghostly
father in Confession; yet the Satisfaction which is made for Obedience of the
Confessor, in respect of the Sacrament, is much more fruiteful. Finally al
manner of scourges, and chastisements, which almighty God sends us, as
Sickness, Poverty, and the like, if they be borne with Humility and Patience,
ar of great force, not only to satisfy for the temporal pains, dew for our
sins, but also for increase of Grace and mercy.

THE SIXTH TREATISE, HOW WE OUGHT TO PREPARE OUR SELVES FOR THE RECEIVING OF
THE most blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
AS amongst all the other Sacraments, the blessed Sacrament of the Altar is the
greatest, so is there requisite greater purity and preparation, for receiving
of the same: because in the other Sacraments, the virtue of God works, but
in this Sacrament is the real, and true presence of God him self; and therefore,
besides the cleannes of the soul, which must go before, by means of the
Sacrament of Penance, it requires also especial devotion, to which devotion
three things do serve very notably.

The first of these things is, the fear and Reverence of that divine majesty,
which is in this Sacrament, for so much as we do truly beliue, that in that
little host is almighty God, the Creator of heaven and earth, the lord of the
world, the glory of the Angels, the repose of all those that be blessed, the
judge of the world, whom the Angels, Archangels, Cherubines, and Seraphines
do praise, before whose sight the powers of heaven do tremble, not for that
they have offended him, but for that considering the highness, and greatenes of
that sovereign majesty, they acknovvledge them selves to be but so many
worms before the same. True it is, that this fear causes not in them any
pain, but a most high Reverence; because they know, that as there is dew all
love to that infinite goodness and bounty, so to his greatenes there is due all
fear. This affection is also much increased in a man, by consideration of the
great number of his sins, and daily negligences. For if the Angels and
Principalities of heaven do fear him, without having done any thing
wherefore, since theye were created, how much more ought a vile and
vvretched worm to fear, which so oftentimes, and in so many manners
offends his creator?

This is then the first thing which a man ought to consider, when he comes
to this table, saying within him self with great Reverence. I go now to
receive almighty God, not only into mie soul, but also into mie body.

But now this fear must be tempered with Hope, which the same lord of ours
gives us, by considering that he with the bowels of pity, and compassion
upon our weakness and misery, inuiteth us to his table, and calls us with
those most svveete words, which are. Com ye to me, all that labor, Matthew.
11.28.
and ar burdened, to wit with the heaviness of your mortality, and of your
passions, because I vvil restore and refresh your souls. And in an other
place, when the Pharisees murmured of this lord, because he did eat and
drink with sinners, he ansvvered them, that They that are whole, Luc. 5.31.
need not the Physician, but they that are ill at ease; and that he came not to
call the just, but sinners to penance. So that with these words, the sinners,
that repent them selves of their sins, may take heart and confidence, to be
bold to approach near to this heavenly bankette.

But touching the hunger and desire which this heavenly bread requires, a
great motive may be to consider the effects thereof, and the great benifits,
which by the same ar communicated to those, that devoutly do receive it;
which be so great, that no man is able to recount them. Effects of Communion
For by the same the Grace of God is given us; by it we become united, and
incorporated to our head; which is Christ. By it we ar made partakers of the
merits, and trauails of his most sacred passion, and by it is renewed the
memory thereof. By it Charity is inflamed, our weakness is strengthened, and
spiritual svveetenes is tasted even in his own proper spring which is
Christ; and by it ar stirred up in our sovvles new purposes and desires
toward all goodness. By it is given us a most precious pavvne of everlasting
life. By it ar forgiven the sins, and negligences which we daily commit,
and by it also a man becomes of Attrite, Contrite, which is as much as to
rise from death to life. By it likewise is diminished the flame of our
passions and concupiscences, and (that which is more) by it Christ enters
into our sovvles to dwell in them, and dwelling there (as he him self
signified when he said, Ioa^. 6.57.
that as his father was in him, and therefore his life was like to the life of
his father) to make like him self in pureness of life, all those that vvorthilie
receive him into them selves, by means of this Sacrament, that now they may
say each one in particular, I live, now not I, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me.

If therefore this celestial bread, work all these effects in the sovvles of
those, that with a pure conscience do eat it, what man is there so
insensible, or so great an enemy of him self, that vvil not have hunger of
bread, that works so great effects in him, that does vvorthilie receive it.
A man ought therefore to occupy him self in the consideration of these things,
the day and the night before the blessed Communion, to stir up by means of
the same these three affects aforesaid, in which does consist actual devotion,
that is so greatly requisite for this meat. To which purpose the tvvoe
prayers following vvil help very much, if they be read with as much attention
and devotion as is possible; because in them the devout soul shall find
words, and considerations to stir up in it self those three affections and
feelings before mentioned.

A DEVOVT PRAYER TO BE SAID before the receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
I Give unto thee, o my Savior and Lord, most hearty thanks and praise, for
all the benifits which it has pleased thee, to bestow upon this so vile
and miserable creature. I give the thanks for all the mercies, which thou
have used toward mankind, for the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, and
chiefelie for thie most holy Nativity, for thy Circumcision, for thy
Presentation in the Temple, for thy Flight into Egypt, for the trauails of thy
voiages, for thy going up and down in preaching, for the persecutions of the
world, for the torments and sorrows of thie passion, and for all that which
thou did suffer in this world for me, and much more for the love, with
which thou did suffer, which without comparison was far greater.

Above all this I give the thanks, that thou have vouchsafed to set me at thy
table, and to make me partaker of thy self, and of the inestimable treasures
and merits of thy passion. O my God, O my Savior! vvherevvith shall I repaie
this thy new mercy? who was thou, o Lord, and who were we, that thou,
being the king of majesty, would com down to these our houses of claie?
Heaven is thy seat, and the earth thy footestoole, and the glory of thy
majesty does fill all this. How then vvilt thou repose thy self in so vile
cotages? may a man think (says Solomon) that God vvil dvvell in earth with
men? If the heaven, 3. Regu. 8.
and heavens of heavens be not sufficient to give the place, how much les
shall this so strait room suffice for thee? O how maruailous a thing is it,
that he which sits above the Cherubines, and from thence beholds the
depths, does now com down to these depths, and place in them the seat of his
majesty?

Seemed it little to thy infinite goodness, to have appointed unto us the Angels
for ovvre safeguard, if thou thy self, being the lord of Angels, had not com
unto us? and entered into our sovvles, and handled there, with thine own
hands, the affairs of our salvation? There thou do visit the sick; thou
do raise up those that are fallen; thou do instruct the ignorant; thou
do teach those that have erred, the right way; and finally thou thy self
art he, that do heal us of all our diseases, and this with no other hands,
then with thine own, nor with any other medicine, then with thine own
most precious body and blood. O good pastor! how faithfully have thou
fulfilled thy word, which thou did speak unto us by thy Prophet saying,
Ezech. 34
I will feed my sheep, and give them a svveete repose; I will seek that
which was lost, and will bring back again that which was cast out.

But who may be vvorthie of such rewards? Who may be vvorthie to receive
so great benifits? Thie only mercy, o Lord, makes us vvorthie of so great
goodness. And forasmuch as without it no man can be vvorthie, let thie mercy,
o mie good God, be favorable to me, and let the same make me partaker of this
mystery, and thankful for this so great a benifit. Let thie grace likewise
supply mie defects; let thie mercy pardon mie sins; let thy holy spirit
prepare mie soul; let thie merits enriche mie pouerties; and let thie most
precious blood vvash all the spots of mie life, that so I may vvorthilie
receive this venerable Sacrament.

I do exceedingly rejoice, o mie God, when I remember that miracle, which
Heliseus did after his death, 4. Reg. 1^ 21.
when he raised one that was dead, by touching him. For if the body of the
dead Prophet was of such force, of how much more force is the live body of
the lord of Prophets? Thou, o lord, undoubtedly art not of less power, then
was thy Prophet; neither is my soul less dead, then was that body;
neither is this touching of thine, of les virtue, then was that of his;
wherefore then should I not hope herehence an other like benifit? wherefore
should a body conceived in sin, vvoork greater wonders, then that body
which was conceived by the holy Ghost? wherefore should the body of the
servant, be more honored then the body of the lord? wherefore should not thie
most sacred body, raise again the souls that approach unto thee, seeing that
the body of thie servant, raised the bodies that approached unto it? And for
so much as that dead body, without seeking for life, did receive that which
it sought not for, through the virtue of that holy body; let it please thie
infinite mercy, o mie lord, that since I seek the same by means of this most
blessed Sacrament, through it I be so raised up and quickened, that hereafter I
live no more unto mie self, but wholy unto thee. O good JESUS, by that
inestimable charity which made thee to take our flesh upon thee, and to
suffer death for me, I most humbly beseech thee, that thou vvilt vouchsafe to
make me clean from al mie sins; and to adorn and deck me with thie
virtues and merits; and to give me grace, that I may receive this most
venerable Sacrament, with that humility and Reverence, with that fear and
trembling, with that sorrow and repentance for mie sins, and with that
purpose and resolution to leave them, and with that love and charity, which
is requisite for so high a mystery.

Give me also, o lord, that purity of intention, with which I may receive
this mystery to the glory of thie holy name, to the remedy of al mie
weakness, and necessities, to defend me from the enemy with this armor, to
sustain mie self in spiritual life with this food, and to make mie self one
thing with thee, by the means of this Sacrament of love, and to offer up to
thee this sacrifice for the salvation of all faithful Christians, as well
living, as dead, that all may find help through the inestimable virtue of this
Sacrament, which was instituted and ordained for the salvation of all. Thou
who live and raignest world without end, Amen.

AN OTHER PRAYER OF S. BONAuenture after Communion.
O LORD God almighty, mie Creator, and mie Savior, how have I ben so bold
as to approach unto thee, being so vile, so filthy, and so miserable a
creature, as I am? Thou, o Lord, art the God of Gods, the King of Kings, and
the Lord of Lords. Thou art the hight of al goodness, of al virtue, beutie and
pleasure. Thou art the fountain of light, the spring of love, and the
embracing of most hearty Charity. And being as thou art, thou do pray me,
and I do fly from thee; thou have care of me, and I have no care of thee;
thou do alvvaies regard me, and I do alvvaies forget thee; thou do bestovv
many favors upon me, and I do not esteem them; and finally thou do love
me, that am vanity and nothing, and I do make no account of thee, which art
an infinite and unchangeable good. I prefer the baseness of this world,
before thee most gentel spovvse; and the creatures move me more, then does the
Creator; more detestable misery, then the highest felicity; and more
boundage, then liberty. And albeit it be true, Proverb. 27.
that the wounds of a frind ar to be more esteemed, then the deceitful kisses
of an enemy; yet I am of such a condition, that I rather desire the deceitful
vvounds of him, which abhors me, then the svveete embracings of him, which
loves me. But remember not, o lord, mie sins, nether those of mie
forefathers, but be mindful of thie merciful entrails, and of the grief of
thie precious vvounds. Consider not that which I have done against thee, but
that which thou have done for me: for if I have done many things for which
thou may condemn me, thou have done many more for which thou may faue
me. Seeing then, o lord, that thou do so love me, as thou shevvest, wherefore
do thou withdraw thy self from me? O most loving lord hold me with thy
fear, constrain me with thy love, and quiet me with thy svveetenes.

I confess o Lord that I am that prodigal son, Luc. 15.
who living over rankly, and loving mie self and thy creatures disorderedlie,
have waste all the substance which thou did give me. But now that I do
know mie misery and poverty, and do return pined with hunger to the
fatherly bowels of thy mercy, and do approach to this celestial table of
thy most precious body, vouchsafe to look upon one with eyes of pity, and
to com forth to receive me with the secret beams of thy grace, and to make
me partaker of the maruailous fruits and effects of this most vvorthie
Sacrament; for so much as by it is given the grace of the holy Ghost; by it ar
forgiven sins; by it ar pardoned the debts dew unto sins; by it devotion
is increased; by it is tasted spiritual svveetenes, even in the very spring of
the same; by it arrenued all good purposes and desires; and by it finally the
soul is joined with her heavenly spouse, and receaueth him into her self,
that by him she may be ruled, defended, and guided in the way of this life,
until he bring her to the desired harbor of his glory. Receive then, o
pitiful father, this thy prodigal son, who trusting in thy mercy,
returns to thy house. I acknovvledge, o my father, that I have sinned against
thee, and that I am not vvorthie to be called thy son no nether a hired
servant; yet for all this, have mercy upon me, and forgive me my sins. I
beseech thee, o Lord, command that the garment of Charity, the ring of
lively faith, and the shoes of ioiful Hope be given me, with which I may
go securely through the rough and cragged way of this life. Let the
multitude of vain thoughts and desires depart out of me; for one is mie
beloved, one mie desired, and one mie God and Lord. Let nothing hereafter be
svveete to me, nor delight me but only he. Let him be al mine, and I alhis, in
such sort that mie heart do become one thing with him. Let me not know any
other thing, nor love any other thing, nor desire any other thing, but only
mie svveete Savior JESUS Christ, and him crucified. Who with the father and
the holy Ghost lives and reigns world without end. Amen.

HERE FOLLOWS A PROFESSION OF THE CATHOLIQVE FAITH, SET out according to the
decree of the holy Council of Trent.
I.N. do with a steadfast faith believe, and profess al and every point,
contained in the Simbole of the Faith, that the holy Roman Church does use;
to wit. I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of
al things visible, and invisible; and in one Lord JESUS Christ the Only
begotten Son of God, and borne of the father before al worlds; God of God,
light of light, true God of true God; begoten not made, of the same substance
with the father, by whom al things were made; who for us men, and for
our salvation came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost
of the Virgin Marie, and was made man; was crucified also for us under
Pontius Pilate, suffered, and was buried; and rose again the third day
according to the Scriptures; and ascended up into heaven; sits at the right
hand of the father; and he shall come again with glory, to judge the live and
the dead, of whose kingdom there shall be no end; and in the holy Ghost our
lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the father and the son, who
with the father and the son is together adored, and conglorified, who
spoke by the Prophets; and one holy Catholic, and Apostolic Church. I
confess one Baptism for the remission of sins, and I expect the
Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

I do most steadfastly admit and embrace the Traditions of the Apostles and of
the Church, and all other obseruances, and Constitutions of the same Church. I
do likewise admit the holy Scripture, according to that sense, which our
holy mother the Catholic Church has holden, and does hold; unto whom it
does appetteine to judge of the true sense, and interpretation of the holy
Scriptures: nether vvil I ever understand, nor interpret the same, otherwise
then according to the uniform consent of the fathers.

I do also profess that there be truly, and properly Seven Sacraments of
the new law, instituted by JESUS Christ our Lord, and necessary for the
salvation of mankind, (although they be not all necessary for all men,) to
wit, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and
Matrimony; and that these Sacraments do give grace; and that of them,
Baptism, Confirmation and Order can not be reiterated, without sacrilege. I
do also receive, and admit all the received, and approved Cermeonies of the
Catholic Church, in the solemn administration of all the a foresaid
Sacraments. I do embrace and receive al, and every of those things, which in
the holy Council of Trent have been defined, and declared touching Original
Sin, and Justification. I do profess also that in the Mass is offered up
unto God a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice, for the li^e and the
dead; and that in the most holy Sacrament of the Altar, there is truly,
reallie, and substantiallie the body and blood, together with the soul and
divinity of our lord JESUS Christ; and that there is made a Conversion of the
whole substance of bread into the body, and of the whole substance of wine
into the blood; which Conversion the Catholic Church does call
Transubstantiation. I do also confess, that under either kind only, is
received Christ whole and entire, and the true Sacrament.

I do constantly hold that there is Purgatory, and that the sovvles, which
be there detained, ar helped by the prayers of the faithful. Also that the
Saints, who reign together with Christ, ar to be worshipped, and called
upon, and that they offer up prayers to God for us, and that their Relics
ar to be worshipped.

I do most steadfastly affirm, that the Images of Christ, of the mother of
God alvvaies Virgin, and of other Saints, ar to be had and retained, and that
due honor and reverence is to be given to them. I do affirm that the
authority of Indulgences, was left by Christ in the Church, and that the use
of them is very behofeful for Christian people.

I do acknovvledge the holy Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church, to be
the mother and mistress of al Churches; and do promise and swear true
Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, who is the Succesfor of S. Peter Prince of
the Apostles, and the Vicar of JESUS Christ. All other things also defined, and
declared by the holy Canons, and Ecumenical Councels, and chiefelie by the
holy Council of Trent, I do undoubtedly receive and profess; and also al
contrary things, and whatsoever heresies condemned, rejected, and accursed by
the Church, I likewise do condemn, reiecte and accurse.

This true Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved, which now I
do willingly profess and hold, I the same N. do promise, vovv, and swear
to hold and confess most constantly, by Gods help, intiere and uncorrupted
even to the last end of mie life; and to procure, as much as shall lie in me,
that mie subjects, or those of whom I shall have care in mie office, shall
hold, teach, and preach the same. So God help me, and these holy Ghospels of
God.

Laus Deo and Beatissimae Virgini Mariae Dei Matri.
A TABLE OF THE THINGS Contained in the six Treatises of this book.
In the First Treatise,
and first part of the same.
OF the fruit which we reap by prayer and meditation. page 1. Of the matter
requisite to be used in meditation. p. 6. The first seven Meditations for the
days of the week. VVondaienight. Of the knowledge of thy sins and thy
self. page 8. Tevvsdaienight. Of the miseries of man's life. p. 15.
VVensdaienight. Of the hour of death. page 22. Thursdaienight. Of the day of
Judgment. page 28. Fridaienight. Of the pains of Hell. page 33.
Saturdaienight. Of the glory of Heaven. page 38. Sundaie night. Of the
benifits of almighty God. 44. Of the time and fruit of the foresaid
meditations. page 51. Of other seven meditations of the sacred passion, and of
the manner which we must observe in them. page 53. Mondaie morning. Of our
Saviors entering into Jerusalem; washing his Apostles feet; and Institution
of the most blessed Sacrament. page 57. Tevvsdaie morning. Of our Saviors
prayer in the garden; his Apprehension, and Presentation before Annas, page 68
VVensdaie morning. Of the Presentation of our Savior before the high priest
Cayphas; of the injuries he received that night; of Saint Peter's denial; and of
his whipping at the pillar. page 74. Thursdaie morning. Of our Saviors
Coronation vvit^ thorns, of the words, Ecce Homo, and bearing of the Cross
upon his shoulders page 80. Fridaie morning Of the Cross, and the seven
words which our Savior spoke upon the same. pa. 87. Saturdaie morning. Of
the pearcing our Saviors side; of his taking down from the Cross; of the
pitiful bevvailing of our Lady, and of Cristes burial. page 97. Sundaie
morning. Of the descending of our Savior into Limbus; of his appearing to our
Lady, to S. Marie Magdalen, to the Disciples, and of his Ascension. page 103.
Of six things that may concur in the exercise of prayer. page 109. Of
Preparation which is requisite before prayer. page 112. Of Reading. page 114.
Of Meditation. page 116. Of Thanksgiving. page 120. Of Offering. page 122. Of
Petition. page 124 An especial petition of the love of God. page 126. Of
certain aduises which ar to be observed in meditation. page 132
In the second part of the first Treatise.
What thing Devotion is. page 142. Of nine things which help us greatly, to
atteine unto devotion. page 146. Of nine things that hinder prayer. page 149. Of
the most common temptations, which be wont to vvearie such as give them
selves to prayer, and of their remedies. page 152. The first remedy against
want of spiritual consolations. page 153. The 2. remedy against importunate
thoughts p. 155 The 3. remedy against temptations of Biasphemie. page 156. The
4 remedy against temptations of Infidelity, page 157. The 5. remedy against
temptations of diffidence and presumption. page 159. The 6. remedy against
excessive desire of spiritual taste and consolation; and against the contempt of
such as have them not. page 160.

In the second Treatise.
OF the utility and necessity of vocal prayer. page 164. A preamble to the
prayers that follow, treating of the preparation and mind with which they
must be said. page 166. The first prayer, for the first day of the week,
serving to stir up in our soul a holy fear of God, by considering those
things that induce us thereunto. page 169. The 2. prayer, for the 2. day, of
the praises of God. page 176. The 3. prayer, for the 3. day, to give thanks to
God for his benifits page 180. The 4. prayer, for the 4. day, of the love of
God. page 183. The 5. prayer, for the 5. day, of Hope in God. page 188. The 6.
prayer, for the 6. day of Obedience. page 191. The 7. prayer, for the 7. day,
in which a man offers him self, and al things that he has to God. page 193.
A prayer to the holy Ghost. page 199. A prayer vvhiles we hear mass, or at
any other time. page 201. A devout prayer to our Blessed Lady. page 206. A
prayer of S. Thomas of Aquine to demand all virtues. page 231.
In the third Treatise.
Diverse Remedies against sin, and the occasions thereof. page 236. The first
Remedy, is to consider how great an evil mortal sin is. page 236. The 2.
remedy is, to avoid the occasions of sins. page 238. The 3. remedy is, to
resist evil thoughts in the beginning. page 239. The 4. remedy is, to examine
our Conscience every day. page 240. The 5. remedy is, to eschew venial
sins as much as we may. page 240. The 6. remedy is, to use severity
toward our body. page 241. The 7. remedy is, to take strait account of our
tongue. page 242. The 8. remedy is, to withdraw our heart from the love of
temporal things. page 244. The 9. remedy is, to exercise almes-deedes and
vvoorks of mercy. page 245. The 10. remedy is, to read devout and good
books. page 246. The 11. remedy is, to walk alvvaies in the presence of God.
page 247. The 12. remedy is, to frequent the Sacraments. page 250. The 13.
remedy is Prayer. page 251. Three other remedies which be, to fly idleness,
to love Solitarines, and to break with the vvoorld. page 252. 253.
In the fouerth Treatise.
THe preface to the Reader. page 254. An instruction or Rule of good life, for
those that begin to serve God in Religion. page 257.
In the first part.
OF mortification of our vices and passions, and of the means that serve for
this purpose. page 267.
In the second part of this fourth Treatise
OF diverse virtues which a Religious person ought to plant in his soul. page
277. Of Charity. page 277. Of Hope. page 281. Of Humility. page 282. Of
Patience. page 283. Of Poverty. page 284. Of Chastity. page 285. Of
Mortification. page 287. Of Austeritie. page 288. Of Silence. page 290. Of
Solitarines. page 291. Of inward composition. page 292. Of inward affection
to the ceremonies of our religion. page 294. Of imitating the first founders of
our Religion. page 296. Of Discretion. page 297. Of Obedience. page 298. Of
such things as may help us, to put in practice that which had been said. page
300. Of Devotion. page 300. Of diverse means whereby to get devotion and first
of the use of the holy Sacraments. page 305. Of the meditating of heavenly
things. page 306. Of Reading spiritual and devout books. page 308. Of
Attention in the time of the divine seruics. page 309. Of hearing and serving
mass. page 310. Of daily exercise. page 311. Of fridaies exercise. page 311.
A brief sum of all that which hitherto has been said. page 313. Of diverse
temptations of those that be new in Religion. page 314. Of temptation in
matters of faith. page 315. Of temptation of Blasphernie. page 316. Of
temptation of Scruples. page 317. Of temptation of Scandales. page 317. Of
temptation of overmuch desire of spiritual consolations. page 318. Of
temptation of uttering Gods favors. page 319. Of temptation to flitte from
place to place. page 320. Of temptation of Indiscretion, and of too much
discretion. page 321. Of temptation of forsaking a man's first vocation. page
322. Of temptation which is covered with the cloak of virtue. page 324. How
a man ought to behave him self toward God toward him self, and toward bis
neighbors. page 326. Of our devvtie toward God. page 326. Of our devvtie
toward our selves. page 329. Of our devvtie toward our neighbors. page
330.

In the fifth Treatise.
THe preface. page 332. Of Contrition and of the two parts which it
contains. page 335. Of the means by which Contrition is obtained. page 337.
Of Confession and what we ought to observe in the same. page 344. In what
cases the Confession is of no value, but ought to be made again. page 350. A
memorial of sins as well touching the ten Commandments, as other matters
wherein a man may sin mortallie. page 353. A general advertisement to
discern, which is a deadly sin, and which is a venial. page 366. A
brief manner of Confession, for such as be wont to confess often. page 368.
Of Satisfaction the third part of penance. page 377.
In the sixth Treatise.
How we ought to prepare our selves for the receiving of the most blessed
Sacrament of the Altar. page 379. A devout prayer to be said before the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament. page 384. An other prayer of S. Bonauenture
after Communion. page 389. A profession of the Catholic faith, set out
according to the decree of the holy Council of Trent. page 393.
FINIS.

