AN Easy, certain, and perfect method, to cure and prevent the Spanish
sickness. Whereby the learned and skillful Chirurgian may heal a great many
other diseases. Compiled by Peter Low, Arellian: Doctor in (...) of Chirurgy
in Paris; and Chirurgian ordinary to Henry (...) the most Christian King of
France and Navarre.



AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts. Anno Dom. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex, Vicount Herefford,
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter. etc. Peter Low wishes good
success in all his worthy enterprises, and high attempts.
ALthough (right honorable) this Treatise be far dissonant from your studies,
yet I have emboldened my self to let it pass, under your honorable
patronage, for by Gods assistance, I intend hereafter to publish diverse other
Books of Chirurgie, all which shall be shrouded under your honorable shield,
and protection, in regard of your manifold courtesies, and liberality to all
Strangers bountifully extended, whereof you cease not every day to give
experiment, but especially in respect of your honors valiant prowess, and
rare Martial exploits in ayding my dread Sovereign, and Master, the most
victorious King of France, so that in honoring him, I must love you, and for
your heroical virtues, admire your wisdom, and courage, in prosecuting all
venterous, and hard attempts: as lately has been experimented to the terror
of the Enemy, peaceable welfare of this Realm, and immortal fame unto you,
and your posterity for ever. Then forasmuch as the dedication hereof, cannot
bring, any addition of credit unto you, but rather, be the more acceptable,
under the title of your honorable patronage, most humbly with my self, I
present the same unto your honors good lyking, as one, that daily
intermitteth not, to wish the advancement of your honorable estate.

Your Honors in all duty most affectionate* Peter Low.

TO THE COURTEOUS Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have taken some pains in making this book, to do the sick
pleasure, and the whole profit, that thereby the diseased may recover their
health, and sound men may preserve themselves from this malady. And albeit
that diverse heretofore of sundry Nations, have published Treatises of this
subject, whereby at this present many coppies are extant, so it may seem
superfluous to reiterate the (...) Yet seeing I by mine own diligent practice,
and conference with learned men in this (...), have found out, diverse ways to
cure this disease, more easy, certain, and speed^ ^hen has been put in ure
by any of this age, and that learned Artists, and skillful Practitioners in all
ages, have written their several judgments, almost upon every particulet
subject, I thought it pertinent and necessary for the advancement of
knowledge, and case of many afflicted with this malady, to impart my skill
herein, for the better instruction of the Commonwealth. For as this disease is
dispersed throughout all Nations, Provinces, Cities, towns, and private
houses, yea, and so many kinds thereof daily increased and multiplied, whereby
men that know the nature of the malady, complexion of the Patient, age,
season, climate, and other circumstances in the like case considered, are of
necessity many times urged to vary from the common cure, and for the better
extirpation of new sorts hereof, to devise, use and apply, new remedies: so it
is needful, for the behoof of the weal public, enlargement of knowledge,
and acquitall of every man's particular duty, whereby he is bound so much as in
him lies, to advance and further the Commonwealth, to publish his
experience, in, and touching the premises. The foresaid reasons moving me
thereunto, I have set forth to the view and reading of al men, such knowledge
herein, as by long study and experience I have gotten: to the intent that a
further learning might be added to the Artists skill, and such as have no
learning at all, may be instructed, without any other teaching. As in this
subject I have manifested my cunning for your benefit, so I purpose hereafter,
(if GOD prolong my days with happy success,) to make you pertakers of my
labor in the whole course of Chirurgerie, and my Book De partu mulierum: by
whose help, I doubt not, but many women shall ease, and shorten their course
in travail. And thus (gentle Reader) I wish your furtherance of knowledge,
both in this, and all other needful Arts.

P. L.

THE PROEM.
IT is a point known of all the Philosophers, and confirmed by their common
confent, that the use and practice of every Art, is better and of more
excellency, then the simple speculation and contemplation of the same; as that
for the which all rules and precepts of Sciences are ordained, and to the which
they are referred, as to the chief end: the which may more amply appear by
Aristotle, Primo Ethicorum; et pri. Topicorum, and diverse other Philosophers,
throughout their whole works: For amongst all humane Arts, the practice of
Girurgerie is the most excellent and profitable, for ^o much as it preserves
man in health and good constitution of body, in preventing sicknesses to come,
by meet and fit medicines; and being sick, does restore him again to the form
estate, which (if it were not seen unto by the skillful and expert Chirurgian)
would tend to the dissolution and destruction of nature. The natural
inclination and disposition of man, by the gift of other humane Sciences, is
only bettered and made more prompt. As for example, Logic furnishes nature,
and teaches to reason well: Rethorick to speak eloquently; the Law shewoth
the way to maintain possessions purchased, and to recover that whereof men are
defrauded. These gifts are in great estimation amongst men: but in respect and
comparison of life it self, which by the learned Chirurgian is maintained and
prolonged, diseases, and maladies cured, they are of little account or value.
For what avails it unto a man to be a cunning Astrologian, a learned Lawyer,
rich and mighty, yea, a Monarch of the whole world, and in the mean time have
no joy, nor pleasure thereof, by reason that he is daily vexed with cruel
pain, and deadly torments of maladies, ready every hour to give up the ghost?
Is not man then greatly beholding unto Physic and Chirurgerie? The (...)
whereof, causes him to enjoy and gather the profit of all other worldly
Sciences.

Hereof it proceeds, that Aesculapius, Apollo, and other inuentors of our
Art, have ever (for the excellency of that Science) been deified and esteemed
for Gods, meaning thereby, that like as divine Authors do farte exceed
worldly inuentors, so this Art found out by the Gods, is worthy to be preferred
by man, to all other worldly Sciences. For this cause the Greek Poet Homer,
does prefer the professors of this Art, to all other professors, how excellent
soever they be. Here upon, I being moved by the former reasons, and love that
I bear to the Commonwealth, I intend to entreat of a disease, whose cure
pertayneth to the Art of Chirurgerie, commonly called the disease of Spain
or Naples. The more general the disease is, and incident to all Nations, the
greater ought the careful diligence of the expert Chirurgian be, to prevent
and cure that malady, Nature, by reason of appetite and inclination to carnal
copulation, does argue (the more is the pity) the universal reign and common
infection, of this contagious disease, throughout all Nations, Cities, and
Towns. Therefore, he that would prescribe an easy, perfect, and true way to
out this disease, should greatly benefit the Public weal, in preserving the
life of an infinite number of people, who undeservedly, by infection from
others, are grievously oppressed, with this detestable malady. Now, by daily
and long practice, and conference with men of learning in this matter, I have
found out diverse remedies and medicines, never set forth by any before this
time. Nevertheless, to make my work more perfect, I will first entreat of the
ordinary cures practiced by others, which diverse men, have written in diverse
manners, to the great hurt of the Patient, and discredit of the Chirurgian,
not knowing, the true cure, which is the cause that many make a miserable end
of their life, which shall appear to the diligent Reader in this my Treatise
following.

The first Chapter of the definition of the Spanish sickness.
THIS Spanish sickness, is one indisposition against nature, bred cheefely by
carnal copulation, and contagion joined with venenositie, as says Ioh.
Suessanus. Or it may be defined, to be an evil intemperature, hot and dry in
the liver and veins, as says Francantianus, yet more dry then hot, and
therefore of more difficill curation: but because that evil temprature may be
without matter, and is process of time with matter and solution of
continuitie, the which penetrateth and corrodeth the secret parts of men and
women, with certain pustulls in the head and forehead, with other external
parts of the body, which in time cause greefes in the night, hardness on ye
bones, (we call them Tophes or Nodosities) with corruption both of the bones,
and other spermatick parts: yet this chances oftenest in the secret parts of
men, because they be laxe and soft, and therefore easy to receive infection:
as also, because it does enter into the capacity of the Matrix, whereof for
the most part, proceeds the original of this disease. This part being
infected with that venim, it enters into the little veins, and afterward
into the great, and lastly into the liver, where it changes the natural
temperature, and so infecteth all the members, corrupting the natural humors
in the liver, which should pass for the nourishment of the whole body which if
they be very vehement, and biting, they engender abundance of external ulcers
and pustls, falling of hair, both of head, brows, and beard: grief in the
joints, head, legs, and arms, with diverse evil accidents, according to the
variety of the humor: yet chiefly in the night, and at such times as the
humor is accustomed to make his paroxismes and motions, which is most commonly
betwixt 3. of the clock in the afternoon, and 9. at night, as ye shall hear
at length in our Chirurgie in the Chapter of humors.

The second Chapter of the original and names of the Spanish sickness.
THere are diverse learned men of diverse opinions, and for the most part,
doubtful, of the original of this disease. Amongst whom the Theologians be of
opinion, and hold it for a Maxim, that for error comes punition, and for
sin, death: and so they think, that GOD does send it, for a scourge to the
people for whordome. There are also many famous Authors, that have written of
diverse strange sicknesses, which diverse times have happened in Italy, France,
and other Countries, like as we see sometimes in our own Country: the
original whereof are unknown unto us. But generally according to their
opinion, we may (no doubt) attribute the original of all diseases unto the
indignation of God, as the first cause, who recompenceth every man according to
his works. For to refrain the filthy lusts of men and women, God has
permitted this sickness to reign among them, as a punishment for sin: like as
we see in the 6. of Exodus, that he commanded Moses to cast powder in the
air, in the presence of Pharao, to the effect, the beasts and people of Egypt,
should be punished and afflicted with Apostums and Ulcers, for their sins and
disobedience. But because I will not intermedle holy things with profane, I
will not insist further in this matter. The Astrologians are of opinion, that
it comes and has the original from t^^ influence of the stars, and
eclipses of the Sun: as chanced at that time, in the I Will of Calecute, when
and where it began. There are others that think it to be ingendered of a
Fornicator and a Lepre, in the West Indies, Anno Dom. 1490. The most probable
of all, is the opinion of the Spanish Historiographers, and also diverse other
learned men that have written of the same: who do report, that it was brought
among the Christians, after ye nativity of our Lord, 1492. by a Spaniard
called Christophorus Columbus, with many other Spaniards, accompanied with some
women, who came from the new found Isles occidentalls. For this sickness is as
common, or rather rifer amongst them, then any other disease with us, and does
infect, as contagious sicknesses do among us. So diverse Soldiers were
infected, who after their return, not only infected their own Country, but
also diverse others. Anno 1493. in the Month of December, (as Nicholaus
Leonitius reports, writing of this disease) when K. Charles the viij. of
France besieged Naples with a puissant Army, where he remained certain
Months, some of the Spaniards came to him, of the which Christophorus Columbus
was chief, and spread this pernicious seed, and termed it the Indian sickness,
which, has had his course since, not only amongst the Spaniards, who call it
the Italian sickness, but also among the Italians, who call it the malady of
Naples, not without cause: for it began first to flourish in Naples. Amongst the
Frenchmen it is called the Spanish sickness, in Enland the great pocks, in
Scotland the Spanish Fleas, and that for two causes, the one, because it began
first amongst the Spaniards: the other, because when the infection spreads
first forth in the body, it is like unto red spots, called flea-bitings. Some
call it the under foot, because that infection often comes by treading with
the bare foot upon the spettle of the diseased with this contagion. There are
some ignorant malicious people, who call it the French sickness, without any
cause or reason. The most part call it the Venerian sickness, because most
commonly, it proceeds of the act of Venus. Some call it Pudendagra, because
in many people it breeds first in those parts in both sexes. Now it may be
called general sickness, because it is generally spread throughout all the
world: but for that these things, concerning the original and names, are not
greatly material, I will pass the^ over, and only show those things that are
most necessary for the true curing of this sickness; declaring first the cause.
For not knowing the cause, it is impossible to find out proper remedies for the
cure, seeing in all diseases, the cause must first be taken away, or else the
true cure cannot ensue.

The third Chapter, of the causes of the Spanish sickness.
Having entreated of the definition and original of this malady, now it
follows to show the causes of the same, which are either external or
internal. The external consist not only in things manifest, but also in
occult and hidden things, which lie as you have heard in the former Chapter.
Here we will content us to say only, that this malady proceeds cheefely
from the act of Venus, when men have to do with women polluted with that
infection, though sometimes it be but small. For by reason that the composition
of the secret parts of both sex, are composed of rare flesh, and spongious, it
happens by the frication they are easily heated and rarefied, and so the
sooner infected. And for this cause, those that do the act soon, are not so
easily infected, as those who are long in doing, by reason that the long
heat does extenuate those parts. Likewise they which have the skin fleane of
their secret parts, take not so easily the malady as others, because being
always uncovered, it is not so tender and delicate, and therefore not so apt
to receive infection. It proceeds also by lying in unclean lynnen, by wearing
the garments of them which are infected, and by lying with such as have any
spyces of it. So that we see many by that means infected, without any company
of women. Moreover, it proceeds also by sucking the Nurse any way diseased
with this sickness, by drinking after them which have Ulcers in their throat, by
kissing or receiving the breath of such as are infected, and by sitting on the
privy after them, and sometimes by treading barefooted on the spettle of
those which have been long corrupted. Whereupon I will set down mine own
experience, as follows. I saw, Anno 1589. in Monsier Coiutret his house,
Principal of the faculty of Surgery in Paris, the number of 26. men,
women, and children, infected, which were sent unto him by the Justice, to
discover from whence came the original of it, because it was thought, that one
infant did infect all the rest: Whose Parents and Nurse being both clean, made
the cause more difficult to be found out. Yet by diligent inquiry, the
infection was found to have his beginning from the Midwife, who of a long time
had been infected with that disease, and by receiving ye child, infected it, by
first breathing upon the same, as being tender and delicate, so the more easy
to receive such infection. Thereafter sucking the Nurse, did infect her, and
sundry other Nurses, one after another, who by giving suck to other children,
did infect them, and finally, the children did infect their Parents. So it was
proved, that by that child, there were infected to the number of threescore,
less and more: which persons I saw, and cured the most part of them my self.
I have known diverse to have been infected only by kissing, of which number I
have healed one in Paris, who was infected by kissing a young Gentleman a suitor
of hers, who had Ulcers in his throat, proceeding from the same disease, in
such sort, that shortly after all her hair did fall, with external pain of
the joints, whom I healed, with the help of God and my confection. The said
Gentlewoman before her coming to me, did infect sundry children, by lying,
kissing, and drinking with them. Some infected only by drinking with those
that were infected before, as you have heard: so that it behoues us to refrain
familiar frequentation with such people. I cured also a Gentlewoman in Paris,
of a great Family, a virgin (as I found by my visitation) which was infected
with this disease: the cause whereof I found to have come by sitting on a
Privy after an infected person. Likewise I healed a boy in Paris of the age of
15. years, who was infected by going bare-foote upon his Masters spettle.

Gallen says, Lib. de Febribus, cap. tertio, that it is dangerous to
accompany those that be in a consumption and stinking breathed, and those that
be infected with the Plague, Leprosy, and such other sickness which come by
contagion, as this does. Many others I have seen, which for briefenes I will
omit. Now let us come to the internal cause of this malady, which is corrupted
meats, that do engender a putred flegmaticke nurature, or a burnt mellancholy;
as diverse sorts of herbs, roots, fishes, fruits, with such like rotten food,
wherewith the French Army was nourished at Naples, where this malady began
first to be known among Christians. Yet will I not affirm, that the
phlegmatic or mellancholick humor is the only cause of this disease, but also
other humors: yet the nearer that men's complexions approach to the phlegmatic,
the apter they are to receive this infection; which ought to be observed. For
we see fewer Chollerick or Sanguins infected with this disease then the
Mellancholick or Phlegmatic: likewise more difficult to be cured, as we find
ordinarily by our experience. Wherein we must note, that after the Phlegmatic
complexion, follows the Mellancholick, next the Sanguine, last of all the
Chollerick, the which in deed is least altered, because among all the humors,
it simbolizeth least with the said Pituitous humor, The humor so altered and
corrupted, does actually let the action, either animal, vital, or natural:
or two of them together, or all the^ three, as well generally throughout all
the body, as particularly in one member, as ordinarily happens in such
dyseases. Some are of opinion, that it comes of the imbecilitie of the vital
spirits, and natural, like as sometime we see by experience. I knew, (when I
was Chirurgian ordinary to the French and Spanish Regiment in Paris,) that 35.
soldiers had carnally to do with a woman infected, yet of the said 35. only
seven were infected with the foresaid woman; which seven were cold and weak
men of complexion, and long in performing that act: the rest were hot and
robust, soon dispatching the act, having the faculty strong to withstand the
venim; and for this reason they were not insected therewith. Diverse such
accidents have I known. Fallopius is of the opynion, that the cause of this
infection, comes often of the passion of the mind: for when a woman loves
not that man she has to do with, she heateth not her self, but lies
quietly, and so thrusts not forth the venim, as some whores do. In this I
think it a manifest occasion, that some bunglers and old men, are not so
commonly infected, as some young men, albeit they have all to do with one
woman: because also old men are dry, having the skin hard, the Gland therefore
not so easy to receive venim, as ye have heard. In lyk manner women very
common, give not so easily this evil, as other women, who are less infected,
and not so common. The cause is, that common women take not so great pleasure,
because they being accustomed night and day to exercise venerie, do not
excitat the humor so much as the other, who take greater pleasure therein, by
reason that they use not the act so often. I have often known men infected
therewith, who have been extremely well loved of the woman, by reason she
took pleasure with him, and so the virtue expultrixe was the stronger to put
forth yt which was venomous, to the great hurt of the man. All these occasions
do infect many, which infection, if it remain any space in the body, shows
certain signs, as ye shall hear in the Chapter of signs.

The fourth Chapter of the differences of the Spanish sickness.
THE original, and cause of this disease being known, it follows to
entreat of the differences of the same: touching the which we must understand,
that it is sometime gentle, and molesteth nothing, other whiles by little
infection it does suddenly augment, and come to the state of the malady:
sometime they pass many months and years, before it be known, either to the
infected or to the Chirurgian, sometime it occupies only the liver, and
consequently the veins, sometime it is spread over all the body, so that the
heart and brains are sometime vexed with great accidents, according to the
variety of the venim, and of the body wherein it happens, sometime with
great simptoms, sometime small. That, which occupies the hair of the head,
beard, and brows, without any feeling and hurting of the body, is the most
simple sort. The second kind is worse, which occupies the skin with little
spots, which wax greater, sometime red, sometime yellow, which cannot be well
extinguished, except that the root of the sickness be taken away. The third
kind is greater, the which not only makes little spots, but also Pustulles,
and Tubercules, first, in the temples, forehead, and head, thereafter through
the whole body, these are round and dry without matter Purulent, yet in time,
if they be neglected, they increase, and become ulcers Virulens, and sordides
chiefly about the throat, nose, and fundament, because these places are more
tender, and therefore so much the more easy to be vlcered. The fourth kind is
that which is infixed in the joints and natural parts, which makes great
dolor, sometime spasme and contraction of one member, or of diverse members
together. The fifth kind is that which makes such relaxation, that paralize
follows in one member, or generally takes away the motion of the whole body.
The sixth kind, is when it is inueterated, so that it possesses and corrupts
the solid and firm parts, as bones, sinews, membrans, and tendons. The
seventh kind is that which causes dislocation of one, or diverse articles. The
eight kind is that which makes such corruption and fracture in the midst of
the bones, sometime accompanied with Herpes, and Darters furfurous, of the which
some appear in the soles of the feet, some in the head, some in the hands,
and some through all the body. The ninth kind is that which occupies diverse
parts of ths head with extreme pain, but chiefly in the night, sometime with
alteration of the scull. The tenth kind is that which causes deafenes with
difficulty of smelling, and also ablation of the five senses naturals. The
eleauenth causes leprosy, which is incurable. The twelueth kind is, when the
sick becomes Ethick, and dies in a consumption. There are a number of others
differences of this disease: Antonius Musa says, that there are two hundredth
thirty and four kinds, but these which I have set down, are the most common,
under the which all the rest are comprehended. Furthermore, we must understand,
that when this disease does degenerate into leprosy, it happens in those,
who often times have been indiscreetly handled by ignorant persons, and when
the body is ill prepared, either by intemperancie of lyse or otherwise. When
it does degenerate into a consuming Fever and does become Ethick, which the
Latins call Tabid, and that it is near the noble parts, it happens in those
that have been often handled only by Sudorfficks, and dry nouriture, as many
ignorant persons do, thinking to dry up the evil humors that way, and so
dry up the humor radical, which of necessity causes the patient to become
Ethick.

The fifth Chapter of the signs of the Spanish sickness.
THE signs of this disease do commonly follow the temperature of the body
diseased. As if a person of the Sanguine temperature be infected, such a one
shall have ordinarily pain and heaviness in the head, but chiefly in the
forehead, and roots of the eyes, in the neck, and shoulders, in the arm, and
often times in all the articles, great pulsation in the temples, appetite to
vomit, with dulnes of the five natural senses, lassitude of all the body,
chiefly, when the party sleeps, and after sleep the mouth clammie, the
veins of the eyes red, ulcers sordids both in the secrets and other parts of
the body, with inflammation and rednes diverse pustulles in the head, face, and
neck, and sometimes through all the body, (which for the most part are red, and
inflamed) great abundance, of sweat, very ill savors, the urine very red and
thick, great pain at such time, as the humor Sanguine reigns, which is from
three in the morning, till nine, as ye may see in our Chirurgie in the Chapter
of humors. If he, who is infected with this sickness, be of the humor bilious or
Chollerick, he shall have great drought with want of appetite, punctions through
all his body like points of needles, pain in the right side of the head, the
body becomes lean, the face and eyes evil colored, the mouth evil tasted,
falling of hair through all the body, with abundance of dry pustulles, which
are more plentiful in these two humors, than in the other two, by reason, that
these humors be more liquid, and so pass more easily from the center to the
circumference of the body. He has ulcers virulent in diverse parts of the body,
chiefly in the yard, codds, and roof of the mouth and throat, great pain at
such time as the humor chollerick reigns, which is from nine in the morning,
till three in the afternoon. If the patient be of temperature pituitous, or
phlegmatic, he shall have pain with heaviness of the hinder part of the head,
neck, arms, and legs, in all the articles, and joints, dimnes of sight, little
appetite, little drought, great coldness in the head and stomach, debilitie of
the parts neruous, trembling palsy, with attraction of some parts of the
body, the mouth homide and clammie, the face and extremities swelled, great
abundance of white pustuls without itch, so that the phlegm be not salt. If
the phlegm be salt, there happen Serpins and impetigines, which we call
commonly Dortors furfurons, or crustous chiefly in the hands, and soles of
the feet, and in the head, and sometimes in all the parts of the body: also
great ulcers evil colored, large, and hard round about, oftentimes Tophes and
Nodosities on the bones, great pain at such time, as the humor reigns, which
is from three in the afternoon until nine. If the patient be of the humor
mellancholike, either by nature, or accident, he shall have pain in the left
side of the head, also in his shoulders heaviness in all the body, debilitie of
the stomach. The body becomes lean, or at the least some part of it, all the
body is evil colored, but chiefly those parts which are most infected with
it, unsavory taste in the mouth, falling of hair, the pustls be hard and deep
but few in numher, many ulcers, and Canchors in diverse parts, swelling of the
bones in the head, but especially in the forehead, hemerands, deficultie of
urine, with astrection of the belly, the sleep is intercepted with great
dolor, at such time as the humor gouerns, which is from nine at night, until
three at morning. These be the signs simple, and particulerly for the
knowledge of this sickness according to every humor: to the end that every one
may have better and more easy knowledge of this disease, I will set down
certain general signs, by the which ye may know the person to be infected,
often what complexion so ever he be. The first, and most common is hard ulcers in
the secret parts of both sex, swellings in the flank called usually Bubons or
Apostumes virulens, running of the raines, voyding an infected humor, which
proceeds from the kernels, called by the Latins Prostata and Parastata,
dolours of the head, legs, arms, and shoulders, chiesely in the joints,
accompanied with swelling and hardness, running along the Muskels, Nerves,
Tendons, Perioste, and other parts Neruonse, in such sort that the sick is out
of patience, so that he can neither rest, walk, sleep, nor lift his arm to
his head. And this happens sometime in one part, sometime in diverse, also
ulcers in the mouth and throat, with difficulty of swelling, pustules about
the forehead, which we call commonly the golden crown, likewise in the roots
of the hair, and all over the head. More-ouer, in the Emunstoires of the noble
parts, as also other parts glandulous, and humids, and sometime over the whole
body, falling of the hair of the head, beard, brows, and eyelids, defluxion
on the eyes, corruption of the teeth, and the pallet of the mouth. Sometime the
whole vnula is consumed, so that the diseased speak always in the nose, and and
sometime there is distention of the Periost, which is the membran that couers
the bones universally. Furthermore, sometime the patient is drousie, yet cannot
sleep, chiefly at such time of the night when the humor is in motion, the
which happens rather at that time then at any other, for two causes, the
first, because the humor is most commonly cold as the night is, the second
because the poares are closed in the night, so that the evil humor does not
void, which by the opening of ye poares in the day do purge. Yet al these
signs do not happen to every diseased person, nor yet in this order as you
have heard, for some appear in one part, some in others, and in diverse persons
sooner then in others, which falls out according to the temperature of the
diseased. Often times there is but a few of these tokens found together, and
therefore it behooves to have good judgment. As for example, if there be
ulcers in the yeard, being hard at the root, and not deminishing by any
application of particular remedies, the malady is to be suspected. Likewise the
running of the raines, and heat of urine, accompanied with diverse accidents,
as particular convulsion, chiefly in the night, where there is erection of the
yeard. More-ouer, ulcers in the neck of the bladder, in all the which if
ordinary remedies do not extinguish the venim, they are to be suspected, as
also tumors in the flank, called Bubones which if they stick inward without
breaking forth, they are evil. And in all these things I find no sure remedy,
but from the particular cure, to the general. Yet sometime men may have this
disease not having any of these tokens above mentioned, saving only little
ulcers of a small breadth, sometimes on the thighs, or on the codds, likewise
women in the paps, and children in the fundament. Therefore in all these things
there is required a good judgment, to consider the qualities and nature of
such ulcers, and to dress them after the mnaner, which ye shall understand
hereafter.

The sixth Chapter of the prognostic of the Spanish sickness.
Having spoken of the tokens present and past of this disease, we must likewise
speak of the Future, to the effect that we may judge of the cure, in what time
it may be helped, or whether it be incurable. First then, we must consider that
either the sickness is recent, or inueterate: if it be recent with few
simptomes external, as Pustulles, falling of the hair, some ulcers in the
secret parts, accompanied with great pain on the shoulders and articles. In
this case, if the person be young, of good constitution, and the time
convenient, like as in springtime, or Summer, then thou may prognostic that
the true cure may easily follow, by using of such familier and easy remedies,
as ye shall hear in the cure. But if of long time, for great dolor, the
members be retired, except that great remedies be used with great discretion,
they remain so. If it be old, inueterate with many simtomes, like as great
dolors of all sorts, as in the head, shoulders, and articles, Tophes and
Nodosities, with corruption of the bones, and ulcers malign in diverse parts,
the body extenuate and imbecill, and of evil temperature, full of evil
humors, and scabbs of diverse sorts, like unto leprosy, and has been often
cured, which happens through the ignorance of them, who take upon them to
cure the same, using only one remedy, which is rubbing with quick silver, for
all the kinds of this disease, thou shall prognostic that the curation will be
hard and long. This sometime happens also by learned Chirurgians, who have
done their endeavor, yet the infection being so great, and occupying the veins
which be near the liver, and the liver it self, and other noble parts, the
joints and other parts spermatick, that hardly it will obey any remedy, and in
this point thou shall also prognostic, that the curation will be hard and
long. Those that eat and drink much, living without diet and observation of
the unnatural things, albeit they be young, and of good temperature, yet they
are as hardly cured as those that are weak, dry, and consumed with other
sicknesses, and are healed with great difficulty, or else not at all. If the
places and vessels near the heart be occupied, as I have noted in sundry
patients, and after that remedies be used, the sick become Ethick, and in a
consumption, then thou shall judge it to be incurable, and in that case thou
shall use no remedies, but Palliatiue, as in the Elephanticks, leprosies, and
diverse other such like discases. Nevertheless, be discreet in giving thy
judgment, for I have cured Spaniards and French, both men and women, of diverse
temperatures, who had often been treated both in Spain, Low Countries, and
France, accompanied with many grievous Simptomes, Nodosities in diverse parts
of the body, ulcers in the mouth, and throat, so that the roof of the mouth
was falling, as also the pype which we call Plectrum Vocis, the nose,
accompanied with diverse sicknesses on the eyes, grievous torments, and all kind
of dolors, which may be reckoned to be most intolerable, the articles all
swelled, chiefly the knees, great pain in the extremities with universal
extenuation, so that the parties become altogether Ethick. Although these have
been seemed incurable, yet by using certain medicines, but chiefly my
confection, I have healed them, contratie to many men's expectation. Truly the
cure is difficill, Quoniam est eronica et cum malignitate coniuncta, but those,
who mend, become fat, albeit they were lean before, because the blood is more
purified, by the medicaments and evacuations, as says Nicholaus Massa. Now it
rests to speak of the curation, seeing we have sufficiently shown the
causes, signs, differences, and prognostics. But first I think it expedient
to set down the nature of some medicines, most commonly used, for the
extirpation of this malady.

The seventh Chapter of the nature of medicines most commonly used for the
Spanish sickness, and first of Gaiac.
THere are diverse remedies, which have been used by our Ancients, and
approved very good, which we use at this present for the curation of this
disease, always diuersifying them, according to the temperature, the time and
variety of the Symptoms; which albeit they be diverse, yet here we will only
speak of those which are most common, and necessary for the curation hereof,
beginning at the Gaiac tree, which we call Lignum sanctum. Consolanus a Spanish
Historiographer says, that in the occidentall Indies, in an I Will called S.
Dominick, this tree grows to a great height, most like the Walnut tree: the
leaf thick and broad, bearing a fruit round and hard, and of a reasonable
greatness, which is eaten of children, and thought to be very wholesome for those
that are of a weak complexion. Iohannis Leonis Africanus, says, that it
bears a certain flower and seed, but because we see none of it in this
Country, and it is not profitable for our purpose, we will speak no more at
this present of that matter, but will entreat only of the tree it self. It
is to be known, that of this tree there are three kinds, as says Ioh.
Monardus, in his 17. book Epist. 3. The first is that which has the fruit
very great, and black within, interlaced with little veins, of the which there
is great abundance in the I Will of S. John. The second kind is not so great,
neither has it ye heart so black, yet it has like rays as the other.
Consolanus says, that this has great virtue in diverse other sicknesses, as
Gouts, Sciaticks, pains of joints, Catarrhes, Epilepticks, Pulmonicks,
Hydropicks, and diverse diseases of the kidneys and bladder, and generally for
all cold diseases. The third kind is smaller then either of the precedents, and
is all white both within and without: the veins in it are smaller then in ye
others, as says Suessanus Neapolitanus. That which is of the best sort is of a
mean greatness, recent, dry, and uncorrupted; which being put in the fire, the
substance does appear gummie, the color yellow, with a mean palenes within,
the barck cleaving hard to the tree. In the choice of the tree you must observe
these properties. In like manner there are three substances to be observed in
the tree, the first is the skin or bark, which dries much, the second is the
rind, and is white in culler, and not so drying, being more gummy: the third
is the black within, called the heart, and has more gummy humiditie, and less
drying; and that we use in delicate bodies and of rare texture, where there is
no need of much drying. The second we use in them that are weak, and the third,
which is the barck, in strong persons, as the most drying. The greatest is
meetest for our use, which grows in an I Will of Hispaniola noua, called Insula
beata, or Diui Iohannis, as says Gartius Abortus, and has great virtue for
many diseases. It dissolueth and makes thin, it mundifieth, it provoke
sweat, it stays vrin, it dries and corroborateth the ventricle, and all the
rest of the entralls, it consumes the stinck of the mouth, it is good for the
evil temprature of the liver, and cold, that comes either of cold drinck or
meat; it is good for obstructions and Hydropsies. It dispatcheth the
superfluous and cold humors of the body: it is good for Catarrhes of the head,
all kinds of Gout, all diseases of the Nerves, all Ulcers, and most excellent
for many kinds of the Spanish sickness by reason of the secret virtue which is
in it.

The eight Chapter, of Salsperill.
This which we call Salsperill is a plant that has many roots, and bears
neither flower nor fruit, and is brought from the Indies, of the which there
are two sorts, the one has the barck thick and fat, the other thin and dry,
which are both good, being dry, recent, and not putrified. It has great
virtue for ulcers that remain, after the cure, for Fissures about the
fundament, Tophes on the head, legs, and arms. It is thought by some to have
more virtue the^ the Gai^^, it offends not the stomach, it procures sometime
loosnes: it grows for ye most part in the Country of Peru; it is hot in the
second degree. There is no pain so vohement, which the dedoction here of,
(being taken in time) does not mittigate; which decoction is good also in
diverse other dyseases, as Catarrhes, distilling from the head, in hidden causes
of Tumors, which are hard to cure, and scrofulus, and from a cold stomach it
breaks wind. It is best using of it in the Spring, or Autum.

The ninth Chapter. Of Chine.
CHine is a certain root, which comes out of the East Indies, or region of
China, for the which cause it is called Chine. It is 3. hand-bredth hie, all
knotry, and brown of cullor, white without, and red within, of a mean weight
if it be good, it has few leaves, it grows near the Sea, or grounds that are
mirie, some in woods, the root is knotty, of a hand-bredth hie, fat, well
tasted. It is in great estimation among the Indians, thought to cure great
difficult sicknesses, but chiefly the Venerian. Also for old Ulcers and
wounds, Tumors, Chirrus, pains of the articles, head, and stomach, defluxion,
and Catarrhes: old diseases of the Nerves, and parts Neruous, also all cold and
mellancholike sicknesses, and is more dry then Gaiac. It consumes all kinds
of excrements, cleanses the entrails, and heals the obstructions; it is
excellent for dislocations that happen of internal causes, it both dries and
comfort.

We read that Charles the fifth Emperor, being grieved with the Gout, was cured
by the decoction hereof. It is reported by men of credit, that in Countries
where it grows, it heals the Spanish sickness, and all the symtoms that
follow thereof, without using any other remedy. We see by experience that it
far passes Gaiac. It has virtue to make fat, those that are lean, as
commonly they are who have been tormented with this sickness. These virtues
and sundry other are set down by Garcius Abortus, Mediciner to the Viceroy
of the Indies. It may be given to all ages and temperatures, also in Fevers,
which may not be done with Gaiac. There is another kind of it brought out of
Florida, which is not altogether of such virtue as this.

The 10. Chapter. Of the nature of Quicksilver, and the true preparation
thereof.
IFinde great diversity of opinions amongst the Ancients, touching
Quicksiluer, for the most part esteem it to be cold and humide. Auicen in his
second canon, notes it to be cold and moist in the second degree. Gulielmus
Placentinus, Arnaldus de villa nouae, and Placarius, thinks it to be cold in
the fourth degree, which may easily be perceived, for it is troth that it
repelleth the humor from the circumference to the center, and causes by the
great coldness hereof, Palsy and trembling, and the members to be inflexible,
as says Pliny, Dioscorides, and Palmarius. Auicen says, that it causes a
stinking breath, with dimnes of the sight, falling of the teeth, which we see
to be true in such as have this sickness, and have often been rubbed therewith.
Some esteem it to be hot and dry, but few approved Authors are of that
opinion. There are two kinds of it, natural and artificial, the natural is
found in the veins and denns of the earth, as says Pliny and Dioscovides,
and is called by them, Hydargirus. It is found also amongst Metals, as
reports Dioscarides in his first book. The artificial is made of Minium,
and scrapings of Marble, as writes Vitruvius in his seventh book of his
Architecture. Some of it is found and drawn out of Lead, and is easily known
from the other, being of cullor brown, and black, and of substance thick,
leaving some rest behind, like the excrements of Lead, which is not meet
forthys purpose. That which is clean white and subtle is good. Nevertheless,
having chosen the most proper for our use, it must be yet prepared and purified
after this sort following. First you shall take so much of it as you will use,
and boil it 6. or 7. hours in water, putting in such things with it as have
the virtue to coroborate and comfort the parts netuouse, as also to purify it,
like as Sage, Rosemary, Camomell, Melilot, Time, with other neruall herbs.
That being done, strain it through a cloth, then after extinguish it,
according to the manner which you shall hear hereafter; and incorporate it with
a little Swines grease. Being well compounded, you must melt it on the fire,
the^ taking it of, you shall perceive the Quicksiluer separated from the grease:
the excrement and leaden substance shall remain in the same grease: Having so
done, you shall strain it through a piece of Leather, to the end that it may
be very pure, then after, extinguish it again, to the effect that you may the
better incorporate it with other Swines grease, or with such medicaments as you
shall hear. If you will have your ointment white, and neither black nor gray,
you must make it after this order ensuing. Take your Quicksiluer and beat it
in a mortar with Vinegar and salt, then pour out that Vinegar and salt, and
put in new, and so beat it with 3. or 4. sundry shyftings, and so your ointment
shall be white. But to extinguish the same, you must put into the mortar with
it a little syrop of Roses, or oil of Petroly, or juice of Lemmons, or fasting
spittle, or a little ointment wherein Quicksiluer has been put, for that is
the best, and will soonest extinguish it. Then beat them together, till such
time as there be not any appearance of the Quicksiluer, least that being not
well extinguished, it should return to the old form. So being well quenched,
as is requisite, you shall make your ointment (having likewise prepared the
Swines grease) in this manner. Melt it on the fire, and boil it with the
herbs before mentioned, or with others of like virtue, being all chopped
small: then all being boiled together, you shall strain it through a cloth,
and mingle with it a little Iris of Florence, which will take away the savor of
the grease, then after, compose the ointment thus.

Recipe axungiae suilae lib. 1. olei Cammomillae, et Anetini an vnc. i. Radicum
anulae parum co^trito, vnc. quat. therebentinae venetae, vnc. ss. Argenti viui
preparati, vnc. quat. Incorporentur omnia simul spatio viginti quatuor horarum,
fiat linementum vt decet.

I use always in stead of the Swines grease, the ointment called Rosatum
meseuis, and put to one pound of this ointment, five ounces of Quicksiluer,
oil of Bays and Anniseede, of either half an ounce, so with that I give
every day one friction, or once in two days, according to the temprature and
strength of the Patient, the which must be considered by the skillful
Chirurgian.

The 11. Chapter. Of the general cure of the Spanish sickness.
AS for the curing of this disease, it shall be requisite to use all the 3.
parts of Physic, which are Surgery, Diet, and Pharmacy: first of all we
must observe the diet, which is the form of life, for as Auicen says, the
disordered course of life, may corrupt the best complexion, and being well
governed, may correct the worst. Then let us begin the cure of this disease by
good government of life in the six unnatural things, which are, the air, the
meat and drink, and all that we use for our sustenance, the motion and rest
of our body, under the which is comprehended venerie, sleep, and waking, the
retention, and repletion, the affections of the mind: these things must be
observed, for without the observation of them, it will be hard to cure this
sickness. The air must be clean, pure, and temperat. The meat ought to be
nourishing, and of easy digestion, that neither ingenders thick nor sharp
humors. It must be more dry then moist, abstayning from fish, salt flesh, all
kind of spyces and fruits, because these engender evil humors. Abstain also
from all manner of Pulse, as Pease and Beans, also from Beef, Swines flesh,
Goats, Hares, and Rams flesh; from all sort of Water-foule, Onyons,
Colewoort, and all kind of roots, these are hurtful, and breed evil blood.
Eat only Mutton, Veale, Kid, Chickins, Dove, Partridge, and such like: you
may also use the broth of them. Your bread must be of Wheat, either Biscuit; or
at the least well baked. Abstain from Wine, for it is an enemy to this
disease; use only the decoction of Gaiac, Salsparill, or Chine, according to
the temperature of the diseased. Use a little exercise, for rest is hurtful,
except there be great pain in the joints, or in some other part; Let not the
exercise be violent, for it dissolueth the natural heat, sleep not long,
because it fills the head with vapors. We must also observe the passions of
the mind, chiefly mellancholy. Be always merry, for then the natural heat
does prevail, and so helps much to the cure. Grief, fear, and anger, do
much hinder the operation of the Medicines. We must take heed to the
excrements, that the vapors ascend not to the head and other principal parts.
So the Patient must have often Clysters made after this manner. Recipe maluae
Althea violarea, et Mercurialis an ma. i. Beulliant ad lib. 1. Addendo olei
Violati vnc. quat. Cassiae vnc. i. Salis drag. i. fiat Clyster. Which you must
use at the least every three days: or every four days four drams of my
confection.

Next, under the Pharmacie, we shall observe all kinds of medicines taken
inwardly, namely, Decoction, Syrrops, Aposymes, Iuleps, Purgations, Conserues,
Electuaries, Clysters, Gargarismes, Pessers, and Baths, which shall be made
only of running water, warmwise, which we call Balneum aquaedulcis: yet ye may
copose it according to the diversity of the accidents, and temperature of the
diseases, as ye shall hear at large in my surgery, in the chapter of Baths.
Yet commonly we make them of water wherein is put Mallows, Violets, Pellitory
of the wall, Fumitory, Patience, Plantine, Cammomell, Mellelot, dry Roses, of
each a handful: and it shall be well done to sees those herbs a little
before you put them in the Bath. The Medicines which be applied outwardly, are
comprehended under the Pharmacy, like as ointments, playsters, Serots, Oils,
Kataplasmes, Embrocations, Fomentations, Epythemes, Sassats, Synapismes, and
Perfumes, the which things must be used according to the kind of the sickness,
for to take away the evil humor contained in the body. But first the body and
humors must be prepared with convenient remedies, as hereafter you shall hear,
to the end the euacuation may be the easier and surer. First of all the body
shall be gently purged with Confection Hamet, or some such like thing; the
next day, open the vain most apparent a reasonable widenes, if there be
plenitude. Afterward use the remedies set down by Ioh. Deuigo, cap. de morbo
Gallico, for the preparation of the humors: or this that follows. Recipe
Syru. de fumo terrae minori, vnc. 1. de succo Endiuiae, drag. 6. Aquary
Endiuiae, capil. ven. et fumit. vnc. 1. The Patient shall use of this the space
of three or four days, one ounce every day two hours before meat. Afterward
he shall be purged with this medicine. Recip. sol. senae mund. vnc. ss. sem.
foenic. dulcis drag. 1. Bullian in s. q. decocti pectora. Et in col. dissole
diapr. sol. drag. 2. Sir. ros. sol. ex agar. and sena, vnc. 1. fiat potio, quam
cap. 3. horis ante insculum. Afterward, he shall bathe himself 3. or 4.
days, and sweat a little in the bed when he is come out of the bath.

These things being done, he shall use this syrrop the space of five or six
days. Re. Fumit. cicor. capil. ven. Enula Camp. Buglossi, Endiuiae, an m. 1.
ss. Pollitrei. m. ss. Polipod. passul. Sebesten an vnc. 1. Prunor. dam. number.
25. Pomor. acetosori vnum tantum parum. conquassatu^^ vini Granatori. lib. ss.
Aquam Endiuiae, Fumit. Buglossi, an lib. 1. ss. Bulliant omnia secundu^ artem,
ad consumpt. tertiae partis: deinde colentur. Et col. add. Zacli. q. 5. Cum
vnc. 2. Succi Fumit. et Endiuiae. De quo patiens sumet in aurora, vnc. 1. ss.
Vel vnc. 2. Cum aquis capil. ven. et Endiuiae atque Fumiterrae. The humors
being so prepared, the body shall be purged after this manner. Recipe Cathol.
drag. 10. dissol. in decoct. cicor. Agrim. Borag. in quo bullierint fol. Senae
drag. 2. Cum sem. foenic. dulcis, addendo sir. Ros. Pallidari. vnc. ss. fiat
potio sumenda. 3. horis insculum. The next day he must be let blood in the
Basilike or median dexter. These things being well performed, are very
needful for the preparation of the humors. And these things must always be
used before the general cure. The Chirurgian, which is the third, puts in
execution these things, if he be learned and wise, as he ought, and well
furnished with things belonging to his Art, knowing not only the Surgery,
but also the principles of Physic, as well in the Theorick as Practick, by
reason that it is requisite for him, to ordain both diet and pharmacy,
otherwise, he is imperfect. Gallen says in his introduction to Physic; that
Pharmacie has need of Diet and Chirurgerie, in like manner, Chirurgerie has
need of Diet and Pharmacie. There are three other things to be observed of the
Chirurgian, to wit, the essence, the cause, and symptoms of the malady, as ye
have heard, the diuesitie of the temperatures, and the fit remedies for curing
hereof, for these things being unknown, the true cure hardly follows: but
only by hazard and not by rules of Art, as the blind man casts his staff.

For these causes we must not marvel at the malignitie and cruelty of this
sickness, nor the sore torments of the sick; for there are many evil
disposed persons in all Countries, who endanger a great many Patients, by not
using of fit remedies, taking one medicine for all sorts of this disease, which
is much against reason. For according to the temperature and nature of the
parties diseased, the remedy must be changed, as Gallen has written at large
in his books De locis affectis. There are also many who profess to know
secrets, and diabolick charms for curation hereof, but all such things are
false, and the Authors there of are worthy to be most grievously punished, for
such things cause the sickness to wax more rebellious, so that hardly
afterward it obeys any remedy, and then the poor Patient dies most
miserably. These things happen by not knowing the nature of the malady, and
remedies, not the variety of the bodies, and the nature of the party
infected. We must understand, that strong people, as Laborers, Mariners,
and such as are used to sore labor, endure more violent remedies and stronger
euacuations, then those which are weaker and more delicate, as women, sick
folks, tender children, Eunuchs and such like: for such persons the medicine
must be gentler, and the euacuations less, otherwise, in using of strong
remedies, ye put them in danger of death. Hereby it may easily appear, that
according to the temperature we must diuersifie the remedies: for in sanguine
and chollerick complexions, we must use other medicines then in the phlegmatic
and melancholic. So that those which say they have secrets and drinks for all
sorts, are rather to be called deceivers and Iuglers, then true ministers of
our Art.

The twelueth Chapter shows how by nine diverse ways this disease may be
cured.
THere are diverse learned men, who of long time have sought out, and put in
practice diverse remedies, as well general, as particular, for the extirpation
of this malady, of the which our ordinary practisioners use commonly four.
First, by decoction of Gaiac, secondly by unctions, thirdly by emplasters,
fourthly by perfumes, or suffumigations. But because these ways for the most
part are both dangerous and and uncertain, as I have often proved, being
also a thing that brings infamy to the diseased, by reason, that this manner
of cure, yea, though it were certain, could not be performed without the
knowledge of many. Therefore I have taken pains, both by daily practice and
observation, as also by conference with learned men touching this matter, to
find a way more certain for the curation, and not so dangerous, nor painful
for the patient, which may be performed, without keeping either bed or chamber,
and that without knowledge of any man, except it be inueterate. And it is
performed by Pills and decoction of white wine, decoction of Salsparel, by
electuarie, and by my Arabic powder, which before me have not been practiced:
and I may as^ure them all to be most certain for the curation of this disease,
and to have been experimented by me, in more than two hundred patients of
diverse Nations, in curing of whom, there happened no accident, but perfect
health. I can, by the like means, and invention of mine, cure Children of two
months old. Now seeing, by Gods help, I have found out things so profitable
for the recovery of health, in an infinite number of people, I will not hide
it, but publish the same so plainly, that every man by his own industry, may
attain to the knowledge hereof. But first I will set down the common way,
daily practiced, beginning with the first, which is the decoction of Gaiac,
and so proceed with the rest, after the same order, to the end, that all men
may know, both the vulgar and ancient way, and also the new, found out and
practiced by mine only diligence.

The 13, Chap. to cure the Spanish disease by decoction of Gaiac, which is the
first way.
AS for this manner of cure, that is done only by decoction, you shall hear
the form hereof, after the manner that is ordinarily used, like as I have
often proved my self. But that I ever healed any only by that way, I will not
say, not withstanding that there is no Surgion in France that has cured that
disease, more then I. Neither could I ever learn of any famous Surgion that
would affirm it to be a true cure. Yet the Spaniards and Italians be of an
opinion, that it may be done. Their reason is, that the first Spaniard that was
infected therewith in the occidentall Indies, in an I Will called S. Dominick,
having an Indian to his servant who professed to heal this disease, only by
that decoction was healed by him, who did also heal many others. So by his
example diverse others do use yt way. But I answer: At that time the sickness
was not so venomous as now, neither gave they it leisure to inueterat as we
do, nor yet was the people of our temperature, being for that cause more easy
to be healed. Among the four ways to heal this disease, I esteem this to be
the most weak and most uncertain, the which opinion is confirmed by all those
that have written, and practiced in this matter. Nevertheless by our
experience we find it a remedy, albeit not altogether sufficient for the
exturpation of this sickness, yet a great help to it, as also to many other
diseases, where need is to heat, attenuat, provoke sweat, and dry
moderatlie. So that I think it should be rather called a preparation to the
cure, then a perfect or true cure. For seeing it is not sufficient for the cure
of a simple sickness, as of a defluxion or Catharre, (this we see by our daily
practice) the which is healed by simple remedies, then much more it must be
weak for the taking away of this sickness: the which is of such nature, as
says Palmanius, that often it receives no curation, notwithstanding the use
of all proper remedies, which make a great euacuation, as well laxatiue as
others. Yet I confess, that there is some hidden faculty that helps much,
by reason that it heateth, rarifieth, and provoke both urine, and sweat, and
is also somewhat propper against the venim, consuming a part of the humors that
be most subtle, so appeaseth the dolor for a certain time, but the primitive
cause does remain with the most part of the humors which be deep, thick, and
gross, of the which comes Tophes, and Nodosities, in diverse parts of the
body, chiefly in the legs, arms, and head, accompanied with dolors. Always
let it be used with a good method and regime, with preparation of the humors,
as you have heard in the general Chaprer. So doing, the venim is almost
withdrawn, if the sickness be recent and the patient of a good temperature.
Therefore I will briefly set down the preparation of this decoction; the time
propper to use it, and the form how it shall be used, with the regime that
should be observed in the usage hereof, at all times. As touching the
preparation, after it be put in powder, so much as you will use, you must
steep it 24, hours in water, for by the long steeping, it receaueth more
force, the water must be warm, and upon one pound of the tree, put ten pounds
of water, either Fountain, or River, as counsels Montanus of Hermodact.
Drag. ij. That being done, it may be made in diverse manners, but the most part
do seethe it in a weak fire, in a pot of earth or Copper, well covered, so
that no air avoid: let it seethe till the second, or third, or fourth part be
consumed, which shall be done according unto the indication, and temperature of
the person. Some do make it by distillation. But whatsoever fashion you make
it of, a little before the full concoction, add some Licorice small broken, to
the effect it be more pleasant, so retire it from the fire, and being
refreshed, strain it through a cloth, and keep it close in bottels for thine
use, the which shall be in the morning, at such time as thou will sweat.
Thereafter thou shall make a second decoction, to drink in the meals, and in
other such hours, as shall be found to be expedient. It shall be made in this
form. Put to the grounds at the rest of the other decoction, as much water as
before, and seethe it as the other, but let it not consume so much, by reason
you shall use long, and much of it. We put to it, for the corroboration of the
stomach, Coriander, Anniseed, Cinnamon, and such like. The time most propper to
use the first decoction, is in the morning and afternoon, long time after
meat, taking a greater measure in the afternoon, then before noone. If the
patient be strong, and the sickness great, let the quantity be greater, and in
Winter, more then in Summer, and in cold folks, more then in hot folks. The
form how it shall be used, is after this manner: that he that uses it, must
be in bed warm, and in a hot air, or if the weather be cold, the Chamber
must always b^ ^ote, and very close, and the air rectified by odorifferous
things, the patient must not go forth, for it is dangerous to expose the body
to the air, the poares being open, as always happens after sweat. It must
be taken warm, to the end it may do the office the better, as also that by
the cold, it hurt not the concoctrix virtue of the ventricle. The quantity you
shall give, is Vnc. viij, or vij, or vj. Having so taken it, the patient must
be covered with clothes, which must be warm and light. The sweat must not be
violent, for by our experience we see, that albeit it be not violent, yet it
weakeneth the body in such a sort, that we are often forced to leave the propper
cure, and give order to the accidents: and the like may happen by the excessive
heat of the Chamber, so that good judgment is required in that matter.
Sometime for the thicknes of the skin, nature does not easily provoke sweat,
for the provocation whereof it shall be well done* to put to the feet and
shoulders, bottels or bladders full of the same decoction, that be very warm.
So cover well the head, as also the rest of the body, in such sort that nothing
be uncovered, saving only the mouth and nose. Before that you take the
potion, it shall be well done to make light frictions with hot clothes,
chiefly on the parts most dolorous, to the end the poares be the easier
opened, and also to provoke sweat. After he has sweat one hour or two, as he
may easily endure, you shall dry him with hot clothes, beginning first at the
parts which be opposite to the dolours, next to the parts dolents, and through
the rest of the body: tub well the head, and in time of sweating, dry often the
face, according as you perceive it to be moist. Being so dried, and the hot
clothes taken from him, he shall refresh him self as before, in his bed,
keeping him well from the cold, which might cause obstruction of the poares and
passages, and might be occasion to hinder the sensible and insensible
transpiration. Two or three hours after he be refreshed, and the motion
ceased, he may dine, using aliments of good juice, and according to the
regiment hereafter set down. Then four hours after meat he shall take a
draught, as before of this decoction, using them as before, and so continue 10,
or 20, days, according unto the forces of the patient, and nature of the
disease, using every three days either Glisters, or some potion laxatiue,
according unto the nature of the humor that domaineth. For often by the great
sweats, the belly not being loose, the excrements doe-drie, and so do much
offend. Those that use to cure by this way, make their decoction stronger in
the end, to the effect it be more desiccatiffe, as also the regime of life more
straight and rigorous, and this way they continue five or six weeks, sweating
every day once or twice, the space of 25. days, the rest of the time they use
good regime, and drink no other drink, for in that time say they, albeit he
sweat not, yet the poares that are opened shall always vapor out some vapors
or sprites venomous, so in that time they esteem them to be healed. But the
truth is, as I have often seen, that this form does nothing, save only hide
the sickness, and appease the dolors for a time, so that it is always recidiue,
and often times by the long and violent usage hereof, the humors are rendered
more drying, maling, and burned, of the which come miserable simptoms, as I
have often seen. In this time the regime is very straight. Whereof comes
great hurt for the straightnes hereof, ordayning only so much bread, with
such a number of plums, as is not sufficient to entertain nature: For in long
sicknesses (as says Hippocr. in his 1, Book, 4, Apho.) that ouer-straightnes
of life is always dangerous, specially in people that are accustomed to eat
much. For (as says the same Author) custom is a second nature. Therefore
they must not be restrained so soon, nor so much from their wonted use. In
like manner, that straight way of life with the decoction, does dry and burn
the blood, and other good humors, and does only consume a part of the
subtilest of the evil humor, and the grossest remains. So by this form of
proceeding, the most part of the people may not, nor has not, the force to
endure that hard intertainment, albeit it were vailable.

I have seen sundry, who by the great usage of this, are become altogether
vncurables. These faults are committed by some simple Barbers, and other
ignorant fellows, who although they know themselves to be ignorant, yet
being most arrogant, not only in this, but also other sicknesses, do take
upon them to cure and heal every disease, having their only recourse to the
diet, by the which they ruin infinite number of people, ignoring the malady,
the remedies, and the temperature of the patient; not considering whether the
sick have force to support that manner of traitment or no: and also whether
the humors be prepared, or if they need prepatation, or if their diet be
propper for the disease, using the same remedy in children and old folks. Ask
them the reason, they will answer you, that they have cured many, but neither
do they speak of the reason, not of those that they have killed. God defend
all Christians from such a kind of Empirickes. The true regime that we should
use in this sickness, must be wisely done, as well for the nature of the
malady, as for the malice of the accidents. As for the nature of the malady,
the age, the region, the time of the year, with diverse other circumstances,
are to be considered. And according unto these things, the regime of life must
be observed, either by adding, or by diminishing. In like manner, in these
Countries that be cold, the natural heat, retireth to the center of the body,
so that the concoction is done the better, and therefore they have better
appetite, as says Hippocr. in his 15, Aphor. and first Book. Also Gallen in
his Commentary, where he says. In Winter and Springtime the ventricle is
naturally hot, and therefore at that time the body should be more nourished.
For oftentimes the lack of nuriture does consume the radical humiditie, by
the action of the same heat, therefore our nuriture must be of a reasonable
quantity, and also of good juice, like as Mutton, Veale, Kidds, Capons,
Chickins, Fessants, Partriches, and little Birds commonly used, leaving all
water Fowls: the which shall be sometimes roasted, and sometimes sodden, as it
shall be found expedient. All things must be of light digestion, and of little
excrement. You shall abstain from plums, for although the decoction hereof be
cordial, the plumme it self is terrestre, and melancolick. Also abstain from
meat that engender gross humors and vicious, like as fish, the which is of
nature pituitous, and full of crudities, like as salt meat, Spicerie, Onyons,
Mustard, and such like, which may heat and inflame the blood, and lift up hot
and sharp vapors to the head and brains. The bread must be of wheat, well
baked, for so it remains longer in the ventricle. It shall be well done to
put with it the powder of Anniseede, and Coriander, for the strengthening of the
stomach. Some men counsel to use only two or three ounces a day, the which
we observe not in our diets: for this our diet is as who would say, Proba
victus ratio, that is, good nuriture, and such a quantity as agrees with the
temperature of the body, with the nature of the sickness, and with the time of
the year, so that no man can set down definitlie any diet, vnknowning both
the Patient and the disease. Let him eat sodden flesh at dinner, and at supper
also, if he be of a very hot temperature, or else he shall use roasted at
supper, in little quantity, or in stead of that, some reasonable quantity of
Reisons, the which do corroborate the entrals. His ordinary drink shall be of
the second decoction; composed as you have heard, drinking as much as he
thirsts. If at any time he be weak, and accustomed to drink Wine or Ale, he
may use a little Wine, mingled with the said decoction. He must abstain from
sleep in the afternoon, for it fills the head with vapors and
exhallations, augmenteth the dolors and Catarrhs. Use reasonable exercise, and
abstain from all affections of the mind that troubles or inflameth the
spirits and humors. It shall be well done to abstain altogether from the act
venerian: for it is a chief cause which hinders the sensible and insensible
transpiration, and euacuation of humors vicious, but reuokes them to the inward
part, and weakeneth much the parts neruous. After this form sometime remains
intemperature in the liver, which is for the most part hot, and in that we
ordain such things as have the virtue to refresh and temper these parts.
Sometimes it happens, that through the great sweat and much charging of
clothes, that the external parts of the body be very excrementous, and in
that, we bathe the Patient to cleanse him. For the same purpose we use the
decoction of Chine, the which has virtue to provoke sweat in like manner, and
dries and makes fat those that be lean. In making of this decoction, you
must cut it in small pieces, and take 2. ounces of it and steep it in 8. pynts
of warm water, the space of 24, hours, then sees it in an earthen pot till
the third part be consumed, and keep it close and warm by the fire. Use 8, or
10, ounces of it in the morning, and also in the afternoon, observing the
regime above specified, and make in like manner a second decoction of this as of
ye other. This is ye way ye I use to cure by decoction.

The 14. Chapter shows the way to cure by friction, which is the second way
used by our Ancients.
THis way of cure which was most commonly used by our ancients to all men, is
done by frictions and unctions, the which things are convenient for some
people, such things observed as you have heard in the general Chapter, and
that the Unguent be well composed, after the form of Ioh. Carpensis, who was
the first inuenter of unction with Quicksiluer. Yet was it neither thought by
himself, nor by oothers, meet to be used at all times, nor for all sorts of
temperatures and dispositions. For to some it weakeneth the entrals and solid
parts of the body, remaining sometimes in the body, which causes leanenes,
trembling, falling of the teeth, and diverse other accidents. Therefore it must
be used with great judgment, considering well first, if the sick can use any
other manner of medicine, and if the sickness be inueterat, engendered of gross
humors and vicious, and adherant to the solid parts, the which happens most
commonly to such as have been often cured before; considering also if there be
Nodosities in the legs and arms, vehemence of dolor in the head and joints,
the which accidents render the body and virtues hereof weak, by reason of the
vehement and continual dolors. When such things do happen, the friction may
be used to the inferior people, that has no great means to get deerer cure:
yet always the body and humors must be prepared, as ye have heard in the
general chapter; and the frictions used with discrerion, as ye shall hear,
and not to rub immoderatly, as do many ignorants, who do mischief to the
people by their unskillfulness, thinking to take away those humors that do
molest the body, and in the mean time, do consume the good humors and
radical humidity, of the which appear greater accidents then before. Therefore
it shall be well done, that no man presume to cure this way, except he know well
the temperature of the person, the kind of sickness, the time most proper, and
the true method to do the same, after this form following.

First of all, the way of life must be ordained as you have heard, after that,
the Patient must be purged with medicaments proper to the humor that offends,
always using such things as are set down in the general chapter for the
preparation of the humors, not forgetting the sections of the veins, with the
baths, in the which must be put such things as are set down in the general
chapter, or else warm water alone, in the which you may put 2. or 3. gallons of
Milk, the which is good to appease the dolors and soften the skin. Ye shall
enter the first day once, afterward twice every day, remaining one hour, or so
long as ye may well endure, observing always before, after, and in the bath,
such things as I have set down in my Chirurgerie chap. of baths. Thus ye shall
continue 5. or 6. days, as shall be found needful. If the body be dry and
hot, accompanied with nodosities and hardness in diverse parts, and retraction
of the members, as sometime happens either being inueterat or often under cure
before, in cold weather and not warmly kept. In that case we ad diverse sorts of
herbs, which have virtue to soften: namely, Mallows, Violets, Pellitory,
Patience, Fumetory, Cammomell, and Roses; take of each a handful and sees them
a little in water before ye put them in the bath: afterward, being gone out of
the bath, he shall be dried and put in a warm bed, afterward annoint him with
such things as have the virtue to loose and soften the hard parts, like as
Axungia humana, Anatis, Anseris, et Galline, an vnc 2. Axungie porci, butyri
recentis sine sale, an vnc 1. Medulle vituline, et cernine, vnc ss. Cum
gummatu^ ammoniaci bdellij, Galbani, et Oppopanacis, vnc 2. sem. malue lini, et
Fenugr. an vnc ss. Olei Liliori, Violari, et Lumbric. an vnc sem. fiat
linementu^. With this you shall rub the parts affected every time you come
out of the bath. Being so continued a certain space, we add to some of these
Axungies, a medicament which is esteemed by our Authors to have a propriety,
manifest or occult for this disease, the which is called Hydrargiro^; or
Quicksiluer. But by reason that of it comes diverse accidents as ye have
heard, being either evil of himself, or evil prepared, therefore, when thou
shall make the unguent, have recourse to the Chapter of Quicksiluer.

The 15. Chap. Of the form of the Friction.
THE body and humors being prepared as you have heard, the Patient shall be put
in a place naturally warm, or in the cold weather it shall be made warm by
Art, exempt of all cold and wind, which may penetrate in the body, and hinder
the operations of the medicaments. For this cause, those that do meddle with
this sort of cure, should have a little close Chamber with a chimney, where
always should be fire, the which must be great in the time of the friction,
and that in the morning at 5. or 6. of the clock, as time most propper. If the
Patient be weak, give him an Egg, or some other thing of light digestion, an
hour before, and half an hour after, a drink of the first decoction warm.
That being done, there must be a reasonable fire, the which the si^^ shall
stand before, turning always about, to the end the heat may penetrate in all
ye sides, and universally throughout the body. Put a cloth about his head,
another about his belly, to the end the unguent touch neither of these two
parts: then ye shall begin the friction at the articles, as hands, shoulders,
elbowes, and knees, afterward, universally throughout the whole body, excepting
always the head and the belly, the which is anointed by some ignorants,
causing thereby death, or some cruel accidents. Rub well, to the end it may
penetrate the better, and let the friction be more copious in the parts
affected then in the rest. The unguent being soked in a part, you must have a
hot sheet and put it about him, so laying him in a hot bed, which shall be
well covered with many clothes, not heavy, there he shall sweat an hour or
two, or as long as he may endure. If the sweat come not sufficiently, put to
his feet and shoulders some hot stones, or pots of earth, or of glass, or
some bladders full of the same decoction warm, as ye have heard in the cure by
decoction. The^ having sweat sufficiently, rub him well with warm dry clothes
til he be almost dry, so take the sheet from him, and after that rub him a
space with warm linen, till he be perfectly dry. Be diligent in rubbing well
his head, afterward let him refresh himself softly: so two howrs after he may
dine, and do the like afternoon, and other times when ye shall annoint him.
Yet there must be both mediocritie and method in the annoynting: for like as
our soft annoynting is not able to open the poares, in like manner the
ouer-strong does open the poars of the skin, making dolor, attraction, and
commotion of the parts. Take always heed to the forces of the sick, and
beware of that which is cause of all dolors and recidiues: that is, the number
of the frictions, by reason that some give ouer-few, fearing these accidents,
and to the contrary, some others that give ouer-many, in such sort that I have
heard men vaunt themselves, to have rubbed the poor Patient 37. times. Before
I had found out other ways for the cure of this diease, I have rubbed to the
number of 5. or 6, times, and oft-times but twice or thrice. Nevertheless, the
time may not be justly limited: but for the greatness of the sickness, and
temperature of the sick, we use the frictions till we perceive a reduction of
the venomous humors, either by flux of mouth or of belly, or of urine, and
sometimes by insensible resolution, but that is seldom and not certain. If we
see in bodies strong and hard, that nature will not work nor obey the
frictions by once a day annoynting, then they must be twice, that is, at 6. of
the clock in the morning, and two or three in the afternoon, so that one day
that way, does more profit then two days other ways. In weak and tender
persons ye must annoint but once a day, and sometimes but once in two days, by
reason that in such people, the ouer-oft annoynting, makes a resolution of the
spirits, and makes nature weak. When the sick begins to spet, it is a
token that the humors are prepared to avoid, and then once annoynting will do
more then twice before, and it shall be well done to rub but once, or twice
at the most afterward. So when nature gives leisure to expel the venim, if we
perceive that the euacuation does not continue till the whole malice be
euacuated, the^ to make it continue, we apply Emplaisters on the neck and
shoulders, composed after the form as ye shall hear in the chap. of the cure
by Emplaisters; so that it shall continue the flux to the perfect euacuation.
For the same effect we may use one Pill or two, composed as you shall hear in
the cure by Pills. In like manner, 8. gra. of my powder, called Puluis
Arabicus, which shall be taken in Conserve of Roses. Sometimes the flux of the
mouth is so great, that we are constrained to stay it by Emplasters
astringents, as of Mastick, Contra rupturum, de bolo, and such like, on the
neck and shoulders ventouses: also frictions with hot clothes; in like manner
Gargarismes, as ye shall hear in the chapter of ulcers in the mouth: In like
manner by Clysters emolients, to diuertise the humor to ascend to the superior
parts: sometimes by using all these remedies, the crise is imperfect, so leaves
some rest, the which by little and little does corrupt the whole mass, and so
makes worse accidents then before. Sometimes it remains in the body half a
year, or a year, sometimes 8. or 10. years, chiefly in persons mellancholick
and cold. So the most part of those dies most miserably, by reason of the
great internal corruption before any external apperance.

But to return to our purpose, we must take heed, that the remedies be
neither over violent nor indiscreetly applied, by reason of the great accidents
which ensue there-vpon, and chiefly excoriation and corrosion of the
intestins, consumption of the humor radical, whereof the sick becomes
tabid, or gets ulcers, sordids, and putrids in the mouth, which often
consumes a great part of the muscles that move the jaws, so the action does
decay. To some the jaws go together, so that afterward they are scarcely able
to open their mouth, as in Paris a Boy that had been handled that way, his
teeth did all fall, and his jaws grow together, in such sort that nothing
could enter into his mouth, so was I constrained to make incision through all
the gums, and so I healed him, yet could he not come to the perfection to eat
any hard thing. Some degenerat in gangrens, so that diverse dye miserably. As
for the corrosion of the guts, which often happens, you shall use Clisters
remollients, as this, Recipe maluar. Violar. an M. 1, fiat decoctio ad lib. 1,
dissol. vitellor. auor. duo olei viol. vnc. 2, butiri recentis vnc. 1, ss. fiat
Clister, which shall be used 2, or 3, times every day. As for the ulcers of the
mouth, have recourse to the propper chap. of ulcers. I have found out an
invention for the usage of the friction, the which is both more pleasant and
profitable, then that which you have heard, as here follows. In steed that
some put before the fire, I put them in a hot stoue being warmed with
decoction of things propper, to soften and rarifie the poares, so by that
means all the parts are all a like hot, the which is not before the fire, by
reason that one side being warm, the other is cold, besides that there be
some who would be ashamed to be seen naked, and in the stoue they are not
seen. Then the patient being there hot, with a cloth about his head, you
shall give him a little of the unguent by a hole made for the purpose, and let
him rub him self in such places, and after the form that you have heard. That
being done, put him in a hot sheet in bed, and cover him as before. By this
means he shall have the flux of the mouth as the other, and in a shorter
space. During the time of the which flux the patient must be nourished with
things licquid, and of good juice, and light digestion, like as soft Eggs,
pottage, made of yolke of Eggs, consumats made of extremities of Calfes, or of
Fowls, French barley, Horge Munde, of the which you shall use little, and often,
washing always the mouth after, remembering that neither before, nor in the
time of the flux must be used any washing, or drink, or any cold thing, the
which things all do stay the flux. If the patient be weary of these things,
you may infuse white bread in wine, and mingle with it a little barley water,
thereafter strayning the bread, that the substance remain in the wine. If in
this time the patient be constipat, use somtymes Clysters, Lenitiues, or
Suppositories.

The 16, Chap shows the way to cure by Emplasters, which is the third way
that our Ancients did use.
THE Emplasters are thought to have the same effect that the liniments have, if
the body be prepared, as you have heard in the general Chapter. Nevertheless
the operation is slow and very uncertain in many, yet for those that do use
them, they must be composed, not only of things written by John de Vigo, but
also other things mingled with them, that have the virtue to soften, resolve,
and dry, according to the nature of the humors, which should be euacuated and
simptoms, if giving also that, there be also some Quicksiluer mingled with it,
prepared as you have heard, the which has virtue against the venim, which is
cause of the sickness, the Emplasters have great virtue on the part whereupon
it is applied, both by reason of the ingredients, as also because they remain
always adherent to the part, so their actions are continual, and are
ordinarily applied where the humors are gross and vitius, adherent to the part
solides, like as Tophes and Nodosities, they also mittigate the dolors, and
resolve the hardness, so that they remain a certain time: for like as that
venim is rooted for a time, in like manner time must be had for the extirpation
of the same. So in that they be most profitable. Nevertheless I think not the
Emplaster or cerot has force to make euacuations sufficient, for the
extirpation of the sickness. I have sometimes proved it, and have cured some that
way, others I have been constrained to seek an other way of cure. I consesse
in all persons being used it does take away a part of the evil, so it hides
the sickness for a time. I find them most propper to be used when the malady is
recent, specially in the first, second, or third kind in young folks, and such
as be easy to move, also in shamefast people, and such as will not suffer the
friction. To such I use this method. First preparing the body and humors, as
you have heard in the general Chapter, next sweat five or six days, after
that method as is set down in the Chapter of the decoction, thereafter he
shall remain in bed using such regime, as you have heard in the last Chapter:
also before the flux of the mouth as in the time of it. Your Emplaisters shall
be made after this form.

Recipe Emplastri Iohannis de vigo lib. 1, de meliloto et oxicroij an lib. ss.
argenti viui, preparati vt dictum est vnc. viij, olei de spica parum, fiat
Emplastrum: the which shall be put on leather or strong cloth, that shall cover
the arms from the hands to the shoulders, and the shoulders, and about the
neck, on the legs from the knees to the toes, and always must it be more
thick in the articles, then in other parts, letting them remain till such
time you perceive nature begin to make eduction of the humors venomous. If
nature be long in working, it shall not be evil done, to make little
particular frictions in the bed once or twice, to the effect the euacuation be
more easy. In some persons if the humors be well prepared, and in good season,
the Emplasters begin to make eduction of the humor, in 3, or 4, days, most
commonly by the mouth, the which sometimes is so violent, that we are
constrained to stay it: first by taking away a part of these Emplasters, and
after that stay the violent flux by such means as you have heard in the
Chapter of frictions. The ulcers that ensue there-vpon shall be cured after the
method set down, in the Chapter of ulcers of the mouth. If there happens
prurit, or blisters, in the part where be the Emplasters, they shall be removed,
and foment these parts with hot wine, in the which Camomell, Roses, and such
like have been boiled, the which has the virtue to consume that which is
cause of the said prurit: afterward the place being dried, apply the same
Emplaster again. Furthermore you shall understand that by the application of
these Emplasters, nature does sometimes discharge by flux of belly and urine,
but I never saw it discharge by flux of the belly save one time, neither is it
so certain as that of the mouth. I have used them to some men and women who
had no euacuation, notwithstanding all preparations of the humors, so was I
constrained to use other form of cure. By all these things you may clearly
judge, what the usage of this cure may avail to the most part of Patients.

The 17, Chap. to cure by perfumes and suffumigations, which is the fourth way,
used by our Ancients.
PErfumes which were used of old, and now also by some ignorant people, for the
curation of this malady, the which in no manner are to be approved for that
intention, being not possible to cure the sick that way. They be most strong
and vehement, of the which come great accidents, and oftentimes death,
specially to those that are lean and of temperature hot and dry, as I have
often seen. In Paris in the time of the troubles, there was great companies of
Spaniards and Neapolitans, amongst the which was a Barber Neapolitan, who
professed to heal al diseases, but chiefly this, by the means of his
perfumes, so that it happened him one time to have eight under cure, of the
which five dyed, three lived, and of them three, two became paralatick, and one
deaffe, and many others dyed in his hands. I have seen infinite others dye by
the ignorance of such curers, who handle men like Horses, using only one
method to all men, little and great, strong and weak. Of this little number
that escapes some become tabid, some hidiopick, for they are most hurtful to
the lungs, and makes great resolution of the spirits, which have great
conximitie with the brains, so that the spirits animal is deprauated and
diminished: to diverse happens contraction of the sinews, paralisie,
trembling, apolexie, with diverse other evil accidents, of the which, if time
would permit, I should give many examples. For these causes and diverse other, I
think it not meet, either to show the way or the just dose of their
poysonable ingredients, like as Orpin, Calcant, Cinnaber, and such like, by
reason that perhaps some men will be so unhappy as to use them. Nevertheless I
doubt not, but perfumes such as we use, are a great help for some particular
affections, which remain after the cure done by any of the three ways
precedent, as deafnes, pain in the head, joints, legs, and arms, falling of
hair, and such like. Wherein I have known them to have done great good, both
to tenuat and incise: as also to expel out by sweat, that which remains; the
which nature, (either deprauated or hindered,) could not cast forth, by reason
of the sickness and tenacitie of the humor, and also of the skin and narrownes
of the passages. So, if the virtue to provoke sweat, as also to loose the
belly, be always moderatly used, and composed only with such things, and
after the manner as ye shall hear, (the which shall not be strong, to the end
they may make no resolution of the virtues, neither hinder them, nor deprive
the action of the parts:) then they shall be made of the roots of Dictam,
Peonie, Tormentil, Iris florentie, Cinnamon, Francumcens, Masticke, Oliban,
Ladanum, an drag, 2. Turpentine of Venice, Calam arematieke, Garyefillate,
Nutmeg, Semen citri, Ceruse, Sandolor. species, an drag, 1. Amber, vnc sem. Let
all these be put in powder, and kept for your use. There be diverse others,
set down in many Authors, and especially by Fallopius in his Treatise De
morbo Gallico. To perform this, ye must have a tubbe, with a tent or
pauillion, or at the least some thing that shall cover it, that no air enter.
The tub must be hot before he enter in, he must be all naked, and sit on a
stool, putting on either side of him an instrument of iron or brass, wherein
shall be little clear coals, upon the which ye shall cast of these powders
here named, to ye weight of one dragm or two, and so shall continue a certain
space, or so long as he may endure, to receive the fume of the same, till such
time as he sweat. If it be possible, he shall keep his eyes close, and put out
sometimes his head. If the vapor be ouer-great, beware that he swound not, as
many do. Therefore as soon as ye see him grow faint, retire him, and put
him in a bed, wrapping him in a warm sheet, and put hot clothes on his
stomach and belly, so he shall sweat easily an hour or two without violence.
Afterward dry him, and use him in such sort as ye have heard in the Chapter of
decoction, and as also touching the way of life. But this must be done in the
morning, as time most propper, continuing 3. or 4. days, as shall be found
needful. If peradventure he be found weak, give him an Egg, or a toste in
wine an hour before he enter in.

These Perfumes ye must use as well perticulerly as generally, to any part
where any thing does remain, as a leg, or an arm, or the secret parts,
nothing being discovered saving the parts affected, so of it come great
commodities. For the same purpose I use dry stones in stead of the bathing tub,
with a persume of this decoction following. Take of Fountain water, lib, 20.
white wine, lib, 4. mingle them with these herbs following. Rec. Saluie,
Eetanice, Stecados, Sambuci, Origani, Folior. lauri, Rorismarini, Minthe, Flor.
Cammomille, Meliloti, et Anethi, Hyprici, an m. 3. Seminum anisi, Feniculi,
Radicum cyperi, Calamiaromatici, Iris florentiae, an vnc 1. Omnia frustulatim
concisa. Sees all these in the pot, and let the vapor pass by the conduit,
so receive the vapor so long as you find it expedient, and sweat in your bed
thereafter as before. If the pain be particular, in one part, you must receive
the vapor only on that part, covering well the rest of the body: and this we
use in diverse other maladies, which shall be set down at large in my
Treatise called The poor man's guide. Also, I use the same perfume in the
bathing tub like as the first, where I have any suspicion that any venim
remains, to the end the parts may be corroborat and comforted, the which
shall be composed in the same manner, adding only to them a little Aqua vita,
the which shall be put on the hot stones in the said bathing tub, on each side
of the sick; so receive the fume thereof as of the perfume, sweating and drying
as before: and so continue for 3. or 4. days, the which most commonly I use
to all solkes in the end of the cure, by the which I have found great help.

The 18. Chapter, to heal this disease by Pills of Mercure, which is the first
way that I have used.
Having sufficiently showed the four ways commonly practiced, by our
ordinary practisioners for the curation of this disease, I will in like manner
let you understand, in so short terms as may be, the ways which I have used
during these ten years: whereby I have cured many, and that very easily
and with small pain, as ye shall hear. First of all to perform this cure by
Pills of Mercure, the body must first be prepared, purged and bled, with other
such like things as ye have heard in the Chapter precedent: also making the
sick to sweat 4. or 5. days, either by such a decoction as shall be found to
be convenient for the habitude of the diseased, or else by my powder, called
Puluis indicus, set down in The poor man's guide, very propper for many
other diseases also. In the mean time, the diet shall be of meats of good
digestion, sodden at dinner, and roasted at supper, always observing the
temperature as ye have heard. His ordinary drink shall be wine, well mingled
with decoction of Chine or Salsparil. He may drink sometime of Chine alone,
always the first drink at meals shall be of wine, for the corroboration of the
ventricle. All these things being duly performed, he shall use of these Pills
the space of 30. or 40. days, taking every day one after his first sleep,
keeping him always warm, that shall provoke a flux of mouth in short space
without violence, the which shall not be perceived but as in a man that has a
Catharre. Sometime happens flux of belly, the which for the most part is
violent, wherefore we use Clysters, wherein hot iron or steel has been often
extinguished, giving him leave to rest a day or two, using one of the first
Pills. If by this means the violence cease not, ye shall use such remedies
as ye have heard in the Chapter of friction, or else 4. grains of the
confection called, Requies Caroli quinti, which is most excellent for all flux
of the belly. Afterward, the violence being stayed, give the rest of the Pills,
every day one, which shall weigh 2. drag. Thus ye shall do, if the sickness be
inueterat, and the body robust and difficult to be moved, onels it shall be
sufficient to use 20. of the said Pills, the which shall be made as follows.
Res. Salsparil, et Seen mundate, an vnc 1. Turbith, Hermodict. Agarici, et
Rhubarb electi an vnc sam. Colocynth, Subtiliter puluerate drag, 6. Hydrargyri
been preparati, vnc 4. Extinguatur diligentissime cum terebint, vnc 1. Addatur
theriace, vnc 1. sem. Sir. Ros. lax. q. s. Ambari grisij, drag 1. Misce et fiat
massa. Cap. drag. 2. aut 3. according unto the forces. In like manner ye may use
these that follow, to the same effect. Rec. Mercurij, drag 25. Musci; drag 2.
Puluis Arab. drag 10. Scammonij, drag 3. Cum succo Limonu^, reducantur ad
formam solidam. Ex quibus dabitur scru. 1. singulis diebus. In the mean time
it shall be well done to use this Opiat, which is cordial, made after this
manner: Rec. Cons. Nenupharis, Violati, Buglossi, Borage, an vnc sem. Cori.
citri conditi. drag 2. Diamar. frigidi, scru. 4. Rasure corni cerui. scr. 1.
Metridatij veteris drag. 1. Cum sir. Viol. fiat opiata, cap. scru. 4. Mane et
taneundem ante cenam.

This being done, ye shall purge the Patient, and afterward cause him to sweat
5. or 6. days, in a dry Stoue, taking always a drink of the decoction of
Salsparill, before he enter in. And when he has remained half an hour or
three quarters, (as he may easily endure,) he shall be put in his bed to
sweat. So by this means, nothing of the venositie shall remain. Be diligent
to excitat the head to sweating, and dry it well, by reason that oftentimes, by
the negligence hereof, extreme pain of the head follows, and defluxions on
the eyes, deafnes, and such like: the which things I attribute to the little
sweating of the head. I never heard any man complain either of the head or of
the articles, after this sort of cure. If peradventure the temperature of the
person cannot agree with this kind of remedy, as sometime it happens, I
change my cure, according to the temperature of the Patient diseased with this
sickness.

The 19. Chapter, to cure by decoction of White wine, which is the second way
that I use.
THis way of cure is very expedient for those that are newly infected, if
they be of good habitude, and of good constitution, but not for all kinds
hereof, nor for all dispositions, nor yet at all times: for the sickness being
inueterat, composed with gross humors and vicious, adherent to the part cold
and solid, which is the bones and other spermatick parts, as it happens in
those that have been handled often before, and have Nodosities and dolors
inueterat of the head and articles, in such sort that the parts be rendered
weak, and therefore nature discharges upon them that which is contrary,
whereof an evil habitude is engendered in the body, and the virtue is rendered
weak, by the continual and vehement dolor. These things (I say) bening so,
this way is not sure: therefore ye must wisely consider of the Patient and of
the sickness, and thereafter the body and the humors must be prepared, as ye
have heard in the general chapter, not forgetting the purgations and sections
of the veins, with good regime, as is said in that Chapter. Afterward you
shall use 5. or 6. days a decoction Sudoriffick, and sweat according unto the
method set down in the Chapter of Salsparil.

This being duly performed, the rest of the time, which will be 15, or 20,
days, you shall use this decoction that follows taking a good draught every
morning, and a brotle an hour after, made of butter and fine herbs, as
Succory, Sorrel, Lettice, Purslaine, Burrage, Buglos, and such like. The
decoction shall be made in this form. Recipe medulle Gaiaci been pulti. lib.
1, chine tessillatim excisae lib. ss. Salseparile vnc. 5, senne mundante vnc.
4, Hermodact. vnc. 1, macerent. omnia preter Hermodact. et sennam, in 12,
pintis Scoticis vini, spatio 16, horar. bulliant ad consumpt. quarte partis,
imponendo sennam et Hermodact. per dimidiam horam ante quam finiat ea
consumptio. In fine decoctionis add aliquid liquiriti. Auferat ab igne et
coletur. If the time be either cold or in Winter, go not forth, if other wise,
go forth, and drink always when you are dry, but specially take a good
drink an hour before supper. This way is most sure as I have often proved,
chiefly to women and children, but then your decoction must be weaker, as you
shall consider by your good judgment. If you perceive it to work much, use it
only in the morning and before supper, but at meals and other times use the
decoction of Salsparill, which shall be composed of two ounces of Salsparill
sodden in eight pints of water, till the fourth part be consumed, and drink of
that when you are dry. After the cure you shall purge again with some
medicament proper, and draw blood of the vain most apparent, if there be
plenitude. Afterward return to your former diet by degrees.

The 20, Chap. to heal the sickness by the decoction of Salsparill and Chine,
which is the third way that I use.
THis is a way of cure that I have often experimented with good success,
chiefly in people of good temperature, and the malady not being yet entered
into the solid parts. Then to perform the cure to such as it is convenient,
the body and the humor must first be prepared, with purgations, letting of
blood, and sweating, as it appears in the general Chapter. The regime shall
be observed, as is said in the Chapter of the decoction of Gaiac. Afterward you
must use of this decoction the space of 20, or 30, days, as you shall find
expedient, the which shall be composed after this form. Recipe Salsparile,
vnc. 4, que sit tenuitur in cisa, Rad. Chine per tessellas excise vnc. 2,
macerentur spatio 24, borars in 10. pintis Aque fontane, Bulliant lento igne ad
consumpt. mediepartis coletur. Of this you shall take a good draught every
morning, according unto the strength of the Patient, sweating there-vpon in
bed, as you have heard in the Chapter of the decoction of Gaiac, doing the like
in the after noone, and so continuing every day, during the time above
specified, excepting always the 7, or 8, day, in the which you shall use some
thing laxatiue, or at the least some of the same decoction made laxatiue after
this form. To a pint of the decoction add half an ounce of Seen, 2, dragmes
of Hermodact, and a little Lycoris, after the full ebullition add an ounce of
sirop of Roses laxatiue. This you shall take in the morning, and a broth an
hour after, made of fine herbs and butter. If this be not convenient enough,
you shall take three grains of my powder called Puluis Tartarianus, or else
half an ounce of mine electuary. The preparation of both is set down in The
Poor man's guide. The day of the purgation he must neither sweat, nor go
forth. The rest of the time he may go forth if the weather be warm.
Nevertheless he must not rise out of bed till two hours after the swea^ be
passed. To some it shall be enough to sweat once a day, and so 18, or 20, days
shall be sufficient. It has greater virtue then Gaiac, and more propper for
those that are of hot temperature. Of the grounds of the rest of this
decoction you may make an other, putting to it five pints of water, and five
pints of why wine, if the sick be weak, or else all water, sees it till the
third part be consumed, and drink of it ordinarily. It has the virtue to
restore those that be weak. The first decoction is most excellent in many
other sicknesses, as Catharres that distill from the head, obscure Cankers,
tumors difficult to discuss, good for a cold stomach, discusseth flatuosities,
most excellent for old ulcers, but best of all for this disease, as I have often
proved to the contentment of many who used that remedy.

The 21, Chap. to heal this disease by my Electuary, the which is the fourth
way that I use.
THis manner of cure which I have often used to my special friends, for the
taking away of this venim, either being recent or inueterat, is done after
this manner. First purge the body with some light purgation, afterward let
blood. Next prepare the humors as you have heard in the general Chapter.
Afterward purge again with this medicament, Recipe decoct. pect. ad dosim
infun^^^^ cathaliconis duplic drag. 10, sir. Ros. pallidar. ex agarigo et senna
vnc. 1, fiat potio, quam (...), horis ante iusculum. Afterward you must let him
blood in the other arm, (...) there-vpon to rest a day, purging him after that
with an ounce of Casse, and an ounce of Sirrop of Succory composed with Rubarb.
Afterward (...) 5, days: and going out of the bath, take a drink of the
decoction of Salsparil (...) after the form as you have heard in the precedent
Chapter. In the mean time (...) beginning to the end, you shall use the regime
set down in the Chapter of Salsparil (...) ordinary drink shall be of the
second decoction of Salsparill. He must neither drink wine nor Ale or Beer,
during the time of the cure, which will last 25, or 30, days, during which
time, he shall use every morning half an ounce of my confection, the
description whereof is clearly and brifelie set down in the treatise entitled
The Poor man's guide, with the sorme how it should be used for many diseases
that it is approbriat to. As for the usage thereof in this disease, there is
only to be observed, that you must neither eat 3, hours after nor 3, before
the taking thereof. And if the taking of it in the morning does not sufficiently
work, you may take as much in the afternoon. Sometime by using of it twice a
day it works too fast, wherefore you must well consider and take it but once
in one day, or once in two days, according as you find it work, and if it
works as it ought to do, it shall be 5, or 6, times every day without
violence. This is a remedy most excellent to be used both Summer and Winter, as
well to young as to old. It heals perfectly, as well the inueterat as the
recens, albeit the time be somewhat longer, being no need to keep the lodging,
nor to alienat the sick from any affairs, the which things are all performed
without the knowledge of any man. Among other excellent virtues that it has,
it is most profitable for the poor people, for many reasons. Wherefore albeit
it be a very precious jewel unto me, yet for the love that I have to the
common wealth, I will not hide it. It has also many and diverse virtues
pertaining to the infantment of a woman, the which I have plainly declared in
mv treatise of The Infantment, the which by Gods help shall be shortly put in
print, and dedicated to the most virtuous Princess the Queens Majesty of
Scotland.

The 22, Chap. to heal this disease by the Arabic powder, which is the fifth
way that I use.
TO perform this manner of cure, the body and the humors must be well prepared
by sirrops or decoctions, purgations, and letting of blood, Bathes, and good
regime, as you have heard in the precedent Chapter. It shall be expedient, that
the sick sweat 5, or 6, days, using the decoction of Salsparill, Chine, or
Gaiac, the which shall be diuersified according to the diversity of the
temperature, as you have often heard before. Afterward during the time of the
c^re which shall be 20, or 25 days, he shall use things of good nuriture, and
drink ordinarily decoction of Salsparill, abstayning from all cold drink,
either actually or potentially. These things being performed, ye shall use of
this powder every day once, or once in two days, according as ye shall
perceive the effects thereof, the which shall be ministered after this order.
First take 10. grains of the said powder, and mingle it with conserve of
Roses, or of Nenuphar, which shall be made in form of a little Pill, taking
it in going to bed, 2. hours after meat. Do the like in the morning,
observing the same order, and that night in like manner: taking only 5. or 6.
grains of the same powder, mingled with the said Conserues, and so continuing
every day, or every two days once, till the perfect euacuation of the venim be
perceived, which will be, during the time above specified, as ye shall clearly
perceive by the signs of perfect health. You shall mark that ye working of
this medicament is often by the mouth, and seldom by the belly, and that like
as it is seldom, it is also very long. Therefore observe such cautions in the
ministering hereof, that ye provoke flux of the mouth, rather the^ of the
belly. Yet whether of them ye perceive nature tend most to, you shall do well
to follow nature, and do the best to continue that euacuation, giving no
occasion in the contrary for the hinderance hereof. This is a reamedy which I
have used sometimes to great Personages, as a thing most propper for them, for
two reasons, first, because it is pleasant, and works thoroughly, secondly,
because it is more costly: and therefore not so convenient for the common
people, whose ability is insufficient to bear the charge thereof. The
composition of it, which will endure the space of three months, with the true
administration of the same in diverse sicknesses, are set down in my Treatise
called The poor man's guide.

The 23. Chapter shows the way to cure young infants infected with this
disease, and first practiced by me.
SEeing that in the formsr chapters I have plainly showed, after what method
our Ancients, and I my self in like manner have cured old folks of this
disease, now in like manner I will set down the way to cure young Infants.
True it is, that diverse Practicioners have of a long time taken pains to find
out some certain method for the same, seeing the great number that daily were
infected, partly by their Parents, partly by their Nurses, and such other
causes, as ye have heard in the Chapter of the causes of this disease. But no
true or perfect, curation could be found by them, because they were contented
with some Paleatiue remedies, whereby the children seemed to be healed till
they came to be 2. or 3. years old: in the which time, by the acrimonie or
sharpnes of the malign humor, the bones do consume, the roof of the mouth
and nose do fall, so that not one amongst a thousand escapes miserable death.
Whereupon, I considering these things, (and as I had found out some easy way
for old folks, so being requested by many of my special friends, and diverse
other honest men, whose children were infected, to set out some certain
method for the delivery of such young infants, who undeservedly were destroyed
with this disease,) after long travail I found out 2. or 3. ways, the which
in deed are good, but very painful, so that afterward, by mine own
diligence, and diligent conference with some of the Docters in Chirurgerie in
Paris, I found out this way, which is most sure and easy, if it be done with
good judgment, and with the method that follows. First, if the Nurse be
infected, the child shall be taken from her and nourished with other women's
milk, or Goats milk; otherwise, if either the Nurse be little infected, or
else the child so young that it may not be so nourished, in that case purge the
Nurse with Confection Hamech, using always good regime, like as ye have heard
in the Chapter of electuarie. She shall also use a decoction sudoriffick the
space of three or four days, and after that, a decoction of Salsparil during
the time of the cure, which should be three weeks or a month, using every day
till the first six days be past, an ounce of my electuary, taking it in the
morning, like as in the proper chapter, or else six grains of the powder
Arabic, which shall be taken as ye have heard, continuing always till you
perceive full eduction of the venim. In the mean ti^e, the child shall take a
little syrrop of Succorie composed with Rubarb; afterward, you shall make an
ointment of Rosat Mesues, or such like, putting to a pound of it an ounce of
Hydrargire, well prepared and extinguished, adding to it, half an ounce of
Turpentine, and incorporating all together in form of liniment. This being
done, you shall cause the Nurse or your self, to rub the liske, which is the
part between the thigh and the body, the first day. After that, rest a day
or two, and rub the thighs a little: this will provoke a flux of the belly.
Then rest two or three days, to the end the flux be not ouer-violent, and then
rub a little the arms, resting there-vpon 2. or 3. days again: next, the
feet and legs, and rest 2. days: next, the back. Here you must mark, that
according as you perceive the working of the medicament, you must abstain
sometimes 4. or 5. days between every friction, so that the flux of the belly
must be entertained without violence, for if it were done every day, it would
be both violent and dangerous. In this time the virulencie of the venim shall
avoid, yet will it render the child extreme weak, by reason of the great
euacuation, and therefore it shall be most requisite to use this water
following: Rec. Medullae Gaiaci, vnc 2. Saisaparile vnc 4. Macerentur p^r diem
in libris 8. Aque fontanae, et fiat decoctio ad libras 6. in col. ponatur in
alembico, addendo conseruae Buglossi, Borrag. Enule Campanae, Anthos. an vnc.
1. sem. Cardui Benedicti, Sumachi, Anis^, Cardomoni, an drag. 3. Mithridatij,
opt. et Theriacis antiquae. an drag. 2. sem. Citri et Cort, citri conditi, an
vnc sem. Zach. albissimi. lib. sem. Cinam^mi, vnc. 1. dictillentur in balneo.
M. Et sumet puer singulis diebus, cochlearia tria per diuersas horas. By this
means I have cured many of diverse ages, and some that were not four months
old. The time of the cure will be 15. or 20. days. It shall be well done
every 6. or 8. days to purge the Nurse, so in this time the cure shall be
performed in both persons.

The 24. Chapter shows the tokens of perfect health.
AFter the general and particular cure of this disease, there remains some
rest which tormenteth the body, and makes the sickness recidiue, yet sometimes
very uneasy to be known, if the sick be perfectly cured: for this cause (as
also to the end if any thing remains, you may give order for the taking away
of the same) ye shall hear certain signs most assured of perfect health,
and that nothing remains. The first and chief sign is the ceasing of the
dolors both universal and particular, specially in the night, and the
regeneration of that which was lost, as the hair and bones putrified,
desiccation of the ulcers, softening of the hard parts, and returning to the
natural color. In like manner, the appeasing of all the symptoms subject to
that disease, helping of the members, as before, doing all wonted actions
without any impediment or hinderance. If these signs be certainly perceived,
you may assure your self that there remains nothing: and so we end this
Treatise.

The second Treatise shows the way to cure the accidents of the Spanish
sickness.
The first Chapter.
SEeing I have sufficiently showed in the former Treatise, of the curation of
this disease, which generally happens throughout all the body, by the which
all men that do profess any learning, and cheefely Chirurgia^s, may easily
cure the same. Now in like manner will I show the true cure of the accidents of
this sickness, which ordinarily we call the Venerian sickness particular: yet of
these there be also many sorts, for some go before the malady, and if it be
not yet confirmed, some follow, and some happen in the cure, and some after the
cure imperfectly performed. Of those which go before, which we call precedents
or forriders, is ulcers and cankors of diverse fashions in the yeard, burning of
urine, Chaudepisses, Carnosities, Pulluines, and such like. Yet sometimes any of
these may happen without the sickness. Those that follow, be pustuls and
ulcers throughout all the body, cheefely in the secret parts, and also in the
forhead, and diverse other parts of the head, in the emunctories, in the mouth,
throat, and fundament, falling of hair, dolors and nodosities of the joints.
Those that happen in the cure, are lack of appetite and walking, ulcers in the
mouth, intestins and conduit of urine, with diverse others, which happens in
diverse manners, according unto the varieties of the ways of cure. Those that
happen after the imperfect cure, make diverse evil accidents, as the fixed
grief of the whole head, or some part thereof: also of the legs, arms, and
joints, nodosities, with putrefaction of the bones, deafenes, defluxions of the
eyes, filthy and creeping ulcers, Fissures, and Darters in the hands, feet,
and diverse other parts of the body, diminution of substance, so that the body
becomes lean and atrified. Of these symtoms, some be cured by the general
cure, but here we shall content us to speak of those which are cured by
particular cure. If not by duly administering of propper remedies, the part
affected becomes rebellious and obeys no remedies, the Patients are tobe
suspected to have great venenositie in the body: where-upon, for greater
assurance, to save them from the universal sickness, I cause them to use every
morning, of my electuary half an ounce; by that means, the evil humor does
auoy de which did entertain the sickness, and so is healed easily. If it
chance otherwise, it shall be well done to cause the sick to use good regime
the space of 10. or 15. days, during the which time, ye shall use a decoction
of Salsparil, or Gaiac, according to his temperature, and some liniment
particular on the part affected, as also on the parts adiacents: the which
liniment shall be composed of Axungie, rosat Mesues, or Butter, adding such
quantity of Mercure as ye shall find expedient. By this linement and the
decoction, ye shall have a great help in the cure.

The second Chapter shows the way to cure those ulcers that happen in the
yeard.
Here we shall begin at the malign ulcers in the yeard, which take their
original by carnal conjunction, laying a part for this time, those that
happen by diverse other occasions, as by having to do with women in the time of
their flowers, and also by the great confrication of some women that be
straight and hot, the which for the most part may be healed of themselves,
notwithstanding we shall speak of some part of them. Of those ulcers which be
malign, some happen in the gland, called by the Latins, Balanus, and when they
be most copious, they be least malign. Others happen in the Prepuce, which is
the utter skin that covers the gland. Those ulcers, for the most part be
few in number, but more dangerous, sometimes complicked with virulencie or
corrosion, with blew or blackish color, accompanied with callosity, and
sometimes with filthiness or rottenness, and evil habitude of the body. All
these accidents must be corrected, or else the ulcers cannot be healed, the
which being neglected, in short space become cacoethick and malign.

Some do end in gangrene or mortification, and then we are constrained to
cute the whole member, or at the least, some portion thereof. For the which you
may have recourse to my Chirurgie, Chapter of gangrene. Sometimes these ulcers
do degenerat into Carcinomes, which if so happens, you may have recourse to
the Chirurgie, Chapter of Carcinomes. It shall be well done, not to neglect the
simplest ulcer in the yearde. For oftentimes by the neglecting of the
universal curation in the beginning, and using only some repercussiue and
astringent remedies, the disease is healed but for a time, so that afterward
it returns within half a year, or a year, or two years, sooner or later,
according to the habitude of the person diseased. I handled in Paris a
Gentleman, who ten years before had a simple ulcer in his yearde, and being
evil cured by sorce of repercussiues, the venim did retire to the center of
the body. So after the ten years ulcers and pustuls appeared in his yearde and
at the perineum, the prostats and parastats became all putrified, and in like
manner the whole scrotum. So he dyed miserably, notwithstanding all remedies,
as many do, when the humor virulent is retired and hidden long time in the
body, the which may chance in old folks. For in such it consumes inwardly
before any appearance without. But to return to our purpose, for the curation
of malign ulcers in the yearde, we must use some light purgations, letting of
blood, good regime, according to the temperature of the body, using also
decoction of Gaiac and Salsparill, abstayning from all strong purgatious, also
bleeding of the arm or any superior part, by reason that the strong medicines
do revoke the humor to the center of the body, the which nature would
discharge by the ulcers, letting of blood in the arms, or any superior parts
does the same. So that if these things be not well observed, the general
sickness follows: for this cause the purgation shall be weak, and the letting
of blood in the inferior parts, as in the legs or feet, also with such method
that the part affected be not irrited. As for the simple ulcers, that be not
malign, but come only by great rubbing on women that be hot, or by great
violence on little Maids, or by some women yt are ouer-straight, (which
seldom happens) or by women that have their purgations, and such other as
you have heard, we use only drying medicaments, and without mordication, like
as powder of Tutia prepared, Terra Sigillata, burnt lead, Bolus Vera, and such
like. You shall put either of these alone, or diverse together, mingled with
some medicament, as Pompholix, Cerat Galien, ressat Mesue, oil Rosat. and
apply it on the ulcer, it shall presently be healed, like as any other simple
ulcers, being used after the same sort. If the ulcer be joined with some other
evil affection or intemperie, the cure must begin at the taking away of the
same. But by reason the evil temperie may be cold, hot, dry, or moist, we
must diuersifie the remedies, according to the intemperie of the humor. And if
the intemperie be hot, you shall use cold things, like as fomentation of juice
of Plantin or water of the same, Nightshade, Knotgrasse, Pastorspurse. These,
or either of them shall be applied on the part, and about the part a cloth wet
of Oxicrat, or Emplaister of Dyapalma, malaxed with oil Rosat. cerat Galien,
Nutritum, de bolo, and diverse others of like quality. If the temperie be cold,
use things contrary, like as fomentation of Claret wine, in the which shall be
sodden, Sage, Origanum, Time, Calaminte, Mariorum, Fenell, Melilot, and such
like. If the intemperie be very cold, add to it a little of Aquae-vitae. The
dry intemperie is cured by fomenting the part with hot water, continuing till
it grows red, which shall humect it. If the intemperature be humid, it must
be dried, as much as it abounds in moist. For therebe some parts that be
humid of them selves, and these must be more dried then other parts which be
less moist. As for example the Balanus must be more dried then the prepuce
that covers it, by reason it is more humid. The intemperie being taken away,
we come to the curation of the ulcer, for the which we diuersifie the remedy,
according to the nature of the said ulcer. Then first you shall perceive if it
be virulent, which is less suspected then the sordid. The ulcers virulent and
corrosiues do proceed of corrupted bilious humor, the which takes the
origin from the ulcers which are in the conduits of women, being irrited
either by great confrication, or else by some venim in the capacity of the
matrix, which newly has been received by some man infected with Gonorrhea
Virulent, or ulcer in the yeard, the which humor being rendered more malign
and adherent, sticks presently to the porosities of the yeard, and there-vpon
falls a great heat and dolor pricking and corrodent, which vlcereth the part,
the color whereof is yellow toward the midst, the borders be pale or red,
the figures vnequalls. For the curation of the which, first you shall order
good regime, purgations, letting of blood, observing always such cautions, as
you have heard, avoiding to use no medicine that be of sacultie repercussiue,
for in these we must take heed that we should not chase the humors to the
noble parts, or to any other part: for nature sending that way, if you put it
back with repercussiue medicaments, undoubtedly the Spanish si^knes will
follow. Therefore you shall hold from the part affected, (as also from other
parts near to it) remedies repercussiues, for such reasons as you have heard.
In the beginning use such as have the force to dull the arcimonie of the humor,
like as to touch it with water of Sublimat, or strong water, or the blew water,
which is commonly used, or powder of Mercury, or a little of my powder set
down in The Poor man's guide, called Puluis Neapolitanus, most excellent for
diverse ulcers. That being done, you shall provoke the fall of the Escare, the
which shall be done by the application of these remedies, like as Unguent
Basilicon, Butter, Muscilages of the seed of both Mallows, and of Line, and
such like. Yet beware that the over great usage of these remedies should not
render the ulcers filthy and rotten. Also have care of the body, for if it be
plethorick or cacochimick, the acrimonie of these remedies may irrit the
ulcers, and so cause them to degenerat in. Ulcers, Maligns, Gangrens, and
Carcinomes. Therefore if you perceive the ulcers irrited by the venenositie of
the humor, so that there be no remedy, make a particular rubbing on the
adjacent parts, composed of things that have the virtue to resolve, heat, and
consume, but always you must mingle with it a little of Mercure well prepared.
For the same effect you may use particular persumes and suffumigations: such as
is set down in the Chapter of perfumes. Then the malice being corrected, and
the virulent humor digered, and become white and thick, which are signs of
good nature, mundifie the ulcer, and dry it with proper medicaments, as with
powder of Aloe, Thus, Sarcocolle, Mirth, burnt Lead, Pompholix, the which you
may use alone, or mingled with some ointment, as Pompholix, Album Rasis,
Desiccatinum Rubenum, or this, Recipe battature eris, and eris combusti, vnc.
1, terre sigillate, vnc. 3, olei Mastic. et Cidon. vnc. 2, fiat Vnguentum. If
by the usage of these remedies the vicers heal not, be assured that the body
is ouer-charged with humors, and that the general disease will follow.
Therefore when you perceive such things, cause the sick to use of my
confection, the space of 15, days with a decoction of Salsparill or Chine,
according unto the temperature. When the ulcer is between ye Prepuce and
Balanus, it causes sometime such inflammation and tumor in the Prepuce, that
hardly or not at all the Glande can be discovered, to see those ulcers, and
then in stead of Emplaisters and Unguents we use distilled waters, collires,
decoctions, whereof we make iniections with siringu^s or other ways.
Nevertheless those things must be composed according to the disposition of the
malady, either to cleanse, resolve, soften, or dry. The iniections being so
composed, you shall use refrenants, like as juices of herbs, Oxicrat, Cerat
Gallien, Vnguentum Nutritum. Afterward cleanse the ulcers with scouring waters,
like as Plantine, Eupatory, Wormwood mingled with Syrrop of Absint, or of
Roses, or of Honny, or a little of Egiptiac. Other-wayes this that follows,
which is both cleansing and drying. Recipe vini albi lib. 1, Aquar. Ros. and
Plantag. an quartam vnam, Auripigm. drag. 2, Virid. aris drag. 1, Aloes and
Mirrhae ser. 2, terrantur subtilissime and fiat Collirium. So by the usage of
these remedies the ulcers shall be cleansed and dried.

The 3, Chap. shows the way to cure the Venerean Bubons, which are commonly
called Pullains.
THE body being oppressed by this venim and chiefly the Liver, nature does
force it self by the virtue expultrice of the said Liver, to cast out that
which is hurtful on the parts most weak of our body, which are ye little
glandes betwixt the thigh and the body, whereof certain byles and apostumes
do proceed, commonly called Pullains or Bubons, the which for the most
part, are cold tumors, of a matter thick and vicious, and are long in
opening. There be other that proceed of humor hot and sharp in these parts,
which does make great tumor, with great inflammation accompanied with extreme
pain. These do open sooner. Now of these tumors some appear near the
glands, some in the membrance that covers the glands, and some in their
propper substance, and of these some do apostume, others not, and some
degenerat in ulcers virulens and corrosiues; the which are healed by the
general cure, some are cured by particular cure, some retire to the internal
parts, and are simptoms, precedents, or forreyders to the general disease,
like as often we see. As for the curation of those tumors, first the regime
universal must be duly observed in the six unnatural things, abstayning from
such things as be contrary, according unto that which you have heard in the
general chapter of the former treatise: purge lightly with some such things
which shall only purge the first veins, and help nature to chase the evil
humors to the Emunctories. Beware of strong purgations, for they revoke the
humor to the center of the body, and the letting of blood in the arm does the
same effect. Therefore use only such medicines as do meekely purge, and let
only blood in the leg or foot. As for the topical remedies, they shall be
neither resolutiue nor repercussiue, as some do, by reason that the resolutiue
do only consume the more subtle, and the thicker does remain, which is
cause afterward of the universal sickness, and the repercussiue do reuerberat
those malign and venomous humors into the inward parts, whereby the universal
sickness may also be caused. Therefore thou shall abstain from such things,
causing the sick to make light exercise, for that makes the humors descend and
avoid more easily. Also for the provocation of the same, ye shall apply
ventouses and drawing medicaments, according unto the nature of the humor.
Nevertheless, begin at things more weak, by reason that all sudden and
violent motions are hurtful and dangerous to nature, by making sudden or
violent attraction, as also for that the tenuitie of the attractiues may make
euacuation of a part, the rest may irrit, and not obey the attractiues. For
this cause, ye shall mingle with the attractiues some emplaistrick medicament,
which shall be made in this form following: Rec. Ficuum pinguinum, number. 6.
Passular. mundatar. vnc sem. Rad. Althaeae, et Brionae an vnc. 1. Coquantur and
add cappar. sub cineribus coctor. capitu^ lilior. albor. an vnc. 3. Cum
fermento, sale, et vitellis oner. vel Axungia, et fiat Cataplasmum. If ye
think good, to mingle therewith Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum, Bdellium, and
Oppopanax, it shall be well. For the same purpose ye may use the emplaister
Diachilon magnum cum Gummis, Apostolicum Nicolai, de Melileto. This being
done, and the humor drawn to a circonference, it shall be necessary to use
some suppuratiue medicaments, as this, Rec. rad. Althaeae, et Lilior. an vnc 3.
Fell. Maluae, Bismaluae, Parietariae et Violar. sub Prunis coctar. an vnc 1.
Coquantur et terrantur, addendo axungiae porci, vel Buturi sine sale, vnc 3.
Oleor. Lilior. and Violar. an vnc 2. Vitellos anor. duos, et formetur
Cataplasma, the which if ye esteem not strong enough, use this, Rec. Rad.
Lilior. Brionae, Althaeae, figilli beatae Mariae, an vnc 1. sem. Lapathi,
Cepar, et allior. sub Prunis coctor. an vnc 2. Coquantur, et conterrantur,
addendo axungiae porci, anseris, Gallinae, an vnc 1. Gummi Ammoniaci, and
Galbani in aceto dissoluti, an drag. sem. Olei Lilior. et Lumbricor. an vnc
sem. Fermenti acerrine, vnc 1. fiat Cataplasma. With these things, and other
such like remedies, ye shall continue till such time the humor come to full
ripenes, in the usage whereof, ye shall put always an Emplaister of Basilicon,
the breadth of a groate, and apply it on the part more iminent under the
Cataplasma.

Then the perfect maturation being done, it may be opened three ways, to wit,
by the Lancet, by the Cautere actual, and by the Cautere potentiall, the which
apertion must be made according to the rectitude of the Fibers and that shall be
done by the potentiall Cautere, by reason that the hear thereof helps the
suppuration of the cold humor. Make good opening, to the effect the thick
humor contained may avoid more easily. Defer not long the apertion, by reason
that oftentimes, the matter contained, lifts up vapors of the same nature to
the noble parts, and the long stay makes the humors take their course to the
center of the body, causing thereby the general sickness, the which if you
perceive, apply attractiues, and do what you can to comfort and corroborate
the noble parts, using also good regime. For by these means, nature puts
the humors forth, either in the same place, or in the emunctories of the heart,
as I have seen in one that I have cured, to whom these accidents did happen.
The suppuration and the opening made, as it ought to be, ye shall produce the
fall of the Escare, either by fresh Butter, Axungie, or Basilicon, or common
digestive. Afterward, mundifie and cicatrise the ulcer, as in others. That
being done, purge well the body, and let blood also, according unto the
habitude. If it happens that the ulcers suppure not well, but remains hard,
tumified, and sordid, the borders turned over, resisting all common remedies,
you shall judge the sickness to follow: whereupon you shall use good regime for
a certain space, with decoction of Gaiac, and some other medicament, to
corroborate the noble parts, to the end they may the better chase sorth that
which is hurtful: the which if all be not sufficient, we come to the general
cure of the disease, and this is the order that ye shall use in the curation
of these tumors.

The 4. Chapter shows the way to cure the Chaudepisse Virulent, called
Stranguria Virulenta.
I Have here determined to speak of the flux Spermatick and Gonorrhea,
virulent or Chaudepisse, which is moved by the contagion of those that are
infected with that venerian venim. Chaudepisse is an inflammation of the glands
prostates and parastates, situate in the beginning of the neck of the bladder,
the which are proper domicils to the Sperme, before it be cast forth. But
Chaudepisse or Gonorrhea virulent, differs somewhat from Gonorrhea not
virulent, because (as says Gallen,) De locis affectis. Gonorrhea, is an
inuolentarie emission of the Sperme, without either putrefaction or ulcers, but
in the Chaud^pisse virulent, is a continual extention of the yeard, with
retraction of the same: in like manner, emission not only of the Sperme as is
in the ulcers, but also of humors putride. Nevertheless, it shall not be
amiss to speak somewhat of Gonorrhea not virulent, because it has some
affinity with the other, as also because they happen both in those parts.
Whereof there is two sorts, to wit, that which is done by repletion, and that
which is done by inanition. By repsetion, as those that have great abundance
of sperme, the which sometime nature of her self does expel for to be
discharged, and sometimes it may be dissolved against the heat of the sun,
and by setting the back long against a hot fire, and also by riding a
trotting horse, as by all other motions excalefactiues. which inflame those
parts, and make fluxion, and sometime by the usage of Beer and all foodes
vaporous, thick, and vicious, the which make inflammation, and do cause
attraction of humors: in like manner, by pain and weakness of the part, which
receives not only the seed, but also the evil humors of the parts
adiacents, the which putrify and follow continually by the yeard. Sometime,
(as says Arnaldus,) it may happen, that it Apostumeth by reason of the great
abundance of humore, which do putrify the prostates, and that without any
outward appearance, as I proved in Paris in a Turk, bond-slaue to the
Ambassador of Spain, who had such a flux for plenitude and lack of woman's
help, of the which came dolors intolerable inwardly and outwardly, with two
great ulcers in the perinium, and suppression of urine, the which accident
happened to this man two sundry times in three years. It is sometime
accompanied with great inflammation of one part of the Scrotum, sometimes it
suppureth, other-whiles it resolves, which happens seldom. When this
happens, neither is the erection of the yeard dolorous, nor the making of
water, by reason that seldom chances ulcers in the conduit of the urine, as
also little habitation with women, which might have brought the matter that
way, and excoriat those parts, by the acrimonie and putrefaction. So by this
and diverse other considerations, we may clearly know, that the seed must be
euacuated, either by ordinory means or extraordinary, or else it becomes
putrified, and put forth by some Apostume, otherwise it remains within, of
the which come many grievous maladies.

The second kind of Gonorrhea not virulent, is done by inanition, and happens
often to those who do think profoundly of love, or that have fine wives, or else
that the vessels spermaticall have received some stroke, or by sitting upon
cold stones, also by rubbing with cold liniments, by falls and strokes upon
the loins, by over hot bathes, for by all these the vessels are rendered weak.
Furthermore the sperme being over sharp and thin, does likewise sometime
cause that accident, which may also be caused by having ouersoone used the act
venerean. All these make heat and inflammation in those parts, whereby happens
attraction of the humor, which being drawn, passes continually, partly by the
heat, and partly by the weakness of the virtues retentrices of the said parts.
So that oftentimes it passes sanguinolent, half elabred, being sometimes pure
blood, the which makes men become Ethick and Tabids, so brings death to many
of them, by reason of the great and continual euacuation of the vital spirits
which pass with the seed. So that in no way this is to be neglected. Sometimes
this happens to men for one of these three causes, the which are all but
frivolous. The first is to appease the great appetite of that carnal love
which they bear to their wives, not having their minds occupied in any
affairs, but in those vanities, and such men are better willing then their
hability suffices. Secondly they do it to vaunt their selves, to be so mighty
in the action that no man can approach them, and this is a foolish vaunt
without profit: nay it is very hurtful to the body. Thirdly they do it for
the great affection that they have to get children, thinking by often using their
wives, that they shall sooner procreat, wherein they are much deceived. For not
gyuing leisure to the seed to be sufficiently elabored, so that it is no more
profitable then water, for that effect. There be two properties which the good
seed ought to have, as I have amply set down in the Treatise of The sickness
of women, in the Chapter of the causes, and the cure of sterilitie. First,
there must be a reasonable quantity of the seed: next it must be well
digested, gluent, and full of spirits, the which two points fails in those
that return to it so often. For neither have they quantity, nor give they
leisure to digest the same. So that they prove sooles, to ruin their bodies
without either honor or profit. This sickness is called in our tongue the
Reples, for the curation whereof, (as also of Satyriasis and Priapismus) you
shall hear at length in the Treatise called The poor man's guide. But to
return to our purpose, the Gonorrhea or Chaudepisse virulent, the which is
done by some venomous sprite that infecteth those parts: The cause is by having
to do with women that are unclean, whereby men get the infection of that
venenositie which has assoped and infected such parts. The simptoms are
extreme dolor in making water by the acrimonie of the humor, which makes
erosion and ulcers, chiefly in the prostats, and also near the balhnus or
gland, by reason of the simpathie, that these parts have one with an other, and
great pain in the erection of the yeard, which makes contraction of the same.
Of the which does often follow the general sickness, and that often by their own
negligence, neglecting the remedies, thinking that by suffering the same run
a long time, the humor venomous should be euacuated, not thinking that the
venenositie does always augment it self by the acrimonie of the humor, which
does communicate to the noble parts, or at the least does degenerat into malign
ulcers in those parts, which be very difficult to heal. Which accidents do
also happen sometimes by carnosities in the yeard, hindering the urine to
pass, so that often comes death, if sudden order be not taken. As for the
cure of Gonorrhea virulent, the universal things must be observed according to
the habitude of the body. Beware either of strong drink, or of strong
purgation, or bleeding in the (...) least you revoke the venim to the noble
parts. Keep good regime, and abstai^ (...) strong drink, all hot meats, and
such as you have heard of before, as all things that have virtue to hear the
blood. It shall be well done, to use decoction of Salsparill and Chine, and
also the remedy that here follows, which has the virtue to open, and make
education of the humor that follows, as also to cleanse and loose. Recipe
terehent veneta drag. 3, lauetur in aqua s Cabiosae and Cicorei pull. liquerit.
drag sem Rhubarb. scr. 2, formentur pilulae. Let the Patient take it all at
once in the morning, and repete it every day till the acrimonie of the humor be
passed, using sometimes drag. 6, or vnc, 1, of Casse. Also Emulsions, which
shall be composed after this form that follows. Recipe seminum srigid.
maiorum an drag. 2, Amigdal, dull vnc. sem, aquarum Port^lacae, and Plantag. ana
vnc. 2, decoct. liquerit. lib. 1, sir. viol. e^iuiubus, ana vnc. 1, sem. Let
him use this every day day, morning and evening. Also he shall use this remedy
most sovereign for his purpose, which has the virtue both to consume the
venim, to cleanse and cicatrise the part which is vlcered, made after this
form, Recipe Carabis and ossis sepiae and drag. 6, Salsaeparillae recentis,
Cortic^ Gaiaci, Ligni Rhodij, Santali Citrini, Ligni Aloes, ana drag. 2,
inedulae 4, seminum mayor. frigidor. and sem Carthami an drag, 1, Rhubarb.
drag. 2, sem, Cinam^mi, Macis, Flor. Cordialium, an scr. 2, Hidrarg. Despumati,
drag sem. Pull. Dianisi and Diambrae, Ras. Eboris, cornu cerui non vsti an drag.
2. farinae hordei Biscoctae drag 6, terebent. q. s. fiat Massa Pilular. Capiat
drag 1, singulis matutinis per 3, horas ante iusculum. So he shall continue to
the perfect curation. Moreover for the same purpose he may use 20, or 30,
grains of the powder Arabica, taking of it four times six grains every
time. As for the topicall remedies we must use no repercussiue, for such cause
as you have heard. Use only such remedies as have the virtue to dull the
malice of ye humor, whereof iniections shall be made, as this that follows.
Recipe Buglossi, Borrag, Scabiosae, Rosar. an M. 1, rasurie medul. ligni sancti
vnc. 1, macerentur per 24, horas in decoct. herbar. predictar. Hidrargiri been
extincti and cum theriaca dissoliti drag 2, Distillr. in balneo M. and vsui
seruentur. If this causes pain or heat, you may use in the beginning such
things as have the virtue to obtund the dolor, like as these Muscilages that
follow. Recipe Muscilag. sem maluae, Lactucae, Psillij, Cydonior. and Lini,
extractae in aquis Bismaluae and Rosar. vnc. 3. If the temperature be cold,
apply the Emplaister of Vigo cum Mercurio on the Perineum, and rub those
parts, as also the Scrotum with the Rosat M^sues, wherewith shall be incorporat
a little of Fugitive. The dose shall be according unto vnc. 2, of Fugitive in
the pound of the rest. If the temperature be hot and bilious, use Ceratum
Sendalinum on those parts to hinder the inflammation. But because by
communication the kidneyes be sometime inflamed, and in that, we do annoint
these parts with Oxirhodinum, or Ceratum Refrigerans Galeni, and also this
liniment which follows. Recipe Axungi^ Galiinae recentis sexies lotae in
aquae Rosatij Aquae Violariae vnc. 2, vel 3, olei de papauare and Muscilag sem.
Psillij extractae in aqua Lactucae an vnc. 1, succi vmbilici veneris and
semperuini minoris vel maiorit ana vnc. sem Camphorae drag sem cere q. s. siat
linimentum. For the same purpose in broad plattine or blade of Lead, being
rubbed with Quicksiluer, and applied to the loins. Then after we have used
these remedies a certain space, to obtund the vehemency of the venim we come
to iniections detersiues, which shall be made of the water above written, so
that you mingle with it a little of syrop of Roses, or Honey, or Absint, using
always the liniment on the region of the kidneyes and perineum. If this
iniection does not cleanse sufficiently, you shall add to five ounces of it,
two dragmes of Egiptiack, so being mundified, you shall pass to remedies
desiccatiues, and Cicatrisents composed of decoction of Plantine, Solanum,
Bursapastoris, of each a little, and boil them in Smiths water, thereafter
strain it through a cloth, and put to it a little of Terrasigil. or Vitrioli
Albi, or Albi Rasis with a little of syrop of Absint. Sometimes the kidneyes are
offended, the which if so be, they remain so without any curing. These be for
the most part the simptoms that happen to this disease, the which are both
maligns, cacoethick, and difficult to heal. Yet the general sickness does not
always follow. There happens oftentimes vehement dolor in the parts
affected, for the which euacuat the body, and use liniments anodius of Axungia
humana, Auseris, and Galline, ana vnc. 1, ss. Hidrarg. preparati drag. 3, fiat
linimentu^. Also a Cataplasme of Medulla Panis Tritici in Lacte cocti, and
diverse others of like virtue, after the method composed, as ye shall hear
more at large in my forenamed Chirurgerie Teatise of Remedies for the same.

The fifth Chapter. Of the carnositie or exerescence of flesh that happens in
the wand or yeard.
THIS which we call carnositie, is an excrescence of the flesh, which grows
in the conduit of urine, or channel of the wand or yeard, the which happens
by reason of some ulcers, or excoriation in those parts, caused by acrimonie of
humor and urine: the which corrodeth and vlcereth the passage of urine in men,
and the neck of the matrixe in women, of the which come most grievous
sicknesses, and oftentimes death, if that the learned and skillful Chirurgian
give not the better order for the curation hereof, which shall consist in
remedies universal and particular, as also medicaments. Cathareticks, which be
most propper for the consumption of the flesh. Yet in the applying of the same,
there must be good judgment used, by reason that the parts about it be soft
and delicat, and so easy to excoriat, also very sensible and dolorous. For
this cause, first of all we must well consider if the Caruncle be old or
recent, for being old, oftentimes it happens that they be so hard that the
medicaments cannot work effectually. Then must the body be prepared by
universal remedies, as ye have heard in the former Treatise, because the
body being full of humors, the using of hot medicaments, such as are the
Cathereticks, make easily new fluxions on the part affected. Next, we must
soften the carnositie inwardly, with iniections which have the virtue to
soften, as this following.

Take roots of Althea, leaves of Mallows, and wild Mallows, Parietarie,
Mercuriall; and such like. Make a decoction in water or milk, of the which
make iniections in the yeard. Outwardly we make fomentations with the same
decoction, adding to it fat Figgs, sem. lini et Fenugreci, with a little of
Spodium. Also in stead of the fomentation, make a Semicupium, wherein ye shall
bathe those parts a certain space, and dry them well afterward. Ye shall make
an embrocation or linement of Axungia humana, Gallinacea, Ceruina, Vaccina,
Vitulina, cum Gummis Galbani, Ammoniaci et Bilelij, et olei Lumbri^^^
Camomille, et Amygdalar. dulcium. That being done, apply the Emplaister of
Vigo sine Mercurio, in oleo Liliaceo, et irino dissolutum, or in place of that,
Ceratum Philippi, Philaggrij, or Dyalthea: so continue with these and such
like, till such time the carnositie be softened, and brought to the quality of
the recent: the which being done, you shall have a wax-candle for the purpose,
rub it with a little of rosat Mesues, or syrrop of dry Roses, and minge
therewith a little of the powder of Sabine. If that the candle may not pass,
we use an instrument of Lead, made in the same form, which may be put in more
rudely, always being rubbed with Quicksiluer, cheefely in the part of the
carnositie. In people that be robust, I have used for the consumption of the
flesh, rosat Mesues incorpored with a little of Sublimat, of the which I have
found good success; also this that follows. Take a little of Orpiment, the
shells of Eggs burned, the shells of Muscles put into very small powder, and
mingle it with rosat Mesues, Cerat Galien, or a little of Oil of sweet
Almonds. This remedy following is very good for tender people. Take Pompholix
well washed with water of Plantine, mingle with the same a little of the powder
of Sabine, and put on the little waxe-candle. If for the usage of these
remedies, dolor or inflammation do happen, or if the carnositie be consumed,
ye shall use this water following, which is most excellent, both for the
appeasing of all dolors, and also for drying. Roc. Album on^r. q. s. Agitentur
diu, deinde excipiatur illa aqua, qua remanet, posea mitte aqua^ Plantag. et
ros. bis tantum quantum ex ouis Camphora par. Viridis eris parum. These being
so incorporat altogether, it shall be passed three or four times through a
cloth, and then put it up in Glasses for your use. It is excellent for diverse
things, but chiefly for the ci^atriring of these ulcers, which come of
carnosities. In the end of the cure it shall be requisite to purge the body, to
the end it may be well cleansed of all the venim that may happen. So by dealing
these ways thou shall have good success. In the mean time you may do well
to use of my consection some six or eight days, for it is most excellent and
necessary for this purpose, as I have often proved.

The sixth Chapter. Of the swelling of the bones, which are called Tophes and
Nodosities.
IN this place I shall speak of certain tumors, which do occupy the bones,
commonly called Tophes, or swelling of the bones. These swellings for the most
part be engendered of an humor petuitous, thick, tardiue, and viscous: soked
in, not only in the parts near the bones, but also in the proper substance
of it self, sometime on the Periost, which is the membran that covers the
bone. Sometimes, the bone does rotte, and then the cure is more difficult and
long. Nevertheless, whether there be corruption or not, you shall hear the
true cure in few words. First and foremost, if you find tumor without corruption
in the bone, and done by malady, ye shall cure it after the general method,
and by the application of the emplaisters of John de Vigo, cum duplici aut
triplici Mercurio. If it come by deposition, and the tumor very great, it shall
be cured after this form following. Rec. Radicum Altheae, Brioinae, Cucumeris
agrestis, tenuiter inscisar. at mundatar. an vnc 1, sem. Folior. maluae,
bismaluae, Pariecarie, Mercurialis, et Enulae Campanae, an m. 1. Flor. et
Folior. Cammomillae, et Meleloti, Rosar. et Anethi, an vnc, 2, Seminis Altheae,
lini et foenugreci, an vnc sem, fiat omnium decoctio in s. q. aquae, quae
seruitur pro fotu, cum spongis, vel filtro ad ruberem vsque.

After the fomentation use this that follows: Rec. vnguenti ros. Mesues, vnc
3. Fugitiui exticti, et preparati vt decet, drag, 6, Agitentur simul, et fiat
linementum. That being done, use the emplaister of Ioh. de Vigo, vnc 1, sem.
Emplastri filij Zacchari, vnc 1. Argenti viui, drag. 3. fiat emplastrum
extensum super aluten. It shall be well done to mingle with it a little of
Ireatum, as counsaileth Francantianus. Thus by the usage of these remedies,
with a just form of diet, the sick shall be healed perfectly. Now, if there
be corruption in the bone, notwithstanding the universal cure which shall
proceed, we must come to another form of cure particular, whether it be in
the legs or arms, in the crane, in ye nose, or in the roof of the mouth.
Take good heed to the corruption which happens in the nose or mouth, by
reason that those bones are spongious of themselves, and by that means does
easily corrupt and fall, and then the sick shall feel dolor, and speak
always in the nose. Also that which he takes by the mouth, for the most part
does come forth by the nose, specially things that be licquid. Then for the
curation of these corruptions, we must first discover the bone, either by Rasor
or medicament Caustic. Afterward, touch it with the Cautere actual, or hot
iron, or with oil of Vitrioll, or of Sulfur, but always the Cautere actual
is the most sure. It works suddenly, corroborateth the part, and consumes
the malign humor, and does in short space, provoke the separation and falling
of the bone putrified: therefore for this purpose we must have Cauteres of
diverse sorts, as some round, some incisiues, some long, some pointed, some
triangles, according to the figure of the bone. The first must be incisiue,
called Culteller, the next round or long, as ye shall find expedient: and
being made red hot, ye shall rub the bone, till such time as ye perceive the
most part of the humiditie and purrefaction to be consumed. This being done,
you must apply medicaments anodines, and such as have virtue to provoke the
fall of the scarre, as things unctuous, like as is Butter, yolks of Eggs,
mingled with oil of Roses or Violets, or some unguent suppuratiue. The scarre
being fallen, it must be mundified with this remedy. Recipe Therebint,
Venetae lotae, vnc 4. Farinae hordei, and Orobi an drag. 2. sir. de Absitio,
Mel ros. an drag, 1, Myrrh, et Ireos Florent. an drag. 1, misceantur. The part
being cleansed, ye shall apply dry medicaments, the which dries without
biting, and use of this powder that follows, the which is of great force:
Recip. Aristol. Myrrh, Cerusae, Plombini vsti saepiens in Aqua vitae, loti an
dragme 2. Pull. Ostreor. combustor vnc. sem. Terant tenuissime. This powder is
excellent, being put on the sore. It causes to separate the rotten bones from
the whole: yet is it not the best way to pull the rotten bone by force from the
whole, like as we do in those which are rotten because externe, but rather let
it fall of it self: notwithstanding, forget not sometime to shake the same,
for by that means it will fall away the sooner. You shall know when it will
separate by the coming ^oo^th of the blood. Nature before it does separate the
corrupted from the whole, engendereth a certain flesh upon the whole bone, to
the end that when the corrupted does fall, the air shall not alter the whole,
the which is a great providence of nature. If it be long in separating, it
shall be well done to bore the rotten bone in diverse places, till such time as
ye see the blood to come forth at those holes. Nature does help by the
transpiration, to engender that flesh which causes it to separate the sooner.
For the generation of that which is lost, the foresaid powders be very good, if
there be mingled with them syrrop of Roses, or of Absint: and after all is well
regenered as it ought, you shall consolide and cicatrice the ulcers, like as in
all other ulcers.

The 7, Chapter of the Warts that come on the extremity of the yeard, betwixt
the prepuce and balanus.
THere happens oftentimes certain little excressence of flesh like Warts
betwixt the gland and prepuce, of the which there are two sorts. The one
proceeds of the venerian sickness, the other not: yet neither of them both for
the most part dollorous, but very much troublesome, by reason of the great
number of them. The cause of such as are venomous is the evil indisposition of
women accompanied with some infection. Those which are not venomous happen by
having to do with women in the time of their purgations, of the which
happens not only that, but also many other grievous diseases both to the
men, and also the children, which are conceived at that time, for either they
become Leapors universally, or some particular part, which we call
Elephanciasis particular, or if this happen not, yet the child is always
sickly, and of short life: for this and diverse other causes it was forbidden in
the 18, Chapter of Leuiticus to use the company of women at that time. But to
return to our putpose for the curing of these parts, whether they happen of
the venerian sickness or otherwise, we must first consider whether they be
recent and soft, or inueterate and hard, as sometime it happens. If hard and
inueterat, they must be softened by such remedies as you have heard in the
Chapter of Carnositie, and being softened, they must be consumed with powder of
Sabine and Ocre well puluerized with an Emplaister of Cerus and a little
Quicksiluer: being consumed, use for the cicatrizing such as you have heard in
Carnositie. Our Ancients, and chiefly Aetius, did cure them by caustic
medicaments, the which are cruel, and not in use amongst us. I have often
cut them with the sheares, afterward consumed them with powder Allumenus or
water of the same, if they be very great, I knit them as well betwixt the
perpuce and gland, as also without the prepuce. Touching which, I will recite a
rare history, which happened to me in Paris in time of the last troubles. A
certain Noble man of Spain having on the side of the prepuce exterieure, a
cressence of the quantity of a great plum, and when the erection of the yeard
was, it waxed as bigg as a tennis ball, so that he could never accompany with
any woman, in such sort that no Chirurgian neither in Spain nor Italy would
take it in hand, at last he sent for me, and after I had considered thereof, I
used remedies rosolutiues for a time, but finding small profit thereby, I did
knit it in the presence of Mounsier Le Fort, and Mounsier Pineau, Doctors in
Chirurgie, and healed it with good success: after the same manner, you may cure
all such warts, which happen in any part.

The 8, Chapter of falling of the hair.
OFtentimes of this sickness comes falling of the hair of the head, beard,
and brows with great deformity, for which we must give order, both to take
away the cause, and also to bring new hair. The cause of this simptom is
either that the aliment, wherewith the hair is nourished, is corrupted and
consumed, or that the skin is dried and pressed together, so that it may not
engender that aliment fuliginous, whereby the hair is engendered and nourished.
For the cure we must euacust the evil humor generally through all the body,
or at least of the parts affected, which may be done two ways, to wit exterior
and interior. Interior by masticators to provoke spitting, as Pereter, Mastick,
Pepper, after which we use exterior medicines, to cause the head to sweat, by
laying many clothes on the Patient, I find no remedy better for it, than by a
hot house, or the reflex of heat which goes from the fornis to the place
where the head shall lie. If after euacuation the body be infected, there must
be general euacuation for that purpose, and herein you shall use the decoction
of Salsparill and Gaiac for the space of 15, days, with a little of my
confection every day, which is sufficient to euacuat the humor, which
offends. After this provoke new hair where it wants, which may be done
sundry ways, yet somewhat painful, for the which I will impart unto you a very
rare secret for growing of hair, and of great vallue, which I have used in
helping of diverse great men, when all their hair has been fallen, and within
a short space it grew again by help of this remedy, made after this manner.
Take the roots and leaves of Mallows put of them in a still one bed, then a
bed of Honney, and so forth, one bed of them, and an other of Honney, till the
still be full. In the mean time you shall cut two or three Horseleaches small
and mingle therewith, afterward distill all with a very soft fire, then distill
that water again in Balmo Marie, and let it stand in the Sun the space of
15, days, afterward rub the parts most void of hair with that liquor 5, or
6, times a day. Also this remedy is very well set down by Fumanellus, which
is, Recipe apes crematas cum melleque commixtas et locum superponito. Or this
Unguent. Recipe apum vistarum, Adianti Vsti, Olei Rosati, quantum sufficit, et
fiat Vnguentum. Or this that follows written by Marinellus. Recipe cineris
cicadarum vstarum, cineris apum vstarum, Olei Myrtini, vel Axungiae, quantum
sufficit, must et fiat Vnguentum. Or this, Re. stercorum murium, et apum ana
vnc. ss. Vnguenti Populeonis vnc. ss. miste et fiat Vnguentum, de quo vngatur
locus, sed prius remoueantur crines. So by the usage of these remedies, the
hair shall easily-come again.

The 9, Chapter of Darters which happen in diverse parts of the body.
OFtentimes after the universal cure of this sickness, there comes in the
face and palms of the hands, feet, and through all the body certain chaps
and dry ulcers, which oftentimes are very large, and are commonly called
Darters or Fissures setpiginous, which sometime be dolorious, other whiles not,
ye parts where they are, be more thick and dry, than the nature of the place
is, and in rubbing of the part you shall perceive white things like beaten
sugar. The cause of the which is a salt pituitous humor and chollerick, burnt
by the intemperat heat of the liver joined with some venomous humor, which
rises in the part, as chances to them, who have used too hot medicines in
the cure of the general disease, or else because there remains some little
portion of the venim in the body, the which is sent to the external parts at
such certain times of the year, as the humor reigns. For the cure hereof
it is somewhat hard, chiefly being inueterate, by reason that the liver is
affected, yet for the extirpation of the same, in so much as may be, we give
first order for the intemperie of the liver, as well by purgations and bleeding,
as Apozemes and Opiats, or Conserues to corroborat the liver and rectify the
blood. The particular remedies shall be in things that soften with some
astriction, like as water of Allom or Sublimate, or this which follows: Rec.
Aquae Maluarum, Branci vrsini, Lapathi, an vnc. ss. aquae Alcumistarum, vnc ss.
(...) all these well together, and rub the place affected.

As for that which is inueterate, we must use perfumes and lineaments after the
form ye have already heard, having always consideration of the person and
time, as ye likewise often heard before: for it is not only sufficient for
the Chirurgian to know the remedies, but he must also know the way to use
them, according as precepts of Art do command. For the same purpose this
unguent following is very good. Take Goats Grease, Cerusse of Venice, or a
little powder of Vermillion, and rub the parts. Notwithstanding all these
remedies, they are sometimes so difficult to heal, that we are constrained to
use the general remedy to bring them to a perfect curation.

The 10. Chapter. Of ulcers in the mouth.
THese ulcers and inflammations which come in the mouth and throat, happen by
the motion of the venim to those parts, and not by the unguents, and persumes,
as some late Writers have affirmed. Howsoever they happen, they must be cured
after this manner following, which differs somewhat from the curation of
other ulcers, for we must in no wise use repercussiues, although there be some
inflammation. First, we must use anodine medicaments, as well to mittigate the
great pain, if any be, which commonly happens through the acrimonie of the
humor, as also to purge the gross humor, which cleaves to the internal parts
of the mouth, which augmenteth the ulcers. This shall be either done with
milk, or decoction of Barley, mingling therewith a little syrop of Violets,
which must be holden a certain space in the mouth, to mittigate the pain.
Also the Mussilages of Maluae, Althae, Lini, Spilij, et fenugreci extracti in
aqua hordei, parietarie, et maluae. Beware always in the beginning to use
things too much cleansing, for it causes dolor: sometimes by the great fluction
the parts are so swollen by the abundance of the humor, in such sort that the
spirits are suffocated, and cannot show them selves; whereby there comes often
mortification and gangrene, which when it happens, we use astringent
medicines, as Decoctionis Hordei, Platage, Bursae Pastoris, Solani, cum Siro:
Rosarum, et Violarum, Papaueris et Hyosiami, you may likewise use this
decoction detersiue. Recipe hordei mundi Ma. 1, Buliant in suffiente quantetate
aquae ad consumptionem mediae partis, deinde add mellis vel siropi Rosati,
vnc. duas, if the putrefaction be great and this remedy not sufficient, we add
unto it a little Calcantum, Aegiptiacum: or this which follows. Recipe
Decoctionis, Hordaei, Plantagenis, Pimpinellae, Agramoniae, Rosarum, an. lib.
1, deinde dissolve mellis Rosati et Diamoron an. vnc. ss. And make a
gargarisme, the ulcer being cleansed, and the putrefaction stayed, we add Man.
1, of the herb called Cauda Equina, to the decoction of Barley above specified.
Aquae Ferratae et Plantagenis an. lib. ss. Allumenis Rochei drag. 8, coquantur
omnia simul ad codsumtionem mediae partis, and with this decoction wash the
mouth 3, or 4, times a day, then the ulcers being dried and the simptoms
ceased, you shall purge the body gently, because that often times a little
corruption remaining in the body the sickness is resediue, that being done we
use persumes of herbs, like as you have heard in the Chapter of perfumes, for
that has the virtue to expel that which is offensive, and also to corroborat
the parts, and to close the poares and cundits of the skin.

FINIS.

