Gather my Saints together unto me. Psalm 50. 5.

THE GLORY OF THEIR TIMES OR

The Lives of ye Primitive Fathers. Co^tayning their Chiefest Actions, works,
Sentences, and Deaths.

Ask thy father, and he will show thee, Ask thy Elders, and they will tell
thee. Deu. 32. 7.

LONDON. Printed by I: Oaks. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the
white Lion. 1640.

G Glouer. fecit.



To the Reader on the Religious and Illustrious Lives of the Primitive Fathers.
THe publication of a Book does draw on much expectation; but this Work does
not only satisfy the Readers curiosity, but even draw him to wonder and
admiration. For was not the Creation of Heaven and Earth most wonderful and
glorious? For when there was nothing but rudis indigestaque moles quam dixere
Chaos, a rude lump void of form, then God made the Sun, Moon, and Stars also,
and set them in the Firmament to give light upon the Earth, and this natural
Light the World enjoyed in the beginning: but afterward out of the Chaos of
blind Ignorance, God to the Worlds greater amazement created and ordained the
Firmament of Religion, and placed therein the Sun of Righteousness our Savior
Jesus Christ then clouded under Types and Figures, and also the Moon which was
the Primitive Church round about which the Fathers shined like Stars of
several magnitudes; but all glistering with light of Life and Learning. Here
is a poesy gathered out of old Gardens, not decayed nor withered with Time or
Age, but as fresh and fragrant as from the newest stock: This savoury meat
has God brought to hand: Here is swee^ out of the strong; let your soul taste
it, and then bless God for sending such able men into his Harvest, in the
innocence of the Church, and in the time of the hottest persecutions: These
were Gods Champions on earth, who did fight his battails, and defend his cause:
even reproving Kings and Princes for his sake: These were called Fathers of
honor, and therefore let us honor them, because they honored God; and though
we cannot imitate them so near in their lives; as we ought, yet let us strive
to imitate them as near as we can in our minds, and let us follow thousands of
Martyrs, through temporal death, to eternal life: and with Nazianzen give our
selves wholly to the performances of all Christian duties: For these Primitive
Fathers they all gloried and took delight in their sufferings; and bid large
profers for Heaven, come what torment could come, even the loss of their
lives; for by their humility and patience, they both triumphed over Tyranny and
Death, and now have obtained for their reward the eternal Crown of Glory,
which they enjoy and wear.

When any of these Holy Fathers met at General Councels concerning any weighty
cause about settling Religion, or suppressing of any Heresy sprung in the
Church: with what devotion and reverence did they meet? not trusting in their
own knowledge, sharpness of wit, strength of brain, deepnesse of judgment, as
it were in an arm of flesh: they knew that there was a Divine power who ruled
and governed all their actions and intentions; they trusted in Him that has
the Key of David, opening and no man shutting, and prayed to the Lord the
Father of our Lord Jesus, to direct their cogitations, this was the way they
took and persevered in: And should such good men as these be forgotten, such
Pillars of Truth as these not seen and made manifest: pity it were that their
worth should be obscured, or that the grave should bury their deserts: All
which time has now brought to light, Most of their Effigies were obtained, as
they are placed before their Works ^ some out of diverse Books of holy Orders,
where they be figured for Saints, others out of several Libraries and places
of Antiquity: but look not so much upon the outward figure of their bodies* as
the inward figure of their minds.
and collected together in one Volume: the use and fruit of which I wish to
every Christian man.

This Work being then a Constellation of Divine Lights, that were visibly seen
in the East and Western Horizon of the Church, and are here set in their
several places and Centuries of years wherein they lived: showing not only
their mortal aspect by curious and lively brass Sculptures representing their
Effigies and Countenances, but also the divine influences of their souls in
their lives, actions, and divine sentences; for their Seraphick Contemplations
were full of sublime and sweet expressions; that as their faces were full of
Reverend lines of gravity, so did their Writings abound with sententious lines
of Piety. Insomuch that these words may justly be subscribed under their
several Pictures. Exempla plus dictis valent; facta mea non dicta vos
Christianos milites sequi volo, nec disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam a me
petere: Examples prevail more than Precepts. I would have all Christian
Soldiers follow my steps, in works as well as words, and in your lives make me
your Rule and Example: for, Omnia prospere Deum sequentibus eveniunt, adversa
spernentibus, for Gods servants and followers are always fortunate and blessed,
but his foes miserable and wretched. In a word, the faces of the holy Primitive
Fathers, are here the object of your sight, their Graces of your knowledge and
understanding, their Sentences may serve for your minds illustration and
illumination, and their Lives for your practice, conversation and imitation,
and in all, they have been and are accounted, sacra Ecclesiae Lumina, holy
Lights of the Church shining once on Earth, and now in Heaven; and therefore
all that would become Stars in glory after this life, let them imitate these
resplendent Stars of Grace, that hereafter they may shine in glory with Christ
Jesus the Son of Righteousness in his Fathers Kingdom for ever. Amen.

Typographus

The Names of all the Primitive Fathers contained in this Book.
Philo Iudeus. Ann. Mundi 4024. Josephus. 4057
Ann. Christi
Ignatius. 71 Polycarpus. 71 Dionysius. 71
Saeculum secundum ab anno 100, ad 200.
Justinius Mart. 150 Irenaeus. 170
Ab 200, ad 300.
Tertullianus. 204 Clemens Alexandrinus. 204 Origenes Adamanti^s. 226 Gregorius
Thaum. 233 St. Cyprianus. 250 Arnobius. 285 Lactantius Firmianus. 290
Ab anno 300, ad 400.
Eusebius Caesari. 329 St. Athanasius. 340 Hilarious Pictav. 355 Cyrillus
Hieros. 365 Ephrem Syrus. 365 Basilius Mag. 370 Gregorius Naz^anzenus. 370
Epiphanius. 370 S. Ambrosius. 374 Gregorius Nyssenus. 380 Theodoretus. 389 S.
Hieronymus. 390 S. Chrysostomus* 398
Ab anno 400, ad 500.
S. Augustinus. 420 Cyrillus Alexan. 430 Petrus Chrysologus. 440 Prosper
Aquitan. 445
Ab anno 500, ad 600.
Fulgentius. 529
Ab anno 600 ad 700.
S. Gregorius Magnus. 604. Isidorus Hispal. 630
Ab anno 700, ad 800.
Beda venerabilis. 731 Johannes Damascenus. 731
Ab anno 800, ad 900.
Nicephorus. 828
Ab anno 900, ad 1000, ad 1100.
Theophylactus. 1071 Anselmus Cant. 1081
Ab anno 1100, ad 1200.
Rupertus Tuitiensis. 1119 S. Bernardus. 1130 Petrus Lombardus. 1145
Ab anno 1200, ad 1300.
Alexander Hales 1245 Bonaventura. 1265 Thomas Aquinas. 1265
An. Mundi 4024. Philo Iudaeus.
PHILO IVDAEVS.

THis Philo was a Jew of Alexandria, of the stock of the priests, and he is
deservedly placed among the Ecclesiastical Writers, because that in his works
he sets forth the praises of the Christians. He was sent Ambassador by the
Jews his Countrymen to Rome, to plead for his whole Nation, and to qualify
Caius the Emperors anger, who was possessed against the Jews for diverse crimes
and enormities which they had committed; hoping by his endeavor and wisdom to
set them right again in the Emperors good opinion: so testifies Photius, and
Saint Jerome, and Suidas, and Eusebius: he flourished in the fiftieth year
after Christ's Incarnation, in the Reign of Nero the Emperor, the occasion
that he was sent to Rome was thus, whereas between the Jews and Graecians,
inhabiting Alexandria, there fell a great sedition, three choice men of either
side was set apart to plead their matters and grievances before Caius. Appian
then being the chief for the Graecians, objected many and enormous crimes
against the Jews amongst others that they would not, neither did give that due
honor and obedience to the Roman Emperor, which they ought: for whereas
through all the Roman Provinces, there were Temples and Altars built to Caius,
that he as well as other Gods might be worshipped: these Jews only of all
others denied to perform any such respect; neither would they swear by the
Name of Caesar: Hereupon this Philo the brother of Alexander Alabarchus, being
an excellent and wise philosopher, and an excellent man for all sorts of
Learning, and knew well how to guide his passion, that nothing could move him
to wroth; in despite of Appion, and all those that strove to exasperate Caius
against him and the Jews, fitted himself to clear his Nation of those foul
aspersions: but Caesar would not hear him, but commanded him (in a great fury)
to depart his presence: whereupon Philo turning himself to his Countrymen that
came along with him from their Nation, as Associates, spoke thus to them, Now
let us be of good courage, and undaunted hearts, for though the Emperor be
against us; yet God that rules him, is for us. This Josephus testifies of him
in his eighth Book and tenth Chapter of his Antiquities of the Jews. And thus
says a learned man of him:

That the noble and courageous heart has still this property, to be always
doing things honest and virtuous; not only for his own particular, but for his
Countries good, though it be with loss of credit, or exile, and with the
frown of princes; for true worth indeed depends of Virtue; and all other
things are of Fortune. For that man, that is truly magnanimous, and of a great
spirit, (as was this Philo) does continually carry himself upright under any
burden, be it never so weighty: and nothing does happen amiss or displeasing
unto him, be it never so difficult and hard to be borne: for a Wise man knows
his own forces, and with his virtue he vanquisheth all sudden accidents.

This Philo was eloquent of speech, rich in sentences, deep and profound in the
explication of the sacred Scriptures: he was excellent as well in the
Pythagorean, Platonicke, as in the philosophy of Aristotle, insomuch that he
was counted one that excelled others. So also was he renowned for his skill in
the Greek, that he was held the chief of his time. Hence the proverb came:
Aut Plato Philonizat, aut Philo Platonizat: Either Plato imitates Philo, or
Philo Plato, because of their congruity in writing.

The Romans in Claudius Reign did so admire his Works, that they esteemed them
worthy to be kept safe in a public Library, as Monuments of his famous
Learning, he was admirable for his threefold explanation of Scripture, by the
Literal, Moral, and Allegorical sense, so that most of the Ancient Doctors
of the Church have imitated him, and have called him the Inventor, as Sixtus
Senensis does relate Possevi.

As he was also famous for his Learning, so for his parentage being of great
descent, and executed Offices of the chiefest esteem with credit and fidelity:
and it is reported of all, that Caius the Emperor, because in the Jewish
Temples, he was not worshipped by these Titles, JOVI ILLUSTRI NOVO CAIO, and
being incensed by Appion against the Jews, but specially against this Philo,
that he intended to have slain him; but failing in that, he did with extreme
violence persecute and afflict the Jews every where; but chiefly those that
lived in Alexandria: This Philo, notwithstanding, being of an admirable courage
and vivacitie, did publicly deny that ever such profaneness and gross
Idolatry should be practiced among the Servants of God, especially themselves
who had fled thither for the Truth.

And that you may fully see what a rare Instrument this Philo was for all sorts
of Learning, either Philosophical or Theological: Let his Mystical
Expositions of Moses Writings express it. He did thoroughly, says one, Search
the Entrails and Bowels of them: by which leaving the literal sense, he
directed men to a higher end, (...), even to gain eternal life, and the
perfection of all Virtue. Nay, says Josephus: Philo was so excellent in his
studies for copiousnesse of Invention, for gravity of Expressions, for giving
light to dark words, that all the Ancients gave him credit for Wit and
Learning, so that many did follow his footsteps: as Clemens, Gregory,
Nazianzen: and among the Latin Fathers, Saint Ambrose, who confesses, that he
exchanged, nay, borrowed many excellent things of Philo. There are some Fathers
that have blamed him a little for his too too inquisitive brain, and do
conclude that He and Origin were in some things fabulous and ridiculous, but
all wise men know, that the greatest Lights of the Church have had some
blemishes. Bernardus non videt omnia.

Therefore, as a Wiseman says, Let no man upbraid another man with his misery;
for weakness and infirmities is common to all mortal men; and no man knows
how soon he may be over-taken and have his failings; for it is an injury to
laugh at another infirmities: when the best of men are incident to the like
imperfections.

But this Philo was also well skild in Histories, wherein he shows not only
a rare commendation of Virtues, but declares himself a sharp hater of Vices:
so that even they which spoke against him for some of his Allegories, give him
a joint praise for his Historical parts and knowledege; the time and place
wherein he lived was full of Learning; he did live in the Reigns of
Tiberius, Caius and Claudius: And so having done so much, he departed this
humane life, about the 50 year after Christ. His usual saying was, That there
is nothing better for a man then to be borne, nor anything better for him than
to die soon and quickly; For Death is the medicine of all evils incident to
man.

Haec legere potes in praef. Joseph.

His Works
1 Of the life of a Wise man. 2 Of ordering our Life. 3 Of the Confusion of
Languages. 4 Of the nature of four footed Beasts, three Books. 5 Of things
subject to sense. 6 Of Learning. 7 Of the Possessours of Divine Things. 8 Of
the Division of unequal things. 9 Of the three Virtues or Graces. 10 Of Nature
and Invention. 11 Of Covenants. 12 Of the success of Generation. 13 Of the
change of names. 14 Of the Giants. 15 Of the five Books of Moses. 16 Of
Dreams. 17 Of the Tabernacle. 18 Of a Contemplative Life. 19 Of Husbandry. 20
Of Drunkenness. 21 Of Sacrifices. 22 Of Providence. 23 Of Idaea's. 24 Of
Alexander. 25 Of Creatures. 26 That every unwise man is but a slave. These
Trithemius, fol. 4
There are more of his Works extant.
2 Books of Allegories. 3 Of the Cherubims. 4 Of the Sacrifice of Cain and
Abel. Of the confusion of Languages. Of Gods Immutability. Of Abraham's
Iournying. Of Fortitude. Of the Decalogue. Of special Laws. Of Circumcision.
Of Monarchy. Of the Honor of Priests. That an honest man is a friend of
Nobility. Of Rewards and punishments. Of Cursings. Of his Embassage to Caius.
These are all sufficient Witnesses of this Man's pains and labor.

An. Mundi 4057. Flavius Josephus.
FLAVIVS JOSEPHUS.

HE was of no mean parentage, Ruffi. c 9. Niceph. c. 18. lib. 2. Eusebius l. 3. c.
9.
or Descent; but of an ancient stock of the Priests: and of that Line which was
the chief of the four and twenty, and by his Mothers side was of the Blood
Royal, she being of the Family of the Asamonaeans, who a long time not only
held the Priesthood of that Nation, but the Kingdom, his great Grandfather
was called Simon Psellus, at what time Hircanus the son of Simon the
High Priest, Joseph. p. 989.
the first of that name held the Priesthood, he was borne the first year of
Caius Caesar, and had three sons, Hircanus the eldest, Iustus and Agrippa: in
Vespasians Time this Genealogy and Succession was truly kept in public
Tables: as his parents were great and Noble, so their Integrity and
uprightness was well known to all Jerusalem, he was bred up from his
Childhood in good Discipline, and had an excellent memory, and quick
understanding: so that the High Priest and Elders of the City much regarded
him: he passed through all the three Sects of Pharisees, Sadduces, and
Essenes: and did most approve the life of the Pharisees, and did in his
strictness of life imitate one Banus, who lived solitarily by fruits and
herbs: At two and twenty years, he professed himself a Pharisie, which is
much like to the Stoics amongst the Graecians, and presently took a Voyage to
Rome, to plead the cause of some honest and good men, who for little or no
cause were bound and carried before the Emperor. In his Voyage the Ship was
cast away, yet he with others, by Gods blessing, with swimming, saved their
lives, and did appear at Rome, and got special familiarity with Aliturus a
Jew, who was in great esteem with the Emperor; by whose help he got to be
made known to Poppaea, the Wife of the Emperor, and so freed those Priests
from their bonds, and further dangers, and was rewarded by her with great
gifts, and so returned home again.

He was in his outward behavior and manners courteous and (...) of humanity:
And in his speeches aff^ble and friendly to all, making himself pleasing and
agreeable to most men, as much as in him lay: and acquainted himself only with
such as were good and virtuous; for in so doing he shunned the hatred of one,
and was sure to get the favor of the other: For Wisemen accustom themselves
gladly and willingly to endure things with patience, to the intent, they may
the better do it, when they shall be forced to sufferance.

He was in his time a famous Warrior, In vita Ios. 1029.
and performed great Exploits, he was taken prisoner alive at the siege of
Iotopata, and was kept with great care and command, by a company of Soldiers.

In the time of his imprisonment, which was but short, being about five days,
he did write many things concerning the government of man in affliction: And
as a Wise man says, which is not impertinent; That afflictions on earth are as
so many good guides and Companions unto the godly, which, though of themselves
unworthy, yet make their cause the better, who aim at a higher end then the
blinded eyes of the ignorant can behold: and become the Masters of their own
hopes: before others perceive them in trouble: For says he, The Heavens are
their only prospect, where they behold the Creator of Nature, in his height of
Wonder; and themselves are the Mine into which they dive, to find reason
triumphant, by which they discern their insurrective passions and afflictions.

And as another says, That it is good for a man to live in the greatest
assurance that he can possibly: howbeit, if he be constrained to hazard and
adventure himself, it is more fit that he contend and strive with it honestly,
then to shun and fly from it shamefully: considering that all men are
destinated to die: but Nature has only ordained and framed them that are
virtuous and wise, to die valiantly and courageously; and to bear afflictions
patiently.

Vespasianus did much honor and respect him for his Learning and Knowledge,
and at his command he married a certain Captive Virgin of Caesarea, but lived
not long with her, for she went with the troops to Alexandria, and he himself
married another, and so with Titus was sent to Jerusalem, where he was in
great danger of the Jews; for they esteemed him no better then a Traitor and a
Betrayer of their Nation: but Titus slighted these clamours of the Vulgar: but
the City being taken, Titus gave him leave to choose something that might be
beneficial for him: but he not desiring to be made rich with the spoils of his
Country, desired nothing but the freedom of his body, and his Writings; both
which the Emperor did grant unto him. He preferred study and knowledge before
honor and riches; for he knew that the one soon fades, and the other abides
for ever: For he held amongst all goods and pleasure of this life, only
wisdom was immortal: And we commonly see, that those to whom Riches most
befall, do find sooner the end of their living, then of their longing: Which
consideration, has caused most wise men to vent these or the like speeches
concerning the infelicity of coveting Riches before Knowledge: How miserable
says one, should I be, if I were the most richest of the the world; with what
a great burden of evils should I be overwhelmed? Why then should a man
torment himself for a thing that he must necessarily leave? And why is he not
rather content quietly with that which is needful; chiefly considering, that
the fairest kind of wealth is for a man to be content in what estate soever,
that is, not to be too poor, nor yet too far off from poverty?

He set free abundance of his Kindred and Friends which were fled into the
Temple, and did save them and theirs from the violence of the Soldiers, to the
number of a hundred and fifty persons: so he was sent by Titus with Cerealis
with a thousand Horse to Tekoah, and saved many of his Friends and Countrymen
by the way from misery and slavery, and got some of them to be released from
their torments. Titus did so love him, that he gave him great Possessions and
Revenues, and took him as his Companion when he went for Rome. Where he was
received with a great deal of Honor, not only of Titus, but of Vespasianus
himself, and Domitianus and his Empress; and had an Annual pension very
large, given him by the Emperor, and it was not taken from him during life: he
lived in Titus his own Court in great esteem, but not without the envy of his
own Nation: his second Wife was of Creta a Iewesse, and nobly descended, by
whom he had two sons.

Nay, even Domitianus himself continued favorable unto him, and punished with
death some of his Accusers.

He was excellent for Philosophy and Rhetoric, Trithem. de Scrip. Ecc. fol.
5. l. 1.
and a famous Historiographer for his time: he was for the excellency of his
Wit and Learning, and singular uprightness of life much admired of the Senate
and People of Rome; though being a Jew, yet he did highly praise Christians,
Ant. Iud. l. 18.
and gave a famous Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, as you may read in his
Works

His Works were so prized, that they with great care were put into the public
Library by the Romans, and he after his death had a Statue of Brass set up
for him by the Senate, and people of Rome.

His life was long and full of pain and labor, for he lived under Vespasian
and Titus, even to the times of Trajan, in the hundred year after Christ.

Eusebius is large in his praise, and so is Ruffinus and Hierome, and
Nicephorus also, and others, and amongst all the turmoils of war and
destruction of his Country, he set time to write worthy things, which the
Church of God even to this day do greatly esteem for their reality, fidelity,
and truth, and here are registered, as Eusebius has expressed them.

1 Of the Jews Antiquities 20 Books. 2 Of the Wars of the Jews in seven Books,
which he not only writ in Greek, but also in his own Language. 3 Against
Appion the Grammarian, two accurate Books. Of the force of Rhetoric one Book.
So after all things enjoying the love both of the Emperor and Citizens of
Rome, he departed this frail and transitory life, and had solemn Funeral
Rites performed for him, and was generally lamented of all good men.

An. Christi 71. S. Ignatius
S. IGNATIUS.

IN the writing of this Fathers life, I cannot but reverence his Antiquity and
admire his Christian fortitude, he is of such ancient extraction, that he was
one of those that enjoyed that for which Saint Augustine wished, that is, to
have seen the Lord Jesus in the flesh, and though he did not as old Simeon
take him up in his arms, yet he beheld him with his eyes, and embraced him
with his heart, and at last for his Name sake, endured constant Martyrdom, and
indeed it was a great happiness to behold Christ, who was the hope of all: and
therefore he himself spoke it, that even Kings and Prophets have desired to
see the same. This great Star of the Church, is by other Reverend Fathers
reputed to have been twelve years old when our Savior suffered. He was the
third Bishop of Antioch after Saint Peter, Eus. Eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 30.
or as Eusebius says, the second. A man singular for his Piety, renowned for
his Love and Zeal.

Dionysius the Areopagite, Saint Bernard, and others report a famous saying of
Saint Ignatius; which he uttered with sighs, and is extant in his Epistle to
the Romans, and it is this, (...), Amor meus crucifixus est, That is, My Love
is crucified. Either understanding by the word Love, his Savior Christ, whom
he so dearly loved: or, else meaning that all his Affections of this World
were crucified, that is, dead in him, according to that of Saint Pa^l, Galat.
6. 14. The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. And no question,
but that our Savior was planted deeply in his soul, and for certainty, that he
did see Christ after his Resurrection, take his own words. Ego vero and post
resurrectionem in carne ^um vidi, In Ep. ad Smy^. and ad Polycarp.
and credo quia sit: And truly I did see after his Resurrection in the flesh,
and I do believe that it is He: and he sets down the time and persons, when
and before whom it was: Et quando venit ad Petrum and adeos qui cum Petro
erant. It was when he came to Peter, and to those that then were with him, he
said, Touch and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have,
and they touched him and believed: so that his own words are sufficient proofs,
but yet it is the consent of all the Church Historians, as Eusebius and Saint
Jerome testify, Ruffin. cap. 36.
and Ruffinus.

As he was led through Asia, with great circumspection by ten Soldiers, he
strived to do good in all places whither he came, for it may be said of him as
of the Apostles, That they went about and confirmed the Churches: even so this
godly Ignatius with holy Discourses and pious exhortations, did establish the
Churches in his Travels, and chiefly, (because at this time Heresies began to
be broached) he gave them special warning that they should beware and shun
them, keeping the Gospel of Jesus Christ which they had received with
simplicity and sincerity. Eus^b Eccles* Hist li. 3. c. 30.
And that they should Mordicus adhaerescere* Traditioni Apostolorum: Cleave
close to the doctrine and tradition of the Apostles, which that it might be
truly kept for ever, Biblioth. p^t^am, Tom. ^. page 76.
he thought it fit to be written out, he is styled Divinus Ignatius,
Inclytissimus and ferventissimus Martyr, that is, Divine Ignatius, a most
famous and fervent Martyr. Nay, Nicephorus goes beyond that title, and calls him
(...), one that saw God, and one that was carried of God: Niceph. Hist. lib. 2.
cap. 35
For when he was a Child, Nicephorus reports that our Savior would take him
up, and show him to his Disciples. And it may be that this was one of the
little Children that were brought to Christ to touch them, and why not that
Child, that Jesus took and set in the midst of them, to learn them Humility?
he long time lived with the Apostle, Niceph. Hist. lib. 13. cap. 8.
and succeeded Euodius (whom Saint Paul mentions) in the Bishopric of Antioch,
on a time in a Trance he saw a Vision of Angels praising the blessed Trinity
in distinct courses alternis Carminibus, Socrat. l. 6. ^. 9.
by singing of Verses by turns. Whereupon he did bring into the Church of
Antioch, the form of Antiphonies or Anthemes, and from that, the other
Churches even to this day do observe them.

He sat Bishop of Antioch nine years, in which time he did maynly build up
the Church of his Savior, being always wondrous strict in reproving
Superstition and Idolatry, in so much that he did not spare to reprehend the
superstition of the Emperor Trajan himself, who then was at Antioch, Niceph.
lib. 3. cap. 2. and 19.
and for that very cause commanded him to be carried to Rome, to be torn and
devoured of Lions* Well, when he had visited the Churches of Smyrna, he did
discourse with, and sent Letters to Ephesus, and Magnesia, Troas,
Philadelphiae, Rome, and to Polycarpus himself. And this Polycarpe does praise
them, for he gives this testimony of them, complectuntur enim fidem, patientiam
and aedificationem omnem quae ad Christum pertinet, That they include and
learn Faith, Patience, and edifying in all things that make to the gaining of
Christ: and herefore worthy to be had in special esteem in the Churches, nay,
to be publicly and priva^ely read and remembered, he makes mention of Onesimus
in his Epistle to the Ephesians. In his Epistle to the Magnesians, he speaks
of Damas then Bishop there, in his Epistle to the Trallians, he mentions
Polybius who then governed it, he entreats the faithful that were at Rome,
not to be moved at his sufferings, nor to be shaken from the faith, which he
had received, for he was ready and joyful to suffer much for the Name of
Jesus: Eusebius. li^* 3^*
and so the Church Historians have kept that Epistle to the Romans, with great
care: and Eusebius mentions it, nay, records it, and so does La Bigne in his
Bibliotheca Patrum, and so Saint Jerome. Eusebius says it begins in these
words, Ex Syria Romam versus iter Instituens, terra, marique, noctu, interdiu
cum bestiis confligo, december Leopardis colligatus, etc. that is, As I came out
of Syria, toward Rome, both by Sea and Land, both night and day I fight with
Beasts, and am chained amongst ten Leopards, which were the ten Soldiers that
did bring me to Rome by Trajans command, who though I do many benefits for
them, yet are they more inhumane and fierce, but I am daily better learned by
their injuries. I could wish that I could see those beasts that must tear me,
I would speak fairly to them to dispatch me quickly, which if they shall
refuse to do, I will incite them: Pardon me, for now I begin to be Christ's
Disciple, All things are of no esteem in comparison of him, Neither fear I
what man can do unto me. Ignis, Crux, Bestiarum conflictationes, ossium
distractiones, con^isiones membrorum, totius corporis tanquam farinae molitae
attritiones, omnia denique suppliciorum genera a Diabolo excogitata in me
coacerventur, si Iesum Christum duntaxat adipiscar. Fire, Cross, breaking of
my bones, quartering of my members, crushing of my body, and all the tortures
that inhumane man can invent; and all the torments of death and the Devil,
come what will, or can come, so I may enjoy my Lord Jesus and his Kingdom for
ever, when this life is ended.

What a proffer did this good old man bid for Heaven, what a victory was this
(to his praise be it spoken) to get this victory of himself, having so many
enemies, as the World, the Devil, and the Flesh, and inticements of friends,
which were as so many blocks laid in his way, hindering, as it were, his
passage to Heaven?

When the time of this Ignatius his Mar^yrdome drew nigh, He used a saying,
which Saint Jerome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, and Saint
Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 28. Iren. l. 5 c. 28.
do both remember: and it is in the same Epistle: namely, this; Frumentum
Deisum; dentibus ferarum molar, ut mundu^ Dei panis inveniar. You may render it
in English, thus: Now I am* but Gods Corn: when the wild beasts shall have
grinded me to powder with their teeth, I shall be his white-bread.

He used also to say, (and no doubt, but he found it true,) Nihil praestantius
est pace Christi; as Damascen relates in the first Book of his Parallels, and
^8 Chapter, There is nothing better then the peace of a good Conscience, then
the peace of Christ. For his Humility, it was much, for he thought it no
disparagement to learn of any that could instruct him, for he went to school
to learn, In vita Ignat. page 91.
when he was thirty years of age: Likewise he thought himself so unworthy
to be buried in any sanctified place; that he chose rather to be buried on a
dunghill, or some common fields: Such was his humility, that he ever thought
meanly of himself; and always subjected his own spirit to the practice of
Virtue. This Virtue amongst all others, though the lowest, yet holds the
pre-eminence; this Virtue is the safest, because it is always at Anchor: for
it endues the mind of Man with divine Knowledge, and ingra^iates him with his
God: And certainly that man lives with most content in his calling, that
strives to live within the compass of it.

Polycarpe said to his Scholars, be ye persuaded, by the example of
Ignatius, Rufus, and Zozimus, or else by the Apostles themselves to hold fast
the faith, for these by that means are with the Lord. He suffered under Trajan
at Rome, Anno Christi 102, the remainder of his bones which were left by the
wild beasts, were sumptuously interred by Theodosius.

Saint Ignatius his Sayings.
Of good and wicked men.
They are like true and counterfeit money: In Epist. ad magnes. page ^
the one seems to be good, and is not; the other both seems and is: strive
therefore both to be and to bear Gods Image: for though the other seems good,
yet prove naught in the fire of trial.

Of the good Persecution.
The Lions teeth are but like a Mill, In vita sancti Ignatii prope finem.
which though it bruiseth, yet wastes not the good wheat, only prepares and
fits it to be made pure bread: let me be broken by them, so I be made pure
Manchet for Heaven.

Of unity in Prayer.
Let it be performed in one place, In Epist* ad Magnes. p. 55.
in one form, in one mind, with the same Hope, same Faith, and same Charity
in Christ Jesus, who does otherwise, is seduced with vain Opinions.

Of Education of Children.
Parents ought to afford these four things to their Children, Epist. ad
Philadelph. p. 96.
Discipline, Admonition, learning Gods Word, and Arts: all these preserve them
from idleness and folly, gives them wisdom, and learnes them subjection and
obedience to their Superiors.

Of Patience, its excellency.
Other graces are parts of a Christians armor, In Epist. ad Polycarp. p. 209.
as the Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, the Helmet of Salvation, but
Patience is the Panoply, or whole armor of the Man of GOD: the Enemy foiles us
without it, but we foil him by it.

Of Graces in the Soul.
Grace flowing from the blessed Spirit of God, Epist. ad Mariam Cass^bi. page 3.
makes the Soul like a Fountain whose water is pure, wholesome and clear; for
Grace cleanses, saves and beautifieth the whole man.

Ignatius wrote these Epistles following.
1 To Saint John the Apostle. 2 To the Virgin Mary. 3 At Smyrna, to the
Ephesians. 4 To the Magnesians. 5 To the Trallians. 6 To the Romans. 7 At Troas
to the Philadelphians. 8 To the Smyrneans, by Burgus. 9 To Polycarpus Bishop of
Smyrna. 10 At Philippi to the Tarsenses. 11 To the Antiochenians. 12 To Hero
the Deacon. 13 To the Philippians of Baptism, by Euphranius the Reader.
An. Christi 71. Polycarpus.
S. POLYCARPVS.

THis Polycarpus was Disciple to Saint John, Niceph. cap. 30 and 35. lib 3.
Eusebius. Ecc. h^st l. 4. c. 13. Ruffi. cap. 50.
and Bishop of Smyrna, when Anicetus governed the Roman Church, in the Reign
of M. Antoninus, and Lucius Aurelius, Commodus being Proconsul. This Polycarpe
came to Rome, and had great conference with Anicetus about the Celebration of
Easter, as Irenaeus does testify, and in his third Book against Heresies, he
speaks largely in his praise and commendation. This Polycarpe was instituted by
the Apostles themselves, and had great familiarity with them which had seen
the Lord Jesus in the flesh: he was sent into Asia, and there was made Bishop,
and lived a long while to a very ripe age, so that the Almond-tree did flourish
in his gray hairs. He was wonderful in esteem and repute for his reverend
gravity, and chiefly because he taught nothing but what he learned of the
Apostles themselves, and what the Catholic Church delivered, and such points
only as were really true and orthodox. And this all the Churches of Asia
manifest, and all the Bishops which succeeded him in that great dignity. He
was not as Valentinus or Marcion, but testis fidelis veritatis constansque, a
faithful and a constant witness to the truth; nay, by his powerful wisdom
and singular piety, he recalled and did reduce many from Heresy and Error.

It is reported for certain, that John the Lords Disciple, and he, going to a
Bath at Ephesus, and espying Cerinthus an Heretic in it, that he said
(fugiamus ocyus) etc. Let us depart for fear lest the Bath wherein the Lords
Adversary is, do suddenly dispatch us: which indeed he had just cause to
fear; forasmuch as the places where wicked men are, in a manner seem to
detest their wickedness: so that one of the Fathers made have out of the house
of a wicked man, and soon after it fell to the ground. Thus this holy man
Polycarpus showed a great zeal and vigor of spirit for the defense of the
truth. And indeed, those Primitive Fathers were very circumspect and cautious
how they kept company with those whom they thought not to be sound in the
faith, imitating that rule of Saint Paul, An Heretic after the first and
second admonition shun, knowing that such an one is fallen away, being
condemned in his own conscience.

It is to be wondered, to think how constant and courageous these Primitive
Fathers were in their sufferings. For they were not disheartened when their
bowels were ripped up, when they rubd with shells and rough stones, when their
very heart strings were cracked in the fire, when there were beasts appointed to
tear them, nay, (per quodcunque supplieiorum genus) whatsoever punishment was
laid upon them, they did rejoice in the midst of them, and so did this
Polycarpus, and Germanicus, and Ignatius.

This blessed Martyr, when the Heathens did cry out, quaeratur Polycarpus, kept
his countenance and resolution so firm, that it bred amazement in his Friends,
who would have had him gone out of the City into some place, to avoid the fury
of his Adversaries, but he continued in devout prayers night and day, for the
Church of God, and for its peace: he did foretell to his Friend, that he
should die in the flames for the Lord Jesus, when as they that came to
apprehend, were entered something near the place where he was, his Friends
advised him to depart, which he easily might have done, but would not, and
said, Domine, fiat voluntas tua, Lord, let thy will be done.

And so came to them, whose countenance when they beheld they were abashed
much, but he commanded meat to be set before them, and entreated them to eat
heartily, and desired them to give him respite but for one hour only, in
which he prayed most fervently, for the pardon of all his sins, and for the
Catholic Church, and so was upon a solemn day brought into the City. Herod
being Prefect, dissuaded him not to suffer that death, but to recant, and to
enjoy life and liberty; he constantly after a little pause told him plain, he
would not yield to his suggestions: which when they saw, they drove him in a
Chariot with violence to the place of Martyrdom, and broke his leg in the
journey: but coming before the Proconsul, he did ask him whether he was
Polycarpus or not? to whom he answered resolutely that he was: then he bad
him deny Christ and swear by the Emperor: to wh^m Polycarpe replied,
Octoginta sex annos illi jam inservivi, etc. I have served him these eighty six
years, and all this time he never did me any hurt, how can I then speak ill
of my King who has kept me ^afe so long a time, and clearly did profess
himself to be a Christian: ^hen the Proconsull told that he had beasts in
readiness to devour him; and Polycarpus answered, Bring them, for I am ready:
then the Proconsull said to him, that he would tame him in the flames: but
Polycarpus told him that they were but momentany, and that he neither feared
beasts, nor fire, nor any other punishment. S^ when they did see that he would
not be frighted, they all with fury cried out: Iste Asiae Doctor, Christianorum
pater, deorum nostrorum eversor. This is the Doctor of Asia, this is the Father
of Christians, this is he that speaks against our gods, and will not worship
them. So the fire being made, he was cast into it; but it was a strange thing,
that the fire would not burn him, but he gave a smell as if of sweet Odours
and Confections, till at last they ran him through the bowels with a sword,
and there issued our so great a quantity of blood, that it amazed them all, and
extinguished the flame.

Such was his holy detestation of Heretics and Enemies to the Religion of
Christ, Polycarpus. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
that when Marcion an Arch-heretick, but one of his acquaintance, met him in
the street at Rome, and wondering that he took no notice of him, said unto him,
Do thou not know me Polycarpus? yea, said he, I know thee well, thou art the
eldest son unto the Devil.

When the Proconsul had urged Polycarpus, as much as in him lay to deny Christ,
He made this answer to him, as before; I have served him eighty six years,
and he has not once hurt me, and shall I now deny him?

And when he was come to the place of his Martyrdom, the stake being fastened
in the ground, and the wood ready to be kindled; they began to tie him to the
stake with iron chains; and he required to stand untied, saying; Let me alone,
(I pray you) for he that gave me strength to come to this fire, will also
give me patience to abide in the same without your tying. Indeed that man
which is accustomed to patience, will never quit or forsake any place for any
pain or trouble whatsoever: for the pains and perplexities that good and
virtuous men do endure and suffer, do, as it were, prick them forwards to
have a more earnest desire to loath, and to leave this wretched and sinful
World; whose sweetest pleasures (as the wise man says,) are as sower Grapes;
whose greatest Honors are fading and false flourishes; whose profits and
riches are but poisoned baits to entrap men: therefore happy are they that have
a good and a quiet soul, for it is given them from above.

For if we consider man according to the life, we shall find him full of
vanity, weakness, inconstancy, misery, and presumption: a fruitful Argument
to divert him from all singularity. And he that will avoyde trouble and sorrow,
must apply his mind to wisdom.

This Polycarpus wrote many things, most of which are kept in the Vatican.
There is extant an Epistle of his to the Philippians.

An. Christi. 71. Sanctus Dionysius Areopagita
S. DIONISIVS AREOPAGITA.

BEsides those of the Latin, many of the Greek writers have written this
Dionysius actions, as Aristarchus a Chronologer, and Methodius Bishop of
Constantinople, Metaphrastes, and Suidas; amongst the Latin Authors, Hilduinus
at the request of Ludovicus Pius the Emperor Ado, Mathaeus Galenus, and
others, as, Cardinal Baronius in his first and second Tome of his
Ecclesiastical Annalls; but both the one and the other, wheresoever they
mention him, style him, Hominem sapientissimum, Episcopum sanctissimum,
Martyrem illustrissimum, idest, A most wise man, an holy Bishop, and a most
famous Martyr.

This Dionysius was borne at Athens the most famous City of all Greece, the
mother of all Arts and Sciences. His parents were eminent, rich, and civil of
life, given much to hospitality, and wondrous liberal. This Dionysius giving
himself to study proved himself so learned that he was accounted among the
chief of Athens. He traveled into Egypt for the more commodiousnesse of
study, Paris^s. 1555.
also for to get the skill of Astronomy: at the age of twenty five years whilst
he lived at Heliopolis with Apollophanes the Philosopher; Dionysius was 25
years old at the death of our Savior, and lived a long time after with the
Apostles: as himself records in the 1^ Epistle to Apollophanes.
he saw that general Eclipse of the Sun at our Saviors Passion which did
envelope the earth in darkness for three hours: which he said was not natural:
and this as one amazed he spoke of it: Aut Deus naturae patitur, autmundi
Machina dissolvetur, (id est) either the God of nature does now suffer, or the
frame of the whole world shall be dissolved. Michaell Syngellus, Michael
Syngellus in Encomio S. Dionys^i.
priest in Jerusalem, reports that he heard his father say, that he heard
this Dionysius speak of that Eclipse in these words, Ignotus in carne patitur
Deus, cujus gratia rerum Vniversitas densa hac caligine obfcurata est atque
concussa, (id est) God unknown in the flesh did suffer; for whose sake the
Uniuerse was struck and covered with thick darkness. And this Dionysius in an
Epistle written to Polycarpus, S. Dionys. in Ep. ad Polyca^
being asked what this great Eclipse might portend, said, that it showed a
change and a great alteration, and that he did seriously observe the day and
the hour.

This Saint Denis took to Wife one Damaris a grave Matron, Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
lib. 4. de sacerd.
as Saint Ambrose and Saint Chrysostom do well note, he lived in the
management of State Affairs, and administered Justice with admirable
discretion, and most men wondered at him for his prudence and Philosophy.

At the same time, Saint Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles came to Athens, and
taught them there true divine Philosophy, driving away, and overthrowing all
the Sects of vain philosophy, as of the Epicures, Stoics, Academicks,
Peripateticks, who at the time resided in Athens, and were highly esteemed of:
but when Saint Paul was entered into the City, he saw an Altar with this
Inscription; Ignoto Deo: From which Saint Paul as a wise and prudent Preacher,
took occasion to preach to them the true God, who is the Creator of all things.

There was in the same City a high and eminent place of Judicature whereon 12
Judges sat to censure Malefactors and Offenders, Why called Areopagite?
and thereupon that place was called Are^pagus, or Mars his Hill; and those
that were appointed Judges to sit in that place were for their severity and
integrity called Areopagites. It so fell out that Saint Paul preaching of the
true God, as also of the Resurrection, and the Judgment of the World, was
accounted by all those great philosophers as a wicked and sacrilegious person:
and so being brought to this place before the Judges, he did with that Divine
Eloquence, and with such forcible Arguments convince those Philosophers:
Dionysius and his wife La maris co^verted by St. Paul to the true Faith.
and by the great blessing of God did convert this Dionysius President and
chief of the Judges, with Damaris his Wife, who used Saint Paul courteously:
and were instructed by him in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: at the
knowledge of this the whole City of Athens was amazed, because that this
Dionysius was reputed of all men to be a most wise and judicious man; but
Dionysius was not ashamed of a Master to become a Scholar, and expressed to the
whole Church, how that he magnified this divine Learning, and sacred knowledge
of Christ. Now though he was thus converted to the Faith, yet he kept the name
of Areopagite, and within three years proved an admirable proficient to
propagate the Gospel of our Savior

And so staying a good while in Athens, he did with great labor and wisdom
preach the Word of God. For he as a wise Harvest-man brought in many sheaves of
corn into Gods Storehouse, the Church, Dionysius journey to visit St. Paul at
Ephesus.
and so he went to Ephesus, to visit S. Paul, and see S. John now returned out
of Pathmos from Banishment, by whose persuasion, Clemens then governing the
Church of Rome, this Dionysius repaired to Rome, (and having done his
spiritual work at Athens) and left one Publius to look to that Flock, He
was by the said Clement authorized to go into France, to preach the Word
there, and to give knowledge of salvation to that Nation; and France was at
that time a fit place to plant the Gospel in; but the first Laborers were
martyred, that were sent thither, hereupon, this Dionysius took his
fellow laborers in this journey, and work, one Rusticus a priest, Eleutherius
a Deacon, and Eugenius, and some others Eugenius he sent to Spain, who settling
at Toledo, was there first Archbishop, afterward going into France, was
martyred.

Dionysius coming into France, esteemed that Paris would be the fittest place
to reside in; and there he found himself not frustrated of his expectation,
for in a short space, he brought many sheep into the fold of Christ; not only
in Paris, but also in many other places, and those that were converted were not
of the meaner sort, but many rich, noble and great persons, who being converted
overthrew the Temples of their false gods, and erected new places for Divine
Worship.

But the common enemy of the Church of Christ, seeing and observing this happy
progress, that this Kingdom would be weakened, if this doctrine was
maintained: Whereupon he began to contrive plots and malicious projects, how
to hinder the work of this Dionysius. And thereupon put it into the minds of
those Idolatrous priests by their malice to hasten his death; but mark the
overruling hand of God, although many were sent armed secretly to dispatch
him; yet there was such a gracious luster and radiancie in his countenance and
gravity: that some of their hearts failed them when they beheld him, and they
repented of their intent, and many others were cast into a sudden fear, and
fled from the performance. See but how strong God is over the actions of
wicked^men, who though they would, yet cannot act any thing beyond Gods divine
disposal.

As there is nothing so sacred, but there will be still found in all ages
sacrilegious hands to attempt and touch it: And though there be not wanting
multitudes of men, whose tongues and hands have no other employment, but to
defile, and diminish so much as in them lies, the honor of God, and of good
men; yet for all that, the virtuous man's mind is not a whit daunted or less
assured then before. And most men know, that the virtue and vigor of him who
in fighting has vanquished his enemy, is always greater then his, who did
never try the combat at all. Even so may we think and say of the virtuous,
constant and well disposed person: who, like to good metal, the more he is
fired, the more he is fined; the more he is hated and opposed, the more is he
approved: For wrongs and attempts may well try him, touch him, or prick him;
but they cannot imprint in him any false stamp: Many out of envy and malicious
disposition, may attempt and set upon a just and upright man, and assail him
both by words and actions, yet not injure him; for in that case he is like a
brazen wall, which the darts of the wicked cannot pierce through; but rather
rebound on their own breasts. And though that such mischievous and malicious
men level right at him to hit, and to hurt him with their harmfull shafts; yet
do they come short of their aims: for either they hit him not; or if they
do, they hurt him not at all. Therefore let all good and virtuous men be
qualified and comforted, and with patience and peaceable playsters; such as are
joy, exultation, and delight: for these will bring him unto greater content,
then humanity can imagine.

But suddenly after, Hescennius Sisinnius the Prefect, gave command that
Dionysius with his fellows should be apprehended: and when he was taken,
Sisinnius had much talk with him; and did much reprove him and blame him, for
that he had preached against the worship of their Gods; and because by his
Sermons, their gods had lost their former honor and worship; and seriously
charged him to confess his error, and to stop up that breach which he had
made, to leave off those novelties, and unheard of doctrines grounded upon no
sufficient warrant, or solidities, that so the people by this recantation might
see how vainly they were seduced; and so return to their ancient Rites and
Customs again. To whom Dionysius answered, (not without a great deal of
Constancy and Zeal mixed with Wisdom and Divine Eloquence) how that they were
no gods whom they worshipped, and how that they were but Idols, the work of
men's hands, and that it was mere folly, ignorance and Idolatry to adore them;
and added that there was but one God, which he preached: at which words spoken
with so deep a resolution; Sisinnius was wondrously incensed and angry, and
commanded him to be laid upon an hurdle, and a gentle fire to be put under to
roast him. Hildrinus relates that he was cast to wild beasts that were kept
hungry, Hildrin. in ejus vita c. 32.
but they would not tear him, and how he was thrown into an Oven made hot,
but the fire did not seize upon him: but he was the second time with his
fellow laborers brought before Sisinnius, and they were publicly beaten with
cruel and many blows by the Officers. But the Judge perceiving their valor
and unmovable courage, that they were not at all daunted with these dealings:
He standing up, commanded in a rage, that seeing they had contemned their gods,
derided the Emperors Edicts, that they had wrought by Magic and other
unlawful Arts (as with Miracles) to delude the people, that they had seduced
the people, and had drawn them from their obedience to the Emperor, to their
faction and part, that although these things came upon them for their faults;
and that they might be punished by the Emperor, for suffe^ing such Seducers to
remain in the Confines of his Empire, commanded them fo^th-with to be
beheaded. At which this Saint Dionysius, Rusticus, and Eleutherius were not any
whit terrified, but with joy and mirth answered, that all they who worshipped
such gods were like them, and would perish even as the dung of the earth. But
as for us (said Dionysius) Come life or death, we will worship the God of
Heaven and earth.

At these words of these holy men, the Judges anger was kindled like fire, and
gave strict charge that their execution should not be deferred; and so they
were haled out of the City to the top of an high Mountain, and delivered to
the Officers and Executioners to be tormented, which was accomplished with all
the cruelty that could be; at the time of Dionysius his beheading, he devoutly
lifting up his hands and eyes to the God of Heaven expressed himself in this
prayer.

DOmine, Deus omnipotens, Filiunigenite, and Sancte Spiritus, Sancta Trinitas,
principio carens, and in quem non cadit divisio, suscipe servorum tuorum in
pace animas, quoniam propter te morte afficimur.

Which deserves to be registered in letters of Gold. I have thus Englished it.

O Lord, God Almighty, thou only begotten Son, and holy Spirit; O Sacred
^rinity, which art without beginning, in whom is no division: Receive the souls
of thy servants in peace, who are put to death for thy Cause and Gospel: to
which Rusticus and Eleutherius answered, Amen.

Which prayer being ended, at the command of the Ruler, they were beheaded with
a sword that was made dull, that so their pain in their Martyrdom might be
the greater.

These worthy Martyrs suffered the eighth of the Ides of October, in the Reign
of the Emperor Hadrianus; in the 110 year of Dionysius his age. It is true
that Metaphrastes, Hildrinus, Hincmarus the Bishop of Rhemes, and others do
say that he suffered under the Emperor Domitian in the ninety first year of
his age: but they are deceived, for Dionysius in a certain Epistle which he
writ to John being banished into Pathmos, in which he says that he did foresee
that he should be released from that misery and should return into Asia, and
that by Gods providence they should see one another face to face: which proved
true; when as the bloody Decrees of Domitianus were called in and revoked, and
those which were exiled for the name of Jesus were recalled: And again the
same Dionysius speaks of an Epistle which Saint Ignatius writ to the Romans
though then dead, who as is manifest, suffered martyrdom under Trajan whom
Nerva succeeded. Mi^hael Syngellus reports it, that Dionysius lived til the
latter time of the Emperor Trajan his reign, but the ancient Martyrologies
affirm that Saint Denis suffered martyrdom under Hadrianus, as Cardinal
Baronius has well and judiciously observed it. Baron. Tom. 2. page 37.
And so secondly we may conclude safely, that Denis lived one hundred and ten
years.

His writings are extant, yet not without some scruple or doubting, howbeit
those of the best judgment give good reason why they are his. I will not
rehearse any of those great Miracles which the papists do ascribe to him,
however I must not neglect to recite unto you his works being so lofty and
divine, and relishing of a Spirit which was ruled by the Dictate of the Holy
Ghost. And indeed I could be large if I should but recite the Testimonies of
all Ecclesiastical Writers who have commended this godly martyr: Bellarmine
says that he used often that saying of Ignatius of Christ, Bell. in scrip.
Eccles. p. 29.
Amor meus crufixus est, that is to say, My love and delight is crucified.

His Sentences follow. And his Works as Cardinal Bellarmine has registered
them.

He used to say that he desired of God but two things, Dion, Ar. Ep. ad
Polycarp.
first to know the truth himself, Secondly to preach it as he should to others.

No less observable was his speech to Timothy: Dion. in Ep. ad Tim.
Had thou seen the Saints agonies at that time (as I did, speaking of their
cruel persecutions of him) thou could not but weep, considering the sentence
denounced against them; that Peter was crucified, and Paul beheaded; that
multitudes of the common Rabble smiting them, did spit in their faces: and it
is worthy the remembering, that at their parting, after they had received the
sentence of death from the Magis^rate, Paul said to Peter: Peace be^ with thee,
thou Foundation of the Church, and Shepherd of Christ's Lambs and Sheep; And
Peter to Paul, Go in peace, thou Preacher of good things, thou Mediator and
Captain of our Salvation, and chiefest Labourer in the Lords Harvest: But at
their departure, (says he) did follow my Master Paul.

And in the same Epistle: Observe a Miracle (my brother Timothy) not to be
slightly passed over. I who was present at their parting; after their death,
saw them hand in hand entering into the gates of the City, clothed with a
garment of light, and wearing on their heads glorious Crowns.

1 Of the Celestial Hierarchy 1 Book. 2 Of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 1
Book. 3 Of Divine Names 1. 4 Of Mystical Divinity 1. 5 Epistles to Caius 4. 6
To Dorotheus 1. 7 To Sosipater 1. 8 To Polycarpus 1. 9 To Demophilus 1. 10 To
Titus 1. 11 To Apollophanes 1 12 To John the Apostle 1.
To confirm that these Works were his, it is sufficient, that they were
allowed of Saint Gregory the Great, in his 33 Homily on the Gospels; and not
only of him, but of diverse others who have writ of him: as St. Maximus, and
others.

An. Christi 150. Justinius Martyr.
IVSTINVS MARTER.

Look upon this effigies, and you behold an acute Philosopher, a Judicious
Divine, a constant Martyr, a stout shield of the Christian Faith: an Elegant,
ancient, and eloquent Writer, in the defense of the Truth: Whom many of the
Fathers have highly esteemed and deeply praised, Photius in Bib. Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. l 4. cap. 11 Hiero. in illa Eccles. Scripto. Epiphan. lib. 1.
Tom. 3. contra 46. Haeresin Tatianorum.
as Photius in his Book entitled the Library, and Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical History. S. Ierom likewise reckons him none of the meanest
amongst those famous Champions of the Church: so Epiphanius terms him, Vir,
sanctus, and Dei, a man, an holy man, and a lover of God. Anastasius, Paulus
Orosius in his seventh Book and fifth Chapter, and Plinius secundus in his
Epistles in the tenth book. But Photius does amongst the rest, give and afford
him a large Eulogie: Photii Bib. fol. 303.
it begins in these words, Est autem vir ille ad Philosophiae tum nostrae tum
potissimum prophanae summum evectus fastigium, etc. which is, That this man
came to a great height, not only of our philosophy, but also of that which is
counted profane, flowing in the copiousnesse and abundance of all sorts of
learning and histories, and knew very well how to beautify and adorn his words
with Rhetorical expressions. Hence was it that he was so able to deliver his
mind in apt terms and significant phrases, so that those things that came from
him were wonderful emphaticall, patheticall, and significant; and worked much
upon the souls of his Auditors.

He was son to Pris^us Bacchius, he was borne in a certain little Town in
the province of Palestine called Naples. But he took great delight in Rome,
and therefore he chose that to be the seat of his residence, where both in
speech, life, and habit, he professed himself a Philosopher: but he made his
philosophy subservient to his sacred study of divinity, and would say, He kept
it for use, and that in his studies he found great profit by it. Tritenhemius
the famous Abbat of Spanheim in his collections of the ancient fathers does
give this Justin Martyr a very good report, for he calls him, Christi amatorem
and cultorem insignem, a great lover and worshipper of Christ Jesus.

Cardinal Bellarmine and Baronius do both highly praise and ex^oll him for
his Learning in their Writings, especially Baronius in his Annals does commend
him, because He was the first Champion that set himself against the dangerous
Heretic Marcion. His words are these, Caeterum non defuerunt, ^aro. A^ral.
Tom. 2. fol 118 Sect. 15.
qui statim adversus Marcionis venena pararent antidotum: praestilit id quidem
omnium primus Justinius Martyr: that is, There wanted not those that presently
prepared antidotes against the poison and venom of ^arcion; but the first that
undertook the cause was Justin Martyr. Nay, he not only praises him for
that, according to his due merit, but also for his valor and prudence in
discovering the Heresy of the Valentinians: Baron. Tom. 2. p. 111.
he cites Tertullian adversus Valent cap. 4. 5. to utter these words, Viri
sanctitate and praestantia Insignes, Haeresiarcharum contemporales
instructissimis voluminibus, and prodiderunt and retardarunt, ut Justinius
Martyr: There were men famous for sanctity, worth and excellency, who by their
dexterous Writings, suppressed the Heresy of Valentinus, as Justin Martyr: so
that it easily does appear, that he did not only suffer much for his Saviors
cause, but also did much study and accustom himself to defend it against all
oppositions in his time. For custom is a second nature: and when the soul
takes delight in any virtue, it is gained upon by an usual and customary
iteration.

He began to flourish in the Reign of Antoninus Pius, and in the time of
Telesphorus, as does appear by his Apology, which he dedicates to the same
Emperor, wherein he grievously complains against the Pr^consul in Asia,
because he did with such extreme cruelty, persecute the poor Christians with
the sword, as was thought, against the mind of that good Emperor, who was
calm and gentle toward them, Baron. Tom. ^. page 107.
and would not suffer them to read any Books of the Prophets which spoke of
Christ, upon pain of death: But this Justin Martyr lays him open to the
Emperor, and says, it was, Opera and instinctu malorum Daemonum, Justin in
Apol a^ Anton^um.
ut per timorem homines ab ill is absterrerentur: By the help and instinct of
the Devils, to skarre and affright men from reading such Books as would learn
them goodness and happiness.

He got much re^ute by being so constant against Id^l^try and Superstition,
This Just Martyr flourished in the year of our Lord, 103.
and by persuading the Gentiles to leave it, as a vain and unprofitable
service, and declared unto them the exce^lency, and benefit of the true worship
of God, so that he did cause many to come out of that miserable condition, and
cherefully to embrace the Faith of our Savior Christ crucified.

But to conclude, the Bibliotheca veterum Patrum, does sufficiently speak for
him, and register his worth, and parts, to succeeding Ages. One of the first
after the apostles times, whose writings we enjoy was Justin Martyr, Biblioth.
Pat^. Tom. 2 page 1*
who flourished in the time of Antoninus Pius, and his successors, Marcus
Aurelius, and Lucius Verus. And in his apology to the senate and people of Rome
he writes, that there were from the nativity of Christ 150 years to his days.
He did not live free from malicious men: But the chief of all his adversaries
and accusers, Qui carbone notandus, was Crefcens a Cynick Philosopher, but no
ways deserving the name, who was a man of a corrupted life, and wholly addicted
and given up to Luxury and Gluttony, and many other vices: he was the
incarnate Devil, that never left off his accusation of this worthy Instrument,
and at last by his malice and envy, got opportunity against him, because he was
a faithful Christian.

It is observed, that the envious man does not bear envy so much to the
persons of those whom they envy, as they do to the good things which are in
them. Envy, indeed, is the Mistress of injustice, and it inciteth both the
thought and the hand to all kind of ill and wicked actions: for when the
condition of another man is just, upright, and cheerful; then is envy most
plotting and contriving, sad and sorrowful. And whosoever bears envy to any
good man, and doing well, it may well be said of him: That he is not only
envious to the Commonwealth, but to himself also, and in the end will be his
own destruction.

It is a principal point of wisdom, truly to know how to esteem of life;
for he that esteems and loves his life for the love of it self, he lives
not but to live: But a wise man lives no longer, then that his life may be
worth more then his death; A great part of life is lost to those that d^ ill; a
greater to those that do nothing; and all, to those that do that they should
not do: But the actions of a well grounded and advised man tend always to some
certain and good end; and what he purposes, he brings to perfection;
because his intendments end in performances of good and virtuous conclusions.

This Justin Martyr used to say of the Christians in his time; Ep. ad Diognetum.
that which the soul is in the body, that are Christians in the World: for as
the soul is in the body, but not of the body; so do Christians dwell in the
World, but are no part of it.

He had diverse other Sayings; Apud Anton. Melissam, lib. 1. se^m.
especially these two: First, It is best of all not to sin; it is next to
that, to amend upon the punishment: Secondly, That it is the greatest slavery
in the World, to be subject to ones own passions.

But moderate passions are the most affable expressions of humanity: passions
must not be too fiery, nor yet too dull; but there ought to be a mean betwixt
both: For the first are like Horses that endanger those that ride them; and the
later prove a trouble to the Guide: The one will not be backed by any, and the
other will be abused by any: a good temper is a sure expression of a well
composed Soul. Therefore the only way to live worthily, and die with praise;
is to be noble in our actions, honest in our intentions, and temperate in our
tongues.

But this envy, though of a long continuance, no whit daunted Justin, for he
did suffer his Martyrd me cheerfully, and willingly surrendered his soul into
his Saviors protection; Saying, He was beheaded in the year 149, or 150.
My life is near finished; and while I lived, I made my chiefest study, the
only trumpet of his glory.

These Works are known to be his.
1 A Dialogue with Triphon the Jew. 2 An Apology to the Roman Senate. 3 An
Apology to Antoninus Pius. 4 An Oration to the Gentiles. 5 Of Monarchy. 6 An
exposition of Faith and the true confession of it. 7 An Epistle to Zeno and
Serenus. 8 An Epistle to Diognetus. 9 A Book of Questions from Christians to
the Gentiles, with Answers. 10 An explication of those questions which the
Gentiles propounded to the Christians. 11 Some Answers to some necessary
Questions. 12 A reproof of certain Sentences of Aristotle.
More questions to the Gentiles about God, and the Resurrection of the Dead.
These be averred to be his by Eusebius, Nicephorus, Zozom^n, Baronius,
Bellarmine, and Bibliotheca Patrum, Perionius, and Tritenhemius, and also by
Robert Stephan in his last Edition.

An. Christi 170. Sanctus Irenaeus.
S. IRENAEVS.

IT is hard to find out the Country, parents, the time of the birth, and the
habitation of Irenaeus, in his young years. But it is certain, he was Bishop
of Lions, Cap. 3. Epist. ^.
and a famous Writer and Martyr: O^^umenius says, he was a Frenchman; but most
do take him to be of Asia, a Grecian, not a Latin, as Cardinal Bellarmine and
others, because he was a constant Auditor to Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna; and
his name does denote him a Grecian, and his Writings were Greek, not Latin,
if we will give credit to Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Basil, Epiphanius, Jerome,
Theodoret, Melissus, Anastatius, and Damascen. His exquisite skill and
dexterity in searching into the secrets of Heresies does sufficiently manifest,
that he was excellent for Philosophy. For usually Heresies have had their
springing from Philosophy, his acute and witty Disputations with them, and his
clear refutation of them do speak his learning; besides the Order and Method
he uses, with the Prefaces before his Books, besides his demonstrating how
that Heresies have not only oppositions and some contradictions in themselves,
but that they do plainly thwart and cross the truth of all Churches, and the
Writings of the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, which he proves in his
first and four last Books; but the nineteenth Chapter of his second Book,
manifests his generality of Learning: First, by refuting all their
sophisticated arguments and ungrounded positions, which he proves to be only
fetched out of the Fables of Poets and Philosophers, herein showing that he had
well versed himself in Thales, Anaximander, Anaxagoras, Democritus,
Empedocles, Plato, and Aristotle: so also in most Tragic, Comic, and Lyrick
Poets; Seeing in the confutation of them in the defense of their Heresies, He
does fitly and wittily use their Exclamations, Lib. advers. Valent. cap. 5.
Proverbs, and Examples; hence is it that Tertullian does style him, Omnium
Doctrinarum curiosissimum Exploratorem, that is, the exquisitest or curiousest
searcher out of all (...) of Learning.

And God having laid him out for a famous Instrument in his Church, Irenaeus
sets himself seriously and ardently to the study of the sacred Scriptures, and
did take wonderful pains and delight in that study: and for his better help
this way, he put himself to Polycarpus, to be his Scholar, which had not
only heard Saint John, but most of the Apostles, which had seen Christ in the
flesh; and no question, it was a great joy to that old Father, to see that he
should have Children who would be constant professors of the Faith in Christ
Jesus: Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 19.
and Eusebius gives him that praise, that he did truly observe all the sweet
speeches that fell from Polycarpus lips, and omitted nothing that he spoke of
Christ his Actions, Miracles, or Passion.

Nay, he was not only with Polycarpe, but also with Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis, and John Bishop of Ephesus, and Aristion, with other who were all
excellently Learned and Apostolical men, and he did eagerly desire the company
of such as had conversed with the Apostles, for so he made himself the abler
to contradict all Gainsayers: so that Saint Hierome and Saint Epiphanius term
him the true Register of the Apostles actions. Epiph. (...) Hierom. in cap. 36.
(...).


He came to be Governor of the Church of Lions in France, or rather indeed
settled the Gospel there, Lib. 1. cap. 9. Lib. 1. cap. 25.
for he says, that inter Celtas commorabatur, and that Rhodanensem Regionem
incolebat, that is, that he abode among the Celtae, and dwelt in the Country
not far from Roan: and hither he was sent a Beato Polycarpo, by blessed
Polycarpe, if you will believe Gregorius Turonensis.

Here with what faith and diligence, pains and carfulness, with what issue
and happy success you may easily judge, for he did constantly preach, and
carefully, and reverently deliver the Eucharist to the people committed to his
charge: take his own words: Oportet nos Deo oblationem facere, Lib. 4. cap. 34.
and in omnibus gratos inveniri fabricatori nostro Deo, in sententia pura, and
fide sine Hypocrisi; in spe firma, in dilectione f^rventi: that is, That it
behooves us to offer our selves to God, and in all things to be thankful to our
Maker, who is God, with a pure mind and purpose, with faith, without
hypocrisy, with steadfast hope, and in ^ervent Love and Charity: and so for his
delivering the Sacrament, Quemadmodum qui est a terra panis, percipiens
invocationem Dei (en consecratio) jam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia
ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti, and gratias agimus Dominationi
ejus, that is, For as ordinary bread after prayer, and consecration, is not any
longer common bread, but is the Eucharist consisting of two parts earthly and
heavenly, and so we praise God. And again, Populo dedit Verbum, praeceptum
faciendarum oblationum. Lib. 5. cap. 2.
The Word did command us to offer Sacrifices to God; not that he needed them,
but that he would be served by us, and therefore he would have us to bring
our Oblations daily to the Altar.

This Reverend old man became famous at Lions, and brought by his preaching and
holiness of life most of that City from Gentilisme, to the knowledge and
service of the true God: Lib. 1* cap 29. Hist. Fr^nc.
but the common enemy of Mankind, envied ^his great success, and so troubled
the peace of the Church with a double mischief; for he brought in a most
cruel persecution against the Church of Vienna, and Lions, which agreed with
those of Asia and Phrygia, in the same ^oints of faith; and also stirred up a
spirit of Error and Lying in some Heretics, as Monta^us, Theodotus and
Alcibiades, and Maximil^^, by both which he disturbed the Christians, and the
peace of the Church: the French hereupon take care for the Brethren, and
therefore sent large Epistles of things done amongst them, as also the Tenants
of Montanus into Asia, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 1. 2, 3.
with their judgments upon them (as Eusebius testifies) and not only so, but
dispatched likewise Letters to Eleutherius, then Bishop of Rome, whom they
desired heartily to keep the Church in unity. Now whom could they find and
choose out to be employed in this weighty employment for holiness and gravity,
and sincerity, praeter unum Irenaeum; but only this one Irenaeus, whom they
knew would undergo all travail, labor, and danger, for Christ and the
Churches good: so Photinus and other chief^ men of the French Churches, with
some Martyrs that were imprisoned, asked him to go Ambassador to Rome, about
some questions of the Church, and so into Asia; which he willingly performed,
In Catalogo Scrip. Eccles.
as Hierome testifies, and presents to Eleutherius the letters in his name,
certifies the Bishop of the doubts, he desires his approbation and confirmation
of the judgment of the French, concerning the Montanists, and so having all
things to his hearts desire at Rome, he very readily prepares for Asia his own
Country, where he did by his own presence and doctrine, afford much comfort to
those distracted and afflicted Churches, by declaring to them the Conformity of
the Western Churches, and the Sea Apostolical of Rome; and mainly settled in
points of Faith (God then giving great success to his labors) he was present
at Caesarea in Palestine, at the Council, where he spoke courageously, and
learnedly in the matters of Faith, Lib. 11. Spec. Hist. cap. 124.
as Nauclerus, Vincentius, Bellovacensis, and Hugo Floriacensis have recorded.

Cardinal Baronius does deny, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 4.
that this Irenaeus went into Asia, because that neither Eusebius, nor Ierom do
mention it; and because Eusebius does speak of his Embassage to Eleutherius to
Rome: indeed to speak strictly, what time he spent, and how long it was ere
he did return to Lions, cannot be distinctly known; but certain it is, that
when Photinus was ninety years old, and when he with diverse other Martyrs
departed this life, that Saint Irenaeus returning from his Embassage was chosen
Bishop of Lions.

His entrance into it was full of danger, unquiet and troublesome, because the
Emperor was then cruel to the Christians, and had not called in the Edicts of
Ner^ for the fourth persecution; but even in this dangerous time, Irenaeus was
valiant, and labored exceedingly by prayer, by preaching, instructing,
arguing, and reproving with patience and wisdom: he seeks the lost*
strengthens the weak, recals the wandering, binds up the brokenhearted, and
settles those that were strong: take Tertullians words of him, Tanta vitae
integritate et doctrin^^ sinceritate gregi is praesidet, etc. He governed the
flock of Christ with such integrity of life, and sincerity of Doctrine,
Tertu^^^ in Apolog.
that a suis amatur, ab exteris suspiciatu^. His own loved him exceedingly, and
others feared him, but God sent peace to the Church in the end of the reign of
Marcus Antoninus Verus, who was moved by the Apologies of Melito, Apollinarius,
Athenagoras, and by the tears and groans of Christians, but chiefly by Gods
mercy, to yield quiet rest to the Church; as also because that rain was
procured by the prayers of the Christians, so that they lived securely, and
held Councels, and did preach freely in his reign as also in the reign of
Commodus who succeeded Antoninus.

But diverse weeds sprung up again to disturb the Church of Lions and Rome,
Iren. lib. cap. 8. and 9.
and the Eastern parts; Lions was troubled with the Valentinians, and
Gnostics; Rome, it was molested with Blastus and Florinus; and the Eastern
Church was disquieted with a great deal of contention about the celebration of
Easter: but against all these did this Irenaeus proceed; he settled Lions,
refuted Blastus and Florinus follies, and was mightily studious to settle the
Churches about Easters celebration. He lived in Antonius, Commodus, and Severus
Reigns; being about 182 years after Christ, but this Severus being a cruel
man against the Christians, raised the fifth persecution against them, wherein
many Martyrs were crowned. But most of all, it raged at Lions, in so much that
the blood of slaughtered Christians ran down the streets, Greg. Turo. lib. cap.
29.
so that their names could not be told, nor numbered, but God has written them
in the Book of Life: at last, this blessed Saint was by the slaughter-man laid
out to death with the greatest part of that City, on the fourth of the Calends
of July, as Trithemius about the sixtieth year of his age, other say the
ninetieth. There is great dispute among Historians, about the year of our
Lord, in which he died; but it is certain, that he with diverse others were set
between two Hills, there being a Cross on the one, and an Idol on the other,
being put to choice, which way he would go, either to the Cross and so
suffer, or to the Idol and live; He and all they chose to suffer Martyrdom,
and so were all put to death.

His bones as relics, were reserved with great care, and laid in rest until
the year 1562. they were digd up in that furious and raging cruelty of the
Hierognosticks, who neither spared dead nor living, nor Temples, Altars, nor
any holy things, but spoiled all, and cast part of his bones into the River;
and his skull was kicked about the streets as a Ball; but a Christian
Surgeon stole it up, and kept it two years, until Charles the ninth got the
City again, and restored to Christians their former liberty: who hearing where
his skull was, came, and decently with great respect buried it, Trithemius in
vita Irenaei.
and caused it to be registered in their common Register of the City.

His Sentences I have here placed, with his Works.

He used to compare the Heretics and Schismatics of his time to Aesops dog,
Iren. l. 2. c. 12.
that lost the substance of Religion, by too earnest gaping after the shadow.

In a just consideration of the glories and honors of this transitory World,
Lib. 2. c. 6.
What profit is there (says he) in that honor which is so short lived, as
that perchance it was not yesterday, neither will be too morrow? For such men
that labor for it, are but like froth, which though it be uppermost, yet is
unprofitablest.

1 Against the Gentiles, 1 book. 2 Of Discipline 1 book 3 Of Schism to
Blastus 1 book. 4 Against Heresies 5 books. 5 Of the Monarchy of God. 6 Of
Ogdoades. 7 Of Easter to Victor. 8 Of the Apostolical preaching.
An. Christi 204. Quinctus Septimius Florens Tertullianus.
TERTVLLIAN.

THis Tertullian flourished in the Reign of Severus the Emperor, Bell^r.
descrip. Eccles.
and lived till the reign of Antoninus Caracalla, as himself witnesses, in
his first book against Marcion, as also in other places. Pamelius who wrote his
life, says, That it was when Victor was Bishop of Rome, who was an African
borne; and when as Septimius Severus was Emperor, that then this Tertullian an
African, was famous also in the Church. There have been those who have striven
about two Questions; first, concerning the knowledge of this Tertullian; from
one Tertullus a Consul; and from one Tertyllianus, a Counselor: as also from
one Tertullinus a Martyr. The second question is about the time wherein this
our Tertullianus lived: some will have him to be converted to ^e Faith, in the
year of Christ, 160. but that is rejected, but Eusebius and others do with
better judgment place him in the year of our Lord 200.

I cannot let pass in the first place, the cause of the multiplicity of his
names. All Antiquaries do hold that he was called Quinctus, a loco in quo
natus: from the place in which he was borne: which was his praenomen ^sed by
the Romans, as Onuphrius testifies, and cites some so called, as Quinct a
Septimia, a famous Matrone. Septimius was added to him a Gente; from his stock
which was amongst the Romans, both Regal, Plebeian and Consular. Lactant. in
lib. instit. c. 1. lib. 5. Ierom. Ep 12^
So Septimius Mesius rex Aequicol^rum. Lactantius in his Institutions, and
Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Fabiola, do suppose this Tertullians stock to
be very noble. The Cognomen, or Surname of Florens denotes a certain Family of
that Race of Septimius: As for his name Tertullianus, it is a derivative of
Tertullus, as Octavianus of Octavus, and as Septimius, of Septimus. It is
concluded by Eusebius and Saint Jerome, that this Tertullianus was an Affrican
borne, the son of a Proconsul; which also is affirmed by Isidorus,
Nicephorus, and Beda: and more specially to be of the City of Carthage.

For his Institution he was happy, for it was excellent, and he was as
industrious to add what could be had by study: his Works against the Gentiles
testify his able parts, which according to Saint Ieroms words; Cunctam saeculi
continent disciplinam, that is, they contain all sorts of Learning. He was
well read in Poets, Grammarians, Histories, and Laws. He was well seen in
Physics and Philosophy. Lactantius says, he was in omni genere doctrinae
peritus: well skild in all kind of Learning. Eusebius styles him, Peritia
rerum and legum Romanorum clarum: He knew well and dexterously the affairs and
Laws of the Romans. Saint Jerome says, he was, Acris and vehementis ingenii,
vir eruditus, quo nihil eruditius, etc. That he had a sharp and pregnant wit;
that there was none more learned than himself. Saint Austine styles him,
Disertissimum; a most discreet man: Nicephorus calls him, Eloquentia acrem and
pollentem: powerful in his Eloquence and Oratory: but he that will see his
large praise, let him read Vincentius Lyrinensis: His words I have Englished;
Inter Latinos omnes hic facile princeps judicandus, that is, Amongst the Latin
Writers, he is chiefly accounted of, for what learning greater then his? Who
more exercised in all divine and humane knowledge? For he was expert in all
Philosophy; He knew all Sects, their Authors, Defendors, Abettors, Arguments,
Fallacies: he was full of all History: his wit was able to decide any
Controversies; and that with forcible Arguments: he convinced any Opposite he
undertook judiciously: who can sufficiently blazon his praises? Each word is a
Sentence: all his constructions victorious. He wrote many Works that were
necessary for Christians: which are all so copiously adorned and beautified,
with such solid Reasons, that they are able to drive any one to his opinions:
Some do style him harsh and crabbed, which is supposed came to him, by his
daily reading Greek Authors: He was not so harsh, but he was as beneficial
for his Matter; and this wit he showed even in his youth; thus and more
copiously does he set him forth, and (under the correction of better judgment)
set but his too severe faults and imperfections aside: look not too rigidly
upon his fall. For those subjects which he wrote of, I dare say it, none
performed them more solidly, or devoutly: and it is thought by candide Divines,
it was his too much addicting himself to the strictness of life, his too deep
austerity that caused his fall: how ever, the most eminent Lights of the Church
have had their imperfections; it is so by the Divine permission, and Satan's
malice; and what if to this end? That Men may know themselves so; and to render
all glory to God: and my conclusion concerning his fall, it shall be vaild with
the Mantle of Charity; and let me say thus much of it, and seriously profess,
When I read him, I admire him. His Discipline may be too rigid for these more
licentious times. But if it was as Saint Paul says, Contundere corpus, to beat
down his proud flesh, that always rebels against the spirit, who can justly
blame him? his method and practice may be harsh and difficult, his intention
and aim cannot but be commendable: though he a little mistook the method, yet
if he attaind the end, may we not conclude him an happy Conqueror? For his
Heresy, of which he stands guilty, have not all Ages shunned that Rock, and
yet entertain Tertullian? For certain, his error was gross, but why may not
that famous Tract of his, de Poenitentia, make amends for it? He is gold,
though not altogether refined; so, nor to to be refused. Wheat he is; who not
thoroughly cleansed, yet may be placed in the Garner: perfectly good he is not,
yet not to be despised; for then who should not? And what pen is that in
Writing never made blot? but I do not here intend a discovery of his faults,
but rather of his excellencies: and so I say to all; Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed least he fall.

He lived to his Clymactericall year, and as Saint Jerome, and Nicephorus
relate it, he in the middle of his Age made this declension: but this Pamelius
whom I follow for the description of his life, says, that he fell into it in
the 53 year of his age: and why might it not please God to give him a recovery
before the revolution of ten years, when it may by his Divine providence be
effected in ten minutes? And how usual it is with God, to bring light of
darkness, and to make crooked things straight; he that knows it not, is not
acquainted with Gods merciful dealing toward penitent and relenting Sinners.

In the year then of our Lord 194. It seems that this Tertullian was
unconverted from Heathenisme, for such an one he was, by his own confession:
When he writes of the Resurrection from Death, the last judgment, the joys of
Heaven, and punishments of Hell, he says, Haecnos aliquando risimus, cum de
vobis fuimus: ^iunt, non nascuntur Christiani. I laughed, and thought scorn of
such points, when I was (of you) (meaning Heathens); but now I see we are not
borne, but made Christians.

But for that time which he passed before his conversion to the Faith, it will
not be so much material for our purpose. Though he was ingenuous and powerful
in pleading Causes at the Bar; Yet will we not insist upon him as following
that course of life, but take him in his time, wherein he says: Cancellos non
adorior, Subsellia non contundo, Iura non conturbo, Causas non elatro: plus
Togaelaesere Rempublicam quani Loricae. that is, I follow not the Laws, plead
not at the Bars, beat not the Desks, disturb not the Laws; do not baule out
any Causes. The Lawyers Gowns have hurt the Commonwealth, as much as the
Soldiers Helmets.

The means as Nicephorus and Eusebius guess, Niceph. l. 5. c 2* Eccles. Hist.
by which this Tertullian was converted, was thus. The Jews being by Adrian
forbidden to return home again after their Wars, they wandered, says
Tertullian, up and down, having neither home, nor friend, without any man to
comfort them, and without God their King. So that at the beginning of Severus
Reign, Bono statures nostrae fuere, Our affairs went well: and the Christian
Faith daily took a larger augmentation; by the famous Writings and Preachings
of excellent Ecclesiastical Writers and Preachers. And it was not promoted in
obscure and little Villages, but in the most eminent and renowned Cities, to
wit, Alexandria, Antioch, Aelia, through all Palestine, as also in Ephesus,
Caesarea, and toward the Western Parts. At Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth; in
Gaul, or France, and Rome. For whole Families, nay, great multitudes came and
embraced the faith; being ready to do or suffer any thing for the defense of
it. At the same time, there were worthy Writers, and diligent Preachers (as
Eusebius reports) to some of which this Tertullian was bound for ever to give
God thanks for his conversion, Tom. 1. Apolog. c. 5. n. 65. 70. and 71.
as he witnesses himself: as at Alexandria, Demetrius the twelfth Bishop: and
Panthenus and his Scholar Clemens Alexandrinus. A^ Antioch, Serapio the ninth
Bishop: at Jerusalem, Gordius the fourth. Theophilus at Caesarea Palaestina.
Polycrates at Ephesus; Ponticus, Palmas, Berillus and Bacchilus at Corinth:
Agrippinus at Carthage: Saint Irenaeus at Lions in France, and Victor Bishop at
Rome: and in this time he set out his Book called his Apology: his
conversion he declares to be by means of one of their Idol gods whom they
worshipped, being by a Christian adjured to declare it, said plainly, that he
was a Devil, and not only by that, but by his reading the holy Scriptures.
Which the Devils (said he) confessed to be the Word of God. Tom. 1. li. ad
Scap. c. 3. n. 20. Ibi^. Apo c. 19. n. 273 274 275. 276. 277.
Moreover, he says, that they are surpassing all others for Antiquity, for
omnes Substantias, omnes Materias, Origines, Ordines, etc. They include all
Substances, Matter, Originals, Orders, beginnings, etc. And also because he
found that what was written in them was Majesticall and Truth it self, Lib. de
Pallio, c. 2. and Apolog. c. 40.
for quicquid agitur, praenunciabatur: nothing is done, but it was in them
foretold; and he confesses, that the Writings of many worthy men brought him
in: he names many; Tom. 3. l. adver. ^^alent. c. 5. n. 41. 42. 43.
as Melito, Theophilus Antiochenus, Apollinarius, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Justinius Martyr, and Irenaeus, whom he calls omnium doctrinarum curiosissimus
Explorator; he was taunted because he went a toga ad pallium, from the study
of Law to that of Divinity; but he justifies his Act most learnedly, in an
Oration made at Carthage, and wrote a Book called, Liber de Pallio: wherein he
shows the Antiquity, Simplicity, Liberty, Gravitie, and Holiness of it, and
says plainly, vitio sibi dari non debere, etc. He ought not to be blamed,
because he had changed his profession.

But observe his behavior, when he was thus converted to the Faith: A. D. 197.
his own learned Writings do sufficiently declare, that he was wholly taken
up night and day in the reading of the holy Scriptures, and did with great
pains get most of it by heart, so exactly, Tom. 2 lib de (...) mu^ieb. c. 3.
n. 33. Ap^l. c. 18.
that he knew each period: in his quotations he did follow the Septuagint,
and highly prayseth it, and did not only exercise himself in the Pentateuch,
and other Historical Books, but in the Prophets, nay, in all those sacred
Oracles.

And what pains did he not take in reading many other Authors, which any
ways might make for the increase of Faith: As Apollonius and Victor; Philo and
Josephus, whom he calls Antiquitatum Iudaicarum vernaculum Vindicem: Tom 1.
Apolog. c. 19. n 292. Tom. 3. l. adversus Haer^s. c. 32. n. 185. 186.
that is, The natural Challenger of the Jewish Antiquities. Appion and
Egisippus, Clemens Romanus, Polycarpe, Saint Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagita,
Papias, Panthe^^s; Rhodon of Asia, Serapion, and one Proculus, whom he styles
Eloquentiae Christianae dignitatem: The dignity of Christian Eloquence, and
diverse others: Behold here the Effigies of a Christian Be.

And it is thought, that he first wrote upon all the History of the Bible in
Verse: Tom. 4. oper is Tertull.
How ever he had an admirable faculty this way; and how wisely he wrote against
one Blastus, who would have had the Christians Easter to have been kept
according to Moses, Tom. 3. l. de praescript. adv. Haeres. c. 53. bae^^s 22. n.
328* and lib. de (...). c. 14. n. 84.
not to Christian prescription: Est praeterea his omnibus etiam Blastus
accedens, qui latenter Iudaismum vult introducere, that is, There is, moreover,
one Blastus come forth, that would have us turn Jews, etc. but who knows not
(says he) that the Gospel is made void, if Christian liberty be to be reduced
to the Law, and in this point what good he did to the Church of God, is to
this day very remarkable.

In the year of our Lord 195, Ibid. c. (...)
and the sixth of Severus Empire: what a worthy dispute had this Tertullian
with a Jew a Pro^elyte, about the spreading of Christ's Kingdom throughout the
World: and what his wisdom was herein who knows not? and did thereupon set
out that Book, Adversus Iudaeos. In quem (says he) enim alium universae
gentes crediderunt nisi in ^esum Christum, qui jam venit, etc. In whom do all
the Nations of the World believe, but in Jesus Christ who is come? and proves
it from that place, Acts (...)
Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, etc. and though some, nay, most of the Roman
Officers at the Entrance into their places did exercise their cruelties by the
persecution of Christians. This Tertullian does highly praise this Severns the
Emperor, for he says, Sed and clarissimas foeminas, and clarissimos viros
Severus sciens hujus sectaesse, etc. Severus though he knew many noble men and
women to be of this way, did not only not punish them, but did highly commend
them, and did publicly withstand such as were their enemies. And some think
that the Emperor hereupon set forth that Law called the Law of Severus and
Antoninus, Tom. 1. l. ad Scap. c. 4. n. 36. Tom ^. Apolog. c. 1. n. 9.
that no man should be condemned being absent, or before his cause was heard:
which gave the Christians great matter of joy: and by the providence of God
made way for the enlargement of the Church and propagation of the Gospel. And
herein who will not say, that this Tertullian did perform an excellent Work
to the Church of God?

And when as the Christians were begun to be vexed by their Enemies, did not
this Tertullian, as Justinius Martyr had done before, write a large Apology for
the defense of the Christians, Apolog. c. 4. n. 50. 51. 52.
and send it to Rome; of which Lactantius speaks, that Tertullian had fully,
and judiciously handled the whole matter, for the general benefit of the
Church of God. Wherein he has this saying, Christianos ad Leones: The
Christians are laid out for the Lions: and says moreover, Ibid. c. 37. n. 490.
Externi sumus, and vestra omnia complevimus, Vrbes, Insulas, Castella, etc.
We are all strangers, yet we fill all your Cities, Islands, Castles,
Garrisons, and yet our reward is nothing but heavy persecutions, death it
self: and this persecution came by three false calumnies and slanders imposed
upon the Christians at that time: as the murdering of Infants; eating man's
blood, and incest: which were all refuted by this only Instrument of GODS
Glory, Tertullian.

Oh admirable Instrument, and painful Laborer! how ought thy memory to be kept
fresh and precious for these rare performances! what shall I term thee, but
Christianorum liberator, The setter of Christians free, who by thy learned
Writings, did even in a manner, stop the fury of Lions!

When this worthy Work was done, he set himself to write against the
Idolatry of Heathens, and the same time was made Priest by Agrippinus Bishop of
Carthage, Tom 3. l. de anima c. 20. n. 226*
in the eighth year of Severus Empire, and then, as some say, he lived as
though he had no Wife: but gave himself wholly to his study and Writing, and
then set forth his Books of Repentan^e and Prayer, and in the ninth of the
Empire of Severus, he persuades the Emperor to favor the Christians in
respect of their innocence, Tom. 1. l. ad Scap. c. 2. n. (...).
and showed how that they prayed for the prosperous success of the Emperors
affairs, and imputes the slaughter of Bizantium to the effusion of Christian
blood.

And in the sixteenth year of Severus Reign, there were many Heresies sprung
up, and spread themselves both ancient and new, whereupon this Champion for the
Church bestird himself, and set forth that Aureum Opus, so it is called, that
Golden Work called de Praescriptionibus adversus haereticos, Tom. 3. lib. de
praes^rip. adv. Haeres. c 45. n. 293. 294.
Certain prescriptions against Heretics. Wherein he showed as well his valor
as his diligence, to suppress and oppose all growing Vipers. Now (says he)
we have only handled them in general, but (God willing) we will answer them
all in particular: At the end of the work he makes a Catalogue of all the
Heretics that then tore the bowels of the Church. He first takes those four
of the Jews. Dositheus the Samaritan, the Sadduces, Pharisees, and Herodians.
Then five and twenty who proved Here^icks out of the Gospel, as Simon Magus,
Menander, Nicholaus, Cerinthus, Hebion, Saturninus, Basilides, Ophitas,
Carpocrates, Caivets, Sethoites, Valentinus, P^olomaens seoundus, Heracleon,
Marcus Colorbasus, Gerdo, Marcion, Lucanus, Apelles, and diverse others: and who
will but confess, that it was no small task to stop all these breaches, and
cut off all these Hydraes heads.

In the eleventh year of Severus Reign, though then the persecution against
the Christians was hot and violent, yet he desisted not from his Labors, and
Writings against Heretics: especially against Quintilla. Who knows not but
that many good spirits have hid their heads in a storm? yet this daunted not
Tertullian, it was his work, and he was resolved to perform it, an infallible
demonstration of a noble and unconquered spirit, not to desist from good
actions, though times prove dangerous.

So, likewise, in the thirteenth of Severus, did he not as worthily withstand
the proceeding of some Libertines, as well at Carthage as elsewhere, who strive
to corrupt the Christians by their Idolatrous shows; Tom 2. de sp^ct. n. 1.
then Tertullian wrote his learned Treatise, de spectaculis, wherein he
handles the case to the full. And at the same time how did he stop an Heresy
arising in Afric, called the Apelletians, from one Apelles: which work is
desired, but not as yet enjoyed.

In the fifteenth year of the Emperor Severus, Tom. 3. l. de Resur. Car. c.
2. n. 25. and 45. n. 320.
did he not famously write against that great Heretic Marcion; and set forth
his Book De Resurrectione Carnis? And presently after wrote his Book, De
Carona Militis* worthy here to be spoken of a little: upon a Triumph all the
Emperors Soldiers, Tom. 3. l. 1. advers. Marcion. c. 15. n. 102.
for the greater pomp were to wear Crowns made of Bays; but one Christian
there was, who when he had his Crown given, held it on his arm, but would not
wear it: whereupon being demanded why he alone had refused to set forth the
pomp of that day; Tom. 2. de Co^o. (...).
he did boldly answer, Non decet Christianum in hac vita coronari, A Christian
ought not to be crowned in this life; a true and a worthy answer. And so upon
this, Tertullian wrote his Book so entitled.

I read not after this, that Tertullian did write any thing for the Church, but
against it, The more is the pity, so great a Scholar should fall so foully.
There are many Fathers who have discoursed what might be the cause of this
Tertullians revolt. Some (as Saint Ambrose) say it was Envy; Vincentius
Lirinensis makes a good application of it. It was, says he, a great tentation
and trial: The Lord says Moses, tries us whether we love him or not, when
there arises up one of these false prophets, or teachers, or dreamers. Saint
Jerome gives him a great praise for his wit: but laments his loss. Saint
Cyprians phrase was, when he would read Tertullian, to say, Hiero^^ in
C^talogo script. Eccles.
Da Magistrum, Give me my Master. Trithemius terms him, Tam in divinis, quam in
saecularibus Scripturis doctissimum: The most learned in sacred and secular
affairs. And that he taught Rhetoric at Carthage, a long time, Gloriose
(says he) with great glory and credit, and again, scripsit Latino sermon
pene, etc. That he wrote almost infinite Works in Latin, wherein he has
most judiciously confuted and overthrown all the Heresies he wrote against,
and licet in aliquibus, etc. and though (says he) he erred in some things, yet
he wrote profitably in many other his Books. He lived till he was old and
decrepite, and so yielded up his spirit, after that he had painfully and
learnedly studied the Word of God, and carefully and discreetly answered all
those that proved Heretics to the Truth.

I have here not followed Trithemius Catalogue, nor yet Bellarmines concerning
his Works, but as Pamelius has registered them, in the Collen Impression, Anno
1617. He has a learned commendation set under his Effigies, wherein as
Tullius was the Pillar and praise of Rome, so Africa glories in her Tertullian.
His Oratory was famous, and Tertullians speech was sweeter then honey, as may
appear by some of his Sentences.

Tertul. de poenitenia.
If thou be backward in thoughts of repentance, be forward in thy thoughts of
Hell; the flame whereof only the stream of a penitent eye can extinguish: and
first so think on the greatness of the punishment, that thou may not doubt
of getting a remedy against it.

Idem, de fuga in persecutione.
The Legion of Devils could not have conquered a Herd of Swine, if God had not
given them power: farbe it then, the Devil should have power over Gods own
Sheep: I may say, That even then the bristles of those Swine were numbered
before God, and much more are the hairs of his Saints.

De Fide.
Ex personis probamus fidem, Tertull. de praescrip. contra Haeres.
an ex fide personas? Do we try men's faith by their persons? we should try
their persons by their faith?

Idem, de Oratione.
The remembrance of Gods precepts, chalkes out a way for our prayers to Heaven:
the chief of which precepts is, That we come not first to make our atonement
with God on his Altar, before we have made our atonement with our brother in
our hearts. For what profit is it to come to the peace of God, without peace?
to come for remission of debts, without remission of debts? How can he appease
his Father, that is angry with his brother?

Idem, de Oratione.
Let us not approach unto Gods holy Altar, before we have made peace with our
offended brother: for to what end should we come to the God of peace, without
peace? for the remission of our own sins, without any intention to forgive
one another? How can he that is not pleased with his brother, think to please
the God of his brother, seeing that God commands him not to be angry at all,
but forgive him? He that then prepares himself on earth, shall be sure of
his reward in Heaven.

Tertullians hours of prayer.
They were the third, Tertull. de jejunio. cap. 10.
the sixth, and the ninth hours: for they are, says he, the more eminent part
of the day, to distribute and distinguish the public affairs of men: so have
they been accoun^ed the most solemn times for Prayer, and Divine Duties in
the Church of God: For at the third hour were the Apostles met together at
their Devotions, and were filled with the power of the Holy Ghost.

GOd Almighty who is the protector and defender of Kings, Tertull. in Apolog.
grant to your Sacred Majesty, along life, a happy Reign, a secure State and
habitation, a strong Army, a faithful Senate or Council, and a Royal people.
These were the solemn Prayers of Tertullian for the Emperors; and used by the
ancient Church.

De Sanctorum Passione.
Tertullian says, that Paul thought himself unworthy to suffer for his
Savior, because he had no more lives to lose for his sake: For he that lost
his life for us that we might live, deserves our life's, and all to be laid
down for him.

Whence it is that the Saints have rejoiced in their sufferings, not counting
their life dear that they might win Christ. Yea, to me (says Saint Paul,
in his Epistles) to live is Christ, and to die is gain. And elsewhere he says,
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. And indeed the sufferings of
the Saints, though for the present grievous and hard to be borne, bring forth
an hope of reward exceeding great and glorious; while we look not at the
things temporal, but at the things eternal. And this should encourage us for
Christ's Name sake to pass through bad report, and good report, setting before
our eyes the example of the Saints; and not only so, but with cheerfulness to
sustain all injurious dealings of men, though they deprive us of livelihood and
life it self, for Christ and his Truths sake; knowing that it is a good thing
to suffer in a good cause, and that this shall make our Crown to be glorious,
and enstate us into blessedness with eternity to have a period.

De Christo VERBO.
Tertullian upon occasion, taking a serious surveigh of the blessed Apostles
Writings, amongst the rest, fixing his eye of contemplation on the first Verse
of the first Chapter of Saint John the Evangelist, affirms thus much in these
terms, This barbarous man wrote more in few words, than all the Apostles in
any one of their Chapters; namely, in these, In the beginning was the Word, and
that Word was with God, and that Word was God.

Which place though at first hard to be understood, contains in it an hidden
mystery, the revealing whereof is worth the while; for in that it is said, In
the beginning was the Word, we must know, that without Gods Word, there had
been no beginning, nothing had been made that was made; for at first God said,
Let there be Light, let there be a Firmament, let there be Sea and Earth, etc.
still God said it; in the beginning was the Word. And that Word was God: it was
very God; for God admits of none accidents, God is all substance; nothing that
is in God or immediately from God, is accidental to God. But Christ the
begotten of God, was with God, yea, God himself: that Word was God. That Word,
which was the Word of the Word of God; for the whole Scriptures speak of that
Word, and without that Word there had been no Scripture.

Tertul. in Apologetico.
Hell is a treasure of secret fire kept under the Earth to punish sinners
withal.

Idem, de Praescript. adversus Haereticos.
It is not lawful for us to devise any thing of our selves, nor to follow that
which others have devised; we have the Apostles of our Lord for our Authors,
who devised nothing of their own heads, but delivered faithfully to the
Nations, the Doctrine which they received of Christ. Therefore though an Angel
from Heaven should preach otherwise, we should count him accursed. Every
Teacher is a Servant of the Law, because he may neither add of his own sense
unto the Law, nor according to his conceit take any thing from the Law, but
preach that only which is found in the Law.

His Works are here as follow.
1 De Pallio, or the Surplice. 2 His Apology against the Gentiles, for the
Christians. 3 Of the Testimony of the soul against the Gentiles. 4 To Scapula.
5 Against the Jews.
Tome 2.
1 Of Repentance. 2 Of Prayer. 3 To the Martyrs. 4 Of Patience. 5 Of Shows and
Plays. 6 Of Idolatry. 7 Of Women's attire. 8 Of the deeking of Women. 9 To his
Wife two two Books. 10 Of the Soldiers Crown. 11 Of Virgins Veils.
Tome 3.
1 Of prescriptions against Heretics. 2 Of Baptism against Quintilla. 3
Against Hermogenes. 4 Against the Valentinians. 5 Against Heretics and
philosophers of the soul. 6 Of the true flesh of Christ, against four
Heretics. 7 Of the Resurrection of the body. 8 Against Marcion. 9 Against the
Gnostics. 10 Against Praxea.
Tome 4.
1 Five Books against Marcion. 2 Of the Judgment Day. 3 His Poems on Genesis,
on Sodom. 4 To a Senator that fell from Christianity to Idolatry. 5
Fragments of some Greek works. 6 To a friend a philosopher, of the trouble of
Wedlock, and of Virginity. 7 Of Fate. 8 Of clean and unclean creatures. 9 Of
Circumcision. 10 Of Aarons garments. 11 Of the blessed Trinity. 12 Against
Hermogenes. 13 Against Apelletians 14 Of Paradise. 15 Of Extasie^. 16 Against
Apollonius
Tome 5. Those that he writ in his fall.
1 An exhortation to Chastity. 2 Of Monogamy. 3 Of flight in persecution to
Fabius. 4 Of Fasts. 5 Of Mod sty. 6 Of the Trinity. 7 Of Jewish meats. 8 Of
Circumcision, and the true keeping the Lords Day.
An. Christi 204. Clemens Alexandrinus.
CLEM: ALEXANDRINVS.

THis great Father was born at Athens, but governed the Church of Alexandria,
(as Saint Hierom witnesses in his Catalogue) He was an auditor to Pantenus
(who dying) this Clemens was Master of the Catechists, his Works are full of
Learning and Eloquence, and wrote in a most elegant style: take but what
Gentianus Hervet produces out of Cyrill the Patriarch of Alexandria against
Julian, for a true testimony of this Clemens endowments and abilities. Quam is
autem utilis sit futurus, hinc potest evidenter perspici. Suntne aliqui, qui
priseis, and ex alto petitis delect antur Historiis. Hi legant Clementem: qui
omnes anti quas it a tenuit Historias, ut nihil little, His History.
qu^ in universo ter^arum Orb gesta sunt that is, How useful and how
profitable to future ages this man will be, may easily be seen, for are there
any who are delighted with ancient and profound Histories? Let such read this
Clement, who was so skillful in all sorts of Histories, that he was not
ignorant of all, or the most famous passages that were done in the World.

Are there any that ^everence the antiquity of Verse and Poetry, Poetry.
and the divine answers of the Oracles? Let such set an high esteem upon this
Clement, who cites the testimonies of many famous Poets, whose Works at this
day are utterly perished, are there any that desire to know the ancient Rites
and Ceremonies of the Heathenish gods sacrifices? Let such take counsel of
this Clement, who lays open plainly all the wicked and profane sacrifices,
Orgies and Mysteries of the old Heathenish gods. So that if any Christian
should yet love Gentilisme, and who should praise and admire the ancient
Manners and Institutions of the old Gentiles, (as would to God there were none)
such a man upon the reading of Clement, unless possessed with the spirit of
slumber and stupiditie, will reject his former opinion of those false gods, and
laugh at the madness of their worshippers, and wish them condign punishment
for their folly. Philosophy.
Are read this great Scholar, who has fully delivered and described the
Original, Families, Sects, Successions, Learning of all those Ancients, yet
he did mightily prefer Christian Philosophy before all other sorts
whatsoever, that there is not any man but of necessity must acknowledge it to
be divine, and in truth to be inspired of God. Does any one desire to know the
Tenants of those Heretics that disturbed the peace of the Church in the
infancy of it? Let him but be conversant with this eminent Father, who both
discovers and explaines, and also learnedly confutes their unsound opinions:
does any desire the authority of the Primitive Fathers; to overthrow such
Heresies as are broached in our times? In this case also will this Clemens give
them great and commendable satisfaction. Does any desire to have the baseness
and corruption of men's manners to be corrected? There is none that does more
sharply lash at vice, and beat down sin; none that gives fairer exhortations
and incitements to Virtue and Piety; None affords fairer demonstrations for
the institution of a godly life; then this one Father. Does any one desire to
see good Discipline decayed, to be restored entire and whole? Hi cum Clementis
doctrinam and vitae sanctitatem (ut par est) laudaverint, qui cum esset
presbyter solummodo, talis fuit, etc. When such shall (as it is equal) have
praised the doctrine and sancti^ie of Clement, who was only a Priest, but such
an one, that if our times did afford but many such, it would go prosperously
and happily with the cause of Christianity.

This Clemens is wonderfully commended by Eusebius, Nicephorus, and Hierome,
and Photius himself speaks of some of his Works, especially of that which he
calls his Pedagogue, which does give directions for manners and life, containing
three Sections, Photius in Biblio beca p. 287.
in which (says he) Dictio est florida, quaeque assurgit in Majestatem cum
suavitate conjunctam, in quibus etiam est eruditio multa and decens: that is,
The Language is flourishing, and arises into certain Majesty joined with
sweetness wherein is very much Learning comely adorned and set forth: so that
as Eusebius and others testify, those blemishes that were cast upon his Works
and Writings, were done by the Eastern Heretics, and Alexander Bishop of
Jerusalem, Trithem. de scrip. Eccles. fol. 8.
gives him a sufficient testimony for Life and Learning. Trithemius terms this
Clement, virum devotum, doctum, and eloquentissimum: that is, a Religious,
Devout, Learned, Eloquent Father: and that fair Encomium which is extant of
him in Saint Ieromes Catalogue, Hieron. cat^^ script. Eccles, fol. 95.
I thought good to insert here made by Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and sent
to the Antiochians. Haec vobis Domini and Fratres scripta transmisi per
Clementem Beatum Presbyterum, virum illustrem and probatum, etc. that is, These
Writings, Brethren, have I sent to you by Clement that blessed Priest, a man
famous and tried, whom you know, and now will know better, who, since he did
come hither by the sending of God, and his providence has mainly confirmed and
increased the Church of God: Origin was his Disciple, Hierom. Epist. ad Mag
Tom. 2 page 108.
and succeeded him in his place at Alexandria. Saint Hierom gives him this
phrase, Clemens meo judicio omnium eruditissimus, nihil indoctum, etc. This
Clemens, in my judgment, was of all others the best Learned, and his Works
full of sacred Philosophy, etc.

His Sentences are these.
He used to say of such, Clem. Alex. ^. ^ Pedag c. 21.
as adorned themselves with gold, that he or she that think themselves
bettered by the addition of gold unto their attires, are worse then gold: And
they that are inferior to gold are not Lords of it, as all men should be.

Out of the depth and bowels of the earth has God discovered and showed gold
unto men: Ibid.
and they have made it the occasion of all mischiefs and wickedness.

Gold, says he, to many men is more dearer then either faith or honesty: For
the love of it makes some men so covetous, as if they were to live here for
ever: And some others are so prodigal, as if they were to die instantly.

Avarice is not the vice of gold, but of man that uses gold ill and wickedly.

The days of that man must needs be happy and long, that hates and abhors
the love of gold for lucre sake.

His Works.
1 His Stromata, or his books of Varieties 8 books. 2 Against the Gentiles, 1
book. 3 His Paedagogue, 3 books. 4 Of Easter 1 book. 5 Of Fasting 1 book. 6 Of
Disputation 1. 7 Of the salvation of the Rich man 1 book. 8 Of Slandring 1. 9
Against those that turn to Judaisme 1. book. 10 Of Ecclesiastical Canons 1
book.
He set forth likewise many Treatises and Epistles, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. ^.
c. 11.
whose Titles cannot be known: and this Father lived in the Reigns of two
Emperors, Commodus and Severus. Ruffin. c. 11.
In a word, he is generally approved of, and to shut up all with that
registered in Eusebius, Nyceph. c. 33. lib. 4. Eusebius lib. 6.
of one Alexander, who was familiar with one Pantenus, and this Clemens: Nam
illos beatos patres, qui ante nos sedulo viam virtutis instituerunt cognovimus.
Pantenum beatum and sanctum. Clementem Dominum meum, qui mu^tum mihi saepe
commodavit. We knew (says he) those blessed Fathers, who before us followed
diligently Virtue, to wit; blessed Pantenus and holy Clemens, who profited me
much.

Origenes Adamantius.
S. ORIGIN.

THis eminent Writer, who was Scholar to Clemens Alexandrinus, was called by
two names, some called him Origin, some Adamantius, which surname was not given
him as some other of the Fathers had given to them, as Saint Basil for his
admirable wit was called Magnus, Saint Chrysostom was so called for his
sweetness of speech, Gregorius Nazianzenus was termed for his wonderful
knowledge in sacred Writ, Theologus, that is, the Divine. But Origin had this
surname from his first growth and progress. The first of his names was given
him for his sublime and divine speculations, who by sweet and mellifluous
Allegories, carries his Readers affection from terrene to celestial
contemplations: his second name he had from the nature of that precious stone
called the Adamant, whose luster and hardness gives it renown; such was this
Fathers noble and generous mind, not daunted or affrighted with any
afflictions, but in all states and conditions kept his resolution and
integrity: so that as Erasmus who wrote his life, speaks of him, in these
words, Quem nec vit ae austeritas, nec perpetui labores, nec dura paupertas,
nec improborum pravitas, nec suppliciorum terror; nec ulla mortis facies, a
Sancto instituto vel tantillum dimovere potuit: that is, whom neither austerity
of life, nor perpetrated labors, nor dejected poverty, nor wicked men's
policies, nor terror of punishments, no nor yet death it self could any whit
displace or remove: oh admired pattern to succeeding ages!

There is not much written of his Country, but most do conclude him to be of
Alexandria, because there his Father suffered his imprisonment, and Martyrdom,
and there left his Wife and Children, It makes not so much where we are borne
as of whom: this Origens Father and Grandfather were Christians, though
Porphyrius relates that his parents were Heathens: his Fathers name was
Leonidas, a honest devout man, and well learned, who after imprisonment lost
his head under the persecution of Severus the Emperor, leaving this Origin
with six other brethren in great want and penury: for his goods and estate
were confiscated to the Emperor. Some report this Leonidas to have been a
Bishop, as Eusebius and Saint Jerome.

This Origin was very famous, Ierom. in Catal. Illust. virorum. Eusebius. Eccles.
Histor. lib. 6.
and so little feared Martyrdom, that had not his mother prevented his
intents, he had made himself a pattern to his Father. For she in the night got
away his clothes, so that he could not go abroad: but however while his
Father was in prison, he wrote a worthy Letter to him; not any ways to shrink
under the suffering for any respect; in which he uses this phrase, Vide pater,
ne quid mea cansa secus facias, Look to it, oh my Father, that you do not
change your resolution for my sake: He was of that undaunted spirit, that he
would comfort the Christians in their Martyrdomes, and would visit others, that
were in chains for the cause of CHRIST: Nay, and without fear of punishment
delivered some from their fetters. And in his Writings, when as he^ speaks of
Martyrs, and their torments, he seems to be even ravished in spirit. He was
not seventeen years old when he was deprived of his Father, and had a Mother
with many brethren, whom he did by labor and study maintain and cherish, and
the better to provide for their sustenance, he did publicly profess Grammar,
which though many may take to be a needless profession, yet in ancient times
it was in high esteem, so that of it, it was said, Senile atque arduum fuisse
negotium: that is, it was a task for an old grave man to perform, and full of
difficulty, for as a great Writer speaks, Non ta^tum expect abatur
Declinationum, Conjugationum and Constructionum ratio: sed sermonis elegantia,
plurimorum Authorum lectio, Antiquitatum and Historiarum peritia; ac etiam
Poeseos, Rhetorices, Dialectices, Arithmetices, and Cosmographiae, Musicaeque
cognitio, that is, There was not only expected in one of these Professors a
method for the Declensions, Conjugations, but there was a requisite elegancy of
speech, reading of diverse Authors, skill in Histories, Poetry, Rhetoric,
Logic, Arithmeticke, Cosmographie and Music, in all which this Origin was
excellently well experienced; and the place in which he professed was no mean
one, but in the famous City of Alexandria: and presently after, he read the
grounds of Religion, divinely instructing the Christians, confirming and
strengthening their hearts against all the storms of persecution. Amongst many
others one Disciple called Plutarchus, was so encouraged by this famous
instrument, that he underwent Martyrdom: and one Heraclas a Kinsman of this
Plutarchus, for his holiness of life, was after the death of Demetrius,
advanced to the Government of the Church of Alexandria, Serenus also was so
instructed by Origin, that he died for the name of Jesus, as also Heraclides,
and many others as well men as women, so servent and powerful was the doctrine
of Origin, and such deep impressions made it in the minds of his Auditors.

He did strictly keep under his body, and subjugated the flesh to the spirit,
lest, as he said, while he saved others, he himself should be a castaway,
he was frequent in watchings, in fastings, humicubations, in labors and wants,
and yet underwent all with a great deal of alacrity, integrity and patience,
his holiness of life was not only admired and followed by Christians, but
also by many Heathens, so attractive and powerful is the example of a good
life.

But now Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, hearing of Origens pains and piety,
thought him a fit instrument to be placed in the Church, and so called him to
be the Catechista, or Reader of Divinity in that place, a weighty and eminent
place, which after the Apostles one Pantaenus, and after him one Clemens had
supplied in the City of Alexandria, and now this Origin enjoyed; and kept it
many years, with a general approbation and renown, the Disciples of these men
were termed Catechumenists, or hearers.

Now he left his profession of Grammar, and sold all his books to a friend of
his for the allowance of four halfpence a day, and wholly addicted himself
to the study of Divinity, in which he so profited and excelled, that he was by
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea, called to
the Priesthood: a great dignity in those times, though much and too much
slighted in these looser and prophaner days.

The Churches of Achaia, were vexed at this time with diverse Heresies, to stop
which Origin was sent with the Epistles or Letters Testimonial of the Church,
and as he went through Palestine, toward Athens, he was by the Bishops
aforenamed, ordained Priest, that He might be the more potent, being confirmed
by authority Ecclesiastical. He did not run, but was lawfully sent, and did
painfully undergo that charge; and indeed his doctrine and life was so
renowned, and eminent, that they caused him to be envied, and hated, especially
of Demetrius; so that he did what he could to cloud and darken this Origens
fame, (a fault not fitting to harbor in a Divines breast, though through the
Devils malice too frequent.) This Demetrius ripped up this Origens faults, and by
his writings did publish them to the World, and especially he upbraided him
with that rash and inconfiderate act of his dismembring himself, which He
styles puerilis error, a childish fact, a blind zeal without knowledge, and
said, that He took some other things Historically, which he should not in the
Gospel, as that having two Coats he should give away one, as also that of not
caring for the morrow, etc. so that what Origin thought not to have bin known,
was, and Demetrius for that imperfection, deemed him unfit for the Priesthood,
and so did now dislike what formerly he approved; and envied deeply him, whom
he should have loved. Such power has premeditated and working revenge.

Well, in the height of Origens fame, these things were divulged, and his
adversary was potent, and thereupon Origin was forced to give way to the
storm, and yield to the importunity of his Enviers, and so left Alexandria,
yet always kept his constancy and courage, and retained his piety unmoved,
preaching the Gospel with all diligence and painfulnesse, striving to convert
many to Christ, not doing as Tertullian did, to turn from Orthodox, to a
Montanist, but the more his affliction was, the closer he kept his piety, nor
yet troubling the World with Schism, nor yet requiting his adversaries with
ill language, or calumniations, but he went another way to work, to do good
for evil, and to speak well of His standerers, (as Saint Peter says) by this
means stopping the uthes of his Gainsayers.

The principal place in which He taught was Caesarea of Palaestine, there he
instructed many in the Faith, and saw the fruits of His labors; for He had
many famous men who were His Followers and Scholars, as Firmilianus, afterward
Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia, of whom He was entertained with applause
through all Cappadocia. Who after that he had seen the Holy places in
Palaestina, returned to Origin again. He brought up Theodorus, afterward
called to the dignity of a Bishop: as also Gregorius, who for the Miracles
which He wrought, was termed Thaumaturgus, who was an eminent Father of the
Church. This Origin did likewise convert Anthenodorus the brother of Gregorius,
and made him leave all his worldly wisdom to gain the knowledge of Christ, and
gained great advancement in the Church of God. He was called to Antioch by
Mamniaea the mother of Alexander Severus, and was by her honorably entertained
and religiously dismissed again, this woman is called by Saint Jerome a
Religious Matron. He wrote a famous and learned Epistle to Philip the Emperor
who was the first King of the Romans which was Christian. He saw Rome which
he calls Ecclesiam magnam a great Church in one of his Epistles, and this was
done in the time of Zepherinus: so again he did return to Alexandria, and
admitted into his society Heraclas again. He recald Ambrosius from the heresy
of the Marcionites, and caused him to embrace the orthodox faith. He never
affected wealth, but contented himself with a low estate; for being so beloved
he might easily have ab^unded in riches, if his mind had been settled on them.
He was so studious, that he would read at his meals. It is said of Him to his
credit and renown, that, Origeni null a par ^aetatis periit a studiis, that
is, Origens whole life was a continued study: and another speaks thus of him,
Origenis ingenium sufficiebat ad omnia perdiscenda: that is, Origin had such a
pregnancie of wit, that he was apt to learn any thing. Adfuit illi mira ex
tempore dicendi facultas, and in obscuris dictionibus perspicuitas^ that is, He
had a wonderful faculty in expressing himself ex tempore, and to explicate
obscure places wondrous quick and able. Quanti fecerit Originem Antiquitas,
etc. How much did Antiquity account of Origin, any man knows, for Saint Jerome
styles him no less then Magistrum Ecclesiarum post Apostolos, the Master of
the Churches after the Apostles: And Saint Augustine wished that His Works were
turned into Latin, Victorinus and Hilarious Bishop do mightily endeavor to set
forth his praises. And as one says, Quis ex Scriptoribus qui post Origenem
vixere, non insigniter ab eo est adjutus: that is, Who of all the Writers who
lived after Origin, was not singularly helped by Origens labors: Nay, to shut
up all, it is said of Him, primus omnium glaciem scidit: He was the first that
broke the ice, for the explanation of the Scriptures. To conclude all, He
carefully employed His time, endured a great measure of affliction, faithfully
preached the Gospel, converted many to Christ, having spent himself in holy
labors for the good of the Church, In the first year of Decius, Ruff cap. 29.
the seventh persecution being raised against the Christians, in the 225 year
after Christ. Nyceph. c. 27. 32. 33. lib. 5.
And in this persecution, it is generally known what heavy and cruel torments
this Origin then endured, and indeed, it was not so fierce against any as this
Father, for He suffered bonds, tortures of his body, being fastened by the neck
with a great iron chain, and many days together: his feet were kept in a
pair of Stocks of wood, and then were stretched four paces wide, with
threatenings of fire, and a most cruel Judge striving by all means to prolong
his tortures; Eusebius. lib. Eccles. Hist. 6. page 173.
but what pious Ejaculations and comfortable prayers, and zealous exhortations
he made and gave to the Christians, is to be wondered at, considering the length
and extremity of his sufferings, that he should retain his valor and
constancy, until the giving up of his spirit. I know how some have sharply
reproved him for that act of dismembring himself, and others have condemned
him and his Writings; but these are not demonstrations, so much as
calumniations of so great a Light of the Church: However if he was in an
error, the Mantle of Charity should hide and conceal it. I have read too that
he died at Tire very old and poor: Trithe. descrip. Eccles. fol. 10.
But we are not to believe a private pen before so great a Cloud of Witnesses
to the contrary: However, He lived to the seventieth year of his age, and
died a constant Martyr for Christianity.

He flourished in the Reign of Antonius Caracalla, Macrinus and others; from
the year of our Lord 213. to 240.

Also I have annexed some of the famous Sentences of this Father.

Origin.
Let every man know his place and order, Origin. super Levit.
and understand what does become his place and degree, and so weigh his actions
and speech, and moderate his gate and habit, yet it may be agreeable to his
degree and profession.

Thou that art a sinner, Origin. super Ezec. hom. 10.
grieve not to encounter afflictions in the pilgrimage of this life, for thou
shall not deserve compassion, if thou suffer with indignation: but rather
think thy self worthy of punishment, and when thou have humbled thy self,
and have said, that Gods judgments are just and right, thou shall obtain mercy
from him, who can restore thee to his favor.

Those that are humbled and cast down, whether worthily or unworthily, let
them leave the judgment to God, and patiently bear his judgments, for
thereby they shall obtain mercy from God, and recover amongst men their
former degree and glory which they lost.

He that has exchanged poverty for riches, Origin. super illud Mat. 20. c.
that he might be perfect, was not made perfect at that instant, when he gave
his goods to the poor; but from that day when the speculation and
consideration of Gods goodness drew to the perfection of all virtues.

Gods providence has ordained all things to some end and purpose. Origin.
super Numb. 22.
He made not malice; and though he can restrain it, he will not. For if malice
were not, Virtue should not have a contrary, it could not shine clee^e, there
would be no examination, and virtue could not be tried and proved. For the
malice of Joseph's brethren was the means whereby God brought about the works
of his providence effected by Joseph.

I have annexed his Works as they are in two Tomes.

Tome 1.
On Genesis, homilies 17 On Exodus, 13. On Leviticus, 16. On Numbers, 28. On
Josua, 26. On Judges, 9. On the Kings, 1. On Job, books 3. On the 36. 37. 38.
Psalms homilies, 9. On the Canticles, homilies 6. On Esaiah, hom. 9. On
Jeremiah, 14. On Ezechiel, 14. De principiis, 4. Threnes, or Lament, 1.
Pamphilus his Apology for Origin. Ruffinus depravation of Origin.
Tome 2.
On Matthew, Tracts 35 On Luke, Homil. 39. On John, 32. On diverse places of the
new Testament, homilies 10. On the Romans, books, 10. Against Celsus, books 8.
Dialogues against the Marcionites, book 3.
An. Christi 233. Sanctus Gregorius Thaumaturgus.
GREG: THAVMATVRGVS.

I Do intend to describe the lives of four famous Fathers of this name, who
have been eminent in the Church for Piety and Learning, for Action and
Passion, viz. Gregorius Nazianzenus, then Gregory surnamed Magnus, Pope of
Rome, Gregory Nyssenus who was brother to Saint Basil the Great, and this
Gregory Thaumaturgus: the greatest part of the Churches Historians have been
copious in setting forth the praises of all these. I now set upon this, and
what I do express to the World shall be true, and mayntaind by sufficient
Witnesses. He was called Theodorus before, and he got his name Thaumaturgus,
from the abundance of Miracles which he wrought, and great Wonders which he
did, if we give credit to Gerardus V^ssius, in his Preface before this Fathers
work; P^ae^at. Gerard. Voss^i.
that Saint Basil ranks him not inferior to Moses, the Prophets and Apostl^s
and that he was full of great Signs and Miracles, that he was endued with
the spirit of prophecy, that he by prayer removed a great Hill which hindered
the perfecting of a Church, that he dried up a great Lake which had caused
great discord betwixt two Bre^hren, that He by His prayer stopped the force of
the River Lycus, which overflowed and drowned the neighboring fields, and so
brideled the swelling waves that ever after they did keep within their own
bounds and banks: That this Father likewise cast out Devils out of the bodies
of men; that He stayed the plague in places that were infected, that he heald
the sick and weak, and that He also raised the dead, and that He brought many
souls to embrace the Gospel of Christ Jesus: Whether he was so full of these
Works and Wonders, I do not here intend to dispute, but I have only related
what I have read of him, and I have not much cause to suspect the words of so
many Fathers of the Church, who witness it of Him. Take therefore, I pray you,
the commendation which Saint Basil the great affords Him in His Book of the
Holy Ghost, Sanctus Basil. in lib. de S. S. cap. 29.
Chapter 29. (...); that is, Where shall I find a fit place for this great
Gregory, and his praises? May I not fitly set him with the Prophets and
Apostles, a man endued with the same spirit in great measure, a man whose life
paralled those former stars of Heaven: a man who did powerfully show the vigor
of the Word of God. We should do injury to the Truth, if we should not account
him amongst the blessed in glory and felicity, which like an eminent Torch
shined in the Church of Christ, S. ^ Basil. loco citat.
and open S. S. tremendam habuit adversus Daemones potestatem. And who by the
help of the Holy Ghost, had mighty power against Devils: He had received such
a plentiful portion of the graces of Gods Spirit, that by the help of
seventeen more Christians; he brought whole Cities and Countries to the
obedience of the Gospel. He also changed the course, and bridled the force of
Rivers: and of a great Lake which was cause of dissension betwixt two brothers:
and his predictions of things to come, makes him that he may be reckoned
amongst the Prophets: If says Saint Basil, I should reckon up all His Wonders
and Miracles, which he did in the sight of the people, I should even attribute
that title to him which his very adversaries afforded him, (...), a second
Moses; for they are so fixed in the hearts of men, and so known amongst all,
so faithfully registered amongst Historians, that the envy of the Devil, S
Basil in Ep. 62. Co^solatar. ad Ecclesiam Naeo caesari.
nor the length of time can ever abolish the memory of them, Qui a tempore
magni praesidis Ecclesiae vestrae Gregorii, Who from the time of that Great
President of your Church, Saint Gregory have flourished. Here I cannot but cite
the admirable commendation that Eusebius the Historian gives him, Eusebius. l. 7.
Eccles. Histor.
beginning thus. (...), about the same time that Xistus ruled the Roman Church,
and Demetrianus who succeeded Fabianus in the Church of Antioch, and
Firmilianus the Church of Caesarea, that this Gregory called Theodorus, who was
an Auditour of S. Origens, together with his brother Athenodorus, did wisely
manage the Church of Pontus, Eusebius. lib. 7. Eccles. Hist. c. 25.
and in another place, the said Eusebius reckons up this famous Gregory's
actions, Verum quoniam Beati Gregorii historiae textus mentionem attulit, etc.
But for as much as the Text of the History has mentioned this Blessed Saint
Gregory, I will not omit the worthy Works of so great a man. There was a great
Lake in Pontus, full of all sorts of fish, which came to be the Inheritance of
two Brethren, who fell to civil dissension about it, so that many men had lost
their lives in the quar^ell: which thing when Gregory heard of, he presently
came to the place, and uttered these words to the two contentious Brothers:
Nolite, o Filioli, rationales animas pro multis animantibus vi^lare, Fraternam
pacem quaestus cupiditate dissolvere, Dei leges and naturae pariter jur a temer
are: that is, Do not, o my sons, o! do not destroy so many reasonable souls
for a few mute creatures, break not the bond of brotherly love and peace for
transitory gain: do not so rashly and desperately violate the Laws o^ God and
Nature at once: come wi^h me to this fatal Lake, and I will by the help of
God reconcile you for ever: Whither coming this good man upon his bended
knees, prayed heartily to God in the sight and hearing of all present; and
Eusebius sets down the words of his prayer, That he desired of God, that never
any more fish might be in it, but that it should be a field for corn, that by
this means these two Brethren might agree in love together: whose prayer God
heard, and did immediately grant his request, to the amazement of all the
standers by. Eusebius. Ec Hist. l^b. 7. c. 25.
Such force have the prayers of a faithful man with God: this one action is
enough to renown him in all Ages: but he was admirable likewise for ingenuity
and dexterity of wit, Eusebius Ec Hist. lib. 7. cap. 25.
as the same Eusebius gives testimony of him in these words. Sed and ingenii
sui in parvo nobis maxima monumenta dereliquit: But he showed in brief the
excellency of his wit. For Magnificentissime scripsit, that is, He writ most
elegantly upon Ecclesiastes, and left a brief, but an eloquent Exposition upon
the Catholic Faith which has been and is a great edification of the Church
of Christ: His words begin thus: Vn^^ Deus Pater Verbi Viventis, that is, One
God, the Father of the Living Word: of the Subsisting Wisdom, of the
Ever-living Power, the Perfect begetter of the Perfect One, the Father of the
only begotten Son: and so goes on, expressing the Deity and Trini^^ in most
apt and significant judicious terms. Greg. Nyssen. in vit S. Greg.


Saint Gregory Nyssen affords this man a singular Encomium, and Eulogie in
these words: Sic^t de Mose ait Scriptura, etc. that is, That as the Scripture
speaks of Moses, so may I of this Gregory: He was seen in all the Learning of
the Gentiles, he found how weak and unwise their opinions were, and embraced
with great ard our and sanctity the Gospel.

Saint Hierome also blazons (...) his Works with praise and commendation. S.
Hi^rom. in s^ ^pt. Ec^l^s. in Theodoro.
They begin thus: Theodorus, qui postea Gregorius a pellatus est, Theodore who
was after called Gregory, was Bishop of Neocaesarea in Pont^s: in his youth to
learn the Greek and Latin with his Brother Anthenodorus, he passed from
Cappadoci^, to Beritum, and afterward to Caesarea of Palestine, where Origin
seeing their admirable wit, taught them Philosophy, and so inst^ucted them in
Divinity; and sent them to their Mother: this Gregory wrote an eloquent Letter
to Origin, extant yet. And Hierome styles him, Virum Apostolicorum signorum and
virt^tum, that is, A man full of signs and Apostol call Miracles. And he that
will read more of him, Hieron, in Ep. S^. ad Oratorem Rom^num.
let him accept of this cloud of Witnesses. Sanctus Gregorius pap lib. 1.
Dialogorum cap. 7. Socrates, lib. 4. c. 22. Enagrius, lib. 3. cap. 31. Cedrenus
in anno 12. Anastasii Imp. Haymo lib. 7. c. 8. N^ceph. lib. 9. Beda and
Ruffinus. Suidas speaks of him also, Factus Episcopus, signis, etc. that is,
(...) Graeco M^nolog ^.
Being made Bishop, he excelled for signs and wonders above humane power. He was
full of holiness. Phedinus Bishop of the Amassensians, ordained him a Bishop.
He flourisht under Aurelianus, and he reigning, this Gregory died. At his
death he thanked God, that he left as many faithful Christians in that City,
as he found Infidels at his coming. Ex Romans Breviario 17. N^vembris.
The Roman Breviary styles him Sanctitate doctrinaque illustris, etc. famous
for sanctity and doctrine, and much more for miracles. At this death he asked
how many Infidels there were in Neocesarea, it was answered, but seventeene:
thanks be to God (said he), for at my coming there were just seventeen
Orthodoxe Christians in this place.

Bellarmine and Baronius declare his worthy parts, and say, Bellar. de Ilustr.
Scriptor. Ecclesiae.
that he was famous for Learning and Miracles, and that he flourisht in the
Reign of Alexander Severus, and Baronius testifies in his second Tome, that
he was made Bishop in the tenth of Severus, he suffered so much for the
Truth, that in the Greek Churches, he is reputed a Martyr.

S. Gregorius Thaumaturgus in Ecclesiast. cap. 12.
It will be worth thy labor, whilst thou art in the prime of thy youth to be
affected with the fear of God, before thou give up thy self unto sin and
wickedness, and so that great and terrible day of the Lord steal upon thee at
unawares, when thou art unprovided for it.

Ibid. Cap. 11.
If thou feed the hungry, and cloth the naked what though others think alls
lost that goes that way, and no better then bread ^ast upon the waters, yet let
me tell thee, that in process of time thou shall have it returned ten-fold
into thy bosom again.

Idem Cap. 10.
Listen to the voice of the King, and of those that are set in authority over
thee, do them no harm, nor be thou too free in thy speeches against them, for
assuredly know that whatsoever thou do or say against them though never
so secretly, it will appear against thee when thou shall least think of it.

Idem Cap. 10.
This World's at no certainty, now it is all war, anon all peace: this year
comes famine; the next brings plenty, nay, such is the inconstancy of things
sublunary, that he which we knew one day abounding in prosperity, the next day
we saw dejected by adversity.

His Works extant are these according to Bellarmine.

1 A Metaphrase on Ecclesiastes. 2 A Panegyricke of Origin. 3 A brief
Confession of Faith, which he learned of St. John's Revelation. 4 An exposition
of Faith against Elianus. 5 A Canonical Epistle. To these Vossius has put
twelve Sentences, Greek and Latin, with Anathematismes. 6 Three Sermons of
the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin. 7 Of the Baptism of Christ. Of the
Epiphany. 8 A dispute of the soul against Tatianus.
He was borne of Gentile parents, but had good education: at Alexandria, he
cast out a Devil from a woman which would have tempted him, and did accuse him
of lust; to the wonder of all: So after great pains endured for the Truths
sake, he died peaceably. Read more of him in Baronius Annals, Tome 2.

I cannot omit to speak some things of him in brief.

1 His patience when a Strumpet reviled him. 2 Divine revelation, and receiving
the Articles of the Faith so effectually. 3 His erecting of a Church, his
flight in the persecution by Decius. 4 He cured diverse of the Plague, and so
also converted them to the Faith. 5 He frees himself from the calumnies of
Sabellius. 6 He was at the former, Council at Antioch, and opposed Paulus
Samosatenus. 7 Before his death, he visits the Churches. 8 Gave away all his
possessions, and yielded quietly his spirit to God.
An. Christi. 250. Sanctus Cyprianus.
S. CIPRIANVS.

IT has always been the providence and goodness of God to raise up, and
find men of parts and gracious endowments, to mayntaine the cause of his
Church, amongst which this Saint Cyprian merits a place, whom so many of the
ancient Fathers of the Church do highly commend, as Gregory Nazianzen,
Hilarious, Ambrose, Prudentius, Saint Augustine, Fulgentius, Maximus, Isidore,
Petrus Chrysologus, Beda and R^banus Maurus: as also Eusebius, Zonaras,
Nicephorus, and Divine Saint Jerome, who bestows this Encomium of him: Quam,
purissi^i fontis instar, dulcis incedat and placidus, ingenio sit facili,
copioso, suavi: and (quae sermonis maxima est virtus) aperto; ut discerni
nequeat, ut rumne ornatior in eloquendo; an facilior in explicando, an
potentior in persuadendo fuerit. When as this Father runs like a Fountain
sweetly and calmly, of an apprehensive, copious, delicious note, and (that
which adds grace to him) of an holy wit: so that it is hard to distinguish,
whether he was more rich in eloquence, or facile in his explication, or more
powerful in persuasion: Pontius Diaconus in vita sancti Cypriani
Pontius his Deacon writing of him styles him thus, Cyprianus religiosus
Antistes, Testis Dei gloriosus. Saint Cyprian, that Religious Prelate, that
Glorious Witness and Martyr: to pass by therefore the part of his life as he
was a Rhetorician, we will only describe him as a Christian.

At this first ingresse to Christianity, he chiefly studied to keep his body
continent and clean from lusts and occasions provoking, saying, Tunc enim
posse fieri pectus idoneum, and sensum ad plenam very capacitatem pervenire; si
con^^piscentiam ^arnis robusto atque integro sanctimoniae vigore and rigore
calcaret: That then his heart would be truly fit, and his spirits to come to
the full capacity of the truth; if that once he could with a strong and entire
vigor and rigor of Holiness trample down his concupiscence of flesh. And not
only eminent for his austeritie, but also in the reading of the Scriptures,
he chiefly aimed how he might improve his labors to Gods glory. He at his
initiation to Christianity, gave and distributed all his estate to the poor,
ut ambitionem saeculi sperner^t: that he might avoid worldly ambition, and
perform an act of mercy well pleasing to G^d. A strange thing, and not to be
paralleld by any of the Fathers. Upon this he entered into the Priesthood:
Where, how worthily he did behave himself is manifest, he was not daunted
with any oppositions, nor frighted with any persecutions, so that as Pontius
says well, Non illum penuria, non dolor fregit: It was not want or sorrow that
startled his noble heart: not his Wifes disswasions, not the worlds frowns,
not the malice of his adversaries could affright him. He stood firm and
unshaken in all estates and conditions, keeping his faith and devotion, and
blessed God in his deepest sufferings. His house was free to all comers, he
never turned widow empty away from him, he was the blind man's eye, and the
lame man's legs, and the naked man's garment, Haec debent facere (dicebat) qui
Deo placerent: These things ought to be done of such as would please God.

There was one Caecilius a Priest and upright man, who first did enlighten his
mind, a man worth commendation, whom this Saint Cyprian highly honored and
reverenced, calling him novae vitae parentem, The Father of his Christian life.
It is not possible to reckon up all his several graces: this adds to his
credit, that being but a Neophyte in Christianity, yet God so disposed it, that
he was chosen to be a Bishop, with an unconceiveable joy of the people, which
did honor him, but he was so humble, that he seemed not to regard their
praises, but at his coming out and going into his house, a World of Christians
attended: quae illi pietas? qui vigor^? misericordia quanta? quanta censura? O
how great his piety? his valor? O how admirable his mercy and his discretion!
His countenance full of gravity and pleasantness, not too much expressing a
severe sadness, nor yet affecting wantonness, but so equally tempered, that
it was hard to say whether he was more loved or feared; his carriage was
answerable to his aspect, not any ways swelling or puffed up with pride, nor
dejected with poverty. But what was this Bishops love to the poor, may be a
pattern to all succeeding ages: but Satan envied this good man, and so at last
he was banished; but even in this state he performed a world of good. Witness
that speech made, and sent to Nemesianus, ^oelix, and Lucius, with other
Priests and Deacons: saying, It is no shame but glory, not to be feared, but to
be rejoiced at, to suffer banishment or pains for Christ; that such as suffer
show that they are valiant Captains of Virtue, provoking by the confessions of
their mouth, and sufferings of their bodies, the hearts of the faithful to
Martyrdom. For, says he, it is no new thing for a Christians body to be
beaten with clubs, or to be full of wounds or skars, in as much as they were
ornaments to them not any discouragements and though the Mines afford no beds
to Christians, yet they shall rest in the Lord: and though their weary bodies
lie on the cold ground, yet they shall be refreshed, though their hands and
feet have bin laden with fetters and chains of iron, yet Christ, will loose
them, and make them free men of Heaven, the tying of them fast here is a means
to make them run the faster to Heaven; and though they be stripped of their
garments, yet Christ's Righteousness would cover them, their deformity shall be
turned to honor, their mourning to joy, their pain to pleasure, and to
endless felicity. And though they could not be admitted the Temples to pray
in, yet they might offer their bodies and souls in humility and contrition to
God, which would be Sacrifices that would please him: And concludes his
comfortable speech to them with the words of S. Paul, Cypr. l. 3. Ep. ult.
These present sufferings are not to be compared with the brightness of that
glory, that shall be revealed to the Children of God. As also that saying of
his shows his worth, Quis doceret poenitentiam lapsos? Veritatem H^reticos,
Schismaticos unitatem, filios Dei pacem, and Evangelicae pacis legem? Who ever
gave such directions to such as were f^lne, to renew their repentance? Who ever
gave better directions to Heretics, to embrace the Truth? Who better taught
Schismatics the way to Unity? or the Children of God the p^th of peace and
prayer? By Him it was that the blaspheming Gentiles were convinced in
themselves of those things whereof they accused the Christians: By Him it was
that the weaker Christians were so willing to forsake all worldly preferments,
in hope of a reward in heaveu. He it was, of whom we may truly learn pity
and patience. It was this Cyprian that overcame the malice of his E^vious
Adversaries, by a sweet and Christianlike meekness? Who was it that afforded
stronger Cordials and Counsels to conquering Martyrs, Pontius in vita sancti
Cypriani
and to speak truth, Quis denique tot confessores frontium notatarum secunda
inscriptione signatos, and ad exemplum Martyrii superstites reservatos,
incentivo tubae Coelestis animaret? Who ever did by the heavenly trumpet,
encourage so many Confessors branded and twice written down and signed, and
daily expecting Martyrdom to stand firm in the faith as Saint Cyprian.

It was then the singular providence of God, that this man should be yet
reserved, so that his fear and his departure was divine and approved, that yet
he might confirm many, convince others, and comfort many others in their
sufferings: for at this time the Church of God was deeply wounded by the common
adversary, and therefore fit it was, that he and such like as he was, should
bind up and cure the wounded and broken. Ribud. in vita sancti Cyp. 439.
Lactantius gives this Cyprian a great commendation, for his gravity, and
cleernesse of style, he was unwilling to have been Bishop, but the voices of
all cried out either Saint Cyprian or none, and indeed who can sufficiently set
forth either his wisdom or diligence in feeding Christ his flock, so that he
was like a loving Father to all, A vigilant Bishop and an heavenly in^pired
Master: when as the Church (...) miserably wasted by persecution under (...)
the Emperor, whose governmen^ was ^ut short, but as Saint Cypri^n witnesses
himself, extremly bloody, for the Church, says (...) having enjoyed a long
peace under his ^^ther, all men studied their private wealth, so that Devotion
and Religion, and good (...) were quite neglected, and all estates and ^orts of
men and women were fearfully corrup^ed; s^vit hoc ^^agell^m Deus, God suffered
thi^ (...) of persecution to reform it; which Saint Cyprian avoided by flying,
as (...) testifies: but his Adversaries sought for him to have cast him to be
devoured by Lions in the Amphitheatre: so that they that would ^ot believe him
a Bishop in prosperity, should (...) him one in banishment: but what great go^^
in his banishment, did he perform, does easily appear, by his care to see
the slaughtered christians to have decent burial, to care that (...) wounded
and mangled should have releafe and comfort; and it plea^ed God to afford him
^uch a persuading power, that he obtained whatsoever he desired for them: but
this storm of persecution was but of one years continuance. For (...) reigned
but one year and three months, so that all things being ^alme, this Saint
Cyprian returned to his charge again, gathering together the dispersed ^lock;
yet for all this, the Barbarians entered N^midia, wasting and destroying many
Christians, whom Saint Cyprians provided for: and got moneys for the ransom of
such as were captives.

About this time a grievous pestilence raged in Africa, in which Saint Cyprian
showed a mavelous measure of Piety and Charity: He comforted some,
administered to those that were in want: he stird up those Christians that were
persecuted by Pagans, to afford them nevertheless relief in the time of
Contagion, teaching them to do good even for evil: but yet not all these
unparalleld patterns could move those Heathens: for Valerianus and Galienus
Emperors, The Proconsull Aspatius Paternus seeing of what great authority
Saint Cyprian was in Carthage, nor yet daring to lay hands on him, commanded
him to depart the City. Well, Saint Cyprian obeyed his Injunction, and went to
Curubis for one year, till the Proconsull died, whom Galienus Maximus
succeeded, and then this Father returned; and if the persecution had not
hindered, he had sold all his Gardens, and distributed the money to the poor:
He told his friends the time of his Martyrdom. But this Proconsul hearing
where Saint Cyprian lived, and how the people flocked to him, commanded him to
be apprehended, and carefully to be watched in his own house: hither came a
world of people, supposing to have seen the Martyrdom of this Reverend
Father; but he knowing this purpose of the Proconsul, did prevent him, for he
departed to Vtica, and writ an Epistle to the Christians showing the cause:
well though he suffered not Martyrdom in the City of Carthage, Sanctus Cypr.
Epist. 33.
but at Sextum, six miles distant, so called, because the sixth great stone from
Carthage was here erected, as also it was called Saint Cyprians Table, not for
his banqueting there, but because he was offered up there, yet there was such
an infinite multitude of people there, as if it had been in the middle of
Carthage it self. Sanctus Aug. Ser. 113. 114. 115. and 116.
Nay, this Father at the very time of suffering was so careful to do good, as
though death had not been so near to him, witness his comforts, that he
gave to Virgins at the same time. He suffered under Galienus Maximus, who when
it was told him that the Emperor had commanded him to death, answered joyfully
do fully what belongs to your office, and one telling him he must lose his
head, Saint Cyprian answered, God be thanked for delivering me from the bonds
of the flesh: the people that accompanied him, desired also to suffer with him.
When he came to the place of Martyrdom, he put off his Bishops attire, and
gave them to his Deacons, only reserved one to die in, and wished them to give
to his Executioner 25 pieces of Gold in testimony of his love to him. All the
Clergy and his friends wondrously deplored his death, so that they laid their
own garments under his body, because none of his blood should fall to the
ground: he covered his own eyes, and so kneeling down, took the blow of the
Executioner quietly, and with all signs of joy. All the Christians had a great
care to see his body honorably interred, not fearing all the threats of the
Officers, nor Heathens. He was the first of all the Bishops of Carthage, that
suffered Martyrdom: (...)
afterward there were two great Churches builded to his honor: one was ^uil^
in the pl^ce of his Martyrdom, the other where he was buried. So many of the
Fathers do praise him, that we cannot comprehend all. Saint Hierome calls him
an holy and most eloquent man. (...)
St. Augustine reckons him amongst the rarest and learned men, a most sweet
Doctor, a most glorious Martyr, an unconquered Martyr: and such like glorious
titles. He suffered under Valerianus and Gali^nus, on the eighteenth of the
Calends of October,

His Sentences are these:
De Sanctorum passione.
The Psalmist tells us, That pre^ious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints. Whereupon says Cyprian, that though they were vexed in small
things, they should be required with great ma^t^rs, and what though they were
in the (...) yet they should come forth with the more lus^re and glory, we know
that the Prophets and Apostles are our patterns in these bonds; and we know,
That if we do suffer with him here, we shall be sure to reign with him
hereafter. And as he did encourage those that were in ^onds, so he advised
those that were free, to cherish those that were in misery.

Cyprian Epist. 2. de disciplina and habitu Virginis.
Discipline is the preserver of hope, the reins of Faith, the guide of
salvation, the encouragement of a good disposition, the mistress of virtue,
making us cleave to Christ, and live to God, and to obtain heavenly promises,
and divine rewards.

Cyprian in Epist.
An open enemy is not so much to be feared, as a secret enemy that creeps on
secretly: as the Serpent, who is so called from his secret creep^ng on.

Cyprian. de 12 abusionibus.
The justice of the King, is the peace of the people, the defense of the
Country, the freedom of the people* the joy of mankind, the ^almnesse of the
Sea, the fruitfulness of the ^arth, the comfort of the poor, the inheritance
of children, and the hope of future happiness.

Cyprian. de habitu Virginis.
Those that are clothed in silk and purple, cannot be sincerely clothed with
Christ, and those that are so curiously dressed, want the o^naments of the
soul.

Cyprian. de laud. poen.
O Repentance, thou do lose that which is bound, open that which is shut,
mitigate adversity, heal after contrition, enlighten confusion, and enliven
desperation.

Cyprian. Ep. 5. de Oratione dominica.
Thy will be done. Christ did practice and preach the will of God, humility in
conversation, stability in faith, modesty in words, justice in deeds, mercy in
works, discipline in manners, innocence in doing wrong, patience in suffering
wrongs, to maintain concord with our brethren, to love God with all our heart,
to love him as a Father, to fear him as a Lord, to prefer nothing before
Christ's love, as he preferred nothing before our love.

His Works follow, as they are reckoned up by worthy Writers.
Four Books of Epistles in number 83. 1 Of the habit of Virgins. 2 One
Treatise. 3 Of such as are fallen one book. 4 Of the simplicity of Prelates and
the Churches unity, one book. 5 Upon the Lords Prayer, one book. 6 Against
Demetrianus, one book. 7 Of the vanity of Idols, one book. 8 Of mortality,
one book. 9 Of Almsdeeds, one book. 10 Of the God of patience, one book. 11 Of
Zeal and envy, one book. 12 Of exhortation to Martyrd^m one book. 13 To
Quirinus against the Jews, three books. 14 To Jubajanus of baptizing Heretics,
one book. 15 To Pompeius against the Epistle of Stephanus the Pope, one book.
Pamelius reckons these two amongst the Epistles. 16 Sentences out of the
Council of Carthage concerning the baptizing of Heretics. There are some
others which are doubtful and supposititious. 17 Of Syna and Sion, one Tract.
2 An Exposition of the Creed. 3 Of the single life of Clergy men. 4 Of the
Works of Christ, twelve Sermons. 5 Of the praise of Martyrdom. 6 Of
Discipline* 7 To Novatianus. 8 Of a twofold Martyrdom. 9 Of players at dice.
10 Of the disposing the Lords Supper. 11 Of Plays and public Shows. 12 Verses
on Genesis. Sodom on the Paschall Lamb. 13 A prayer for the Martyrs which
begins Agios. 14 Another prayer which begins, Domine ^ancte pater. But there
cannot be any certainty of the truth of these, and therefore I leave it to the
Readers liberty.
(...)
S. ARNOBIVS

WAs by Country an African, (...)
He was eminent in the Church of God, in the Reign of Dioclesian the
Emperor, and professed Rhetorike with the applause of all men in a certain
City of Africa, called Sicca. Amongst many other excellent Scholars to whom he
read daily, the most famous for wit and learning was Lactantius, there are many
things which do greatly set forth the praise of this Arnobius, though many
pens have striven to ^ully, or at least to lessen this man's good name; and to
cast aspersions, and make suspicions of his Writings: for who can in the first
place, but ingenuously confess him to be an able man for learning; how is it
possible else that he should have brought up others to that height and
excellency? How could he otherwise have kept his place with such a general
approbation? How could he have set forth those worthy Works which are reserved
in the Church with great applause? For where can there be more solid pieces
found then his? And secondly, his conversion from Heathenisme to Christianity,
as it was worthy of commendation, so the more prayse-worthy, because it was
voluntary, sincere and constant: voluntarily d^ne it was, for there were no
threats to terrify him; no tormentors to urge him; there were no men employed
in that service to win him; nor yet any preferments (either promised him to
allure him, nor any could he hope for in those times, and from those persons,
that then ruled; neither did he (by any probability) lay down his former
profession upon any such indirect and uncertain foundations: so that without
torments and threatenings; without rewards or hopes of any he did voluntarily
embrace Christian Religion: an act very rare, to offer up himself willingly
into the Lords Harvest. Then secondly, his conversion was sincere, though by
many Bishops not only suspected; but at first feared: for when as he came to
them, and did earnestly desire of them to be received into the Church, Sixth.
Sene^s. loco praedict.
and to be baptized, it is said, quem cum illi rejicerent, veriti, ne vir
saeculari eloq^entia tumens, Religioni Christianae, quam semper oppugnaverat,
illudere vellet: Whom, they fearing denied it to him, lest he a man swelling
and puffed up with secular wisdom, and who had always thitherto opposed
Christian Religion; should make both a mock of them and it, whose dealing and
proceedings in that kind were wise and politic: For it is usual with great
learned men without the special grace of God working and ruling them, to
despise the simplicity of Christianity: but yet God brought him in, work he
had to be done by his pen, which should stop the mouths of the Adversaries of
his Church. And who knows not Gods dealing with Saul, who was sorely against
his children, yet a man in that state and condition well known for Learning and
able parts, but brought to be one that was ready to die for the Name of the
Lord Jesus. It makes not what the instrument has been so much as what it is.

But yet Arnobius finding this repulse at these Fathers hands, leaves not his
intendments; but presently produces his Letters Testimonial, sufficient
proof that He intended what he made profession of. For then Obtulit eis in
Argumentum sinceritatis suae praestantissima adversus pristinam Religionem
disputationum volumina; tanquam fidei suae obsides, Sixth. Senen. loco p^ae
^icto.
that is, offered to them those most excellent Volumes of his Disputations
against his former Gentilisme, as infallible arguments of his sincerity, and to
be for ever the manifest pledges of his Faith: which were presently with great
joy received by them* and he received of them the sure seal of Christianity.

And as his conversion was voluntarily as from himself without any constraint
used, as it was sincere without Hypocrisy, as may be seen by his Works, so
likewise was He in the third place to his dying day constant in it: For
notwithstanding the hate and envy of his former associates; notwithstanding the
dangers that Christians are subject to, and more specially those of that time,
in which He lived, being many; though He could not choose but know the mockes
and scoffs that were put upon Christians, yet none of these could any whit
remove him; or cause him either to be sorry for his act, or to relinquish the
Faith: contrary to the practice of too too many Formalists and Temporizers; who
can take up, and lay down Religion as they do their garments: but our Arnobius
did go on and hold out.

Now thirdly, for his upright life and learned Writings, they are known to all:
though there be some disputes about the latter, yet, none but Heathens have
spoken against his life: no question but his life was answerable to his
profession; however Charity shall persuade where none accuses: and hide his
blemishes if He had any: and therefore I will a little touch upon the latter:
some calls his Works, Insignia volumina, famous Volumes: others say, Multa
praeclaraedidit: that is, He set forth many admirable pieces, Habuit (says
another) multos egregios and Nobiles Discipul^s: that is. He had many
excellent and Noble Scholars. (...) E^cl^s fol. 14.
To omit what Saint Jerome and diverse others have said of him, I will express
to you the testimony of Erasmus concerning his Commentary, which He has ^rit
upon the Psalms: though some have suspected the Work to be none of Arnobius
p^nning, yet Er^smus does as well, as many others give many excellent and fair
conclusive arguments to avouch the certainty of it.

When as He lived about Frankendale, this Commentary was brought him: at first
he doubted whether it would please or not, because they were termed, J^^uni
Commentarii, empty Commentaries, and Impoliti sermones erant, and soloecismis
scatentes, They were of harsh and impolished language, and had some seeming
Soloecismes in them; But (says he) when I had turned over two or three leaves,
and strictly read them; Sensinon esse vulgarem Infantiam; led expolitissimam
impolitiem, and copiosissimam brevi-loquentiam, etc. that is, I perceived, that
they were not childish, but most polite and neat in their dress, speaking much
in little: the words, indeed, seemed somewhat more neglected, but the sense
most ample and absolute, so that I thought no small store of treasure to be
come unto my hands. Would to God (says he) that there were more store of such
judicious Authors as Arnobius was; who writes so perspicuously, Erasmus in
Epist. dedicat. in ^omm^nt. in Ps^^.
so learnedly, so briefly, and so holily. For his Solecismes they proceeded not
from unskilfulnesse, but from judgment, and are not to be imputed to the man;
but the times: nor can any prove this not to be the same Arn^bius, who writ
against the Gentiles: For it is certain, the same pen writ, though not to the
same persons: He writ the one to Scholars learned, this to the common people,
He fitted himself to the meanest, that all might understand what all did
sing: he had a care of the weakest; that he was so short, it was for m^mory,
that he was so plain, it was for profit, in both these he showed exquisite
eloquence and depth of judgment, as well knowing what he did. He does not use
any circumlocutions, he desired rather to give the best, then much and
naughty. His style is no where languid or dull, he strives to refresh, to
stir up, to comfort the Reader, for the learning and sincerity that you shall
find, you may admire him. In brief, he has so done all, that none but the
malicious can speak against him, or his Works. This, and a great deal more
does that learned Erasmus speak of our Arnobius; so that who pleases to read
his praises at large, may view them set forth in the Epistle Dedicat^ry, before
the Commentary on the Psalms, printed by Frobenius.

This Arnobius flourished in the time of Dioclesian, from the year of our Lord
290, to 300.

Arnobius sayings.
Of Prayer.
It is the bed of a sick and weak man's soul, refreshes in tentations, and
keeps warm the actions of grace. In Psalm. 41.

Of Despair.
He that falls into Despair, is like a ship that loses her Anchors, and runs
on the Rocks. In Psalm. 42.

Of Persecution.
Persecution brings death in one hand, and life in the other: for while it kills
the body, it crowns the soul. In Psalm. 45.

His Writings.
1 Seven Books against the Gentiles. 2 Commentary on the Psalms. 3 A learned
tract of Rhetoric, he died under Dioclesianus the Emperor.
An. Christi 326. The life of Eusebius Caesariensis.
EVSEB: CAESARIENSIS.

EVsebius Bishop of Caesarea Palaestina, formerly called the Tower of Strato,
Fortunatus de vita S. H^llarii an^e ejus opera.
for his great friendship toward Pamphilus, surnamed also Pamphilus, being
Scholar to Dorotheus the Eunuch, a most learned man, and a most diligent
searcher of the Divine Library with Pamphilus, was so famous among all the
contemporary Bishops of his age for his knowledge in divine and humane
Learning; so that his deserts were celebrated with this most noble Eulogie of
the Emperor Constantine, who would often say, That it was Eusebius happiness
to be worthy to be Bishop, not only of one City, but of the whole World. A
praise of an high strain beseeming an high place! Indeed, men's abilities
should be answerable to their dignities: greatest perfections are fittest for
greatest places and promotions. If Moses be placed over all the Israelites as
supreme Judge, his endowments ate proportionable; but with his employments his
measure of spirit is abated, and part rests on the seventy Elders, who were
fitted for the like performances. He that is (...), is an Over-seer, and such
had need be furnished with more then ordinary gifts, for correcting of vice,
instructing the ignorant, making straight that which is crooked. Such were the
manifold endowments of this Reverend Bishop Eusebius.

And for his eloquence, Biblioth. sacra page 248.
Saint Jerome styled him, Romani eloquii Tubam, the Trumpet of Roman elocution.
Eloquence in a Minister is a singular ornament. Moses was fearful to take up
Gods Embassage, not being eloquent, but slow of speech: therefore God
appoints his brother Aaron for his helper. The lineaments of a Picture make
it no exquisite without colors and varnish; they make it beautiful.
Oftentimes a fair outside leads us to the finding of hidden worth within, and
the phrase or style of writing, sets a luster upon the matter. Luther caused to
be painted over his study door. Verba sine rebus, Erasmus: Res sine verbis,
Lutherus: nec res, nec verba, Carolastadius: and res and verba, Melancthon.
Words without matter, Erasmus: matter without words, Luther: neither matter nor
words, Carolostadius: both matter and words Melancthon. Thrice happy
Melancthon: judicious and eloquent.

Omne tulit punctum qui mis^uit utile dulci. The same was the commendation of
Eusebius.

That he was a defender of the Arrian Heresy, and a corrupter of the Nicene
Synod some Writers affirm, either deceived by the affinity of name and
dignity which he had with Eusebius first Bishop of Berithus in Palaestina, and
afterward at Nicomedia in Bythinia, Captain of the Arrians, or else induced to
that belief, because Eusebius of Caesarea, would not consent in the Nicene
Council to the propounders of the word (...), or Consubstantiall; but after a
long inquisition and examination of the said word, done by him not maliciously;
but rather out of sincere piety; for when many of the Bishops would have the
word Homousii, as excluding a multitude of gods, inducted by Arrius, and most
of the Bishops did sharply oppose the acception of the same word, as
introducing the opinion of Sabellius, who held that the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost were but one person; through their diversity of opinions: Eusebius being
doubtful to whether part he should assent: Eustathius Bishop of Antioch,
accused afterward by Cyrus Bishop of Bexoen, opprobriously termed him a
Favourer of the Arrians, and a corrupter of the Nicen Faith. Eusebius on the
contrary, affirmed, that he neither favored Arius, nor corrupted the Nicen
Faith; but that Eustathius did introduce the perfidious opinion of Sabellius:
Lastly, when it was declared by the Fathers, that this word Homousii did not
take away the distinction of persons, which were of the same Nature and
Essence, he subscribed to the Decree of the Homousii, or Consubstantialls, and
by the Fathers command he composed that Nicene Creed, which is now sung in the
Church.

A singular stayed discretion in a man of authority and eminent dignity, not
rashly to suffer any noveltie to creep into the Church without examination, how
far forth it may prove profitable to the good of the Church; especially in
matters of greatest importance, such as this, concerning the Deity's essence,
and manner of existence, which is well distinguished by the Schoolmen: every
person in the Deity (say they) is alius and alius, sed non aliud and aliud: the
former notes the distinction of persons, but the later their essence to be the
same and undivided: such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the
Holy Ghost.

And that you may the better be drawn into the admiration of his eloquence,
take notice of some of his sentences, which were like Gold Coin, containing
much worth in a little compass, they are here inserted.

Of the Law and Gospel.
Moses did write the old Law in dead Tables of stone, Eusebius. Demonstrat.
Evangel. page 144.
but Christ did write the perfect Documents of the new Testament in living
souls.

And the difference of the Law and Gospel may further appear in this, that
the Law is a killing letter, for it works death, making us liable to the
curse, For cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in
the Law, to do them: but the Gospel is a quickening letter, and supplies for
our defects in not obeying the Law, we being clothed with another
righteousness, the long white robes of Christ's righteousness; the imputation
whereof makes us as acceptable to God, as if we had fulfilled the Law in our
own person, Christ having actively and passively fulfilled the whole Law for us
by satisfying Gods Justice, and working our salvation.

Of serving God.
There are two ways of serving God; Ibidem.
when we despise the World and love God only: this is Religion in perfection:
the other is, when we love God and the world, and this is an imperfect
affection and profession of Religion.

The former is perfection without imperfection, which is not attainable in this
life: for since we be partly flesh, and partly spirit, our affections are
divided in their operations. I sleep (says the Spouse) but my heart waketh:
her better part was directed toward God, her carnal part was less capable of
heavenly raptures, being sluggish and drowsy. The good that we would do, that
do we not; but the evil we would not do, that do we. We love God and the
World here, as if the love of God and the World were competible; but the good
Christian labors (as much as he may) to renounce the World, to gain God,
which is better then 1000 Worlds: to lose God is to lose all, Toll meum, and
toll Deum: to lose the World and get God by the loss of it, is with Mary to
choose the better part, which never shall be taken away. God is All in All.
None but Christ.

Of Christ's Incarnation.
Christ that he might show himself unto men, and teach them the true way of
adoring and worshipping his Father, Ibid. p. 165.
taking on him our nature came down into the World; his first Miracle being to
show God in the shape of a man.

And surely that was a great miracle, far beyond the reach of our capacity,
that the Creator should so far stoop to the Creature, as to take upon him
the nature of man, that he that made woman should be borne of a woman, that he
whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain should be contained in the narrow
womb of a Virgin, that God that made man should himself be made man, in all
things like us, sin alone excepted; that the Son should take upon him the
nature of a servant; that the King of Kings should be subject himself to the
meanest vassals; that he that was invested with the Robes of the Deity, should
be clothed with the rags of our humanity. A wonder exceeding all wonder! a
Miracle without a parallel!

Of the Devils power.
The Devil does work upon the natural inclination and free will which men
have unto evil, Ibid. p. 159.
thereby overthrowing States and Cities, and by the flattery of pleasures
drawing many souls to all kind of wickedness, taking their affections with
pleasant and delightful objects, he does hold the World in captivity and
subjection.

The Devil cannot compel us to commit sin: he may move externally by
propounding objects, but the tinder which takes fire, is our own natural
corruption. We may thank our selves for sin, and the punishment of sin. Eve
blamed the Serpent; the Serpent beguiled me: this made her not excusable: had
she not consented to the temptation, the Serpent had not deceived her; but the
occasion of sinning being offered, and the will consenting, sin is committed,
and punishment for sin is admitted.

Of the Apostles.
Christ chose illiterate men to convert the whole World, Ibid. p. 163.
which he did, that his divine counsel and power working and operating in
them might be manifested and declared.

It is Gods ordinary proceeding, by small or no means to bring great things to
pass: what were a few fishermen for converting the whole World? What weak
instruments were Rams Horns, for the blowing down of the walls of Jericho?
Elijahs Mantle divides Jordan. A little barley Cake tumbling down the Hill
overthrows the tents of Midian. Thus Gods strength is perfected in weakness,
and his Majesty shines in meannesse; and the more contemptible the means, the
greater is his glory manifested in the means: that he that glories may glory
in the Lord.

Of Christ's Divinity.
Christ's Divinity shined through his body, Ibid. p. 188.
as light does through a Lanthorn, with beams of humane and divine light,
illuminating the souls of men.

No marvel then, that his Adversaries confess saying, Never man spoke like
this man: his words argued his Divinity, which were socelestiall and void of
exception, as man's wisdom could not contradict. When his Adversaries would
have apprehended him, they went backwards and fell to the ground; another
argument of his Deity, the rays whereof confounded the faces, and daunted the
courage of malicious men. When Pilate said, Know thou not that I have power
to condemn thee? reply was made, thou could have none, except it were given
thee from above. My Deity stoops not to thine humanity.

Of Gods Word.
The Fountains of Israel were the words which were delivered to Israel, Ibid
p. 191.
for to them the Oracles of God were first committed, whence living waters
should be drawn to water the Church of Christ.

Therefore Saint Paul's caution was not in vain, that we should not despise
the Jews, they being broken off from the Olive tree, we being graffed in, and
partaking of the fatness of it: their ruin is our rising. Let us not be
high-minded, but fear, least we suffer by their example.

Of Gods Omnipotency.
God does order, Ibid p. 168.
augment, perfect, penetrate, and move all things in every place; yet his
nature is not thereby impaired or polluted; and thus he becomes a Savior and
Physician to the wicked; and as the Musician shows his Art in tuning a
disordered Harp: so Christ declares himself to be the souls Physician, by
curing man's discording affections, and regulating them by his exemplary Life
and Doctrine.

It is God that is able, when and how he will to dispose of the creature, for
his own glory, and our good: If we be so fast bound with chains in prison,
that we cannot get out, he turns our captivity as the Rivers in the South:
if sickness oppress, God is our health: Are we hungry? God is the bread of
Life to feed us: thirsty? God is water of life to refresh us: naked? his robes
of righteousness cloth us, he is every way able to relieve us.

Of Salvation.
Christ by his precious blood wrought man's freedom and redemption, Ibid. p.
496.
his desertion by God on the Cross was either to manifest the dignity of his
passion, or his miraculous affection to mankind, laying down his soul for
man's salvation.

Admirable was his love to man in so great a work, and in the manner of
performing it: the work was wonderful; that enemies should be saved, who were
to be destroyed: and the manner of it as wonderful, that it should be procured
with the shedding of his own blood, a drop whereof is more precious then a
thousand Worlds. Our sins were of a deep die, which nothing but Christ's blood
could expiate. It was not the shedding of the blood of Bullocks or Goats in
time of the Law that was satisfactory to God: they were types of the shedding
of the blood of the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World:
manent actn, tolluntur reatu. This is Christ our Savior.

And as he was infinitely read in Books of Divinity, so by way of Commentaries
and Illustrations on them, he composed many Volumes, therein following Origin,
of whom he was a diligent admirer and imitator.

He flourished under Constantine the Great, and Constantius about the year of
our Lord 320. And after a long and studious life, he surrendered his soul into
his Makers hands. His Life was written by Accacius his Successor, and Eusebius
Bishop of Emesen. His Apology is to be found in his Works, sacr a lib. 2.
hist. there collected.

Now appertaining to the understanding of the divine Scriptures, are these
Works following.

1 All the Canonical Books of the old Testament translated into Greek. 2 Of
Hebrew places, one Book. 3 Of the description of the Holy Land, one Book. 4 Of
the doctrine of the Ancients, and another of collections of Divinity. 5
Learned Commentaries literally and mystically on the whole Psalms. 6 Fifteen
Books of Commentaries on Isaiah the Prophet. 7 Thirty Volumes in defense of
either Testament, opposed by Porphyrie in fifteen Books. 8 Of Evangelicall
preparation five Books. 9 Of Evangelicall demonstration, twenty books. 10 Of
the dissonance of the Evangelists, one Book. 11 Of Evangelical Canons one Book.
12 Commentaries on the first Epistle to the Corinths.
An. Christi, 330. L. Caelius Lactantius Firmianus
LACT: FIRMIANVS.

I Do not find any mention of the parents, Country, or education of this
Father, nor is his fame and reputation therefore diminished, seeing that he is
registered and numbered amongst the ancient Pillars of the Church for his Piety
and Learning; and he is sufficiently praised by those pens, whose worth and
verity have been approved in all ages. It is no small credit to be enrolled
amongst a cloud of so divine and pious Fathers; I find by the testimony of
Saint Jerome, (...)
that he was the Scholar of Arnobius, who, in the Reign of Dioclesianus the
Emperor, was together with Flavi^s, the Grammarian called to preferment, and
that he publicly taught Rhetoric in Nicomedia. He addicted himself to
writing Books: amongst other his works, Saint Jerome speaks these words of
his Treatise of Gods Anger, Edidit Lactantius librum qui inscribitur
Grammaticus, ^ieron. de (...) illust. in ^act^n.
and pulcherrimum, de Ira Dei, that is, Lactantius set forth a book called the
Grammarian, and another beautiful and fair piece of Gods Anger: and indeed,
his subjects which he treates of, and the style in which he writes are both
excellent, divine and fluent, savouring of a mind that was truly mortified and
intended to bring his Auditors to a resolved course of sanctification and
piety. For piety and holiness is the true knowledge of God: it was never yet,
says he, rewarded with punishment or shame: For true piety preserves and
defends every virtuous man from shame.

The party to whom he dedicates the most of his Works, adds no small
testimony to his parts and learning, for most of them were inscribed to no
less person than to Constantine the Great, an Emperor whose fame does and
will for ever flourish in the Church, if for no other cause, than even for his
piety, and study to preserve the professors of the Gospel, and for his
bounty and liberality to the Bishops of his time: as also for his building of
Churches for divine worship; and his valor and heroicke constancy in opposing
Heretics and Schismatics, who began to grow potent: And Saint Jerome leaves
him not thus, Hieron. in tra^s. Eusebius. sub Constable. magno.
but proceeds further in his divulging his praises, in the translation of
Eusebius, under Constantinus the Emperor in these words, Lactantius quasi
quidam fluvius Eloquentiae Tullianae Crispum filium Constantini Latinis literis
^rudivit; vir omnium suo tempore eruditissimus, that is, This Lactantius flowed
with Eloquence, and was as abounding as Tully himself, and as famous for his
style of Latin: He was Tutor to Crispus the son of Constantine, and learned
him the Latin tongue: A man in his time of all others the most learned and
dexterous for the education of Princes, and well and deeply seen in the points
of Divinity: and again, Lactantium propter eruditionem hic legendum, that is,
Lactantius therefore is approvedly read for his singular Learning; Hieron. in
Epist.
Quis mihi interdicere potest ne legam institutionum ejus libros, quibus contra
Genies fortissime scripsit, quos silegeris, stylum Ciceronis excerptum
reperies, that is, who can forbid me to read his Books of Institutions, which
with such a noble and valorous resolution Lactantius published against the
Heathens; which if you do read, you shall find a pure, elegant and eloquent
phrase, no whit inferior to that of Cieero.

Platina gives this Lactantius also a fair commendation in these words,
Platina in vitis Pontif. p. 38.
and to the same effect. His vero temporibus floruisse Firmianum Lactantium
constat Arnobii Discipulum, etc. that is, about these times flourished
Firmianus ^ actantius Arnobius his Scholar, who taught Rhetoric in
Nicomedia; who upon some disturbance left that profession, betaking himself to
writing: in which he was so excellent, that next to Cicero, he bore away the
name from any other Writer: He writ many famous Treatises, full of judgment
and discretion, so that in his old age, he was for his rare parts appointed to
be Tutor to Crispus, the son of Constantinus the Emperor, a place of great
weight and estimation, and of no less carfulness and wisdom: which argu^^h
this Lactantius to be able in his parts, or else he would scarce have been
admitted to a place of that dignity: Saint Augustine and Jerome, in several
places are not sparing to commend this Lactantius; the latter of them speaks,
that although his parts were great and his preferments eminent and large, yet
he died very poor, and so lived: not gaping or greedily pursuing worldly
preferments of honor and riches; but as one who was willing to count all as
dung and dross, so that he might gain the eternal inheritance: For a quiet
and peaceable life ought to be preferred before all other things, and should be
the chiefest study and care of every man, so that he might pass his life time
in joy and tranquillity, that his soul might be free from anguish and
trouble at his death. For it is impossible for that man to be excellent both in
riches of this world, and in the practice of godliness: Honor and riches are
the occasions of all kinds of mischiefs, for they do draw and seduce a man
out of the right way.

In the time of the great persecution of the Church of Christ under
Dioclesianus the Emperor, Eusebius. Eccl^^. H^stor. l. 8 c. ^.
begun against the Christians (as Eusebius relates it) in the nineteenth year
of Dioclesian, in which there was cruel demolition of Churches and sacred
Temples, burning of holy and godly Books, inhumane tortures and torments
inflicted against the Christians; so that, where any were found that were pious
and Christian, they were fetched and most severely martyred for the truth,
Baron. ^nno 302. ^um. 16.
as Cardinal Baronius averres: and indeed all other Ecclesiastical
Historians, that though the Tempest raged horribly, yet this worthy constant
Father retained his piety, and feared not any Tormentors, but resolved both in
life and death to keep his steadfast faith in the merits and mercies of Jesus
Christ.

Behold, in this Lactantius a true pattern of a true follower of Jesus, who
despaired not in the depth of his penury, and poverty, nor yet was daunted or
struck off from Heaven by the rage of persecution: these two I dare boldly say
have made many to deny their Lord that so dearly bought them, with the price of
his most precious blood.

To be poor by nature is no shame unto a man; for we brought nothing into
this world with us; nor must we carry any thing out of it; but to be made poor
by any evil or unhappy occasion of our own, that we ought to be ashamed of and
hate: And there is one thing only for which poverty ought to be beloved:
because that makes trial and show of whom thou art beloved; for who was
poorer on earth then Christ, which died for us; for he had no where to repose
or lay his head.

But this furious Thunderclap removed not this stout Lactantius, but as his
name, so his nature was firm and fixed: his education under such a stout
Master, was a great motive to him to stand fast, for Arnobius (whose Disciple
this Lactantius was) did, to testify to the World his constancy in Religion,
(...). de scrip. Eccles. p. 45.
even in the Reign of Dioclesian, set forth seven Books against the Heathens
(as Bellarmine avers) by which and his Masters example, Lactantius learned to
imitate so noble a virtue. It is none of the least testimonies of a pious mind
to be spurred on to follow good examples. And it is a thing very unfit and
inconvenient for any man to carry goodness in his mouth, and have none at his
heart.

I cannot omit to mention likewise thus much of him, that when as with much
profit and commendation He had learned of Arnobius, (that being sheltered by
some friends to the Gospel of Christ during the time of persecution) as I am
persuaded not without the singular providence of God, ordering it for the
preservation of this man, that he was in his old age (as I have said before)
upon several proofs, called to instruct Crispus, Hi^ron. in scrip. Eccles. in
Lactantio.
the son of Constantinus: as Saint Jerome, Ruffin^s, and Socrates: do
witness: any man of judgment, I suppose, will conclude that such a wise,
religious, potent, and munificent Emperor as Constantine would never have
taken such special notice and knowledge of a decrepit old man; had he not
certainly been informed of, or really known the worthy parts and pious
endowments of this Reverend Lactantius: neither could he have been admitted
into the Emperors favor, had he not been formerly well approved by the
Fathers of the Church; and had of them Letters Testimonial and Commendatory
for his integrity and learning; nay, unless he had been well furnished with
learning and gravity, holiness of life: Constantine would not have committed
the Education of his son unto him: Good Education being the manifest pillar
of Nobility and Greatness, and indeed good and able Tutors are necessarily
requisite about the persons of Princes. Education, indeed, alters the whole
course of Nature; Hence it is said, that an ill man by due ordering and good
governance, is made good, as a piece of ground which is full of weeds, may by a
skillful and diligent hand be clear and fruitful to bring forth fruit. So a
mind that is full of vices and corruption may by good discipline be made
honest and virtuous. Education, says one, is compared to a Sickle and a Hand;
and being demanded the reason, made this answer: that if there was any vice in
the soul, it would weed it out, and if there was no virtue as yet in the
soul, it would plant some in. These things aforesaid, seriously considered,
do not a little set forth the luster and glory of our Lactantius: and to add
this one thing to what has been said, all the Historians do not mention any
thing of his removeall from his great charge, but by all probability he
continued his place with repute, and a general approbation as well of the
Emperor as of his son. For his carriage in the place, or how long he
continued it, nor Saint Jerome, nor Eusebius, Ruffinus, nor Nicephorus, nor
Bellarmine, Hieron. in scriptis Eccles. in Lactantio.
or Baronius do once mention: and therefore we may safely suppose that
Lactantius was upright and virtuous. If we may give credit to Saint Jerome,
this Father also was an industrious man for his Writings, of which there were
many penned that are not now extant. And we may believe that though the Author
did escape the great persecution, yet many of his works perished in the flames,
when as the enemies of the Church did not spare to burn the Word of God; and
of those that are extant, Cardinal Bellarmine has censured some of them to be
none of Lactantius. Bell. de scrip. Eccles. p. 46.
Especially the Verses, and those of the Phaenix: his words are these, Et
quidem opera omnia quae extant exceptis carminibus, sine controversia Lactantii
sunt, carmen de Phaenice Ethniei hominis videtur esse, and, carmen de
Resurrectione and Paschate, and de Passione ambiguum est an Lactantii sint:
that is, and truly all the Books that are extant, except the Verses, without
controversy are of this Lactantius making: the Verses of the Phaenix seem to
be an Heathens: as also the Verses of the Resurrection, of the Passover and
Passion are doubtful whether they be his or not? neither do I certainly find
the time of his death, nor yet the manner, but all agree that he lived till he
was very aged: an argument that God saw him necessary for the benefit of his
Church.

His Sayings.
I have added some of the famous Sentences of this Lactantius, that you may by
them perceive what a learned man he was, in his Treatise of false Religion
against the Gentiles: in his third Chapter of the Governance of the World, to
prove one God, he says: Deus ergo quia perfectus est, non potest esse nisi
^nus: ut in eo sint omnia, that is, God being a perfect substance must needs
be one: that all things may be in one.

All vices are temporary, nor can always be, and therefore the followers of
them are vain in the prosecution. De divino praemio, lib. 7. cap. 10.

The followers of righteousness are contemned here, but their reward is great
hereafter. Godliness always enriches the possessour. Lib. 7. de divine
praemio, cap. 11.

No righteousness, no wisdom, no knowledge of God, no way to curb our unruly
affections, and to suppress sin without Religion. Lib. de ira D^i, cap. 12.

Every man is mortal because corporeal, for every body is soluble and
corruptible: they are but unwise therefore, who trust upon long life, when at
any time they may be dissolved. Lib. de opific. Dei, cap. 4.

There is no conquest, but there is also a battle, nor no virtue but has its
enemy. God would have our graces proved, and known, not overthrown. The Devil
therefore may exercise us with combats, not conquer us by his assaults: but
that we knowing we are beset every where, should always watch and be ready.
Lib. de opificio Dei, cap. 20.

Lactantius reading the first Verse of the fourteenth Psalm, viz. The fool
has said in his heart that there was no God; asked why the fool said so: he
first gives this answer, because he was a fool: then he asks the question
farther, why he did say so in heart, and not with his tongue? Because, said
he, if he had said it openly and before men, then they would conclude him a
fool indeed. Ibid. 16. cap. 14.

I have here also registered his Works, as recorded by Cardinal Bellarmine.

1 Of divine Institutions, 7 books. 2 Of Gods Anger, one book. 3 Of the
Creation, one book. 4 An Epitome upon his books. 5 Verses on the Phaenix. 6 On
the Lords Passion. 7 On our Saviors Resurrection.
Saint Jerome reckons up one that was written to the youth of Afric, and
another inscribed the Grammarian, and two to Aesclepiades. One of Persecution.
Four books of Epistles to Probus, two books of Epistles to Geverus, two of
Epistles to Demetrianus his Auditour.

An. Christi, 340. Sanctus Athanasius
S. ATHANATIVS.

AMongst these glorious Lights of the Church, who have been (even) by their
Adversaries, not only known; but confessed to have bin eminent for piety and
learning; this reverend Athanasius deserves for his worth to be enchased, if
you will believe a cloud of witnesses: then you cannot but have this Athanasius
in a singular reverence, Greg. Nazian. Encomium S. Athanasi^, p. 5.
for Saint Gregory Nazianzen speaking in his Oration, that God has always had
famous men in his Church, either dignified for their good Government, abilities
of Learning, or for Miracles done by them, or else for their constancy in
suffering Martyrdom by Tyrants. (Ex his Athanasius) alios exaequavit, etc. So
speaks that Father, That this Athanasius did equal some, came short of very
few, excelled many; he obtained the Learning of some, the Eloquence of others,
the Action of others, he followed some in meekness, others in zeal, and many
he exceeded in his sufferings: he lost by none, gained some goodness from
all; so that the same Father speaks thus in his commendation; G^eg. Nazian.
Encom. S. Athanas. p. 3. l. 1.
(...), Athanasium laudans, in praising this Athanasius, I commend virtue it
self, for it is all one to set forth the praise of him and virtue, for he does
truly possess all virtues in himself. For virtue in all works is chiefly,
and above all things to be praised, as the head fountain, our most precious
Jewel, of all manner of riches: Virtue is said to be a strong Castle that can
never be won; it is a river that needs no rowing; a Sea that moves not, a
fire that quenches not; a treasure that ever has an end; an army never
overcome; a burden that never wearieth: a spy that ever returns, a sign
that never deceives; a plain way that never fails; a sirrope that forthwith
heals, a renown that never perishes: it is only virtue which attaineth
everlasting blessedness: all these appear at once in this our Athanasius, as
you shall plainly confess by his constancy in suffering; and by his Piety, in
the conclusion.

Lampadius does declare him to be well descended of virtuous and Religious
Parents, Lampad. in vita S. Athan. Tom. 2. p. 27.
who had no more Children but this one Athanasius who did not degenerate from
their worth, but added luster and glory to his progenitors; his spring showed
what a rich harvest he would produce. For even in his young years he was
Ingenious, liberally disposed, of upright carriage, obedient to his parents. He
is of all Writers famous for his actions, even in his youth especially for one
which I cannot omit: when Alexander the Bishop of that City did yearly
celebrate a great Feast in memory of Peter the Martyr; which had been formerly
Bishop in the same place: he having his house by the waterside saw many youths
playing together (now the manner of their sport was that all the boys should
personate Priests and Deacons) and so they all consented and cho^e this
Athanasius to be their Bishop, and so they presented unto this Athanasius, some
other youths which were not yet baptized, that they might be baptized by him:
so Athanasius performing all things requisite, baptized them with the water of
the sea, and gave them good counsels and admonitions, directing them what to
do hereafter, which the Bishop of Alexandria beholding and wondering at their
actions, caused them to be brought to him, whom when he had asked many
questions, being certified of the act, would not have the children to be
rebaptized, and gave order forthwith that Athanasius parents should be brought
to him; to whom he gave strict charge that they should see him brought up to
Learning, which they performed. So this Athanasius profiting exceedingly in all
sorts of learning, he was as an other Samuel to the old Bishop, Alexander: who
at first used him to read to him, and write from him: then he was ordained
Deacon, and so received the order of Priesthood: about what time Arrius began
to broach his too too infectious Heresy, about which there was some priva^e
meetings and conferences at Alexandria, before the Nicene Council: in which
this Athanasius showed himself a maine opponent, and that with an admirable
expression of Learning and integrity.

Whereupon the old Bishop Alexander going to the Council at Nice, took this
Athanasius with him, not only as his companion in his journey, but as his
fellow Champion in this great conflict: and to speak truth, his learning
procured him all good men's love, and hatred from the Arrians: well, His old
Lord Bishop dying, shortly after the Nicene Council, this Athanasius was not
only by his last Will, but by the General Suffrages of all the Churches of
Alexandria, chosen Bishop of that See; and that not without the singular
providence of God so disposing it: for he proved so eminent, that few in after
times equaled him: take but a judicious man's testimony of him, Iudicium in
(...), vis ingenii excellen^, In vita S. Atha scripta per virum doct. Tom. 2.
p. 118.
Eloquentia eximia, inveris sententiis tuendis (...), in adversariis refutandis
firmitas inexpugnabilis, and ad res adversas perferendas. Magnanimitas vero
Heroica a Spiritu Sancto accensa in ipsius pectore flagrabat: This Athanasius
had a sharp judgment, a strong wit, an admirable gift of Eloquence, resolute
in defense of the truth, valorous in refuting his Adversaries, and patient in
all adversities: in a word, There was an Heroical magnanimity kindled in his
heart by the Holy Ghost. There is not any Doctor of the Church since the
Apostles times, that suffered for so long time; more hatred, treacheries,
persecutions; even as though the whole World had conspired against him. For as
one says well, Non solum Episcopi, sed ipse etiam Imperatores, Regna,
Exercitus, populi infesti sunt: Not only Bishops, but Emperors, Kingdoms,
Armies, Nations molested him: but the Son of God (whose cause this Athanasius
maintained) protected him. So that this Father would say, though an Army should
encampe about me, yet would I not fear, Psalm. 27. Witness those slanders and
tales raised up against him by Eusebius, the Bishop of Nicomedia: witness the
gross suggestions of a certain Arrian Priest, that lived with Constantia, the
sister to the Emperor, wife to Licinius, who being sent to Constantine,
suggested to the Emperor, that Arrius was unjustly condemned, so that the
Emperor called him from his banishment, and endeavored to restore him again
to the Church. Arrius counterfeiting that he was of the same faith with the
Nicene Council, complaining that Athanasius would not admit, him into the
bosom of the Church, and that all would be peace, and all factions cease, but
only for this only man Athanasius, and such like: in so much that Constantine
being overcome with these delusions, writ sharp and reprehensive Letters to
Athanasius, to admit this dissembling Arrius to the Church, and threatened the
good Bishop, (being persuaded that Arrius was no Counterfeit) that unless he
would receive him, that he would presently send such to him, that should not
only strip him of his Bishopric, but also cast him out of the City of
Alexandria: but he withstood this storm, and sent Letters to Constantine,
declaring the reasons why Arrius could not nor might not be entertained: Then
his Adversaries failing here, stirred other calumnies against him by wicked
instruments Meletians. For they politickly divulged it, that Athanasius should
exact new customs, and impose new burdens upon the Churches in Egypt, and
that he intended evil against Constantine the Emperor: but being sent for to
Constantinople by the Emperor, he made his innocence appear to the
Emperor, so that the Emperor honored him highly, and sent him back to
Alexandria, with Letters Certificatory, that all what was objected against him
was false, and gave him this commendatory title, Virum plane Divinum existimo.
I hold him a sincerely Divine Man. This was the Emperors opinion of him.

But these Devilish instruments left not prosecuting their causes; they
accused him of Magic, and that he had out off the hand of one Arsenius, to
practice with; then a wicked woman accuses him, that he had forced her
chastity: but all these engines failed, for Constantine upheld this Athanasius
integrity a long time; yet he also still hearing new accusations and continual
complaints against this Athanasius, whether out of anger, or being overcome
with the policies of Athanasius adversaries, or whether in hope this Athanasius
being removed, his accusers would cease, or whether to safeguard this good
Bishop from violence, he consented to banish this Athanasius to Treveire in
Gaul, which indeed gave scope to Arrius his admittance to new favors, and
liberty the more to settle and spread his poisonous Heresy: which those of
Alexandria, not liking, Tumults being among the people; Constantine sends for
Arrius to Constantinople, to declare his Faith, and took oath of him, to agree
to that which was established in the Nicene Synod, But this Impostour, though
he swore, yet, not as the Emperor believed, but to such Tenants as he had
closed in his bosom: well having thus dissembled with the Emperor, and being
confirmed, he and his followers prove themselves raging Wolves amongst the
faithful; till at last by the prayers of the Church, especially by the devout
and uncessant Prayers of Alexander then Bishop of Constantinople, who was
threatened and hated by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia and Arrius: the good man
desired of God in the Temple, either to take him out of this miserable life, or
else by his divine hand and power to send some redress to this great spreading
evil: It pleased God that the next day, Arrius going with great ostentation,
with a great number of followers, to a public meeting, sitting in Latrina, was
senseless (and mad as it were) and voided out a great deal of blood, and his
bowels, so that he died like Judas: and presently after him died also the
Emperor Constantine; but before he died, he commanded Athanasius to be
recalled from banishment.

So Constantine his son coming to the Imperial Dignity, sent for
Athanasius, and sends him after Honorable and Princely entertainment to the
Church of Alexandria, persuading them, that his Father sent him into
banishment, not for any ill will, but because he thought that course to be the
only way to keep him from his Adversaries.

Thus Athanasius being entertained (after two years and four months
banishment) he governed the Churches of Egypt; but continued not above three
years; and then the Priest mentioned before, which won Constantia the Sister
of Constantine the Emperor to the Arrian cause; seduced also his son
Constantius; which he effected the easier, because he was appointed the Keeper
of his Fathers will, and this young Emperor was of an unconstant carriage, so
as Theodoret complained of him, (...), that he was too easily won to
belief. Hereupon they urge vehemently that the word (...), was not in all the
Scripture, and that all the Churches in Egypt, Palaestine, Phaenicia, and
several other Countries were all full of Tumults about the urging of that
word, and this they also complained of at the Council of Antioch, at which by
the Injunction of Constantius, were ninety Bishops assembled, to the
Dedication of the Temple which Constantine had built. The Arrians also
prevailed so far, that they deposed Eustathius from the Bishopric of
Antioch, and having possessed themselves of that, broacht their Heresies. Well
Athanasius could not long rest at Alexandria, but Gregory being in his Seat,
he fled to Julius the Bishop of Rome, who sent him to be at his old Seat
again; but the Emperor Constantius was vexed, and the Arrians were all up
against him; nay, he could find no hope of shelter in the East, for the
Emperor sent Captains, Tribunes, Centurions, Soldiers: nay, whole Armies to
bring this Athanasius, and promised rewards to them that could bring his head:
but all their search was in vain to find him that God hid: for Athanasius was
kept close a long time in a close pit, and fed by a familiar friend, as Abdias,
in former time did the Lords Prophets: yet at last a Maid servant made it known
to his Adversaries: but Athanasius was sent away that very night before the
searchers came, by the goodness of God; and so conveyed himself into the
West; where Constans after the death of Constantine the younger reigned: hereby
the help of Julius the Roman Bishop, he got a little breathing: but it was
concluded at Sardis, that the Nicen Faith was right, and that they who did
defend contrary, were not fit to be admitted amongst the faithful. The Decree
of that Synod is to be read in Theodoret.

Upon this grew the Division of the Eastern and Western Churches, and this was
it that made the Church of Rome to flourish; but the Eastern Churches were
divided into three parts. There were first Arrians and Eusebians, then the
Aetians and Eunomians, and lastly, the Macedonians: by these three the Churches
were miserably vexed.

But four years after the Council of Sardis even to the death of Constantius
some ten years space: this Athanasius was again banished into the Deserts of
Libya; but the Emperor was sorely vexed at him: but Liberius then Bishop of
Rome, pleaded hard for him, in so much that Constantius banished him for it:
well in the absence of Athanasius, Constantius caused councels to be held in
several places, that was chief against Photinus the Heretic, who dispraised
both the Orthodoxe and Arrians. Against this Photinus, both the Orthodoxe
Christians and Arrians agreed well.

But in what troubles was the Church under the Reign of Constantius, who
governed 24 years, in which space there were so many Councels, and nine
contrary Confessions of Faith to that of the Nicene Council; the two first
were proposed at Antioch, the third by Constantius his Ambassadors to
Constans: the fourth was sent by Eudoxius, to the Western Bishops: the fifth,
sixth and seventh was at Sirmium, the eighth at Seleucia by the Acacians, the
ninth was at Constantinople: to which Vlphilas the Bishop of the Goths
subscribed: upon all these has Athanasius divinely spoken.

Witness his Creed, every syllable whereof bears matter of importance
answerable to the judgment of so divine an Author: whose doctrine in other
things was no less judicious, though not altogether so profitable, as in this
his compendious abridgment, and abbreviation of the Christian faith briefly
comprehended in a short Epitome, yet not so briefly as plainly dilucidated and
expounded to the general benefit and edification of the Church. Concerning
which it may be said, maximum in minimo, that the greatest thing is in the
least, the most matter in fewest words. And albeit in the Apostles Creed there
are not many words, yet the words might appear unto some not sufficient for
restrayning Heretics from their opinions; and hence this Father advisedly
undertook the penning of this his Creed, for explication of those articles
which others wrested and perverted to their own and others destruction: which
had it bin sooner written, in all probability those their errors had bin nipped
in the bud, and never germinated to the scandal and annoyance of the Church of
God. So that as it is said of the good woman by the Son of Syrach, Many
daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all: so may we say of
this learned and reverend man, many have written Creeds of the Christian faith,
but thine (the Apostles only excepted) is inferior unto none, yea, superior
being compared with others.

Upon these occurrences, Constantius died, sorrowing for three reasons: The
first, that he had furthered his Kindreds death; the second, because he had
nominated Julian the Apostate Emperor: the third, that he had too much
approved those new and Heretical Arrian points.

But now the case of the Church under Julian was deplorable, who strive to put
down all Christianity: But for all this, Athanasius receives his charge at
Alexandria, where while he staid, he called the Bishops together, and they
strengthened the Nicene Confession: and they condemned the Arrians, Eunomians,
Macedonians, and the Audaeans, and Apollinarians with the Sabellians: but now
the Church increasing at Alexandria, by Athanasius presence, the great
Philosophers, Magicians, Wisards, and South-sayers, cry out, that they can do
nothing, unless this Athanasius be removed: So Letters were granted not only
to take him, but to kill him: upon this Athanasius leaves Alexandria and
intends to go by ship to Thebais: his friends grieving at his departure, he
told them, Nubecula est ^ito transitura: It was a cloud that would soon be
over, and so it came to pass: for the year after, Julian died fearfully: but
how ever, he sent after Athanasius to apprehend him; but they were deceived
that sought him, for he came presently back to Alexandria, and kept close till
Julian was dead. Then Iovianus succeeding in the Empire, recalled the banished
Orthodox Bishops, and embraced them highly; Athanasius writ an Epistle to this
'Emperour of the Nicene Faith: but this good Iovianus after seven months
reign died at Bythinia; so Valentinianus and Valens succeeded him: different
these were, for Valentinian was Orthodoxe, but Valens was an Arrian; and did
persecute the Eastern Churches; so that Athanasius was forced to hide himself
in his Fathers Monument, the space of four months: yet for all this stir,
this Emperor was in a manner forced to give leave to Athanasius to reside in
Alexandria: so long as this Athanasius lived, the Church of Alexandria was
quiet: but this good Father died in the seventh year of Valens his Reign,
peaceably, and in his old age, having been Bishop 46 years of Alexandria. This
Father is commended of all Ecclesiastical Writers. Gregory Nazianzen styles
him, Tubam ingentem and columnam Ecclesiae: The great Trumpet of the Church,
and the Churches Pillar: and further he calls him, O^ulum Orbis, Doctorem
Certaminum, vocem magnam, fidei sustentaculum, secundum Christi praecursorem
and Lampadem: Epiphanius calls him patrem rectae fidei. Theodoret styles him,
(...), the Bulwark of Truth. Ep. 48. and 49.
Saint Basil praises this Father highly: so does Julius the Roman Bishop, in
his Epistle to the Alexandrians. So does Constantine the younger in his Letters
to the said Citizens. So does Saint Hierome, Ruffinus, lib. c. 14. So does
Cassianus lib. 7. de Incarnat. cap. ult. and Vincentius Lirinensis, and
Cyrillus of Alexandria, and diverse others: and so this Father having finished
his course, and kept the faith, expects the second coming of the Lord Jesus.

Athanasius his Sayings.
Of Faith.
The religious form of godliness is above every form, and is known only by
Faith: For it is the light of the soul; the door of life; the foundation of
eternal salvation: for without it no man can come near the number of the sons
of God; De side cap. 6. lib. 10.
and without it all the endevo^^ of man is of none effect. Gal. 3. 26.
So the Apostle Paul declares himself, saying, ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus.

Again, his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain to life
and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

To believe rightly in God, and also of the whole Trinity, is to direct all our
hope unto God: Athan. in Gal.
and with sure trust to depend only upon his truth and goodness.

These are the works of faith, says he, namely a quiet and good conscience:
the love of God, and the blessed Trinity; and the hope of things to come: a
boldness to come to the Throne of grace, prayer, true worship, confession of
the truth; obedience, perseverance, in yielding up of the spirit, and to go
immediately to God.

Saint Athanas. de meditatione.
Let the Sun when it rises in the Firmament, see the Psalter or thy Prayer
book in thy hands: that so the Son of righteousness may shine into thy heart
by faith in thy heart.

Saint Athanas. de meditatione.
Be instant at prayers with God, and worship him that hung upon the Cross for
thee at the sixth hour of the day.

His Works follow in two Tomes: Tome the first.
1 His Oration against the Heathens. 2 Of the Incarnation of the Word. 3
Disputation against Arrius, in the Nicene Council. 4 Upon that Scripture, All
things are given me of the Father. 5 Epistle to Adelphius. 6 Epistle to Maximus
7 An Oration against them, who say the Sun is no creature. 8 Against Serapion.
9 Testimonies of holy Scripture to prove the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity. 10 Exposition of faith. 11 Liberius Epistle to Athanasius. 12 Athanasius
answer. 13 An Epistle to Jovianus the Emperor. 14 A Narration of the Nicene
Council. 15 Five Orations against the Arrians. 16 An Epistle of the sentence
of Dionysius of Alexandria. 17 Epistle Catholicall. 18 A Refutation if the
hypocrisy of Meletius, Eusebius, and Paulus Samosatensis. 19 An Epistle to the
Antiochians. 20 An Epistle to Epictetus. 21 Of the Humane Nature. 22 Against
Apollinarius of the Incarnation. 23 An Oration against Apollinarius. 24 Of the
coming of Christ. 25 Against Sabellius. 26 An Oration proveing that Christ is
one. 27 A Letter to Serapion of the death of Arrius. 28 An apology to
Constantius. 29 Two apologies for his flight. 30 A Letter to all solitary. 31
The Protestation of the Alexandrians. 32 A Letter of the Councels of Ariminum,
and Seleucia. 33 A Letter to the Africans. 34 A Letter to all Orthodox
Christians. 35 Letters to Palladius, to Antiochus, and to Dracontius. To
Marcellinus. 36 Of the Sabbath, and of Circumcision. 37 Upon that Scripture,
Who so shall speak a word against the Son of man, etc. 38 Upon that, as they
came to the Village. 39 Upon the Passion. 40 Of the holy Virgin. 41 Of
Virginity. 42 Of the Sower. 43 An Oration against all Heresies.
Tome the second.
1 An Oration of the Ascension of Christ, translated by Lampadius. 2 Of
Melchisedeck. 3 A Letter to Serapion of the Holy Ghost. 4 Another of the same.
5 A concise Oration against the Arrians. 6 The first Colloquie of the Arrians
with Jovianus at Antioch. 7 The second, and third and fourth. 8 Of the
Incarnation. 9 The Creed of Athanasius. 10 Jovianus Letter to Athanasius. 11
Athanasius answer. 12 Several Letters. 13 Definitions. 14 Synopsis of the
Scripture. 15 Five Dialogues of the Trinity. 16 A Dialogue betwixt an Orthodoxe
and a Macedonian. 17 A Colloquy of Athanasius. 18 A Letter of the Churches
tragical troubles. 19 Several Disputes and Objections, 17. 20 Questions to
Antiochus. 21 Interpretation of the Evangelicall Parables. 22 Other Questions.
23 St. Anthonies life. 24 On the Paras^eve. 25 Fragments of the Commentary on
the Psalms. 26 Other fragments out of several authors. 27 Of the united
Deity of the Trinity. 28 Of the proper Persons. 29 A Treatise against
Marcellinus. 30 Of the several names. 31 Of the united substance of the
Trinity. 32 Of the blessedness of the Son of God 33 Of the profession
Catholic, Lib. 6. 34 Of the Catholic and the Arrian Confession, Lib. 5. 35 Of
his own faith nine books. 36 Of the Unity of faith, ten books. 37 Of the
Faith of the Unity and Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, eleven Books.
38 Athanasius dispute with Arrius at Laodicea. 39 An exhortation to Monks. 40
Athanasius and the Egyptian Bishops, their Letter to Marcus Pope of Rome. 41
The Rescript of Marcus. 42 Upon our Saviors Passion.


Then follow seven Homilies, and then several Encomiums of this eminent Father.

Cardinal Bellarmine de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, ranks his Works into
four Tomes, but I have reckoned them as they are printed at Paris in two
Tomes, Anno 1627.

An. Christi, 355. The Life of St Hillarie Pictavius.
S. HILLARIE PICTAVIVS

SAint Hillarie Bishop of Poicters, Fortunatus de vita S. Hillarii ante eius
oper^.
was borne in the Country of Aquitaine, ninety miles distant from the British
Ocean, nobly and generously descended, and his natural gifts so improved by
education, that he became a worthy Champion in defense of Christian Religion.

For although Saint Paul say, that not many wise, many noble according to the
flesh, yet when they that are noble by birth receive Christ and the faith of
Christ, they prove singular instruments of Gods glory, and the good of his
Church; accordingly did this blessed Father shine to posterity, by the
manifold natural endowments, and spiritual graces, wherewith he was
beautified.

His Wife and Daughter he endoctrinated with the rudiments of Christianity,
Sex^i sin^si^. Et^^ioth p. 248
and himself lived a strictaustere life, shunning the conversation of Jews
and Heretics. Herein he showed himself a true Christian, whose practice must
be answerable to his profession; for otherwise a man may be said to bear fire
in one hand, and water in another: whatsoever a man professes, except he put
what he professes in practice, there is a shadow without substance, a tree
without fruit; whose leaves of profession will not keep it from being cut down
and cast into the fire. No such tree was Saint Hilary, but the Psalmists tree,
which brought forth his fruit in due season.

O most perfect man, whose life was with love to fear, and with fear to love
Christ.

He preached often to inform the people of the mystery of the Trinity,
sowing the words of truth on the ground of their hearts.

In this he was a faithful Minister of Christ: he did feed Christ's sheep,
as well as cloth himself with the wool: and how did he feed them? pavit
verbo, pavit exemplo, by doctrine, and example: his example availed to the
teaching of the ignorant; his doctrine for information of the judgment, both
of learned and unlearned.

This his pious zeal being known, he was elected Priest, and his fame spread
abroad through France, and foreign Countries. Afterward he resisted and
opposed the Arrian Heresy; whereupon the Bishops Valens and Vrsatius;
persuaded the Emperor to banish Saint Hilary into Phrygia, together with
Dionysius Bishop of Millain, and Eusebius Bishop of Vercels.

And it is observable, That wheresoever God has his Church, the Devil has
his Chapel; and where the Husbandman sowes wheat, there the enemy sowes
tares. As the truth of God was propagated, so the tares grew up among the
wheat: and not only so, but the tares would overgrow the wheat, and not suffer
it to grow up with them.

During his banishment, he understood that his Daughter Abra left at Poicters
with her mother, was sought in Marriage by a wealthy proper young man;
whereupon he wrote a Letter to his Daughter that he had provided her a Husband
of great Nobility, and of such admirable beauty, that it exceeded the amiable
colors of the Rose and Lilly; admonishing therefore not to match her self to
any one until he returned, and that till then she should expect the coming of
this promised Bridegroom. Whereupon his Daughter Abra, mildly embracing her
Fathers counsel, remained unmarried.

A notable example of an obedient child in a matter of greatest consequence.
She did not so much satisfy her fancy, as magnify her understanding in
receiving her Fathers advice. Which should other children do, they might
please God better in obeying his Commandment; and their Parents, who lege
talionis, deserve more respect then their children can give them.

Many Bishops by the Emperors command, being assembled at Sel^ucia, to give
their opinions concerning the Arrian Heresy: Saint H^lary coming on a Sunday
into a Chapel belonging to a Castle; Florentia a Heathen Maid cried cut with
a loud voice, That a servant of God was come thither; and falling down at his
feet, she earnestly desired his benediction; and afterward leaving her
parents, she followed him even to Poicters; saying, That though he were not
the father of her generation, yet he was the Father of her regeneration.

Thus it is an easy thing with God of the stones to raise up Children unto
Abraham; to mollify stony hearts, and make them fructify, and beyond all man's
belief, by small or no means to bring great things to pass, no less then an
Heathens Conversion, at the sight and approach of a man of God. Such is the
freeness of Gods grace, which is agens liberrimum. The Wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but know no^ whence it comes,
nor whither it goes; even so is every one that is borne of the Spirit.

He got much credit and approbation in the Arrian Synod; and by persecution of
his enemies, Valens and Vrsatius, was sent back again into France; where Saint
Martin met him; seeking his acquaintance, and adoring him as an earthly Deity.
Afterward Saint Hilary being come home, and finding his Daughter to whom he had
written a former Epistle, constant in desiring to be married to the Bridegroom
which her Father had provided; she returned unto Christ the Bridegroom of her
soul, whose body her Father with his own hands buried; O glorious Funeral
better than life, being translated from Earth to Heaven, and that in the flower
of her age and spring of her youth: Thus despising natural affection, he
showed loves perfection, in seeking her eternal felicity and glorification.

An History which sets forth to the life the reward of obedient Children: She
that obeyed her earthly father, is rewarded by God her heavenly Father: And
whereas she did expect for a recompense of her patience an earthly Bridegroom,
she was espoused to the Bridegroom of her soul, fairer than the sons of Men,
richer than the greatest Potentates, whose are all the Beasts of the
Mountains, and the Cattle on a thousand Hills; sweeter than all sweetness,
and better than all goodness.

Within few years after, Saint Hilary departed this present life in the Reign
of the Emperors Valens and Valentian, Earth deploring, Heaven rejoicing, and
also our Savior Jesus Christ admitting him into felicity, to whose glory he
had lived and died.

Thus a blessed Life was seconded by a blessed Death; and he that had seen the
various changes in the revolutions of times, did at last exchange (...) dross
for gold, misery for happiness, and in peace was gathered to his Fathers.

But what eloquence can express his facundiousnesse, he being in discretion
provident, in handling matters profound, in learning eloquent, for virtue
admirable; in composition various, in resolution subtle and wise, as our
Savior says, as a Serpent, yet gracious as the simple Dove. He was the Salt
of Wit, the Fountain of Eloquence, the Treasury of Knowledge, the Light of
Learning; a Defender of the Church, and an Enemy to the opposers thereof; whose
words read, seemed not words but thunder; He that would know the character of
his mind, let him remember his constancy, read his Volumes, and weigh his
Sayings, some whereof are here inserted.

Whose excellency may appear to any indifferent Reader, who shall weigh them
in the balance of mature judgment; and they deserve no less approbation or
title, than sometimes did the sayings of Pythagoras among the ancients, which
were entitled (...), the golden words of Pythagoras; for according to that of
the Wise man, A word spoken in due season is like unto Apples of Gold in
pictures of silver. Such were these following, viz.

Of Custom.
Custom is a strong obligation, and therefore he is a better Christian, who
not only by remission of sin, but by ignorance in sin is blameless and
innocent.

Whence it was, that the Prophet denounces a woe against such as draw iniquity
together with cords of vanity. Such are the cords of long continued custom,
which habituate a man in an evil way, making him irrecoverably wicked. Can a
Blackamoore change his skin, (says the Prophet) or the Leopard his spots? no
more can ye that are accustomed to evil learn to do good. So that the truth
of the ancient Proverb is manifest, that Custom is a second Nature: for as
slips of trees that are ingrafted, and inoculated into another stock partake
of the nature of the stock whereinto they are ingrafted: so whatsoever vice a
man accustometh himself unto, to the same are his affections glued (as it
were) and inseparably joined, and the corruption thereof concentra^ed and made
coessentiall unto it.

Of Gods Works.
God has performed many things whose natural causes being hid; yet their
effects are known. And Faith is religious, though joined with natural
ignorance.

A fit Register of Gods various wisdom, yea the treasure house thereof is the
whole Universe, wherein all his works are done in number, weight and measure;
all which by their operations and impressions they make, are easily to be
discerned, to be nothing else but the footsteps of his Majesty. Now as Moses
could not see GODS face, but his hinder parts he saw, so can we not many times
discern Gods works in themselves a priori, but a posteriori we may; by
necessary collections. Proportionably Faith (which is the gift of God) in it
self is a glorious grace, but because of our ignorance, natural and affected,
we do not attain to that height and depth of that divine mystery; which they
that shall do, must be (...), must have an Eagles eye, not (...), having their
understandings darkened, being strangers from the covenant of grace.

Of hidden treasure.
By the similitude of hidden treasure, the riches of our hopes are showed;
because God was found in man, for obtaining of whom all is to be sold, that
wading through all wants, we may attain the riches of Heaven.

That man can want nothing, which has him, which is All in all. And as
sometime the Philosopher said, Omnia mea mecum porto, Whatsoever is mine, I
bear about me, so may a Christian rich in grace say, Deus meus, and omnia,
since I enjoy God, I enjoy all; without whom enjoying all, I enjoy nothing;
other things utor, non fruor, I enjoy for their use, but have no true
contentment in enjoying them.

Of the Church.
Those that are out of the Church cannot be capable of understanding divine
mysteries; for the ship wherein Christ preached the Word of Life, was a Type of
the Church, those without being like the sands were not intelligible.

And hence appears the folly of them that forsake the Church, and
excommunicate themselves for fear of being excommunicate by the Church. It was
sometimes Saint Paul's saying, Brethren, I would they were cut off that trouble
you: but such there are in these days as cut off themselves; they are so far
forth obnoxious in troubling of others among whom they live, that being
conscious to themselves, they become a punishment to themselves, in forsaking
the Church that bred them, that educated them, that instructed them, that
defended them, that (had they continued in it with sincere and pure Religion)
would have saved them. But they went out from us, because they were not of us.

Of the love of God.
Such is the power of the love of God, that it makes us to be of one spirit
and affection with God, as distance of place or time cannot alter or change a
settled affection.

Magnes amoris amor, The Lodestone of love is love. Gods love allureth ours;
Prior nos dilexit Deus (says Saint Bernard) tantus tantum, and gratis
tantillos and tales. God first loved us, and that in a high degree, when we
were vile and contemptible. A strong inducement to render love for so great
love.

Of Election.
The Elect clothed with the wedding garment do shine, in the newness of
regeneration, neither is our election merit, but our merit proceeds from
election.

God electeth none for their own sakes, or any thing in them, but of his mere
free mercy. Wherefore did he love Iaakob, and hate Esau? Search not into Gods
secret counsel: Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria. Cannot the potter
make one vessel for honor, another for dishonor? as the clay in the potters
hand, so we were in Gods, who chose us or rejected us, either for the
magnifying of his mercies, or the manifesting of his justice.

Of Hypocrisy.
The inward part of the cup is most useful; if it be foul within, the outward
washing is to no purpose, and so the inward integrity of the conscience does
purify the body.

God requires truth in the inward parts, and of all the sacrifices of the Old
Testament most esteemed of the fat of the inwards; he will have no dissembling.
That Harlot in the Kings would have all the child or none; she was the childs
mother: but that other Harlot said, Let it be neither thine nor mine, but let
it be divided. God hates divisum and dispersum cor: we must not have one
heart for God, and another for the Devil: give him all, or none at all.

Of Self-denial.
Christ is to be followed by taking up his Cross, and though not in act, yet
in will we should be ever ready to suffer with Christ, as companions of his
passion, though not in act, yet in affection, for when Christ comes to
judgment, how shall eternal life be obtained? by wealth, gentilitie, or
dignity? these things and the like are to be contemned, and Christ to be
followed, whereby eternity with loss of earthly felicity is gained.

It is an hard matter at once to look up to Heaven with one eye, fixing the
other upon earth: we must either adhere to our selves, and deny Christ; or
adhere to Christ denying our selves. No man can serve two masters, that is,
commanding contrary things. Let us then deny our selves, saying, with the
blessed Apostle, We have forsaken all, and followed thee.

Hilary on that in Matthew, My yoke is sweet.
What is sweeter than Christ's yoke? what is lighter than his burden? to
abstain from wickedness, to desire that which is good, to love all, to hate
evil, to obtain eternity, not to be taken with things present, and not to
impose on another that which thou would not thy self suffer.

Hilar. lib. 4. de Trinitate.
Words and sayings are to be understood according to their causes, because the
matter is not subject to the speech, but the speech is subject to the matter.

Hilar. de Trinitate.
The flesh became the word, that is man God: his humanity is in Heaven, his
Deity was of Heaven: this is in Heaven as it was, and that is in Heaven which
was not.

Hilary in principio: Lib. de Trinitate.
All humane speech and eloquence is obnoxious, to contradiction: because such
as disagree in manners, disagree also in mind, and the error of their foolish
will does strive against the truth, either not understood, or offending their
folly.

Hilar. lib. 1. de Trinit.
The beginning of Discipline is humility, whereof there are three documents
which especially belong to a Reader or hearer, the first is, that he despise
not any Science or Author. Secondly that he be not ashamed to learn. Thirdly
that when he has gotten knowledge, he do not despise others.

Hilar. super Mat.
Christ did so highly commend concord and peace that he affirmed that Prayers
made in the Unity of the spirit should be heard, and has promised that where
two or three were gathered together in his name, he would be in the midst of
them.

An Epitaph on Saint Hilary collected out of an ancient Author.
Hilarious cubat hac Pictavus Episcopus u^na,
Defensor nostrae terrificus fidei.
Istius aspectum Serpents far nequibant,
Nescio quae in vultu spicula Sanctus habet.
Hilary of Poicters this Grave does contain,
Our Faiths Defendor, which he did mayntain:
His blessed aspect did Serpents away chase,
Affrighted to behold his holy Face.
His Works.
1 Against the Emperor Constantius, 1 book. 2 Two Books unto the Emperor. 3
Against Auxentius the Arrian, one book, and one concerning Synods against the
Arrians. 4 An Epistle to his daughter Abra, and a Hymn. 5 Commentaries on
Matthew. 6 The explanation of some places. 7 Of the unity of the Father* and
the Son. 8 Of the ^ssence of the Father, and the Son. 9 Epistles to Saint
Augustine.
He was abundantly eloquent, as appears by his twelve Books of the
indivisible Trinity, written in a swelling style, as are his Commentaries on
the Psalms.

An. Christi, 365. Sanctus Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus.
S. CIRILLVS.

BEfore the passages of this Fathers Life shall be treated of, 'twill not be
amiss to discover two things: the first the time in which this St. Cyrill
lived; Bell. de script. Ecclesiast.
for Bellarmine places him in the year 365: his words are, Sanctus Cyrillus
Hierosolymae Episcopus, etc. St. Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem under Constantius,
often cast out of his place, by the fury of the Arrian faction, but restored,
and at last dyed under Theodosius. Surius in vit is Sanct.
But Surius puts him in the year of our Lord 340. Now the difference is not to
be accounted so great, the one accounting from his birth till he began to be
esteemed of in the Church, and the other reckoning from the time of his being
first Bishop, to the time of his Death. The other is, the distinguishing this
St. Cyrill from the Patriarch of Alexandria, and also from another St. Cyrill
Deacon and Martyr; which is thus to be known; first, he is known from St.
Cyrill of Alexandria, because this was but a Confessor, that of Alexandria a
Martyr; so also was that St. Cyrill which was a Deacon: then also by their
difference of Times; this of Jerusalem being in the year 365, the other in
430. But St. Cyrill the Deacon was in the same time with this worthy
instrument: yet they are easily distinguished; for this Saint was Bishop of
Jerusalem, the other did defend the faith in Phaenicia, in Heliopolis, whose
Martyrdom (as Theodoret in his Ecclesiastical History relates it) was no
less famous than Cruel, perpetrated by the Gentiles under Constantine the
Emperor; Theod. Eccles. Histor. l. 3. c. 6.
for in that this St. Cyrill did break some of their Idols and Images, they
not only killed him, but ripped up his belly, and eat his Liver; upon whom God
did speedily manifest a terrible revenge: for the Teeth first, and then the
Tongues of all that tasted his Entrails fell out, putrid and fetide, then
their Eyes; and so all presently miserably dyed. Now this St. Cyril though he
had diverse bloody and malicious Enemies who would, if they durst, have acted as
much upon him; yet he was by the all-ruling Providence, and protection of God,
preserved from their fury.

So these two things being cleared, let us proceed to write the actions of this
worthy Saint. Constantius reigning, who was son to Constantine the great;
this Cyrill succeeded Maximus, who was Patriarch in the same Metropolis: Ex
Romans Martyrol.
A man magnae Sanctimoniae, Doctrinae, Prudentiae, qui successit ob praeclaras
rarasque animi, corporisque Dotes, (id est) Of great Sanctimony, Learning,
Wisdom, who did succeed Maximus for his rare and excellent endowments both of
body, and mind; who endured many heavy things for the testimony of Faith and a
good Conscience, being often forced to forsake his place: and yet after all
these storms, raised by the Devils agents, he slept quietly in the Lord. Of
whose undefiled faith the Synod of Sardis writing to Da^asus, Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
have given a large and evident Testimony, which is to be seen in Theodoret;
which because it is so prevalent to remove all the scandals of his adversaries,
I have here set down.

We have exhibited to the Church of Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all
other, the most reverend and most Holy St. Cyrill, which was appointed and
approved by all the Bishops of the Provinces (as says the Canon) and also
waged many famous Combats with his Adversaries the Arrians, with admirable
success and renown. He is said to have governed the Church singularly well,
and it is known that he got the hatred of many for his great Charity and
Compassion toward the poor, for this made him famous and envyed; for in the
time of a great famine, when as the poor were destitute of all helps, and
means, and knew not where to find relief, they flocked all to this holy
Patriarch, as to their utmost refuge: He was so liberal to them, that he gave
them all he had: nay, so full of pity and compassion was this Father, that
when he had nothing left him of his own, he took the Vessels and Church
ornaments, and sold them to relieve the necessity of the indigent; so that he
feared not to spoil the Temples Material, so that the Temples Spiritual
might be furnished, imitating in this his action, the examples of St. Ambrose,
St. Augustine, and others; and even for this act he wanted not many
adversaries: yet for all their proceedings he justified the act, and was
beloved of all pious and good men.

Nicephorus says of this Father, Niceph. l. 9. c. 14. Eccles* hist.
that inter veteres Ecclesiae patres, etc. St. Cyrill is reckoned amongst the
ancient Writers of the Church, and is reputed famous amongst the Defendors, and
Champions of the Catholic and Apostolic Doctrine: for he was not only
equal to very many of those strong Pillars of the Church, but their Senior,
and held the Catholic Doctrine sincerely; and as he is mentioned of most
Historians; as Socrates, Theodoret, Zozomen, Nicephorus, and others: So none
speak of him, but with singular and honorable account: and when as Nicephorus
speaks of learned and judicious men, as Pa^lus of Constantinople, Athanasius of
Alexandria, Anthonius of Egypt, Eusebius Bishop of Emissen, Titus Bostrensis,
Basilius of Ancyra, Loco Citato.
Eudoxius, Acacius the successor of Eusebius of Caesarea, and St. Cyrill, who
succeeded Maximus, and Ephrem Syrus, (says he.)

It Is also said, that St. Cyrill was not only endowed with parts requisite for
the adornment of such a great Patriarch, but also with the Spirit of prophecy:
For when as Iulianus the Emperor had given command to have the Temple of
Jerusalem rebuilded, and the charges thereof to be disbursed out of the common
stock, St. Cyrill being at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, remembering the
prophecy of Daniel, and what our Savior had confirmed in his holy Gospel, and
told it to many, how that one stone should not be left upon another which
should not be thrown down; Dan. C. 9. Man. C. 24. Luke 19.
said presently, all what is here foretold shall come to pass: the Bishop said
it, and in one night there was such a terrible earthquake in Jerusalem, which
parted the very stones of the foundation, and so all the upper building fell
down, and with the fall ruined all the contiguous houses: and whereas many of
the Jews came to behold what was done, suddenly there came down fire from
heaven, and consumed all the Instruments and Tools of the workmen: So that
what St. Cyrill had said, did come to pass. Socrat. L. 3. C. 17, and 20.
Eccl^s. Hist.


Nicephorus says, that there was a Cross seen in the heaven of almost all the
Jews, by which this St. Cyrill did convert ma^y to believe on JESUS the
Savior of the world, Niceph. Lib. 9. C. 22. Eccles. Hist.
who dyed upon the Cross; and this St. Cyrill mentions in his Epistle to the
Emperor Constantius: and others affirm, that GOD did by this sign add
Confirmation to this worthy man, and gave efficacy to his Doctrine, So that
what he preached of Jesus which was crucified, was readily and chearefully
embraced.

Theodoret says, that Macarius being dead, and Maximus that followed him;
Theod. lib. 2. 27
Cyrillus alacris and promptus doctrinae Apostolicae propugnator in Episcopatus
gradulocatur, (id est) Cyrill the lively and prompt Champion of the
Apostolical Doctrine was placed in that preferment. Whereupon the Arrians
knowing, and indeed finding his undaunted spirit and courage; for the opposing
of all Heresies, and defense of Piety and Truth, (as Sozomen relates) raised
sundry Calumnies, Sozomen. li. 4. C. 25. Eccles. Hist.
and spread abroad diverse disgraceful reports of him, ins^much that they
thought to have possessed the Orthodox Bishops of these his scandalous acts,
and to have utterly eclipsed his glory: yet for all these projects and
pretenses, the Catholic Bishops, being 150, which held a Council at Seleucia,
would not any ways confirm or ratify his deposition (as Theodoret testifies)
nay, Theodor. lib. 2. C. 27.
they were so far from doing any thing against him, that they did resolve to
proceed against his chiefest adversary, who was called Acacius, and excluded
him from the Synod: and as Nicephorus who did write the Acts of the Seleucian
Synod, and of this Acacius and his Favorites says, they did not nor should
profess the faith Catholic, nor would they suffer any objections to be
brought in against this famous Cyril: nay, moreover, those that were invited to
the hearing the cause of Saint Cyrill decided, who had also determined his
deposition, were not only not there nor was there any who answered for them,
B^^on. Annal. Anno 359.
yet (as Baronius reports) St. Cyrill was driven from his place by the Arrians
in the Council of Constantinople.

Mark (says Nicephorus) the admired integrity of this Cyrill, Ni^^ph. l. 9. c.
43.
who appeared to defend his innocence notwithstanding all his enemies bravadoes
and menacings; nay, he was so far from being daunted, that he affrighted the
hearts of all his enemies, so that they durst not maintain their forged
accusations before so many famous and learned Judges: But when as they found
the Emperor infected with their heresy, then they grew potent and impudent,
and Cyrill being removed, Heraclius was brought in, and after him Hilarious,
(as Nicephorus maintains) for they two administered the affairs of that Church
until the reign of Theodosius, Niceph. l. 9. c. 49.
and then Cyrill was again restored, Niceph. l. 12. c. 16.
and how reverently and piously he determined all affairs belonging to that
place is easily seen.

And Epiphanius (who was the Hammer of Heretics) gives this Cyrill a worthy
Encomium, in these words, Qui praeter Acacium Arrianum, cum multis aliis illius
sectae Episcopis contendere religionis ergo non dubitavit, Epiph. lib. 3. Tom.
1. Haeres. 73.
that is, who not only not feared to encounter. Acacius the Arrian, but did
Christianly and faithfully oppose diverse other Heretical Bishops: nor is Saint
Jerome wanting to commend him: for Cyrillus (says he) F^rtissimus Christi
athleta, orthodoxae fidei Assertor constantissimus etc. That valiant Combatant
of Jesus Christ, that most constant Mayntainer of the Orthodoxe faith, for many
years together, strove for the propagation of Divine Truth, suffered various
and heavy persecutions, exercised in these dangers from the beginning almost of
Constantius Reign, to many years of Theodosius, Hieron. in Catalogo, script.
Eccles.
yet all this while, in these manifold grievances kept his first resolution,
and died in the faith at last. Thus he.

And says Nic^phorus, though the Arrians at that time by their flatteries,
policies and suggestions, had corrupted the mind of the Emperor, though the
Court was also all of that Sect, yet this Cyrill startled not; which was an
infallible demonstration that he preached not Christ out of vain glory, or in
hope of reward at Court, no^ yet that he was desirous to follow the times, but
that thee strove to keep the ^aith in a pure conscience, Niceph. lib. 12 c. 24.
as knowing that would be his recompense at last.

Cardinal Bellarmines testimony of him shall briefly conclude my discourse of
this laborious and constant Ambassador in the cause of Christ. Saint Cyrill
(says he) after he was made Bishop of Jerusalem, for his singular parts and
Learning, Bellar. de scrip. Eccles.
the state of the Church at that time requiring faithful Dispensers of Gods
Word: was often driven by the Arrians from preferment, yet did he hold the
faith till his death, which was under Theodosius the Emperor. Inscriptis
Sancti Cyrilli ante opus.
He preached every Sunday, and all the Lent every day with great pains, and
profit.

These are some of his Sayings.
Sanctus Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, Praefatio in Cat.
Be not curious in things of vanity, seek not to know what is done in the
City, what the King does at the Court, what the Bishop in his Consist^ry, what
the Priest in his Parish; it is high time to look into thy self, and then up
to Heaven from whence thy salvation comes.

Idem 16.
Some come to Church for fashion, others to meet their friends: this man upon
one pretense, that man upon another: yet its better to come so then not to come
at all: in the mean time the net is cast out, the Word being preached draws in
them which came with no intent to be caught at all; being thus taken they shall
be preserved, for it is Christ that has caught them, not that he may destroy
them, but that being dead, he may bring them to life eternal.

Idem Cat. 16.
Let every good Christian say thus within himself; certainly, now the mystery
of iniquity is wrought; the rumor of wars affrighten me; the Schisms and
divisions of the Church are ready to distract me; the difference amongst
brethren make me amazed; surely the end is not far off: Lord when thou come,
let me be prepared for it.

Idem Cat. 16.
What though thou suffer for Christ's sake? suppose that fire, and swords, racks
and torture, be now ready to seize thee, harken what the blessed Spirit of God
the Comforter says unto thee: Trust still in God, those are but flea-bitings;
continue but a while, and thou shall be in Heaven for evermore.

Here follow the Treatises of his which are called his Catechismes: by the
Paris Edition, Anno 1631.

1 An introductory to Baptism, and his Lecture out of Esaias, upon that,
Lavamini. 2 Of Repentance, and of remission of sin, of the adversary of man.
Lectures upon that of Ezechiel, Justitia justo. 3 Of Baptism, Lectures upon
that of the Romans, Know ye not, etc. 4 Lectures upon that of the Colossians,
Cavete ne quis vos, etc. 5 Of faith, out of that to the Hebrews. Chap. 11. 6
Of the sovereignty of God, of Heresies, and Lectures out of Esaias, upon that,
Turn unto me, ye Isles. 7 Of the Father. Upon the Ephesians, for this cause. 8
Lectures upon that of Jeremy, Deus magnus, and fortis. 9 Lectures upon Job,
upon that who is he? 10 Upon that, and in one Lord Jesus Christ. 11 Upon that,
the only begotten Son of God. Upon that of the Hebrews, Multis, and
multifariam. 12 Upon that, He was incarnate, and was made flesh. 13 Lectures
upon that He was crucified. 14 Lectures on Christ's Resurrection. 15 Lectures
upon that, He shall come again to judge the quick and dead. And of Antichrist
out of Daniel, Aspiciebam, and Throni, etc. 16 Lectures upon the Holy Ghost.
Upon the first of the Corinthians. 17 Lectures upon the holy Catholic Church,
the Resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Out of Ezechiel. And
the hand of the Lord was upon me.
1 Lectures to those who are newly baptized, out of that of Saint Peter, Be ye
sober and watchful, etc. 2 Lectures upon the body and blood of Christ, out of
that of the Corinths. What I have received of the Lord, etc. 3 Lectures upon
that of Saint Peter, Cast away, therefore, etc.
These were the pious and learned Works of this Father, which the Church has
always kept as a solid buckler against Heretics, and as a restorative to the
faithful members of our Lord Jesus Christ.

An. Christi, 368. Sanctus Ephraem Syrus.
S. EPHREM SYRVS.

IT is not fitting that such eminent Lights should be hid under a Bushel,
Gregor. Nyssenin vita Sancti Ephr.
but that their renowned and pious actions should be blazoned to the World for
admiration and imitation; the time in which he died in the Church, was under
Valentinian and Valens, He led a Monastic course of life, and was over the
Church of Edissa, as Trithemius reports in his book of Ecclesiastical
Writers: He was made Priest by Saint Basil the Great, borne he was of Christian
parents in the time of Constantine the Great, a Syrian he was by Nation: even
from his childhood abstemious, and shunned the appearance of evil: His parents
in a Vision saw a fruitful Vine branch spring forth of Ephraems mouth and they
saw it spread, Ex vetustis. Graecis. Manuscrip. Anony^is.
as it were, into most parts of the world, and though all the fowls of Heaven
came and eat of the fruit, yet still there remained a great quantity: this as
they verily judged, showed how his doctrine of the true Vine Jesus Christ
should be so copious and delicate, that all Nations in all ages, might out of
his Works gather nourishment, and yet there would be store enough for others
that should come after: and certain it is, that this man had admirable
endowments, whom all the worthy Fathers of the Church have so highly commended:
it will not, therefore seem false what here is recorded of this Father, if so
many worthy Writers may be credited: and it has always been the custom of
the Church, to celebrate the memory of pious and religious men; especially of
those who did as this Ephraem, optabat enim non videri, sed bonus esse: he did
not only desire to seem, but to be really good, whose mind was as a golden
Ring all enchased and decored with rich jewels: hear therefore what a man he
was, of whom Gregorius Nyssenus speaks thus, Gregor in vita. Sancti Ephr.
Celebrandus est mihi, igitur Ephraem ille, qui cunctis Christianis versantur
in ore, that is, That Ephraem the Syrian must be praised of me, who is well
known to all Christians in the World; neither is he ashamed of his Kindred,
whose Virtues are as a general light to all, whose life and doctrine have made
most men wonder at him, there are none but such as be ignorant of great Saint
Basil, but know him. And as the same Father speaks, the praises which he gives
this man, are not small, or such only as are worldly: neither does he speak
of his education or form of body, or comeliness of his person; but as he
witnesses they were, Idem ibid.
Actio and Contemplatio; Fides, Spes and Charitas, Pietas erga Deum, etc. that
is, Action and Contemplation, Faith, Hope and Charity, Piety toward God.
Meditation on the holy Scriptures, purity of mind and body, strict
Mortifications, privacie of life, diligence in prayer, often changing his place
by trials and hardness, a flying from evil, being instant in preaching, no
lodging but the cold earth, an incredible austeritie of life, poverty with
singular Humility, merciful in a manner beyond humane condition, opposing, and
indeed not enduring the Broachers of Heresies: in a word, furnished with all
the gracious endowments that should be in the man of God; how zealously did He
in His Writings by sundry places of Scripture, and several undeniable
arguments detest those furious and mischief working Heretics, as Sabellius,
Arrius, Apollinarius, Anomius, Novatus, and others: in so much that He was
styled the Pancratiastes, or the unconquered Soldier of Jesus Christ: Greg.
Nyssen. in vita S. Ephesians.
For his great love to God and his Neighbors, the words of his own will, do
sufficiently declare, which deserve to be engraven in Golden Characters; Nullo
modo in tota mea vita contra Deum contumeliosus extiti, nec sermo stultus e
labiis meis egressus est: Neminem in tota vita maledict is onerari; nec cum
ullo* Christiano homine contentiosum me praebus: that is, By no means in all my
life (says he) have I reproached God, or suffered foolish words to fly out
of my mouth, never did I burden any man with curses, nor did I ever show my
self contentious with any: so that it does plainly appear, what
circumspection he had over his ways: He was wondrous studious in the Word of
God; and made diverse very comfortable and learned Commentaries; and he was
wonderful eloquent to persuade men to embrace the Word of God; he kept his
body and mind chaste and pure; as does appear by repelling the shameless
behavior of a lewd woman, which being instigated by the Devil, thought to
have enticed him to lust: but this grave Father, what with his exhortations,
admonitions, and divine speeches, caught and overcame the Tempter; so that
she, which had been light of behavior by his fatherlike advise, proved a
grave, modest, religious Matron; He would very often weep for and bewail the
calamities of men, the loss of time, his inbred corruptions. He that reads
but that one Tract of his of Humility seriously; will (if endued with any
spark of grace) remove all pride and self-conceit, and will with that King,
and this Father confess, That he is a worm, and no man, corrupted with sin
and iniquity.

Indeed, Humility for her excellency should be the sister of true Nobility: for
God has more respect unto them that with humbleness of heart, can cast
themselves lowly before the presence of his Majesty. For as the lowliness of
heart, makes man highly in favor with God: even so meekness of words, makes
him to sink into the hearts of men; such was this our Ephraems condition of
humility.

Who shall read his book of Divine Love, whose heart will not be inflamed? For
the greatest argument of godly love is to love that which God wills and
commands: and contrariwise not to love that which God loves not: And the
true lover of God, (which is properly the charitable person) is under no rule;
but he is Lord above all inventions, all precepts, and all commandments, that
God has given to man: for love is not confined or limited within any bounds.

Who shall read his Tract of Chastity and Virginity, wherein it is praised, but
will study to keep his body and soul free from adultery and lust, and say as
Saint Paul did, that our bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost? For
Chastity is the beauty of man's life, consisting either in sincere Virginity,
or in faithful Matrimony: For chastity, purity of life, continency, or
refusing the corrupt pleasures of the flesh, and of this witty wicked world;
are precious in the ^ight of our Creator: and do possess such as keep their
bodies clean and undefiled; and in life and conversation refrain from evil.
And who is he that has any sense in him or faith, meditating his Divine
Sermons of the last judgment, and Christ's second coming; but will speedily
prepare himself to appear, and strive ever so to live as if he was presently
to give an account of his whole life, for our whole life is nothing else, but
as it were a glue, which in a man fasteneth the soul and body together, which
proceeds of the temperament of the Elements, whereof the body is made, which
if it be not violently melted before, through our own distemperance, or
loosed with the moisture of our own merits; or suddenly consumed with the love
or hate of God, wears away through age of the body, and so at length comes to
nothing: Life is of its own nature a grievous thing, most miserable and full
of innumerable cares: O life (says a wise man) how may a man get from thee
without Deaths help? thy evils be infinite, and yet no man is able either to
avoid, nor yet to abide them: And if any good thing happen to a man in his
life; he feels also therewith tribulation and sorrow, as sometime no other,
which makes our joys little, and our life deplorable.

For the manner of his life, it was solitary; for he would say, by this means,
Gregor. N^ss^n* in vit. Sancti Ephr.
Ex turbulentis hujus saeculi perturbationibus ac procellis liberari, etc. that
is, He was freed out of the turbulent turmoiles and storms of this World, that
he did sweetly enjoy his thoughts without distraction, that he was the more
fit for divine Contemplation and study. Yet he often removed, but it was
still to do some notable service for the Church of Christ. He went to the
City of Edissa, to visit the Churches, and to meet with some learned Father to
confer, but by the providence of God he met with an Harlot, who was impudent,
yet witty, this Ephraem presently turned his eyes away not willing to behold
her; but she the more earnestly looked him in the face to whom he spoke, Oh
woman, why do you so greedily gaze on me, to whom she readily replied, Ex te
viro ego sumi: I am come from your loins, why then do you cast your eyes upon
the earth, out of which you were taken, and neglect me? well he rejoiced that
GOD had sent him good counsel from the wicked.

But not staying here he went to Caesarea of Cappadocia, where he both heard
and saw that sweet Trumpet of Gods glory Saint Basil, whom he entirely
reverenced, here he desired of God to give him ability of utterance to preach
to the people, which God gave him abundantly, he did not any ways affect
praise, so his will runs: Nulla Ephraem cecineritis carmina, etc. that is, sing
no Verses in commendation of Ephraem, bury me not with any lofty Linnens or
Ointments, raise no Monuments or Tombs, for I am a sojourner and a stranger
here as all my Fathers were, Psalm. 39. He was wondrously merciful to the
poor, for though he had not of his own to give, yet by his sweet and
attractive Sermons, he stirred up the hearts of others to relieve them: he was
of so Angelick an Aspect, that his Dove-like simplicity, his compassion and
integrity was easily decyphered in his countenance: Gregorius Nyssenus
compares him with Abel, for offering sacrifice to God, Genesis 4.
which was his soul and body, as an acceptable sacrifice; to Enoch for his
constant walking with God: to Noah, for his never making shipwreck of Faith and
a good Conscience. To Abraham for leaving his own, and going forth by Gods
promises. To Isaac being willing to lay down his life for the Gospel. To
Iaakob for supplanting Esau, so he the Heretics: and for blessing the people
at his death. To Joseph for Chastity; and especially for distributing the pure
wheat of GODS Word wi^ely to the famishing souls: in many things to Moses for
striking the Rock, and bringing forth water from the flinty stone: so he by
the Rod of Gods Word did fetch tears from hard-hearted men; and brought many
to repentance. To Iosuah, for bringing many into the spiritual Canaan: to
Samuel, for devoting his youth to God. To Elias, for reproving false Teachers:
to Elizeus, for abundance of the spirit; to Saint John Baptist, for living in
the Wilderness; and teaching men to repent: To Saint Paul for his manifold
sufferings, and indeed it is hard to say, wherein he was defective: at the
time of his death he denied to have any cost bestowed upon him, but willed
them to give it to the poor. And a great man having prepared a rich Vestment
for him, said, That piety should be respected before poverty; and so did not
give it as Ephraem had willed him: but he was presently sorely visited, and
could not be released till this old man imposed his hands on him, and blessed
him, and then said to him, Greg. Nysse^. in vit.
Perfice, Homo, quae dudum promisisti, Perfect that which whilome, o Man, thou
did promise, and so he was restored to health: Well, this Father gave the
people comfortable directions at the time of his death, so that it was rather,
Transitus quam mors, a sleeping in the Lord, quietly and comfortably in
fullness of days, and was buried by the Monks that were his Disciples: I
could be tedious, if I should largely and particularly express the praises
that many Writers afford Him: Bas. in Hex. divin. opific. Hom. 2. Hieron. in
Cat. so^ip Eccles.
Basil the Great says of him, that distabat a mundana sapientia, He affected
not worldly wisdom; Saint Ier^me says, that He came to be of that fame, that
next to the Scriptures, his Works were publicly read: Theodor. Hist. Eccles*
l. 2. c. 30 Zozo. l. 3. c. 15
Theodoret styles him a most admirable man, an excellent Writer in his fourth
book, Chap. 29. Zozomen says of him, that about that time, there lived one
Ephraem Syrus, a man excelling others, and a singular ornament to the Catholic
Church; Hist. Trip. l. 5. c. 45.
the Tripartite History calls him a man admirable for knowledge and writing.

So also does Simeon Metaphrastes, Anastasius Synasta, Photius, Cedrenus,
Nicephorus, Trithemius and others, so as I have said. He flourished under
Constantine the Great, and died under Valens.

Ephraem Syrus his Sayings.
Of the excellency of Faith.
As the body is more worth then the raiment, so the soul more worth than the
body, Ephraem Syrus de side, p. 74.
and faith in Christ more excellent than all: get therefore that in thy soul
which may get him, who is the rich clothing both of soul and body.

Upon earnest, though late repentance.
Despise not an old man who desires to come to the haven; though he comes late,
Ephraem Syri senten. p. 214. Tom. 2.
yet he comes in time* God rejected not those that come at the eleventh hour,
thou know not but that he may have his penny as well as the first.

Of perseverance in Grace.
The resolute Traveller knows that his journey is long, and the way durty and
dangerous, yet goes on in hope to come home to his house: so let the Christian,
Ephraem Syrus de virtute, c^p. 4. Tom. 2.
though the way to Heaven be narrow and difficult, though it be set with
troubles and persecutions, yet let him go on till he has finished his course
with joy, for Heaven is his home.

Of the neglecting the Souls welfare.
He that feasts his body with banquets and delicate fare, Ephraem Syrus in
illud, attend tibi, c. 6. Tom. 2.
and starves his soul for want of spiritual food, is like him that feasts his
slave, and starves his own wife: therefore rejoice rather with thy wife and
keep under thy servant, and so all shall be safe.

Of coming to Christ.
Stay not away (o my soul) from him though thou be wounded, for he came to
heal; though thou be lost, for he came to seek: let not thy diseases
affright thee from the Physician; Ephraem Syrus in peccatorem and Pharisaeum p.
550. Tom. 2.
for he calls those that are sick and maimed: if thou dyest uncured, it is thy
own fault; his mercy and goodness is open freely to thee, as to Mary Magdalen,
and the penitent Thief.

His Works are contained in three Tomes, which contain matters of several
subjects, all full of Divinity printed at Antwerpe, 1619.

Bellarmine doubts of many of them, Trithem. descrip. Eccles. fol. 20.
Trithemius does thus record them.

1 Of the Holy Ghost, one book. 2 Of compunction of heart, one book. 3 Of
Contrition, one book. 4 Of Penitence, one book. 5 Of the strife of this World,
one book. 6 Of the Day of Judgment, one book. 7 Of the Resurrection, one book.
8 Of the blessedness of the Soul, one book 9 Of Thoughts, Homily, one. 10 Of
the difficulty of preaching, one book. 11 Of celebrating the mysteries, one
book. 12 Lamentations for the City of Edissa.
An. Christi 370. Sanctus Basilius Magnus.
S. BASILIVS.

THe life of this great St. Basil is of worth and rarity, that it is not only
fit for imitation, but also admiration; and therefore I have excerpted it partly
out of his own works, and partly out of those funeral Sermons which have
been made for him, by St. Gregory Nyssen, and Gregory Nazianzen, the one his
half brother, the other his most faithful and worthy friend, as also out of
St. Hierome, Amphalochirs Bishop of Iconium, and Helladius Bishop of Caesarea,
and successor to St. Basil: I also take some passages out of Metaphrastes,
Suidas, and Cardinal Baronius. A Writer says of this St. Basil, that he well
deserved the name of Great: for he was Magnus ingenio, Magnus Eloquio, Magnus
Sapientia, Magnus Sanctimonia, Magnus Divina gloriae propugnande,
propagandaeque Zelo, Magnus adversus Hareticos Constantia, Magnus dein omnibus
rebus and negotiis. (idest) He was great in Wit, great in Eloquence, great in
Wisdom, great in Sanctity, great in defending, great in propagating Gods
glory, great inconvincing Heriticks, and great in all his employments and
undertakings.

He was born in Helleno-Pont in the Island of Pontus, of Noble, Wealthy, and
Holy Parents: Birth.
his Fathers name was Basil, his Mothers Emilia; they had ten Children, whereof
the eldest was called Ma^rina, who dyed a Religions Virgin: such as the trees
were such were their fruit, for all their offspring are commended for piety
and holiness. His grandfather, and great grandfather endured heavy miseries
and afflictions for Christ's sake under the reign of the Emperor Galerius
Maxim^s, a sworn enemy to the Christians: in his time these kept close in
Deserts and Caves, and endured all hardness, as well for their lodging,
apparel, diet, as also expecting each moment when they should have been
apprehended, and at last suffered constant Martyrdom for Religion. So you see
this St. Basil proceeded from an holy and religious progeny, and what more is,
he was a grace even to them. He was of a rare wit, and grave judgment, sweetly
composed behavior, wondrously modest: he got learning first at Caesarea, then
at Constantinople, then he went to Athens. where he gained and held the love of
Gregory Nazianzen: Well, he was wholly bent to the study of Theology, and
therefore left Athens, and went into Egypt, to see and hear one Porphyrius
read Divinity; and here he stayed one whole year.

He was of an excellent constitution, but with much watching, praying, reading,
fasting, and spare diet: he did much wear down his strength. He left this
Porphyrius, and travailed to see Jerusalem. He converted his Master Eubulus to
the Faith of Christ, so that he travaild with him to Jerusalem, where lodging
at Antioch, at one Libanius his house, a great rich man: this Saint Basil
expounded to this Libanius some of Homers verses, wondrous difficult to be
understood, with such readiness and wit, that he even astonished this
Libanius, so that he made them a great banquet; but Eubulus and Basil feasted
with nothing but mere bread and water: and this St. Basil strived to have
won this Libanius from Idolatry to Christianity, but could not, so deep was
his wilfulness: but he gave admirable directions and instructions to the young
men concerning their behavior and deportment in their studies; and so took
leave of Libanius, and were wondrous kindly entertained of the Bishop of
Jerusalem, and were by him baptized.

Having ended this j^urney they returned to Antioch, where Meletius the Bishop
made this Basil a Deacon, and being ordered, he showed by his able parts what a
Prelate he in time would prove, for Antioch was filled with his fame, so that he
went to Caesarea a City of Palaestine, where Hermogenes the Bishop consecrated
him a Priest, who presently dying, all men's expectations were upon Basil to
have succeeded him, but Factions arising, one Eusebius a Catholic Christian,
but puffed up with envy and vainglory, succeeded Hermogenes, and this Eusebius
perceiving the admirable parts of Basil, and withal the peoples affection to
him, began to hate him, so that Basil retreated into Mataria, beyond the River
Iris, a solitary place of Pontus. Here he stayed some certain years with
Gregory Nazianzen, where they led such holy and godly lives, that they were
esteemed rather divine than mortal. St. Gregory in his 8. Epist. has lively
described his life with S. Basil. Here they were both driven to that exigency,
that if it had not bin for S. Basils mother Emilia, they had there perished.
Here St. Basil gained many scholars, and was famous as well for his Doctrine,
as his pious example: and in this place they had matter enough to exercise
their patience, not only from their poverty, but also from their adversaries:
for it happened that Musonius Bishop of NeoCaesarea dying, when there were
public meetings for the election of another Bishop, that might be worthy the
place, as St. Gregory Thaumaturgus was, they all pitched their thoughts upon
this Basil, which so gald the Heretics of that place, who knew his Doctrine
would overthrow theirs, and his life shame their doings, that they presently
with all the policy they could, raised slanders and opprobrious disgraces
against this man. But Basil like another Lamp had so enlightened all Pontus
with his virtues, that though Valens the Empeperour favored the Heretics, and
though they did waste the Eastern Churches, and daily accuse this Basil: nay
though this Basil was hated of Eusebius before, and seemed to be well content
with a solitary life: yet as if stayed up at this time by God, he reconciles
himself to Eusebius, who ever after highly loved and esteemed him: and being
departed this life, all men concluded that there was none so worthy of this
place as St. Basil: so by their choice, and by the advice of Gregory Nazianzen,
he yielded to their requests, and proved a worthy shepherd to that flock, as
well by truly feeding them, as by driving away all Heretics, which were as
Wolves to devour the Church.

But scarce was he settled in this Bishopric, but there arose a mighty famine
in this City: the rich and Merchants would not part with their provision, so
that there were miserable complaints made by the poor. St. Basil to mitigate
this grief, did whatsoever he could, for he sold all his Lands and other
goods, and freely distributed them to the poor, as well Jews Children as
Christians: the goodness of this man stayed not here, but as he had made
himself an example to all; so he frequented the public places, and there
exhorted the rich by several places of Scripture, and sweet speeches, Greg
Naz. in laud. S. Bas.
to distribute to the poors necessity; so that at last he got provision for
the needy. He was also as careful to see the sick provided for; and he caused
public places to be erected for their maintenance, and would often not only
visit them, but also administer to them. Some there were that hated him even
for these worthy deeds, but he left not off, but proceeded the more
courageously, because he was opposed; for virtue is always envyed, yet it
faints not.

Julian the Emperor having known him at Athens before sent and desired him to
write to him, but though he was Emperor, yet because of his Apostasy, this
Basil would not entertain any courtesies from him; whereupon this Apostata
intended when he had finished the Persian War, to have put this Basil and
Nazianzen to death; but he failed, for he dyed miserably in that war: nay,
when Valens the Emperor persecuted the Orthodox Christians, and had removed
some, and had put 80 Priests into one Vessel, thinking to have burned them in
the Sea; this Valens meeting St. Basil, spoke him fair, and afterward sent to
him by several messengers to win him to that Heresy, yet nor the threats
nor promises of this Emperor could once stir or move him. Then Modestus his
Prefect commanded him to be brought before him, which was performed, and Basil
being come, the Prefect looking sternly upon him, told him, he wondered that he
could stand before him so impudently: and art thou only he that opposest the
Emperor? to whom St. Basil answered, he wondered that he should so tax him of
Impudence, when as he was free; but he was bound to obey the King and Emperor
of heaven and earth: but says the Prefect, will you, nil you, you shall be
made to obey: for know you not who we are that command it? no body, said St.
Basil, while you do command such things: Know you not said the Prefect, that
we have honors and preferments to bestow upon you? but said St. Basil, they
are but changeable like your selves: then the Prefect said, none of the
Christians ever answered him so: perhaps said St. Basil, you never examined a
true Bishop before. Upon this the Prefect all in a rage, threatened to
confiscate his goods, to torment him, to banish him, or to kill him: to whom
St. Basil made this answer, he need not fear confiscation, who has nothing to
lose; nor banishment, to whom only Heaven is a Country: not torments, when his
body would be dashed with one blow: nor death, because it was the only way to
set him at liberty. Thus they parted, only St. Basil had that night given him
to resolve what he would do, but he was the same next morning. The Prefect
related all to the Emperor, how he lost his labor in examining this Basil,
whereupon the Emperor thought to have disturbed him, even in the performance
of holy duties in the Church upon a Twelfth-day; but suddenly coming in, and
seeing the Reverend carriage of the Bishop, and the Priests about him, all
seeming as glorious stars, he made a large offering; but Basil refused it, as
coming from an Heretic. The Emperor was so suddenly taken with a swimming
giddiness in his head, that he was feign to be upheld by the hands of his
Courtiers; and after speaking with this St. Basil, he was so mitigated, that he
was intended to have proved favorable to all the Orthodox Christians: but such
was the uncessant malice and policy of the Heretics, that they procured that
Valens banished this Great and famous Basil.

And now it was expected that the Emperors decree should be fulfilled, to the
grief of the people, and to the joy of the Heretics, his adversaries; but God
crossed this, for the same night the Physicians had laid the Emperors son
Galate down sick of a doubtful disease; whereupon the Empress told Valens,
this is a just revenge from God, inflicted for the banishment of St. Basil,
whereupon the Emperor called for him, and said to him; If thy prayers be
right and faithful, pray that my Son may live: to whom St. Basil replied; If
you would be of the same faith, your son would be well: his son did recover,
and Basil went home; but shortly after the Emperor caused the Heretics to pray
for his son; it was performed, but to the grief of the Emperor afterward,
for his son speedily dyed.

The Arrians insisted and urged that there was no hope of good success as long
as Basil stayed at Caesarea: whereupon it was decreed again to have him
banished^, but when the writing was brought to Valens, to confirm, the pens
would not write, being often tried, and the Emperor could not write, he was
so amazed and convinced in his own judgment, finding that God did protect
this Basil.

Many and great were the troubles and trials of this great Bishop, but he still
kept his faith and constancy, and never was moved by fear or favor, it was
not the frowns nor promises of great Ones that could taint Him, he desired
heavenly, not earthly contentments. So having been Bishop of Caesarea and
Cappadocia eight years, and an half, and some odd days, he departed this
life with these words, Into thy hands (O Lord) I commend my spirit: he was
buried with great state and lamenting, by all the Inhabitants of Caesarea, as
well Jews as Christians; but above all the Physician which Saint Basil
converted from Judaisme to Christianity, showed his depth of sorrow.

The Church of God is enriched with the rare labors of this father. Saint
Gregory Nazianzen writing of this Saint Basils works avers thus much of him,
Neminem ante ipsum adeo divine, adeoque secure sacr as liter as interpretatum:
That before this man, none ever did expound the sacred Scriptures more
divinely, or more safely: and the same Father calls him elsewhere nolesse
then, Vinculum pacis, Tubam Veritatis, Clarissimum Reipub. Greg. Naz. in laudem
S. Basil
Christianae oculum, virumque cujus doctrinae moribus, and doctrinae mores
recte concinuerint. The General Peacemaker, Truths Trumpet, the bright Eye of
the Christian World: and a man, whose life and learning did in all points
justly concentre.

Gregory Nyssen styles him thus, Prophetam and Sancti Spiritus Interpretem,
Greg. Nyss. in Orat. de Basil.
Generosum Christi Militem, Excellentem Veritatis Praeconem, Invictum
Catholicae fidei propugnatorem: that is, a Prophet, an Interpreter of the
blessed Spirit, a truly valiant So^idier of Christ; an excellent Preacher of
the Truth; an unconquered Defender of the Catholic Faith, and that for valor
and for strictness of Life, he was another Elias, or like Saint John Baptist.

Saint Ephrem says, S. Ephraem Orat. Panegyr.
that Saint Basil was so beloved of God, that he was kept in the midst of all
dangers, as an other Noah, and as Moses Aaron and Iosuah.

Symeon Metaphr astes names him, Praeclarissimam Ecclesiae facem,
splendidissimum purae Veritatis Solemn, qui suorum claritate radiorum omnes
orbis terrarum or as illustret: and also Excelsam Dei Columnam, Theologiae
I^bar, legitimum ipsius sapientiae filium. Consummatam Intelligentiae
perfectionem, Patris aeterni Legatum, Divini verbi Tubam, Donorum Spiritus
Sancti Dispensatorem fidelem: that is, The resplendent torch of the Catholic
Church, a bright Sun to the truth; by whose luster and brightness all the
parts of the world are enlightened, a main Pillar for the truth of God, a
bright beam of theology, the very son of Wisdom, the perfection of
Understanding, the Ambassador of the Eternal Father, the trumpet of Gods Word,
a faithful Steward and Dispensour of the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Thus do
these, and so have many others of the Primitive Fathers celebrated this Saint
Basills praise. Cardinal Bellarmine speaking of his Works, calls them no
otherwise then Basilii Magni opera praeclarissima, the most famous works of
Saint Basil the Great: Bell. de script. Eccles. p. 119.
he flourished under Valens, died under Gratianus, as Saint Hierome in his
Ecclesiastical Writers does testify.

Saint Basils Sayings.
To know thy self is a difficult consideration. For as the eye can see all
things but it self, so some can discern all faults except their own.

Divine Love is a never failing treasure: he that has it is rich, and he
that wants it is poor.

The love of God is an excellent ointment to cure the infirmities of the mind,
and clear the eyes of the understanding.

Basil. in Hexamero.
He that will^know true love, let him learn to love Christ, for Christ is
love.

Basil ibid.
Divine love is a never failing treasure, he that has it is rich; and he that
wants it, is poor.

Basil in hom.
What shall I do? shall I pull down my Barnes? Who does not pity his
unhappiness? He wants in abundance, and is troubled with too much wealth, and
is unhappy in his present prosperity: and as his field brought him a great
increase, so that increase did augment his care and trouble.

Basil in Hexameron.
There are three things which nourish Humility: daily subjection,
consideration of our own frailty, and the hope of reward.

Basil in Hom.
Every Hypocrite is like Simon carrying the Cross on his shoulders: they
afflict their bodies with corporal abstinence, and yet through the love of
glory they live to the World.

Basil ibid.
Three things do settle a wandering mind, watching, me ditation, and prayer,
the assiduity and fervencie whereof do establish and settle the soul.

He being asked why we should love those that speak ill of us: In Regu^ fall.
disp. q. 76.
answered, Because for their sakes it is, that we are blessed, according to
those words of Christ, Blessed are ye when men speak evil of you, Mat. 6.

He likewise being demanded of Eubulus the Philosopher, what was the definition
of Philosophy? answered, The meditation of death.

He being demanded again, Roswed. l. 1. p. 153.
Quis est mundus, made this answer; Ibid.
Qu^ est super mundum.

Saint Basil speaking of the joys of Heaven, says, of the sweet harmony that
is there, the sweet melody, the heavenly music they enjoy would ravish a
soul on earth, if it were but capable of it: nay, farther he goes; and says,
that it is sweeter than devotion; more sweet than contemplation, and far
sweeter than all things in this earthly Mansion.

Sanctus Basil* in Psalm* primum,
When he had read the Bible over, says, that it is a Physicians shop of
preservatives, against poisoned Heresies: A pattern of profitable Laws,
against rebellions spirits; a treasury of most costly jewels, against beggarly
rudiments; a foundation of most pure water springing up unto everlasting life:
The original thereof being from Heaven, not from Earth; the Author being God,
not man, the matter verity, piety; purity, uprightness. The form is Gods
Word, Gods testimony, Gods Oracles are effects, light of understanding,
repentance from dead works, newness of life, peace and holiness the end and
reward of the study.

The same Basil hearing of a Senator that had renounced the World, Ibid. l. 1.
and yet retained unto himself, some part of his means to live within a
Cloister, told him, that he had left to be a Senator that was not made a Monk.

I have here set down his Works as they are contained in four Tomes printed
at Basile, in the year of Grace, 1540.

Tome 1.
1 Homilies upon the work of the six days, being eleven in number. 2 Homilies
upon the Psalms. 17. 3 Homilies of several Arguments. 28.
Tome 2.
1 Of Virginity, two books. 2 Of Paradise, one book. 3 Against Eunomius three
books. 4 Against Sabellians and Arrians. 5 Of the Holy Ghost, one book. 6 Of
free will, one book. 7 Of Baptism, two books.
Tome 3.
1 Sermons, seven. 2 Of the judgment of God. 3 Of the Confession of Faith. 4
The sum of Morals, 80. 5 Questions largely explained. 6 Questions shortly
explained. 7 Monastical Constitutions.
Tome 4.
Epistles of Saint Basil, and Gregory the Divine, 180. 2 An Epistle to Chilo of
solitary life. 3 Other Epistles of the same. 4 An Oration against them who
calumniate those which say there is a Trinity.
Cardinal Bellarmine thinks as Saint Hierom, that there are but nine Homilies
of Saint Basils, the other two he supposes to be Gregory Nyssens: and so this
great Light went out, whose memory will ever be fresh and honorable among the
faithful.

An. Christi 390. The Life of S. Gregory Nazianzen
S. GREGORI NAZIANZEN

GRegory first Bishop of Sasima, a little City in Cappadocia, then of
Nazianzen in Cappadocia, and then of Constantinople; whom the Graecians for his
singular learning and authority, first after Saint John the Evangelist,
surnamed the Divine, was a living Library of Philosophy and Divinity, and the
most eloquent Orator of his Time, attayning to the high style of Polemon
Laodicenus a most famous Sophister. So that as men exceed beasts in the ability
of speech, so he excelled others in the faculty of Eloquence and sweetness
of speech; whereby he allured men's minds, inclined their wills and affections,
defended the poor and oppressed, comforted the afflicted, and got himself a
general fame and good opinion: using it also to the edification and
instruction of others in Divinity; For his eloquence was but the expression of
his divine contemplations and conceptions. Non enim tam nos ratio juvaret, nec
tam esset in nobis manifesta, nisi quae mente concepimus, proferre etiam
loquendo, possemus. Ipsa vitae praecepta, ets^ natura sunt honesta, tamen plus
ad formandas mentes valiant, quoties pulchritudinem rerum claritas orationis
illuminat. Reason would not be so helpful to us, nor so manifest in us,
unless we could by speech express our conceits. Even moral precepts of
life, although naturally honest, yet are more powerful to fashion minds, when
cleernesse of speech does illuminate their beauty. And in this faculty this
famous holy Saint was most powerful; so that it may be said. Veram animae
illius pulchritudinem in oratione ^lucere, hanc illius comitem ac ministram.
The true beauty of his soul did shine forth in his eloquence, Rhetoric being
both his companion and servant.

And to the higher increase of his glory, he was a familiar friend to Basil
the Great, and St. Hierome was his Scholar for Divinity, moreover he was of so
great authority and estimation in the Grecian Church, that whosoever durst
oppress his testimony was accounted and suspected for an Heretic, and
generally he was a man of so great learning, integrity and eloquence, that his
Adversaries durst not contradict his assertions, so that Gregory's (...), or
affirmation was a confirmation and authority to prove any point of Divinity.
He loved and adored solitude and the Monasticke Life, and when for his
excellent Learning and sanctity of life, he should have been made a Bishop,
he retired himself into obscurity, desiring rather to lead a poor religious
life, than to be advanced to popular Honor. But Omnipotent God would not have
so clear a Light of Religion, which might illuminate many souls, hidden under
the bushel of a Monastic life. Being therefore by divine providence discovered
and found out, he was by the people made a Bishop, and afterward to excuse his
former flying and retiring, a solemn (...) was composed, i^ qua ars artium
animarum regimen ostenditur, showing that the government of souls, is the Art
of all Arts. For his great Learning and sanctity of Life, he was called Gregory
the Great, before Pope Gregory was so styled. At the last growing old, and
incapable of Episcopal Government, having constituted another Bishop in his
place, he returned to his former solitude and Monastic Life.

He lived in the Reign of the Emperor Theodosius, Anno 390.

Gregory Nazianzen his Sayings.
We should walk in the middle way between fearfullnesse and rashness, Gr.
Na^. in apo.
that we may be more modest then they are, who ambitiously aspire to
undese^ved honor, and more confident then such as decline all good actions for
fear of being censured.

In a great multitude of people of several ages and conditions who are like a
Harp consisting of many strings, Greg. Naz. in apol.
it is hard to give every one such a touch in words and preaching, that they
may all be pleased, and none offended.

A spark of envy will sooner inflame the mind, Greg. Naz. in apol.
than the flames of virtue can warm the affection. For a little Wormwood
being cast into a great deal of Honey presently makes it bitter, but twice as
much Honey mingled with Wormwood will not make it sweet.

Better is that spiritual warfare which does make one drawn ere to God* Greg.
Naz. in apol.
then that peace, which does separate from God.

The Art of Arts and Discipline of Disciplines is government in a man, Greg.
Naz. in apol.
who is of all creatures most various in manners and diverse in will.

The chief wisdom is a laudable life and a pure mind before God, Greg. Naz.
in apol.
whereby the pure are joined to him that is pure, and the holy to him that is
holy.

He that for a virtuous course of life begun desires to be praised, Greg. lib.
8.
he eats the fruit of his tree before it is ripe.

Thus Gregory Nazianzen used to say, that God required but three things of
every man that should be saved: First, faith and confidence in God. For Faith
is the gift of God, and breathed by the Spirit of God, into the hearts of those
that be the children of God. And through a lively, quick, and fruitful faith,
we have our first entrance unto God: but the faith that is without good works
is not a lively, but a dead faith* and therefore now not to be called faith, no
more than a dead man is to be called a man.

Secondly, continence in his tongue. For the tongue is a slippery and nimble
instrument, whereby commonly the treasures of the heart are in such wise
unlocked, and laid forth, and spread abroad, that not only thereby friendship
is greatly engendered, earthly treasures increased, the life quietly stablished,
perpetual praise and everlasting felicity obtained, but contrariwise
friendship is decayed, worldly riches are diminished, the life most miserably
wasted, infamy and immortal pain is thereby purchased. The tongue if it be
well used, is the most precious member of a man; but otherwise the most
detestable, pernicious evil, and full of pestiferous poison: And it is most
plain, that the heart within is very filthy, and foully defiled and corrupted,
whenever the tongue is wickedly ^ent, and utterly unclean, by filthy and
wicked speeches.

Thirdly, Chastity in his body. For Chastity is the beauty and glory of a man:
a chaste heart, (which is only seen and approved of God) is most precious and
blessed in his sight; and therefore deserves of all men, so far forth to be
well judged or else condemned, as the words uttered from the mouth, the manner
of outward gesture, the usage in eating and drinking, and the order of
apparel, seems to be honest, modest, temperate, and seemly: And Chastity
without Charity is a Lamp without Oil; take the Oil away and the Lamp
gives no light: take away Charity, then Chastity pleases not at all.
Therefore that man whose mind is wholly dedicated to the use of virtue and
chastity of life, and despises the vanities of this life; most certainly
prevails and obtains salvation in the end.

He composed Works in prose and verse, containing 30000 Verses, as namely
annotations on the first Chapter of Ezechiel, and a Sermon on the contention of
the Maccabees, also on the Pharisees question concerning Divorce. One Homily
beginning, Jesus qui piscatores: and on the passion and death of Christ out of
the four Evangelists A Tragedy ent^tuled (...), Or Christ suffering. He writ
also in favor of the younger Christians, prohibi^ed by Julian the Apostate to
study any Grecian Arts, besides many other divine Poems, that young men
learning them instead of the Greek Poets, might attain the knowledge of the
Greek Tongue, and of versifying.

An. Christi 370. Sanctus Epiphanius
S. EPIPHANIVS.

THere were many of this Name, and therefore it will be convenient and
profitable to the Reader to know them, that thereby this famous Father may be
distinguished from the rest, and nothing attributed to him, but what does truly
belong to him. There was one that was called Epiphanius Scholasticus, because
he translated the Tripartite History of the Church out of Greek into Latin: as
Cassiodorus testifies, there was a second that was Bishop of Selybria,
otherwise called Olybria, which writ an oration against the burners of Images,
Possev. Appar. sac. page 509.
(as Possevinus says) another was called Vlpianus a Sophister, as Suidas
reports. A fourth of this name there was, who in the acts of the second Nicen
Council, affirmed that Eusebius of Cesarea, had in his Commentaries on the
Psalms spoken some things of the inequality of the Father, and the Son,
which did relish of Arrianisme, and specially upon those words of Psalm the
foureteenth, Dixi Domino, Deus men's es Tu: I have said unto the Lord, Thou art
my God. The fifth of this name was this reverend Father, whose Life and Actions
I now describe, who was Bishop of (...) in Cyprus, whom St. Hierome and other
famous Historians have largely and highly commended.

Read his Life therefore with a care, and purpose to imitate his piety and
virtues: He was borne in a Town of Phoenicia, not far from the City which
takes her name from Eleutherius: borne he was of poor and obscure Parents, and
his father died when he was young, and so he was le^t with his mother and his
sister Callitr^pe to be brought up: but they having but short means were not
able to nourish him, and themselves, had not Tryphon took compassion on them,
who adopted this Epiphanius for his own son, and did likewise allow a
sufficiency of provision to his mother, and sister during their lives.
Therefore says a wise man give unto the good, and he will requi^e thee
again, or lend it unto others; but give to the evil disposed, and he will
beg and crave more; neither have compassion on the needy: for he that may
give, and gives not, is utterly an enemy: And he that promises forthwith, and
is long ere he do it, is but a suspicious friend^ what need words to our
friends, when we may succor them with works of our Alms* It is not right that
we render those who are in necessity only our tongue, which is the worst
thing without; of whom we receive the Heart, which is the best thing within:
Nor yet when thou have bestowed thy Charity, boast not of thy good deeds, least
thine evil be also called to remembrance, and laid to thy charge: But remember
this, that a virtuous and charitable Hand is not bound to make the Tongue a
fool.

Now I cannot but praise God who has raised many a famous instrument for the
good of his Church, out of poor and mean families: He takes the poor from
the Dung hill, Psalm. 113.
to set him with the princes of his people, says that Princely Prophet; and
here poverty is not to be despised or ^lighted, nor men to be disparaged by the
means of their families. A man were better live poorly, being assured of the
bliss of heaven, than to be in doubt thereof, possessing all worldly riches:
For no man is poor, but he that thinks himself poor.

This Triphon was a Ie^, well instructed in the Law of Moses, who as most
thought, took this Epiphanius unto him, to marry him to his only daughter; so
this Ep^phanius did live with this Triphon, and grew in years, and obtained an
excellent knowledge in the Hebrew: thus it pleases God to make room for those
whom He intends to advance. Well, God so disposing all things, this Triphon and
his daughter both dyed, and this Epiphanius was left with their whole estate,
which was very large, by Triphons only appointment. Enjoying this fair
estate, with the affluence of all contentment (his Mother also being dead) he
took his sister into his house, and lived wondrous pleasantly. It so fell out
that on a time this Epiphanius going to the Town in which he was borne, by
chance there met him a Man, a Christian by Religion, whose name was Lucianus,
famous for his Learning and Virtue. God does use to dispose of Times and
Persons: It was well for Epiphanius that God lent him this fair occasion to
embrace Christianity. This Lucianus led a Monastic life* strict and holy the
professors of it were in those times, and followed it only, that they might
the more sweetly and quietly addict themselves to prayer, meditation, and
reading* neither was it less commodious for writing, and to shun the snares
and tentations of the World; to subjugate the flesh to the spirit, and to
mortify sinful lusts and affections; so being by this man instructed in
Christianity, he was, together with his sister, baptized into the Faith of
Christ Jesus, by the Bishop of that place: and so having disposed all his goods
to the poor, he with Lucianus embraced a Monastic course of ife. This
Lucianus put him to Hilarion to learn, whose Manners and Learning Epiphanius so
imitated, that he made the virtues of so great a Master more conspicuous: He
increased wonderfully in Learning daily; so that people began from all parts to
resort to him; so that his Fame being grown to such an height, he could not
enjoy that privacy in that course of Life which he desired. Upon this, he made
a departure into Egypt, where he also was highly esteemed for his rare gifts
and endowments: From hence, after some time he returned to his own place; where
being come, and knowing that Hilarion was sailed to Cyprus, having a great
desire to see him, Epiphanius sailed to Paphos, and at the first meeting with
Hilarion was almost overcome with joy: presently Hilarion appointed him to go
to Salamine; and so it fell out, that that Church at the same instant being void
and destitute of a Pastor, the faithful Christians by prayers having entreated
God that they might have one that was faithful: instantly Epiphanius presented
himself in that place, and by the prediction of Pappus Bishop of Cytria, an
holyman of life, and specially God disposing it so, Epiphanius was appointed
the man, who modestly at first refused this imposed dignity; but afterward was
made Bishop of that See, in which he so lived, Poss^^. App^r. sacr. p 510.
that as one says well of him, vitam Doctrina, Doctrinam vita Comprobaret,
that his Doctrine approved his Life, and his Life defended his Doctrine: he
was, as the same Writer speaks, semper Haereticor^m acerrim^s oppugnator:
always a sharp opposer of Heretics, witness that admirable and painful
work of his, called his Pammachion. He quite stopped the blasphemous mouth of
Aetius the Valentinian Bishop, and did reduce all of that sect to the Orthodox
faith; no easy piece of work to bring those to embrace the truth, who for the
most part are filled with the spirit of Contradiction, and Contumacy: He purged
all Cyprus, defiled and slurried with this and other Heresies; and having
gained an Edict from the Emperor Theodosius, he cast out all the Heretics out
of the Island: Well, He was a great Engine in promoting the Christians cause*
and as some do report of him, he was famous for some Miracles: At length it so
fell out, that Eudoxia the Empress deeply hating John Chrysostom, this
Epiphanius was by her called to Constantinople: where being come, he was laid
at by all the fair baits that could be, to stand against this famous
Chrysostom, and to consent to his deposition; but all their slights could
never move him from his integrity, and love to that worthy Father: So he
departs from the Emperors Court, and entered into a Ship to have returned to
Cyprus, and made a famous speech to his fellows, in which he did by all
persuasions that could be, stir up their Spirits to Innocence of Life, and
Constancy in the Christian Faith: For, said He, GOD would call him from this
labor here, and settle him in glory in Heaven; and so after fervent prayers,
he embraced them sweetly; much like as St. Paul did the Ephesians, Acts. 20.
and uttered these words, Salvi estote filii, Epiphanius enim non vos amplius
videbit in hac vita, that is, God bless you my Children, for Epiphanius shall
see your faces no more in this life; and so it came to pass, for he did
depart this Life shortly after, being aged an hundred and fifteen years, and
three months: for a little before he went into the Ship, Arcadius asking him
of his age, Possev. Appar. Sacr. p. 541.
he answered, Sexagesimo aetatis anno ad Episcopatum promo^um esse, in eo autem
per quinquaginta quinque annos and tres menses vixisse: that is, that he was
promoted to the Bishopric when he was sixty years old, and he lived in it
fifty five years and three Months. The Ship that he dyed in arriving at
Salamine, and it being told abroad of the Bishops death, all good men lamented
his loss, and so he was buried with great lamentation, and abundance of
tears. Manifold are the commendations that the Fathers have afforded to this
Epiphanius. Hierom. in lib. de scrip. Eccl.
St. Hierome says, Epiphanius Cypri Salaminae Episcopus scripsit adversus
omnes haereses libros, etc. and in extrema senectute varia cudit opera; that
is, Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, Writ Books against all Heresies;
and in his extreme old age set forth many works: Apol. secund^ Cont. Ruffi^.
the same Father says, non tibi sufficit contra omnes detractio, nisi
specialiter contra beatum and insignem Ecclesiae Sacerdotem styli tui Lanceam
Dirigas, that is, Can it not suffice thee to have slandred all men, but thou
must needs direct thy Lance against that blessed and ever famous Father of the
Church Epiphanius? Aug. lib. de Her. ad quod vult Deus.
Saint Augustine speaks of him, Epiphanius inter-Graecos magnos habitus, et a
multis in Catholicae fidei sanitate laudatus, that is, Epiphanius was accounted
amongst those great Greek Fathers, and is praised of many that are of the
Orthodox Faith. (...). That is, about this time E^iphanius flourished, not
only famous for his Life, but also for his singular parts of Learning. So
Photius speaks of him likewise, Zozom. lib. 6. cap. 26.
in confuting all Heresies he excelled, so that he styles him for this (...):
That is, the most Copious and Commodious: So, ex Menologio Graecorum: (...),
That great and admirable Epiphanius. Photii bibl. N. 124.
See you may what a worthy Man this was, by that Epistle which Acacius and
Pau^us writ to him in the times of Valentinian, Valens, and Gratianus: It
begins,

(...).

To our most Honored Lord, and in all things to our most religious Father,
Epiphani^s Bishop.

Epiphanius his saying.
This Epiphanius used to say, that he never let his adversary sleep: By which
he meant, not that he took any delight in disturbing of him when he was a
sleep: but that without agreeing with his adversary, as the Scripture speaks;
Agree with thy adversary: and let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath; for
without forgiving of him, he would never let him go to bed.

Wrath and revenge (says a Philosopher) is a vice most ugly, and furthest from
all humanity: for who beholding a man by fury changed into a horrible figure,
his face enforced with rancour, his mouth foul and embossed, his eyes wide,
staring and sparkling like fire; not speaking, but as a wild Bull roaring, and
braying out despightfull and venomous words, forgetting his estate and
condition, if he be learned, yea, and forgetting all reason; who, I say, will
not have such a passion in extreme detestation? For wrath and revenge takes
from man the mercy of God; and destroys and quenches the grace that God has
given him: And he that is inclined to his own passion and will, more than to
forgive and show mercy, is near unto the wrath of God.

I have here annexed the Works of this great light of the Church.

1 His Panacion against all Heresies, being in number at that time fourscore.
2 A Book entitled his Anchorite. 3 The sum of his Books against Heresies. 4
Of Measures and Weights. 5 Of the life of the Prophets a short History. 6 An
Epistle to John, Bishop of Jerusalem. 7 An answer to Acacius and Paulus
Epistle.
Of all these there is no doubt to be made: this Epiphanius is said to have
written the life of Hilarion, but it is not extant. In the Epistle to the
Bishop of Jerusalem there seems something to be added: who desires to know
this, let him read Bellarmines Controversies, li. 2. de Sanctis cap. 9.

These, though they seem to be but few, yet considering their worth and
nature, they are of all men of learning and judgment, held to be rare and
admirable for use in all ages. He flourished in the reigns of Valens,
Gratianus, and Theodosius, as St. Hierome witnesses, until the fourteenth of
the said Emperors reign.

An. Christi 374. Sanctus Ambrosius.
S. AMBROSIVS.

PAulinus at the request of Saint Augustine did write the life and passages of
Saint Ambrose: Vide Palin. in vit. S. Ambros.
in his prologue or entrance into it, he uses these words, Hortaris
venerabilis pater Augustine, etc. that is, you desire most Reverend Father,
Saint Augustine, that as Athanasius and Saint Hierome did write the lives of
Paulus and Antonius driven into the Wilderness, so that likewise I would
describe in my style and phrase the life of this most blessed Father Saint
Ambrose Bishop of Millain; but I am unable fully and completely to express the
merits of these eminent men, who were Ecclesiarum muri, Eloquentiae fontes,
that is, the Walls and Bulwarks of the Churches, and the fountains and
springs of Eloquence, but I have collected this Life from Paulinus, rather then
from any other, because he was a present Witness of most, and had
instructions from Marcellina, sister to Saint Ambrose.

His Father was made Prefect, to administer the affairs of France: when his
son was born there appeared a swarm of Bees, Paul^n. in vita ut sup.
as he lay in his Cradle, who sat upon his mouth and covered his face all
over; Card. Baro. in v^t. Am.
and at last flew so high into the air, that they could not be seen: which
wondrous thing, his Father, with his Mother and Daughter beheld, and commanded
the Nurse not to drive them away, and presently spoke these words, Si vixerit
infantuli^s iste, aliquid magni erit: that is, if this infant live, he will be
some great man. Which thing was truly fulfilled in his mellifluous Writings:
afterward he came to Rome, his Father being dead, being accompanied with his
Mother and his sister, and another Virgin, who had a sister called Candida,
where this young man gained wonderful knowledge in the liberal Arts, and was
not (which is a thing too common with young beautiful personages) infected
with the sins of that populous City, but did wholly apply himself to his
study, and in short time by his excellent wit and memory (the great helps to
Learning) he was eminent for his parts, so that he publicly professing and
handling matters, was taken notice of by Probus then a Praetor, and was
approved of for ability of Counsel and Judgment: so that this Probus adjudg'd
him a fit man to govern the affairs (being, Baron. Annal. Tom. 4. p. 225.
as Baronius testifies) cruditione praeclarum, eloquentiae studiis egregie
excultum, optimisque compositum moribus, that is, famous for his Learning,
excellently accomplished for eloquence, and of worthy carriage and sweet
behavior; so that he made him Ruler of Insubria, Liguria, and Emilia; and so
this Ambrose came to Millain; to whom as he departed, Probus uttered (as it
proved prophetically) these words, Vade, age non solum ut Iudex, Card. Baro.
Tom. 4 p. 22^.
sedut Episcopus, that is, go and manage the affairs, not only as a Judge,
but as a Bishop, which came to pass five years after: Auxentius the Arrian
Bishop being dead, who governed the Church of Millain, Dionysius the Confessor
of blessed memory being banished, and the people being divided and almost ready
to rise, and mutiny about the election of a Bishop; this Ambrose to stop the
fury of the peoples rage, and to hinder the Arrian faction, undertook to decide
the matter: but of a sudden there was a voice as it were of a Child heard to
sound these words, Ambrosium Episcopum, that is, Ambrose the Bishop, and so
both parties, as well the Orthodox Christians, as the Arrians cried out
publicly with one consent the same words; but he was offended at this, and
going out of the Church caused a tribunal to be erected, and some persons to
be punished: but they cried out; let his sin be upon us: and knowing him to
be a Catechumenist, they did promise remission of his sins by the virtue of
baptism: well he gave himself to study Philosophy showing indeed what a wise
man he would prove in the Church of God; nay to divert the peoples intention he
gave admittance to common women to resort unto him; but seeing that would not
take effect, he intended to fly and leave the place, so in the middle of the
night he intended to have gone to Ticinum, but he was discovered at the Gate
of the City of Millaine called Romana; so that God seemed to hinder his flight:
so being kept by the people; word was sent to the Emperor Valentinian how
Ambrose who was their Judge, was of all men desired to be their Bishop: which
gladded the good Emperor: and especially rejoiced Probus, who heard that his
words were come to pass; but Ambrose again prepares to escape, and hides
himself in a great man's house called Leontius; but the matter being concluded
by the Emperor, and the peoples desires satisfied, Leontius who had formerly
hid, now brings him forth, well finding no hopes any longer to resist: he was
brought to Millain, and desired to be baptized by none but a Catholic Bishop;
Cavebat enim solicit perfidiam Arrianorum: that is, for he did solicitously
beware of, and shun the treachery of the Arrians: being baptized, he fulfilled
all Episcopal Functions, and was eight days after his Baptism, to the great
content of all, named and ordained Bishop: a few years after his Ordination,
He goes to Rome, where he finds his sister, and the other Virgin; but his
Mother was dead: He going over the River Tyber, to a rich Woman's House, healed
one of the Palsy; which was published and known abroad, only by touching his
Garment, which she presently devoutly kissed and was restored. Such power has
God given to godly men, from time to time.
Coming to Syrmium, to ordain Anemius Bishop, he was opposed by Iustina a
Queen, who would have not him, but the Arrians to do it: well he proceeded to
it, where an impudent Maid boldly putting on the priests habit, came boldly and
sat by Saint Ambrose, to whom he spoke, that though he was unworthy of such
an Office himself, yet she nor any of her Sex were to be admitted into the
Office of Priesthood, and told her, she had need to fear some heavy
judgment, which fell out; for the day following she died: having performed
this, he returned to Millain. But Iustina prosecuted him with all her power and
malice, for she set the people against him, and promised them places of
eminence and great rewards, if they would take him and send him to banishment:
Amongst the rest one Euthymius thought to have performed it; but failed; for it
is in vain to dispossess those whom God has placed: but Iustina's malice
ceased not, but she intended to act that by force, which she could not by
policy: For the Arrians by her counsel beset the Church called Portiana, and
would not suffer any Catholics to enter: but God stirred up holy men to put by
this plot also: at this time there were Anthems, and Hymns, and Vigils kept in
the Church of Millaine, and so have continued in the Western Churches to this
day; but the Arrians informed Iustina, that Ambrose should give men money to
give of that she was troubled with ill spirits, Paul. in vit. S. Amb.
but that lie was disclosed, and one of the Arrians was presently possessed of
an ill spirit, and was forced to cry, That so let all those be tormented, which
would deny Martirs, or the unity of the Trinity, or the Trinity which Saint
Ambrose maintained; but the Arrians took him and drowned him in a fishpond,
adding murder to their treachery; but in spite of all these adversaries St.
Ambrose every day grew more famous then other; retaining his Integrity and
Humility; at the same time, as Paulinus has it, there was a man who was a
great Disputant and an Arrian, and would not yield to the truth, being in the
Church, where this Saint Ambrose preached, saw an Angel stand by his ear, as
it were speaking to Ambrose, what he taught the people; at which sight he
presently altered his mind, and was converted to the faith; there were
likewise two Bedfellows who were Arrians, and they intended to propose a
question to Saint Ambrose; and so coming to the Church with a great Company,
the question was of Christ's Incarnation: these swelling with pride, and
forgetting the power of God, or his Judgments upon scorners, both in their
coming fell down suddenly dead; which when Saint Ambrose heard, he presently
made an admirable Sermon to confirm the Incarnation of Christ; Ambrosii Tom.
4. Epist. 56. ad Valen. Imp. Tom. 5.
as it is to be read in his Works: and in his Epistle sent to Valentinian the
younger; Iustina being dead, there was a certain Witch called Innocentius, who
being punished for his Villainies and Witchcraft, confessed more then he was
asked, and said, there was an Angel to inflict greater punishments upon him
then those, because of Saint Ambrose, for he had sent Devils to kill Saint
Ambrose, but they found him hedged by God, as Job was; so another came to his
bedside with a sword to have killed him, but could not stir his hands; and he
confessed that Iustina had hired him before her death; so being sorry and
repenting his intent, he was by prayers restored to the use of his hands. This
Saint Ambrose freed a boy possessed with a Devil, which left him as soon as
he came near Millain; the Conjurers demanding of the Devil why he left him; he
replied, se timuisse Ambrosium, that he feared Ambrose: he was sent by Probus
the Praetor.

Maximus being dead, and Theodosius residing at Millaine, Saint Ambrose being
placed at Aquileia; it so fell out that there was a Synagogue of the Jews, and
a Grove of the Valentinians burnt by the Christians; in so much that both these
began to insult over the Orthodox Christians; these Valentinian Heretics
worshipped thirty gods: whereupon the Governor of the place sent word to the
Emperor what was done, and the Emperor commanded the Synagogue to be
rebuilded by the Catholic Bishop of that place; and revenge to be executed on
the Agents; which when Saint Ambrose heard, he presently sent an Epistle to
persuade the Emperor to revoke his act: Epist. 17. ad Theodos. Imp.
and sent word that he was ready to die, rather then fulfill it: So when he
came to Millaine, the Emperor being at Church, he treated of this in the
presence of all the people, and spoke to the Emperor divinely and courageously
in these words. Ego te ex ultimo Imperatorem feci, etc. that is, I have at last
made you an Emperor: I have delivered your enemies into your hands; I have
subdued those that rose against you; I have confirmed you in the Empire; and
have made you triumph without your help or power, and now will you triumph
against God, who has done all this for you? To whom when Sermon was done, the
Emperor replied, Oh, Bishop, you have this day spoken against us: but this
Ambrose did answer, I have, oh Emperor, spoken for you; and he did persuade
him so divinely, that the Emperor did revoke his former Decree; nay, the
Bishop was so careful to maintain Gods honor, that he would not go to the
Altar, until the Emperor gave him his faith for it: A worthy Champion and fit
for such a place. This you may see in his Letter to his sister Marcellina:
Epist. ad Marcell. soror. 18.
nay, that miserable destruction and slaughter made in Thessalonica, by the
Emperors consent, Saint Ambrose hearing, denied him entrance into the Church,
until he had done public acknowledgment: to whom the Emperor said: David
the King did commit murder and adultery; to whom the Bishop, Quem secutus es
errantem, sequere corrigentem, that is, as you have followed him in his fall,
so follow him in his repentance: Epist. 59. ad Theodos. Imp.
to which the mild Emperor did agree, and submit.

The fame of Saint Ambrose his wisdom was spread far and near: so that two
mighty and wise men of Persia hearing his fame, addressed themselves for
Millaine, and furnished themselves with many questions, to ask him to try his
wisdom; so they came and staid disputing with him by an Interpreter, from the
first hour of the day, until three of the clock at night; and wondering at
his wit and wisdom, departed, and taking their leave of the Emperor went to
Rome to see Probus, and so went home.

But now Theodosius leaving Italy, and going for Constantinople, and
Valentinian being appointed Augustus for all Gaul, there was a direct order
under the name of the Senate, by one Symmachus for the restoring of the Altar
of victory, and for the charges of the Ceremonies: but St. Ambrose finding the
plot, Epist. 11. and 12.
writ to the Emperor and so wrought, that Symmachus was not able to effect his
desires: but when Valentinianus was dead at Vienna, then Eugenius undertook
the Empire, and Flavianus the Prefect with Argobastes, desired to have the said
Altar restored: which when Eugenius granted, Ambrose hearing this departed from
Millaine, came to Bononia, and so to Faventia, where staying a while, The
Florentines entreated him to go to Thuscia, which he yielded not, desiring to
see the face of that sacrilegious person; and presently sent him a Divine
Letter, as you may read in his Works; while he stayed in Florence, there was
one Decens in whose house St. Ambrose abode, Epist. 15. ad Eugeni.
who had a son called Pansophius, who was possessed with an ill spirit, but by the
prayers of S. Ambrose and the imposition of his hands he was restored: He built
there a great Church, Vide Hort. ad Vir. Tom. 4.
and therein laid the relikes of Vitalis and Agricola, whose Corpse were found
in the City Bononia, for they were promiscuously buried amongst the Jews.

Argobastes the Commander at the same time prepared for War, and having
raised a main Army, overthrew the Adversaries: being in banquet with the Kings
of that people; they asked him whether he knew Saint Ambrose, to whom
Argobastes replied, he knew him very well, and loved him deerly, to whom they
replied: Ideo vincis, quia ab Ambrosio diligeris, qui dicit soli, sta, and
stat, Therefore thou overcommest, because thou art beloved of Ambrose, who
says to the Sun stand, and it stands.

Saint Ambrose leaving Tuscia, returned to Millaine, when as Eugenius went to
war against Theodosius, Flavianus, and Argobastes going likewise said, That
when they returned conquerors, they would make the great Church in Millaine a
stable for their Horses; and try the Priests by force of arms: but they
failed: for Eugenius fell by his own soldiers, and Theodosius got the
victory; which when Ambrose heard, he rejoiced, and sent his Deacon with
Letters to the Emperor, to pardon those that were Agents and involved in that
war; and then sent John a Tribune, afterward Praetor, to persuade the
Emperor to spare those that had fled to Churches: nay, he himself came to
Aquileia, and prayed for them, whose petition the mild Emperor easily granted,
and falling at his feet, confessed, he was preserved by his prayers, and
afterward went to Church, and gave his three sons into the Bishops hands, and
died not long after: About which time the corpse of Nazarius the Martyr, was
found in a Garden not corrupted, nor his hair on his head fallen, but the corpse
was redolent, and so were buried in the great Church at Millaine, Ambr. sermon.
14 de S. S. Tom. 5.
by Saint Ambrose his care. This Bishop was very abstinent, full of watching
and prayers, diligent in writing, never dining but on Sundays, or at the
Celebration of the Birth-days of the Martyrs. He weakened his body with
writing, he had an especial care for all the Churches, wondrous courageous for
Gods Truth, merciful he was also to the poor and captives; at at time when
he was ordained Bishop, he gave all his money to the Church, and to the
poor; all his Lands, only some reserved for the mayntenance of his sister,
he bestowed on the Church: he rejoiced with those that rejoiced, and wept
with those that wept; he would weep when he heard any Religious Priest to be
dead, because the Church wanted such men; he foretold his death: He grieved
deeply to see the covetousness of men who oppressed the poor.

A little before he lay down sick, he reading the 43 Psalm, in the sight of
Paulinus, there appeared, as it were, a bright fire entering into his mouth, and
his face presently was as white as snow: Paulin. in. vit. Ambros.
which so amazed Paulinus, that he could not write what came from Him; the
Captain Stilicho had a servant possessed, and Saint Ambrose healed him, but
he after writ many false things, and Stilicho should have punished him:
Ambrose hearing of it, ^ad the servant to be brought to him, to whom Saint
Ambrose said, he should be delivered to Satan, which came to pass immediately:
He healed likewise Nicetius of the pain of his feet. After he had ordained one
Priest of Ticinum, he fell sick, and Stilicho hearing, said, That all Italy
would be ruined when so pious a man died. Four Deacons in his sickness,
discoursing softly, who should succeed him; one answered, Symplicianus: and
Ambrose by inspiration answered presently, Senex, sed bonus: that is, He is an
old man, but a good man, at which they were affrighted; which came to pass,
for Symplicianus did succeed him; and Venerius succeeded Symplicianus: Foelix
governed the Church at Bononia; Castus and Polemius bred under Saint Ambrose,
continued Deacons in Millaine: before he died he was instant in prayer: those
that stood by heard him pray with his hands lifted up, and so he departed this
life, and was buried in a Church called by his name, with the confluence of
abundance of people of all sorts and ages; he was another Elias, and feared
not to speak the truth before Kings and Emperors, so that he got the title,
Irrefragabilis Ecclesiae Doctor, and is reputed amongst the most famous Fathers
of the Latin Church.

Baronius and diverse others have writ his life, Saint Augustine prayseth Him
highly, so do all grave Historians; His Works that follow will praise him in
the gates: He flourished under Gr^tianus and Theodosius Emperors, and died
the third year after Theodosius, which as Baronius says, was in the year of
our Lord three hundred ninety seven.

Sentences out of Saint Ambrose.
Against covetous desires and pride.
Men that are carried away with insatiable covetousness, Amb. ^ super illud
Johan. ager cujusda^^ divitis.
are (as it were) hurried to Hell with unbridled and untamed Horses. What
wealth or faculties had thou, oh man, at thy first entrance into the World:
Amb. 97. did.
what shall thou have at thy departure? why do thou therefore torment thy
self?

Against neglect of grace.
Gold is offered to thee, Amb. in sermon. de. El^^mosyn. and jejunio.
thou do not say, I will come tomorrow and take it, but art glad of present
possession, thou shunnest delays, and put aside all excuses: but salvation
is promised, offered to our souls, and few men haste to obtain it.

Confession of sins.
To accuse our selves is to acquit our selves: he that confesses his sins,
Amb. sup. Beati Immaculati.
acknowledges Gods righteousness. Confession takes off Gods anger.

Against anger.
Anger is the firebrand of all evil: resist it if you can; if not, Amb. de
Paradiso.
keep thy place: the best station is thy patience. Amb. de offic. lib. 1.


Liberality.
It is not to be so much enquired, Amb. l. de Viduis and de offic. l. 1
how much thou give, but with what heart: that is not liberality, when thou
take by oppression from one, and give it to another.

Of Virgins.
The victory of Virgins exceeds that of Angels, for they live out of the
flesh, these live in it.

Ambros de officiis.
Victory is most glorious, after a combat difficult and laborious.

The circle of goodness is to use Justice in seeking, wisdom in inventing,
fortitude in prosecuting, and temperance in possessing, that there may be
Justice in the affection, wisdom in the understanding, fortitude in effecting,
and temperance in using.

We have all things in Christ, and Christ is all in us. If thou desire to be
cured of the wounds of sin, he is thy Physician: if thou art in a hot Fever
of worldly affections, he is thy cooling Fountain: if thou art laden with
iniquity, he is thy Justice; in necessity, he is thy helper: if thou fear
death, he is thy life; if thou would shun darkness, he is thy light: if thou
seek Heaven, he is the way: if thou desire spiritual food, he is thy
heavenly Manna.

Self accusation for sin is the beginning of Justification: for he that
declares his own transgression, glorifieth Gods Justice by his confession.

Ambros. super Beati immaculati.
A clear conscience should not regard slanderous speeches, nor think that
they have more power to condemn him, than his own conscience has to clear
him.

He that gives counsel to another, should be exemplary in good works, in
learning, in integrity, in gravity: that his speech may be wholesome and
irreprehensible, his counsel profitable, his life honest, and his opinion
gracious.

Comfort should be given with mild gentleness, not with rugged harshnesse,
that so it may rather pacify sorrow, and mitigate the fury of passion, than
stir up in the mind any commotion.

Christ took upon him the nature of man; that he might confirm man. Again,
Christ suffered himself to be overcome, that he might overcome by his
sufferings.

Again, says this Father, we owe God all that we have for our creation: O
then what do we owe him for our preservation?

Again, he says, what have we that we have not received? yes, says he, sins
of all sorts and degrees.

His Works in the Pari^ian Edition 1549, are by Cardinal Bellarmine registered.
In the reading whereof, you shall find no less judgment then eloquence, well
beseeming such a Father.

Tome 1.
1 Of Offices, 3 books. 2 Of Virgins, three books. 3 Of the Institution of
Virgins, one book. 4 To a devout Virgin, one book. 5 To a fallen Virgin, one
book. 6 Of Widows, one book. 7 Of Penitence, two books. 8 Exhortation to
penitence, one book. 9 Of forsaking the World, one book. 10 Of the good of
Death, one book. Bellarmine takes that book to a fallen Virgin not to be St.
Ambroses.
Tome 2.
1 Of the calling of the Gentiles, two books. 2 Of Faith to Gratianus, five
books. 3 Of the Holy Ghost, three books. 4 Of Faith against the Arrians, one
book 5 Of the Incarnation, one book. 6 Of the Mystery of the Pasche, one book.
Bellarmine allows not that of the calling of the Gentiles, to be this Fathers.
Tome 3.
1 A Funeral Oration at the death of Valentinian. 2 Another on Satyrus. 3 Of
the Resurrection. 4 On the death of Theodosius. 5 Ten books of Epistles. 6
Sermons to the people, 92. Bellarmine doubts some Epistles to be his, and some
Sermons.
Tome 4.
1 His Exameron, six books. 2 Of Paradise, one book. 3 Of Cain and Abel, two
books. 4 Of Noe, one book. 5 Of Abraham, two books. 6 Of Isaac and the soul,
one book. 7 Of Jaacob, and a blessed life, two books 8 Of Joseph, one book 9 Of
the blessings of the Patriarchs, 1 book 10 Of Naboth, one book. 11 Of Eliah,
and fasting, 12 books. 12 Of Tobiah, one book. 13 Of Job and David, three
books. 14 Of David's Apology, one book. 15 Of Solomon, one book. 16 Of
Mysteries, one book. 17 Of the Sacraments, six books. 18 Of the dignity of the
Priesthood, one book. 19 Prayers before Divine Service. 1 book. 20 Commentaries
on some Psalms. 21 Another apology of David. 22 Of David's interpellation.
Bellarmine allows not of these apologies to be Saint Ambroses.
Tome 5:
1 On the Gospel of St. Luke, ten books. 2 Commentaries on all St. Paul's
Epistles. 3 Of the Resurrection. 4 Holy Prayers. 5 Hymns holy, 6 A Song of the
Saints by Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine, that begins Te Deum laudamus
Some of the Commentaries on Saint Paul's Epistles are doubted not to be of
Saint Ambrose his Writings, and as Bellarmine says well, not without cause.

First, because Saint Augustine against the Pelagians uses the authority of S.
Ambrose, and yet does not use any out of these Commentaries. So having done
such famous things for the truth, his memory will ever be sanctified, and at
the day of the Resurrection will be gloriously rewarded by our Lord Jesus
Christ.

An. Christi 380. Sanctus Gregorius Nyssenus.
S. GREGORIVS NYSSENVS

THis famous Father of the Church was Brother to St. Basil the great; S.
Hierom: de script. Eccles.
he is called Gregorius Emisse^^s by Honorius, and Trithemius: his Life,
Studies, Actions, and Sufferings, though mentioned all by several Writers, yet
by way of History none have completely done them: but those things which
Gregory Nazianzen remembers of him, in His Epistle to him, are so many, great,
and large, that they may serve in place of (...) History. Theodoret, so Cratos,
Suidas, Nicephor^s, and the Roman Martyrologie, with some later Writers, as
Volateranus, Trithemius, Possevinus, have written most Honorably of his Life,
Doctrine, Eloquence, accounting of him as a Father of Fathers. Gregory
Nazianzen does speak of Him in several places with great commendation and
approbation, Possev. in S^c. Appar. p 677.
and did write many Epistles to him, as his 34, 35, 36, 37. 42, 43. 95. 142.

But if there were nothing else to set forth his praise, and to cause him to be
worthily ranked amongst the great Fathers of the Primitive Church: it is enough
that he was sent into banishment by the Arrian Heretics, under the Emperor
Valens; and this Emperor dying, he was appointed the only man by the
Antiochian Synod, to go and settle, and order the Eastern Churches: had he
not been eminent and faithful, the Fathers of that Council would not have
employed him in so weighty a charge; for it is a labor full of difficulty,
and must be undertaken with a great deal of wisdom and patience: and this
honorable charge was not only imposed upon his shoulders; but also the
Oecumenicall Synod of Constantinople, under Theodosius the Emperor, destined
this man as most fit to visit the Churches planted in Arabia: so that for these
his actions, he is worthy to be accounted amongst the chiefest Champions of
the Church: this Father was likewise admired for his Eloquence and Rhetoric
by those that have the knowledge in the Greek. Phot. Biblioth.
Photius says of him, that he alone carried away the Bell from all men for
his elegant style and eloquent expressions* One calls him, (a learned man
pervigilom Antistitem, the faithful and vigilant Prelate: He was the elder
brother of Basil the Great: Theodor. l 4. c. 28.
he embraced a Monasticke life, highly respected in those Primitive times; and
so joining Theology to his other indowments, he proved in short time an eminent
Pillar of the Truth: he did read the Scripture with all diligence, reverence,
and strictness, having a special regard to the genuine sense of it, at all
times: so being made Bishop of Nyssa, of which City he took name, he did for a
while surcease the reading of the old and new Testaments, and addicted himself
to the study of Rhetorique; insomuch, that Gregory Nazianzen in his 43 Epistle
to him seems a little to reprehend him: for his time of coming to his
Bishopric, it was under Valens, when Gregory Nazianzen had the Bishopric of
the Sasimes allotted him by St. Basil: This Gregory did (as Theodoret relates
it, Socrat. l. 5. c. 8
succeed his brother Basil in the Bishopric of Caesarea, which some have
questioned for an improbability: Well, he was a man meriting commendation, and
so you shall hear what report the Ancients do afford him. Saint Hierome
speaks of him thus: Hierom. in s^r. Eccles.
Gregorius Episcopus Nyssenus, etc. That is, Gregory, Bishop of Nissa, brother
to Basil of Caesarea, not long since read to me Gregory Nazianzen his learned
books against E^nomius, who is said also to have written many other famous
Treatises.

Nicephorus Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 29.
in his Ecclesiastical History describes him in these terms. Basilius habuit
fratres, etc. That is, Basil had brethren, of whom Gregory Bishop of Nissa was
one, the light, and ornament of the Nyssen Church; a man answerable to his
brother for Life, Manners, Learning, Piety, Faithfulness, Courage; who though he
was married, yet he did not any ways neglect the care of souls: He writ his
book called Hexameron after his brothers death, and also against Eunomius and
Apollinaris: he is greatly praised for his indefatigable labor and study,
especially for that funeral Oration in praise of Gregory Thaumaturgus: Soc^.
l. 4 c. 21.
Socrates also describes him by praising his parts and abilities, saying,
Basilius autem duos fratres, etc. That is, Basil had two famous brethren,
especially this Gregory, who finished the book not perfected by his Brother
called the Hexameron, not without demonstration of singular learning and piety.
Theodor. l. 4. c. 28.
Theodoret writing of him, praises him for his strictness of life and purity
of learning. Phot. in Bibli.
Photius in his Bibliotheca makes mention of this Gregory in these words,
Lectus est similiter Gregorii, Episcopi pr^ Basilio adversus Eunomium liber,
That is, we read and approve of a Book of St. Gregory Bishop of Nyssa for St.
Basil against Eunomius: he uses a style that is so full of Eloquence and
Rhetoric, that it does even ravish the minds of the Readers, and captivates
the ears of the Auditors. He does methodically beat down Eunomius. He is
more concise than Theodore, more copious than Sophronius, full and abounding
with Enthymemes, and examples of all sorts: so that I may truly pronounce it,
that as far as Gregory, for comeliness, splendor, and pleasantness excells
Theodore, so far does this man surpass in copiousnesse and confluence of
veiled arguments, Phot. Biblioth.
and illustrating examples: and the same Photius in another place goes on in
his praise in these words, Lectum est Alterum Gregorii Nysseni opus, That is,
there is another work of Gregory of Nyssens, read of the same matter, in
which, grappling with Eunomius, he arms himself with all sorts of arguments
dexterously; so that overthrowes him by maine force of wit and learning, and
pulls down and defaces all the said Eunomius tottering ill-grounded Conceits
and fancies: but the gracefulness of his speech, and the lusty joined with
sweet pleasure does manifestly show it self in every line; and amongst many
others, that testimony which Suidas does yield unto him, is not to be slighted
or neglected: Ex Suida.
it begins thus, Gregorius Nyssenus Episcopus, etc. that is, Gregory Bishop of
Nyssa, brother to Saint Basil of Caesarea, a man excellent for his
qualification, being completely furnished with Learning of all sorts, chiefly
addicting himself to the study of Rhetoric; in which he gained such an
eminency, that none of the ancient Fathers do in this kind exceed him. He
writ an admirable book against Eunomius; as also another no less famous, of
the Creation of Man, and many excellent Sermons did he make; but that Treatise
of the Soul, which he writ to his sister Macrinia, deserves the praise of all
Learned men in succeeding ages.

Cardinal Bellarmine says that he writ in the fourteenth of Theodosius his
Reign, Nyceph. l. 12. Eccles Hist. c. 13.
and that he was present at the first Council of Constantinople, as Nicephorus
does report it; he writ the Symboll of Faith, set forth in the same Council.

Sayings out of Saint Gregory Nyssen.
Of Usury.
A Usurer that lends his money out, Contra Vsura^ios. Tom. 1 pa. 978.
is like a man who stands by another ^icke of a burning Fever, who desires to
drink water to ease him: the other does reach him it, but it does him no good,
but a great deal of further mischief to increase his pain: so he, though for
the present he seems to relieve his want, yet he afterward does mainly
torment him.

Against the same sin.
He loves no labor, but a sedentary life: Id. Ibid.
the pen is his plough, parchment is his field; Ink is his seed: Time is the
rain to ripen his greedy desires, his sicle is calling in of Forfeitures, His
house the Barn where he winnows the fortunes of his Clients. He follows his
Debtors as Eagles and Vultures do Armies: to prey upon the dead Corpse.

Of the same sin.
Men come to Usurers as Birds to heaps of corn; Idem. Ibid.
they desire the corn, but are destroyed in the nets laid for them; so
borrowers for a time may flourish, and come and go, but at last lose all. For
Usurers are as fishers, as soon as they have caught fish in one place, let
down their nets in another.

Of relieving the poor.
There is no excuse to be found for hard heartedness against the poor:
Gregor. Nyss. de paup. Amand. Tom. 1. p. 971.
for where can the rich cast their eyes, but they may behold them? He therefore
that despises the poor, despises his Maker.

His Works as they are set forth in the Edition of Basil 1562. I have here set
down.

1 An Epistle of a Christians name. 2 Of the Lords prayer one book. 3 Of the 8
Beatitudes on Mat. 5. 4 Sermons of the Nativity. 5 Of Saint Stephen. 6 Upon the
sixth Psalm. 7 Of Easter. 8 Of the Assumption of Christ. 9 Of the Trinity, and
that the Holy Ghost is God. 10 That there are not three Gods. 11 Of the
difference of the Essence and Hypostasis. 12 Of the faith in the Trinity. 13
Upon that of the Apostle, Then shall the Son himself be subject unto him, 1
Cor. 15. 14 Of Sleepers. 15 Of Infants taken away. 16 Of the Resurrection,
four Sermons. 17 Author of the Lords Assumption. 18 Upon Matthew. 25. As much
as ye have done it to one of these, you have done it to me. 19 Disputation of
the Soul, and of the Resurrection. 20 Of the Trinity against the Jews. 21 Of
holy Baptism. 22 Commendatory speeches upon Saint Basil. 23 Upon the 40
Martyrs. 24 On Pulcheria. 25 On Placilla. 26 Gregory of Naeo-Caesarea. 27 On
Theodore a Martyr. 28 On Meletius. 29 Upon the Creation of Man. A supplement to
his brothers Hexameron. 30 Of Philosophy eight Books. 31 Of the life of Moses,
one book.
Here as Bellarmine observes, want his books against Eunomius.

These are therefore in the Edition of Paris added in the year 1573.

1 Eight Sermons on Ecclesiastes. 2 An explanation upon the Canticles. 3 Of the
form of a perfect Christian. 4 A Catechisticall speech. 5 Against those that
defer the Baptism of Children. 6 Of avoiding fornication. 7 Against those
that will not be reprehended. 8 Upon the woman sinner. 9 Of loving the poor. 10
Of true Virginity. 11 An Epistle to Flavianus.
Concerning which Bellarmine does give good observations for distinction of
them. Briefly, this famous man was studious and well learned, being excited by
his brother Saint Basil, lived gloriously, and died piously in the year of
Grace 380, Valentinian and Valens then swaying the Roman Eagle.

An. Christi 388. Theodoretus
S. THEODORETVS

NIcephorus the Historian has taken the greatest pains and travel amongst
all others to describe the life of this Theodoret at large, and therefore I
shall principally follow his steps. This Theodoret (says he) was born at
Antioch, a famous place, and an ancient City, and renowned for many things;
but specially for that, in that the Disciples were first called Christians in
this place: Acts 11. 26.
as also for the Apostles determining that great question about Circumcision,
sent their resolutions to this place, by Paul and Barn^bas, Acts 15. 22, 23.
with Judas and Silas, The Apostles and the Elders with the Brethren unto the
brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and in Syria, and Cilicia, etc.
so that this City is ennobled in this respect, and as the place of his birth
did grace him, yet more did his parents Nobility and Religion; for they were
both great personages, Niceph. in vita Theodoret.
and both addicted to Christian Religion: but his Mother (as my Author
testifies) was grieved in mind deeply because she was barren, and was without
any hope of issue to inherit their large possessions; so that they both
resolved to bequeath all their Revenues to the mayntenance of Christians, and
to Monasteries whereof there were many in Syria; but by her prayers she was
heard, and God did not deny her the request of her lips; but did grant her her
hearts desire, and fulfilled her requests, and sent her a son which (she
said) should be dedicated to God, and she was as good as her word, for his
name imports as much as a gift of God, or Theodoret: well this her son by the
provident care of the parents, and by the acutenes and excellency of his own
wit, in a short time profited so in piety and letters, that though (as
Procopius testifies) juvenis consecratus Episcopus Cyri, etc. he was very
young, yet he was chosen and consecrated Bishop of Cyrus, which is a Town of
Syria of the Jews, which was builded by Cyrus King of Persians, and was by him
enfranchised and endowed with many privileges; what he did, being now seated
in this Reverend place, you will by the sequel perceive: what a worthy work
did he presently set forth called the History of the Lovers of God? was he
not as vigilant to find out and discover, nay, to expel Heretics out of the
Church, or reducing them to it? At the same time there were whole Parishes in
his Diocese infected with the pestilent Heresy of the Marcionites, and did
not he by his sole wisdom and labor, even to the hazard of his own life,
bring them back into the bosom of the Catholic Church? which thing alone
shows him to be an able and learned Prelate: for it is a task of tasks to
learn men to swim against the streams of their own perverted wills; and to make
obstinacy it self to submit and yield; was he not wondrous diligent to gather
the bodies of the Saints, and interre them with great respect; and in the
honor of them to build famous Temples? as (also imitating his parents piety)
was he not wondrous charitable too, and conversant with those that lived an
holy Monastic life? did not he visit them? and refresh their bowels with the
bowels of love and compassion. Especially one Symeon called Stillites, which
lived austerely, and one Iacobus Nizibenus, and many others whose lives and
virtues he writ elegantly, and left them to posterity. He was a careful
imitator of Johannes Chrysostomus, for he always proposed him as his worthiest
pattern in forming his style of writing; and by this means he proved so
fluent and eloquent, so full of grace and learning in his works: It is good to
have worthy patterns to imitate, and it is no less ingenuitie to gather good
by them, they are lent for the same purpose: how sweet and beautiful are his
studious and mellifluous Commentaries upon the Scriptures? How divinely does he
resolve the hardest places of the old Testament? How significantly has he
explained the Prophets, how elegantly has he delineated that sweet singer of
Israel? What learning is there wanting in his divine Treatise of Gods
providence? How strenuously and powerfully has he laid open the fond conceits
of abundance of Heretics; as of Simon Magus, Menander, Basilides; Carpocrates?
of Hermogenes, Tatianus, Cerdo, Marcion, and Manes? Of Hymenaeus, and Phyletus,
Ebion, Cerinthus, Paulus Samosatenus, Sabellius, Marcellus, and Photinus? Of
the Nicolaitans, Montanists, Noetians? As also of Arius, Eudoxius, Eunomius,
Macedonius, Donatus, Meletianists, Apollinarians, Messalians, Nestorians with
the Eutychians? in the which labors he has showed to all ages to come, what
gifts and endowments he had lent him of God, and how well and faithfully he
used them to his Creatours glory, and the Churches benefit; I cannot let pass
that hot contention that once was betwixt that worthy Father of the Church
Saint Cyril, and himself, sprung rather from zeal to Religion in them both,
and from the study of piety, then any vain ambitiou, or self-conceit of their
own sufficiencies: and it is not a wonder; for where does not that great
firebrand of Hell, strive to kindle the fire of dissension and division, was
not there strife even amongst the Apostles? and great ambition, had it not
been regulated by our Savior? This contention betwixt these two Fathers
happened in this manner: whereas there was a Synod appointed at Ephesus, to
stop the grouth and spreading of the Heresy of Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople; which did daily begin to spread it self, and to infect diverse
with its contagion, this Saint Cyrill being first come, had by his own labor
and wisdom condemned Nestorius for an Heretic, not knowing that John Bishop
of Antioch, or the other Bishops of Syria would have been there: but when John
Bishop of Antioch, and the other Syrian Bishops, amongst whom this Theodoret
was one of the chief were come, and perceived that Cyrillus did not seem to
respect their counsels; they took it ill at his hands, and thereupon canceld
his Decrees as void; and so by a general consent with a great deal of labor,
they all condemn this Nestorius; it is thought, that had not the care and
wisdom of Theodosius the younger calling the Bishops together to
Constantinople taken away, and removed this contention, it would not have so
soon ended, but he did take it away, and Nestorius was anathematized, and
Theodoret and Saint Cyrill wondrous loving one to another ever after: to
proceed, that renowned Council of Calcedon, wherein sat 600 Bishops, and
above, where this Theodoret was present; I say the testimony of that so learned
a Council is a large proof of this man's Faith and Integrity: for was not he
by the general acclamations of all there present publicly styled Catholicus
and Orthodoxus Ecclesiae pastor, Nicep. Callist in vita Sancti Theodor.
and doctor sincerus; that is, a Catholic and Orthodoxe Pestor of the Church,
and a sincere Doctor for the truth: a large commendation from the mouths of
such a cloud of learned Witnesses, which bestowed it not on him for flattery or
favor, but by desert and merit: do not the learned Epistles of Leo the Bishop
of Rome, sent to him, sufficiently commend him? by which it may easily be
perceived how vigilant he was to settle Truth in the borders of the Church,
and how carefully he preserved the Faith amongst the high swelling surges of
Heresies unviolated? will not his daily meditations and explanations in, and of
the sacred Scriptures eternize his fame to posterity? Does not Gennadius Priest
of Messilea, Gennad. in l. script. Eccles.
afford him and his labors a large Encomium? calling his Writings, Scripta
fortia, per quae Confirmat and ratione and testimoniis Scripturarum, etc. that
is, Impregnable and undeniable arguments, by which with Reasons and Testimonies
out of Gods Word he does confirm and establish it, that Christ was truly
incarnate of the Virgin Mary. And does not Cardinal Bellarmine rank him
equally with St. Cyril, Card. Bellar. de scrip. Eccl.
and styles him, virum plane Doctissimum etc. that is, an absolute learned man:
Photius he also reckons him an able man, against Heresies: Phot. Bibli. p. 902.
903.
first he uses his authority as well as Saint Athanasius, to prove that
Dionysius was not tainted with the Arrian Heresy. (...), so also does
Theodoret censure of Dionysius: and again, he takes and approves of him as well
as Ignatius, and Clemens Stromataeus, or Eusebius in the condemning the
Nicholaitans for Heretics, in these words (...), etc. That is, Leco praedict.
and page pr^d.
but Saint Ignatius and Clemens, and Eusebius, with Theodoret of Cyrus, do all
agree the Nicholaitans to be Heretics; so that this Theodoret, as appears,
was a Father of no small Esteem or regard: and does not Photius in another
place afford him as high praise for his Ecclesiastical History, Photii
Bibliot. page 19.
beginning thus, Lecta est Theodoreti Historia Ecclesiastica, etc. that is, The
Ecclesiastical History of Theodoret is likewise allowed, and says, of all
which I have formerly nominated, he uses the most convenient Style and phrase
for an History; Clarus enim and grandis, minimeque redundans, that is; for he
is perspicuous, weighty, and not too luxuriant; and praises him for so
learnedly relating the Acts of the second Synod: Is there not also a short
Epigram in Greek in an ancient Manuscript, concerning the Excellency and
Eloquency of Theodorets Disputations in three short Verses, In Augustano
Codice. M. S.
which are here set down.

(...),
(...)
(...).
That is, that as another Nilus with his overflowings, he made all the Grecian
fields fat and full of Eloquence, and by his labors had enlarged the Faith;
which shows likewise not only the indefatigable studies of this Theodoret;
but also the admirable wit and wisdom that flowed in his soul, Sixtus
Senensis de Theod.
and was expressed in his works. Does not likewise Sixtus Senensis speaking of
his selected questions of the Scriptures, speak in these words, ab initio
Geneseos adultimum librum Regum, insigne opus, etc. that is, Questions from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of the second of Kings, a most famous work; in
which, says he, by way of Question and Answer, Theodoret does briefly and
clearly explain all the hard places of Scripture with admirable industry! what
pen can sufficiently blazon thy worth? for his Commentaries on the Psalter,
does not the same Senesis style them, Nobiles Commentarii, that is, Heroicke
Commentaries: and upon his Commentaries on St. Paul's Epistles, does he spare to
commend him? For says he not, Feruntur Commentarii in omnes Pauli Epistolas,
in quibus quantum fieri ^otest. etc. that is, there are likewise extant
Theodorets Commentaries on all St. Paul's Epistles, in which (as much as can be)
the genuine sense of St. Paul is succinctly, elegantly, orderly, and piously
expressed, and (which in Saint Paul's writings seems to be most difficult)
sentences are joined with sentences, with wonderful skill and Art, to the
great profit of the Reader. And if I should enlarge my self which of the
Fathers either do not use his Authority with great approbation and
commendation, and all of them do hold him an able judicious eloquent man; he
dyed, being not very old, but rather spent with labor and studies than with
age, and dyed in the reign of Theodosius the younger Emperor, and was buried
in the same Sepulcher, in which that holy man Iacobus Nizibenus, before
mentioned, was intombed.

His sayings of the government of the soul.
The delights of the soul are to know the Maker: Treatise of divine
Providence, cap. 12.
to consider the Works of Heaven, and to know her own estate and being.

The soul knows all things, wherefore he that knows his soul, knows all
things; and he that knows not his soul, knows nothing.

The soul when it dies carries nothing with it but her virtue and learning,
Ibid. c. 16.
and it seeks none other help: wherefore all such as for the multitude of
their sins and transgressions are hopeless, as murderers, blasphemers, with
such like wickedness; the justice of God and their own deserts condemns them
unto everlasting death, from which they shall never be delivered: But such
(says he) as have lived godly and carefully, shall be by death delivered from
the prison of the body, and shall ascend up into a purer life, and dwell in
heaven for ever.

If the soul of man (through sin) be once dead, Ibid. cap. 16.
it is never again revived, but by the only mere grace and mercy of the most
gracious and ever-living God; whose vengeance (by his justice) still waits
the destruction of wicked and wilful sinners: therefore say the learned, and
do conclude, that blessed is the soul that is not infected with filthiness
of this World.

I have set his Works as they are registered in two Tomes Printed at Collen,
1617.

Tome. 1.
1 Upon all the hard questions in Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deu^eronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and upon the Kings. 2 Exposition of all the
Psalms. 3 Upon the Canticles. 4 Upon Jeremiahs prophecy. 5 Upon Baruch. 6
Upon Jeremiahs Lamentation. 7 Upon Ezekiel. 8 Upon Daniel, Hosea. 9 Joel, Amos,
Abdiah, 10 Micha, Nahum. 11 Habakkuk, Zephaniah. 12 Aggee, Z^^hary. 13 Malachy;
to which are now added these. 14 Upon Moses Song. Exodus 15. Upon his Song in
Deuteronomy. Upon Anna her Song. Upon Abakkucks Song. Upon Esaies Prayer. Upon
Jonas Prayer. Upon Ezechiah's prayer Upon the prayer of the 3 Children. An
Hymn of these 3. Virgin Mary's Song. Zachariah's prayer. Symeons prayer.
Tome 2.
1 Upon all St. Paul's Epistles, from the Romans to Philemon. 2 Ecclesiastical
History 5 Books. 3 Three Dialogues against certain Heretics. 4 The fables of
Heretics 5. 5 An Epitome of divine decrees. 6 A religious History. 7 Of
Evangelical truth drawn out of the knowledge of Philosophy. 8 Of Divine
providence: and of the soul of man.
An. Christi 390. Sanctus Hieronymus Stridonensis.
S. HIERONYMVS.

THis great and eminent Father of the Church must be ranked according to his
deserts: In writing whose life I follow the directions of Erasmus of Roterdam.
To begin therefore; the time of his Birth was under the Reign of Constantine
the Great, in the year of Christ 331, in a Town called Stridon, which was
ovethrown by the Goths, then wasting and spoiling several places: Upon the
borders of Dalmatia, and Pannonia, Hieron in cat. Sc^iptorum illustrium.
as he himself testifies, some, as Blondus will have it, to be that which now
is called Sdrigna, a little Town of Histria in Italy: some hold, that to this
day there is to be seen Saint Hieroms Monument. He had a younger brother called
Paulinianus: his mothers name was Castorina; His Fathers name was Eusebius: but
we will not insist upon his parents, but will declare his own worth: he had
sufficient means, as may appear by his education, which was at Rome; then
counted the only Nursery of Letters, as he does testify: for though learning
was at the same time in France, Spain, and Affricke, yet no where was it so
free from pollution and corruption as at Rome. His Master, for the Grammar, was
Donatus, and Victorinus for the Rhetorique. Some have made question, whether
this Donatus were the same that made such eloquent Commentaries on Terence and
Virgil: Well, making fair hopes of a large progress in Learning, and being
well furnished in these, he proceeds to read Porphyrius Isagoge, or
Introduction to Logique, and read the Philosophy of Plato, and the Stoics; but
not staying here, he looks now into Cosmography, History, and Antiquities; and
intends to study Divinity, and to set it forth with all the luster that might
be. His fellow students were Pammachius, Bonosus: both these were highly born.
Heliodorus, who for his eminency of parts was made a Bishop. In Epist. ad Damas
pap^^.
This Hierome received his baptism also at Rome, as he proves: and now being
sufficiently seasoned with these Arts, he soars higher, and follows the
footsteps of learned men, as Pythagoras, Plato, Apollonius; and so he
addresseth himself to travail: he surveyed all France, and gained
acquaintance and love of the chiefest Scholars: he testifies that he was at
Triers, where he described that Book of St. Hilaries de Synodis with his own
hands; and Bonosus travailed with him, as may be seen in his Epistle to
Florentius; so having taken a view of most of the Libraries, and having
conferred with the learnedest in those places whither he came, he visited the
place of his Birth, and the place of his new Birth, having like a wise Merchant
stored himself with abundance of Goods, he resolves upon a course of life,
and a fit place to settle down in: he likes not Rome, as savouring somewhat
of Paganism, and was too full of pleasures, which are dangerous Baits for
young men to be ensnared with: Neither does he like his own Country, being
corrupted with Barbarous delights, as he testifies himself in his Epistles,
saying, In my Country they make their belly their god; and he is counted the
holiest, which is the richest. So taking advice with his fellows, he resolved
to depart into some remote place, that he might the freer give himself to the
study of the holy Scriptures, and the more truly follow our Savior.
Pammachius advised him to marriage, but this Hierome desired liberty. Bo^osius
he persuades him to a Monasticke course of living in some remote Island. Well,
the mind of St. Hierome was thus resolved, he got him a rich Library, and
took a competency of means for his support and maintenance; he goes into
Syria with Heliodorus with him: but Heliodorus repents him of his resolution,
and so returns home: it is thought that they both in their journey saw
Jerusalem, which was famous at that time. And being now destitute of his
friends, his body was much altered by changeing his course of life, so that he
was sick, but was wondrously courteously used by a Monk, but more especially
by Euagrius, who afforded him lodging kindly at his house: being recovered to
his health, with a great ardour of soul he set himself to follow Christ: so
he departed far off into a solitary place, where was no company but wild
Beasts and Serpents, and a few Cells of Monks here and there scattered among
the Syrians and Agarens, only Euagrius would now and then even in this his
solitariness give him a visit: Ruffinus who of a former friend, became an
Enemy, at this time came to Nytria of Egypt; and now also his brother
Paulinianus having betaken himself to a Religious course of life, was after a
while made a Priest; which thing John Bishop of Jerusalem did not approve of,
but Saint Hierome does answer it sufficiently, his dislike grew, because
Paulinianus was made so young, being not yet thir^y years old, as may be seen
in his Epistle to Paulinianus.

Saint Hierome lived four years in this state, all this while subjugating his
body, and studying and meditating continually, with watching, fastings and
prayers; and serio^sly repenting the sins, which he had in his youth committed;
and imploring Gods grace to preserve him from future temptations: So that as
Erasmus speaks, he did not only study hard all day, but spent most part of
the night in pious performances, so that, Minima pars noctis dabatur somno,
minor cibo, nulla otio, that is, He did allow the least time to sleep, little
for refreshments by diet, none for idleness. When he was weary with study, he
would go to prayer, or to sing an Hymn; he read over all his Library, and what
is rare, sacras literas ad verbum ediscebat, that is, he learnt the Scriptures
perfectly to a word, he was vigilant in reading the Prophets, and finding out
the intent of their prophesies; he was studious in the Evangelists that he
might know our Saviors life the better, and with more ease and profit follow
it. His prayer was, Lord, let me know my self first, that I may the better
know thee, the Savior of the world. He was so addicted to reading, that he
would let none pass him, no not, Ethnicos, non Haereticos, not the Heathenish
Authors, nor yet the Heretics: what he read with judgment, he made use of
knowing how to fetch Gold from a dunghill, or Medicines from poison; by this
means so fitting each Author for his own memory, that he was able to speak
suddenly upon any point of Learning; he was mainly taken with Origin, so that
he called him by way of praising him Suum, his own; that little Book which he
writ to his Associate Heliodorus shows sufficiently what an able man he would
prove in the school of Christ.

He had excellent skill in Hebrew, knowing how necessary it was for the
understanding of the Scriptures, which he got of one Bar-hamina, he obtained
excellent knowledge in Chaldee, knowing that some of the Prophets; as Daniel,
and some other books as that of Job, was written, not only in the Hebrew, but
also in the Chaldaick Dialect; so likewise did he gain the Syrian, because of
some affinity with the Hebrew. Now having past so long a time in this strict
and rigid course of life, by the persuasions of Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine,
and Paulinus Bishop of Antioch, whom upon some necessary employments the
Emperor had called to Rome; some say he was made Priest at twenty years of
age by Liberius Bishop of Rome; but he testifies he was ordained at Antioch,
by Paulinus aforesaid. When he came to Rome, he was acquainted with many
Noble Matrons, especially Marcella, who being stirred up by Athanasius, and
other Priests of Egypt, was the first of that sex, that professed a Monasticke
life at Rome* and she by her fair devout carriage gained others as well
Virgins, as Matrons, to the same profession; especially Sophronia, Principia,
Paula, and Eustochium: to whom diverse others joined themselves; and Hierome
instructed them, and stirred up their spirits to the study of the holy
Scriptures; but he wanted not those that envied him; for there came in closely
at the same time certain Arrians under the name of Origenists; whom they knew
this S^int Hierome had in high esteem; and so they did strive to defame his
splendor, by raising scandals of him, so that he left the City of Rome as
unworthy of him, and (as some write) Melania and Paula went with him, or else
did presently follow him, he describes his journey in his Works, and gives
sufficient Reasons why he went, and why he visited so many places; he terms
Gregory Nazianzen his Master for Divinity; he heard likewise Apollinarius at
Antioch; he went to Alexandria, but for the practice of Divinity he chose to
live in Bethelem, which he made famous by his excellent preaching; Here Paula
builded four Monasteries, three for women, one for men, in which Saint Hierome
lived many years, as he testifies in his Epitaph of Paula; Ruffinus
prosecuted Saint Hierome with a great deal of malice; in so much that Saint
Augustine began to suspect him, until he better knew his life and learning;
yet though this Ruffinus was so bitter against him; He had famous men that
stood for him, as Epiphanius in Syria, Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria,
Marcella, Pammachius, and Chromati^s at Rome: so that being much threatened and
hated by these Arrians, his life may be termed a tedious Martyrdom, he
studied Gods Word thirty years: having buried Paula his Disciple, the time
came that his course was accomplished, and so in the ninety one of his age, of
Christ's Nativitie, 422.

Under Honorius and Constantius he paid Natures debt, his bones were
afterward translated to Rome; where to this day there is a Monument of his to
be seen: He was in his life of such fame that Greece did rejoice, that she
had his Works translated.

His Epistles are approved of in Italy, France, Spain, all Germany and Afrike;
He was honored and sought to far and near by Bishops, by Noble Matrons, by
great Rulers: many great personages, came far having seen his Works to see
the Author: Amongst the rest, one Alipius sent by Saint Augustine, Paulus
Orosius the Historian came to see him; so did Sulpitius Severus who highly
commended him; Apodemius out of France, with many others with him; He was full
of Eloquence; but he that will read Erasmus commendation of him, will admire
how one man should be so generally expert in such rare gifts; Quis docet
apertius, quis delectat urbanius? quis movet efficacius? quis laudat candidius?
quis suadet gravius? quis hortatur ardentius? etc. that is, who teaches more
distinctly? who delights more modest^^? who moves more effectually? who praises
more heartily? who persuades more gravely? who exhorts more ardently? Dalmatia,
Pannonia, Italy may boast of him; Stridon rejoices in him for bringing so
great a Light to the world; Italy comforts her self in three respects: First,
that she instructed him, next that she baptized him: lastly, that she
reserves his bones as a memorial of him.

France is glad that he sent Epistles to her inhabitants, all the world may
be comforted in having such an excellent Bulwark for the truth, all ages and
sexes may get profit out of his Volumes: Trithem. in Scrip. Eccles. fol. 25.
the best wit may he help, and all cannot but praise him except Heretics,
whom he detested. Hear but what Trithemius speaks of him, Vir in saecularibus
valde eruditus, in divinis Scripturis inter omnes doctores eruditissimus, etc.
that is, He was a man well seen in secular Learning, but in Divinity he
carries the chief fame amongst all the Doctors of the Church, famous for the
knowledge in Languages; he was the rooter out of all Heretics, the defender of
the Truth, a labourer in Virtue, an hater of Vice, Baron. Annal. Tom 3.
a true Meditatour on Gods Law.

Baronius does commend him deeply, as you may read in his Annals. So does
Prosper.

Sentences out of Saint Hierome.
Upon Heresies. Hieron. in Epist.

Dead flesh is to be cut off for fear of Gangreenes, the scab'd sheep is not
to be admitted into the Fold, lest it defile, corrupt, and spoil others.
Arrius at first was but as a sparkle; but because he was not at first
suppressed, he proved the incendiary of the whole Church.

Of Innocence.
We must be like to children who forget hurts, Hieron. super illud Mat.
quicunque humiliaverit se.
who do not retain anger, look not on beauty to lust after it, does not speak
one thing, and think another: so unless we have purity and such innocence,
we shall not enter Heaven.

Of Gods Word.
If according to the Apostle Christ is the power and the wisdom of God, then
he that knows not the Scriptures, Hieron. sup. Isa. in Prover.
knows not the power of God; he that is ignorant of Gods Word, knows not
Christ.

Of simplicity.
Thou must be a Dove; and a Serpent, the one not to do hurt to others, the
other not to be hurt by others.

Upon disgrace.
The Son of God endured the shameful death of the Cross, Hieron. in Epi.
and do thou think to follow him and be where he is, and live here in
pleasures?

Upon Women.
Women's beauty is not to be respected, Hieron. contra Iovinian.
but their chaste modesty: she is truly chaste, who has liberty and
opportunity to sin, and will not.

E duris ad placida.
He used to say of himself, that whether he did eat or drink, In Reg. Monac.
cap. 30.
or whatsoever else he did; that horrible voice was ever in his ears: Surgite
mortui, and venite ad j^dicium: Arise you dead, and come forth to judgment.

He says, the first Adam sinned by a Tree; whereby we were lost: and our
second Adam to redeem us, dyed on a Tree.

If Adam was cast out of paradise for one sin, O Lord, what shall become of a
sinner that has a world of sins?

All Virtues are so united together, that he that wants one wants all, and
therefore he that has one, has all.

Whatsoever it is a shame to speak, it is a shame also to think: therefore
the safest and perfectest course is to accustom the mind to watch over the
thoughts, and at their first motion either to approve or reject them, that so
good cogitations may be cherished, and the bad extinguished.

Beware that thou have not an itching tongue or ears, Hier. in Epi. ad
Nepotian.
Do not detract from others, nor harken unto them that do detract from others.

He that does afflict his body, Hie sup. Ep. ad Romans
and yet forsake concord, does praise God in the Cymball, but does not praise
him in the Quire.

He that gives alms to a poor sinner, Hier. ibi. Glo. sup. illud Ecccle. 10.
Da misericordi, etc.
is truly merciful.

For nature is to be respected, not the person. For he that gives to a poor
sinner, not as he is a sinner, but as he is a man, he does not relieve a
sinner, but a man.

Christ was a sacrifice ordained for our reconciliation: Hier. super Lucam.
and if thou do contemn the mystery of the Sacrament, thou contemnest the
remedy contained in the Sacrament.

A just and valiant man should neither be deject in adversity, Hier. sup. I^el.
nor puffed up with prosperity, but in both estates should be moderate.

When the body is strong the soul is weak; Hier. sup. Amos lib. 2.
and again when the body is weak, the soul is strong.

The kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Hieron. in Ep
for it is great violence that men borne on earth should seek Heaven, by virtue
possess it, whereunto they have no right by nature.

I have here set out his Works as they are recorded by the Edition set forth
1567, contained in nine Tomes.

Tome 1.
1 Hortatory Epistles, 42 2 To Heliodorus. 3 To Rusticus and Laeta. 4 To
Salvina. 5 To Ageruchia, two Epistles. 6 To Paulinus. 7 To Paula. 8 To
Eustochius, 3 Epistles. 9 To Paulus Concordiensis. 10 To Theophilus of
Alexandria. 11 To Castrutius. 12 To Exuperantius. 13 To Julianus. 14 To the
Virgins of Hermon. 15 To Ruffinus. 16 To Chromatius, to Antonius, of shunning
suspected places. 17 To Sabinianus, Nepotianus. 18 To Florentius, Demetriades.
19 To Furia, Gaudentius. 20 To Caelantia, Eustochius, two Epistles. 21 To
Lucinius, Abigaus. 22 To Julianus, Castorina. 23 To Theodosius, Augustine. 24
To Nycaeas, Chrysogonus. 25 To Rusticus. 26 Twelve funeral Epistles in praise
of many.
Tome 2.
1 Against Heretics. 2 Helvidius Jovinianus. 3 Apology for his books against
Jovinian. 4 Apology to Domnio. 5 To Pammachius. 6 Against Vigilantius. 7
Against the same, one book. 8 To Marcella against Montanus. 9 Against the
Luciferians. 10 Originists. 11 Against John of Jerusalem. 12 To Pammachius, to
Theophilus. 13 Apologies against Ruffinus, three books. 14 To C^esiphon against
Pelagius. 15 Against the Pelagians, three books. 16 Thirty Epistles of diverse
Arguments. 17 Eight Epistles to Hierome.
Tome 3.
1 Prefaces and explication of questions, 2 To Paulinus. 3 Prefaces on the
Pentateuch. 4 On Jonah, Kings, Chronicles, Esdras, Tobiah, Judith, Hester, Job,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Esaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel. 5 Twelve
prophets and four Evangelists. 6 Then follow the explication of questions
propounded by diverse, as Damasus, Dardanus, Vitalis, Amandus, Miverius,
Alexander, Cyprian, Paula, Euagrius, Marcella, Sophronius, Hedibia, Principia,
Fabiola, Ruffinus, Sunia, Fretella, Algasia, Paulinus, Desiderius. 7 Then
follow some questions out of Hebrew on Genesis, Chronicles, Kings. 8 Also books
of Hebrew names, which are in the Old or New Testament.
Cardinal Bellarmine does doubt of some of these Works, whether they be Saint
Hieromes or not, as those upon the Kings and Chronicles.

Tome 4.
1 Commentaries upon the four greater Prophets, and on Jeremies Lamentations.
Tome 5.
A Comme^tarie upon Ecclesiastes, as also upon the twelve lesser Prophets.
Tome 6.
1 Commentaries upon Saint Matthew. 2 Upon the Epistles to the Galatians,
Ephesians, Titus, Philemon. 3 A book of Didymus put into Latin by Saint
Hierome. Some doubts are made whether in the fourth Tome the Lamentations of
Jeremy, were done by Saint Hierom: it is thought to be Rhabanus Maurus, because
it is found amongst his Works.
Tome 7.
1 Commentaries on all the Psalms. Bellarmine makes some doubt of some of the
Psalms, viz. against 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19 20. and says they are not of
Saint Hieroms turning.
Tome 8.
1 Commentaries on Job 2 On the Proverbs. 3 Homilies on the Canticles. These
are rather attributed to Beda, because they are said to be written in favor of
Vecterius. Now Vecterius was a Bishop in England, in Beda's time, as he
testifies those on the Proverbs are thought to be of Beda his Works, because on
the 21. and 31. Gregory is cited, and in the 30 Saint Hierome himself is cited.
Commentaries on the Epistles are suspected to be Pelagius.
Tome 9.
1 There are many things of other men's, as of Eusebius, Caesariensis, Ruffinus,
Augustine, Gennadius, and others, which are all good pieces, but not to be
ascribed to this Father.
And so I will shut up the life of this Great Saint Hierome with the praises
that Saint Augustine gives him in his 18 book de Civitate Dei, Non defuit in
Temporibus noster presbyter Hieronymus, that is, there wanted not in our time
that Priest Saint Hierome, a most learned man, skillful in three tongues
especially, which turned the Scriptures not out of Greek, but out of Hebrew
into Latin. So his actions and indefatigable pains, with his many sufferings,
do serve to show that he did well employ his time to Gods glory, and the
Churches good: which does even to this day reap great benefit out of his Works.

An. Christi 411. Sanctus Chrysostomus.
S. CHRYSOSTOM.

I Am now to Write and describe to the view the sweetest Father that the Church
of God inioyd in many ages: As Bellarm. in 398.
whom to praise is but of Desert; whom not to Commend, would seem barbarous
and unchristian. He was an Auditour and Disciple to Eusebius; then when he was
Priest at Antioch: he got this name Chrysostom, as one says, Ob venustatem
Eloquii, for his graceful Eloquence: it signifies a golden tongue, for he was
prevalent and attractive, a man most learned in Theology, of an admirable Wit
in his framing his Homilies, he was beloved and reverenced of all men; His
fathers name was Secundus, and his mothers name was Anthusa, both able and
noble: He was borne at Antioch; in which place, after some time spent in
secular affairs, he entered into the Priesthood, and was made Governor of the
Church at Antioch, and Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople dying, being by the
persuasions of Arcadius the Emperor placed Bishop in the same See, Sophr. in
prat. spirit. cap. 119.
he did worthily manage that great charge: Sophronius does highly commend this
man, for he writes, Nunquam eum mentitum fuisse, nec unquam alicuj
maledixisse, neque scurrilialoquutum, nec Iocos admisisse: i. e. That he never
told a lie: never cursed any, never spoke any scurrilous matter: never admitted
of vain sports. Admirable parts ^ and indeed fit for a man of his Calling:
many learned men have admired his parts: Anianus says thus, Anianus ad Horom.
Episc.
Chrysostomus certe peculiare illud custodit, etc. i. e. Chrysostom keeps
that peculiar gift and property, that though wondrously studious, always
watchful, though an enemy to dullness and stupidity; yet never does his words
fly out into vain flashes, but still applied to the profit of the hearer, for
his very style is accommodated to the profit of the Church, expressing
antiquity and learning together; neither too lofty, nor too mean: at all times
keeping equality and measure, full ripe, modest, free from all fault of too
much affected curiosity: not too luxuriant, not sordid, nor yet too much
garnished; yet sufficiently and powerfully trimmed and decked; not too subtle,
not too smart or sharp, unwantonly, pleasant, wondrously copious, expressing
an admirable faculty of the Master, yet always free from pride: hence it is,
that the plain man may read him with profit, and the greatest scholar cannot
but praise him with just desert. He does not only equallize Saint Basil, nor
yet parallel Saint Gregory, but exceeds them: in a word, here the curious
Palate shall find true Eloquence joined with Wisdom: sound Theology set forth
with luster: Holiness and Scholarship joined in one, in his Works throughout;
there is store of Bread and abundance of Milk, with variety of sweet Delicates
of all sorts for Divines. In his Homilies to the people, Sixtus Senens.
he studied for their profit, not to tickle their ears, but to ravish their
hearts, performing in all the office of a painful Doctor: he was industrious
in his Expositions, powerful in his Morals, in all full of Complacency; he
would tell his Auditors, they were not only to learn, but to exercise
themselves in practicing, and searching the Scriptures, lest they should be
addicted to Idleness: He very seldom handled any questions that were curious
to the Auditors; as of Predestination, Reprobation, of Grace, or of Free Will;
but when necessity, and the Auditory in his judgment were fit to understand
them; then he performed them plainly, soundly, and with a great expression of
Piety and Learning.

He had excellent judgment in Morality, and did contemn Riches, and hated
Vices, so that it does appear by some golden sentences, that he was, as one
styles him, vere Aureum flumen, truly a golden River. Take an Instance in some
of them here set down to your view.

1. Virtue is neither troublesome, nor hard to be obtained. 2. It is easier
far to live well than ill. 3. Small and little vices ought to be avoided
with greater study than great. 4. No punishment so great as an evil
Conscience. 5. No man is hurt but by himself. 6. It is better to suffer than
to offer injury. 7. Many do hurt unjustly, none are hurt unjustly. 8. This
worlds glory is reproach, and reproach in this world is glory. 9. This Life is
rather a Death than a Life. 10. Death is better than this worldly Life. 11. We
gain most in Afflictions and Miseries. 12. That all punishments are to be
accounted, and may be made beneficial. 13. Charity is the most gainfullest
trade. 14. A private seclused life is preferred before all worldly
contentments. 15. To be deprived heaven is a greater punishment, than to be
punished in Hell. 16. Not to be too wise is to be truly wise. 17. That we may
powerfully and evidently prove the Divinity of Christ without Scripture.
Saint Chrysostom, as it appears by all Ecclesiastical Writers does surpass
most for abundance of Similitudes, which add luster to ones speech and work,
upon the Affections, Comparisons, and Metaphors to stir delight in the
Hearers: He is not like St. Ambrose for his difficulties; nor does he use
Poets and their Fancies with St. Jerome; nor yet Jests, and pleasant Conceits
with Tertullian; but with a Fatherlike affection, fits himself to edify
souls committed to his charge.

That famous Historian Theodoret styles him Ioannem eximium orbis terrarum
luminare, Theodor. lib. 5. Eccles. Histor. in Theodos.
John the eminentest light of the whole world: and again, (...), This great
John being made governor of the Church of Constantinople, upbraided the
wickedness and lewdness of many men; for wickedness and lewdness in the
heart of man, makes the Spirit of God dull and insensible, that is, not to
work in him according to his divine Nature: Likewise he admonished the
Emperor and his Empress to stand in the faith, for faith is the gift of God,
and breathed by the Holy Ghost, which is the Spirit of God, into the hearts of
those that be his Children and walk in his ways. He also exhorted the
Priests to frame their lives according to the Canons of the Church, and told
them, that such as would not, should not enjoy their places; and he used this
speech unto them recorded by Theodorete, Theodor. Eccle. Hist. l. 5. c. 28.
(...). That is, that it was not fitting that they should enjoy any Priestly
honor, who do not live as true and zealous Priests should do: and by this
means Saint Chrysostom did not only reform those of that place, Niceph. l.
13. c. 3.
but also by his reverend carriage did also settle all the Thracian Churches,
Socr. l. 6. c. 3.
which did contain six Bishoprics: nay, and by Authority rectified at the
same time all the Churches in Asia, which then had eleven Bishoprics; Zozom.
l. 8. ca. 2, 3.
and further his good pattern extended, if you please to read the aforesaid
Theodorete, in his fifth Book before cited. Ponticam praeterea Ecclesiam quae
eundem habet Episcoporum numerum, quem Asia eisdem legibus adornavit: he also
adorned and graced the Churches of Pontus with the same institutions, which did
contain in it as many as Asia.

And here a little to digress, Note well.
any one may see plainly these four particular points, and they deserve
imitation.

1. That if the Churches Discipline be not strictly maintained, corruption of
manners presently break in: for want of Discipline ushers in Licentiousness.

2. That when Churches are fallen from their pristine and ancient Government,
they are to be reformed by Discipline. For Discipline well managed settles
Reformation.

3. That the fittest and only men who still have, and always should reform
Churches by good Discipline, are Bishops, for they have both power and
discretion.

4. That good examples are of admirable operation; for does it not easily
appear, that by the wisdom of this one Reverend Bishop, how all the other
Churches strive to follow his pattern? It is an old one, yet a true saying,
Exempla magis praevalent quam praecepta, Examples make a deeper stamp than
precepts.

In brief, the two first of these well considered, our Zelots would not so
much speak against such good means, unless they be ignorant. The third,
well observed, would teach all to afford those reverend Prelates more honor,
and to learn the fifth Commandment better, and to practice that rule of Saint
Paul, Let such as rule well have double honor; they would not surely, if they
had any insight into the Primitive Times, so rashly and unchristianly murder
their spiritual Bishops.
Fathers, nor yet so deeply wound their The Church.
Mother, by Scandals, Slanders, Reproaches, Schisms, Factions, Fractions,
Conventicles, Libells, and the like hasty hare-brain'd fancies. The last will
directly condemn them, for not obeying and following such ancient and allowed
Fathers: But I will not insist upon this, though it does fairly offer it self
to me, but return to our Father Chrysostom, as he has begun a fair
Reformation in the Church.

Having so fairly wrought upon these Churches, Niceph. l. 1. c. 3
he proceeds further; he settles the Churches likewise in Phaenice, though
addicted to Idolatry; nay, though they worshipped Devils, and gatherd together
all the Priests, Zozom. l. 8. c. ^.
and settle them to study Piety: and send thither the Emperors Edicts
(obtained by him for that purpose) to demolish and throw dow^e the Images of
the Idols, and to ruin their Temples; and as for the Officers and workmen
which should effect this great task, he paid them not out of the Emperors
Coffers, Socrat. l. 6. c. 3
but stirred up the spirits of noble Matrons, whom he had instructed in the
Faith, and flowing in wealth, to give large sums of money to this purpose,
assuring them that it was a worthy work, to cast out the Devil by this
means: Theodor. l. 5. cap. 29.
and this his Counsel was so powerful, and wrought so effectually, that in
short space he left the Devil not an house to put his head in, but levelled them
to the ground.

And this able Enginiere left not off thus, but proceeds further: when as he
perceived the whole Nation of the Scythians to be deeply entangled and
ensnared in the Arrian Heresy, ^o expel this and the professors of it, he
took this course; he ordained many Priests and Deacons, that could speak the
Tongue expertly, and placed them in several Churches, and appointed likewise
Readers; and thus he by his care, reduced many that were far gone with that
Heresy, to the Orthodox Faith: and often he himself would give those
Churches visits, and speak to them learnedly by an Interpreter; Niceph. l. 13.
c. 3, 4.
and still inducted others who had a faculty that way: Zozom. l. 8. c. 6
and thus as in Phaenicia he had expelled the Devil, so in Scythia he drove
out his Champions and strongest upholders. Socrat. l. 6. c. 3


And now finding in these his undertakings such an happy success, he being
encouraged in his virtuous proceedings stops not here, but stoutly works
whilst he sees an opportunity: which was as follows.

Hearing for certain that those Scythians, Theodor. l. 5. cap. 31.
who are called Nomades, living by the River Ister, eagerly ^hirsted after the
knowledge of the truth, and yet did want all means which should direct them to
the knowledge of Christ: being as those Children spoken of, who cried for
bread, but there was none to give it them, This Saint Chrysostom (sorrowing
that the Devil should keep their souls in the shadow of darkness any
longer) sought diligently far and near for such men as imitated the
footesteps of the Apostles labors, Socra. l. 6. c. 3.
and having found them, sent them to bring those wild people to the knowledge
of the Gospel; and sent his Letters with all speed to L^ontius, Zozom. l. 8.
c. 6
then Bishop of Ancyra, wherein he signified, that the Scythians had embraced
the Truth, and exhorted him to send able men to them, to confirm them in the
received Faith: furthermore, having heard of the Marcionists, who had about his
jurisdiction infected some people with their Heresy, to stay this running
soar, he dispatched Letters to the Bishop of the same place, that He should
carefully expel all of them out of their places, and for fear least he
should either want help or courage to effect his desires, he sent him the
Emperors Edicts, obtained for this purpose, to encourage him in it: so by
these his noble actions, the case is clear, that he (as another St. Paul) had
a great care of the Churches welfare, unity, and prosperity. Indeed a wise man
will order and square his actions and thoughts by divine Laws; for by that
means he shall be sure to be blessed.

I must not let pass in silence another notable and famous passage of this
Father, Niceph. l. 12. cap. 4.
recorded by Theodorete, Nicephorus, Zozomen, Socrat. l. 6. c. 6.
and Socrates, which shows what a brave gift and faculty he had in
persuading. It so fell out, Zozom. l 8. c. 4
that there is one Gainus, or rather Gainas, for so it is in the Greek, (...),
A Scythian by Nation, Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 32.
of a Barbarous mind, full of Insolency, and Tyranny; who that time was a
commander in war, and ruled not only over the Army of his own Nation, but
over certain Troops of Roman Horsemen, and some Regiments of Foote-forces,
whom not only most men feared, but even the Emperor himself, (knowing his
bloody disposition) mainly suspected.

This wicked Gainas desires of the Emperor, that he and his might have a
Temple allowed them, (he being mainly affected with Arianisme:) The Emperor
for the present told him, he would think of it, and at last promised him one:
But the Emperor calling this Divine John Chrysostom to him, wished him to give
this Gainas an answer: Withal the Emperor informed him of his maine Power,
and strength, and Tyranny, and so thought it best by yielding to his desire to
assuage his high swollen pride. To whom this John presently answered: Ne istud
ei pollicare, neque dare sanctum Canibus mandes. You may not promise it to him,
neither may you give holy things to Dogs: nam nunquam patiar, ut qui Deum
Verbum Sancte, Theodor. l. 5. Eccles. Hist. cap. 32.
and auguste laudibus and Hymnis Celebrant, expellantur e Sacro Templo: idemque
tribuatur his, qui contra eum Blasphemias loquantur, that is, for I will never
suffer that those, who praise God the Word with holiness and Hymns shall be
expelled the Temple of God, and the same to be given to those who furiously
do speak Blasphemy against him. And I beseech you (oh Emperor) not to fear
the power or Malice of that Barbarian, but call me and him together into one
place, and be pleased with silence to hear me speak to him; for I persuade
my self I shall overcome his fury. Well, the Emperor was glad to hear this
good Father to say thus much, and the next day he caused them both to meet.
Gainas he lays claim to the Emperors promise; Niceph. l. 12. cap. 45.
Chrysostom answers him, that it was not fit for the Emperor rashly to
attempt any thing against sacred places; to whom Gainas answered, that he
would have a Temple; John Chrysostom replied, that the Holy Temple was free
and open to any one that would truly serve God in it, and pray in it: But
says Gainas, I am of another Sect, and I would have a Temple for my self, and
all those that be of my way: And I think, I who have performed such and so
many exployts in the Romans defense, may justly claim this privilege: To whom
Saint Chrysostom again answered, the rewards bestowed upon you for your
Service, has not only equalled, but exceeded your labors; for you are made a
Commander, and have attained to a Consular dignity, and you ought to consider
what once you were, and what you may be; in what indigency you lived, and now
how you have abundance of all things: how poorly you passed over Ister,
accoutred in mean habit, and now what Princely Ornaments you have on: think
therefore seriously the smalnesse of your labors, in respect of the greatness
of your reward; and be not, oh be not ungrateful to those who have bestowed
all these upon you: I mean God, and the good Emperor. With these speeches, as
Theodoret reports, he so overcame for the present this Gainas, that he was mute
and ashamed, and he styles this Father, Theodor. l. 5. Eccl^s. H^st. cap. 3^.
Ioannes celebris, totius orbis terrarum Doctor; John, the famous Doctor of the
whole world. Furthermore, when as this Ganias did break forth into cruelty, so
that he wasted all places, and frighted all men, even the Emperor himself;
and when they did not know how to send an Ambassador to him, for none durst
approach him; yet as Nicephorus relates it, and Theodoret (...). that is, at
that time leaving all others, as struck dead with fear, they had recourse to
this John, the most undaunted soldier of Christ, and exhorted him to undertake
the Embassage to this Gainas: Theodor. l. 5. c. 33.
well he was not any whit daunted with his former free discourse with him, nor
yet at his cruelty; but willingly takes his journey into Thracia: and Gainas
having intelligence of his coming, and knowing what a zealous, Zozom. l. 8. c.
4
pious man he was for Gods service, went a good way to meet him; and friendly
taking him by the hand, kissed it, and made his son embrace his holy knees,
such force is there in virtue, that it makes even Lions become calm; virtue
has that power and efficacy, that it stops the envious and slanderous mouth,
or else the ears of the^ that shall hear it.

Cardinal Baronius cites one Metaphrastes, Baron. Annal. Tom. 5. p. 113.
who found it in antiquities, that this Chrysostom prevailed so far with
Gainas, that he made peace with Arcadius the Emperor; and that he set some
certain men of note free from slavery, and specially that he loosed
Aurelianus the Consul, and Saturninus from banishment: and this seems to be
true, by the Homily of Saint Chrysostom, which does begin in these words:
Beati Johannis Chrysostomi Homilia, cum Aurelianus and Saturninus acti essent
in exilium; and Gainas egressus esset a civitate. An Homily of that blessed
John Chrysostom. when Aurelianus and Saturninus was banished, Chrysostom. Hom.
eo^. titulo and de avaritia.
and Gainas departed out of the City: and the same Baronius cites a Sermon
made by Chrysostom, when he returned to Constantinople, so it begins, Multo
tempore silui, I have been long silent, at last I am returned to your love.

I have been abroad pacifying storms and tempests, and to bring those into
harbor, who were ready to sink, and so goes on wondrously divinely: and was
not his care great for the Churches peace, when as he undertook that voyage
into Asia, and at Ephesus met Palladius, Cyrinus and Paulus his associates? so
there was a Council at Ephesus where assembled seventy Bishops, about
Symoniack Priests and Bishops. S. Chrysostom, Zozom. l. 8. c. 6
as Zozomen testifies, deposed 13 Bishops, others say but six, this act
commends his integrity. So he returned to Constantinople again, and preached to
his charge, where he was received with joy, as he expresses in that Homily; how
did the voices pierce the Heavens? Hom de regress. suo ad Constant.
The whole City was a Church, and the like: How faithful was he in telling
Eudoxia the Empress, that she would for her covetousness, be called a
second Iezabel; but now the Empress being angry, studied revenge: Pa^^ad. in
Dialogo rerum gest. ^. Chrysostom.
and so Theophilus coming to Constantinople, with some other Bishops, of whom,
as Palladius affirms Acacius of Beraea, was of greatest note, and indeed
Chrysostomes greatest adversary; for they sent to Antio^h to enquire of his
life when he was young; but finding nothing worth objecting, they then sent to
Theophilus to Alexandria, and set his malice on working, who was glad at such
an occasion: but they found accusation against him for that Sermon which he
preached, out of 3 Kings 18 for they alleged that what he said against Baals
priests was meant of them: and what he spoke of Iezabel, he meant of Eudoxia:
Thus Chrysostom was beset with the malice of the Empress, and of three other
women, whose names were Martia the wife of Promotus, Castritia the wife of
Saturninus, and Eugraphia: as also by those some Bishops whom before he had
deposed, and loose priests of Constantinople, and the East and West Bishops for
receiving the Origenists. But Theophilus workt upon two priests which
Chrysostom had deposed, the one for murder, the other for adultery; so
Theophilus calls a Synod against Chrysostom: and brings these and others to
accuse him; Saint Chrysostom thought them not competent Judges, nor the other
sufficient accusers. So amongst all these troubles he preaches to the people
wondrous godlily, but they desist not, Baron. Tom. 5. 173.
but produce 29 Articles to accuse him of: which Baronius sets down
completely: so they never left until they procured his banishment: so they
gained upon the Emperor to banish him, and so not having heard his accusation,
he is forced to Heiron: but upon an Earthquake that fell, he was recalled;
but staid not long: for a few months after, He was by their malice banished
to a little Town of Armenia, called C^cusus; from thence to a place that lay
upon the utmost confines of the Roman Empire: exposed to the cruelty of the
Barbarians, but God prevented: for at Comana He did quietly and peaceably
commend his soul to God, and his body was in^erred hard by Basiliscus, the
famous Martyr: many Bishops suffered for his sake: and few of his adversaries
escaped unpunished. The Bishops of Europe hated the proceedings. The Bishops of
the West would not communicate with those of the East, until they had set and
enrold his name in the Table of the most famous constant Bishops: and after
this his later Writings were brought to Constantinople, and there by a company
of pious and devout Christians were reserved: and so after a long and tedious
troublesome life, this famous Chrysostom departed.

Sentences out of Saint Chrysostom.
Of Continency and Chastity.
As a great shower of rain falling upon the fire does straight extinguish it is
force; Ioh. Chrysostom. Ser. de Joseph. p. 42.
so the Word of God in the soul by meditation, puts out all the fire of
lustful concupiscence.

Of Riches.
They are unthankful Fugitives, and destroy them that love them most; as a
boat, if overlad^n it sinkes, Chrysostom. ser. de Avaritia. p. 46.
but being justly ballasted sails prosperously: so when men stir to heap up
too much wealth they drown themselves in perdition: Do not hord up more
therefore then is useful, for fear thou losest what is necessary, be rich in
necessaries, not in superfluities.

Of covetous thoughts.
If thou would not fear a storm in a calm, or sickness in health, nor
beggary in wealth; do as the dresser of Vines, cut off the superfluous
branches, that the tree may bring fruit, and not leaves only: so cut off those
insatiable thoughts of wealth: and thou have enough.

Of brotherly love.
A bulwark of Adamant is not more impregnable than the love of Brethren: Chrysostom.
Homil. ^e pace, and de recipiend. Severiano. p. 48.
as a City compacted and united is fortified against all assaults; so Brethrens
hearts knit up in love are unconquerable. It Was love that brought the Son of
God from Heaven, to reconcile all things to himself.

Against Covetousness.
A covetous man is as bad as the plague, Chrysostom. Epist. ad Hebraeos c. 9. Hom.
15.
for as it infects the air, the house, the body, then the spirits; now it
makes men to be inflamed, now they are distracted, and can take no rest: so is
it with the covetous. For there cannot be a worse infection in a Commonwealth
than covetousness: nay, they are worse than Whores, for as the Prophet says of
them, They open to all passengers: so does the covetous oppress father,
mother, brother, sister, servant, or friend. What? he stands not in awe of God,
nor his sacred Word, but laughs and derides his threats.

Of Faith.
Solid Faith is like a mighty Rock; Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Tim. 1. c. 6. Hom. 18.
which though the winds, and waves, and weather do all beat against it to
overthrow, yet it stands unshaken. So true faith grounded on that great Rock
Christ holds out in all temptations and spiritual combats.

Man discerns another fault easily, Chrysostom. l. 3. de (...).
but his own very hardly, because in another case his heart is quiet, in his
own troubled, and a troubled heart cannot consider what is good.

Contemn riches, Chrysostom. super Ep. ad Hebraeos sermon. 25.
and thou shall be rich, contemn glory, and thou shall be glorious: contemn
thy enemies, and thou shall overcome them: contemn slothf^lnesse, and thou
shall enjoy rest and quietness.

Discourse and sudden speech declare a man's inward affection, Chrysostom. ^. 3. de
Vest^.
for a lascivious man craftily conceals his vice, is discovered by his filthy
speech. For the conscience cannot be so dissembled, but that the wanton^esse of
the mind may be discerned in the countenance, and the secrets of the heart are
discovered by the motions and gestures of the body.

Spend an hundred years in delights, Chrysostom. de reparatione lapsi.
and another hundred, nay, ten hundred: what are all they to eternity? Is not
all the time of this life wherein we enjoy delights and pleasures, but like
one Nights Dream in comparison of eternity?

The Devils first assault is violent: Chrysostom. super Mat. 4.
but if he be then valiantly resisted, his second temptations will be weaker,
and being once foiled, he proves himself a coward.

If it were possible to be revenged on the rich, Chrysostom. super Ep. ad Heb. sermon.
2.
you should see all the prisons filled with them, but amongst other evil
qualities belonging to riches, this is one, that they deliver and protect
offenders from punishment.

If thou separate art and exercise, Chrysostom. in polic. lib. 6.
exercise without art is more profitable, than art without exercise. For art is
unfruitful without practice, and practice is rash without art.

Saint Chrysostom says, that John Baptist spoke more when his head was off,
than when it was on: For (says he) he then spoke of Christ but with one
tongue: but being dead, all that heard him speak of Christ, spoke by him.

Of praise.
When God is praised, and when thanks be given unto him of men, then the more
plentiful blessings are given of him, even for their sakes by whom he is
blessed: for he that prayseth God, makes him a debtor of a greater blessing.

When Eudoxia the Empress, who was wife of Arcadius, had sent Messengers unto
Saint Chrysostom, with many threats and terrors, how she would molest and vex
him, if he did not condescend unto her desires: The messengers failing of their
purpose, when they returned, told her, saying, In vain do you go about to
terrify or fright this man, Simeon Metaphras. in vita S. Chrysostom.
for he fears naught bnt sin.

Saint Chrysostom reports, that it must be our hand, that must bring us to
Heaven, and not our tongue only.

He calls the life of man a Fair or Market, where some are seeking for gain
and profit; others for pleasure and delight: others for prayer and devotion:
and the last of these are those that walk as children of light.

Saint Chrysostom calls Saint Paul the tongue and Teacher of the whole World,
who lived like an Angel on earth; and now enjoyes a crown in Heaven.

Saint Chrysostom gives man the reason why the Angels did not bring the
tidings of our Saviors birth first to Kings and Princes, or other great men,
as well as to the poor Shepherds: And this is it, because, says he, great
men's ears were so stopped with cares and honors, that they have no pleasure
to hear it; or would not take so much pains themselves: but sent their
servants.

His Works are here registered, He departed in the thiriteenth of Arcadius and
Honorius, He was made Bishop in the fourth of Arcadius, and received
Priesthood in the eleventh of Valentinian the younger, and in the eighth of
Theodosius the elder.

His Works as Bellarmine does reckon them whom I follow, are contained in five
Tomes printed at Venice 1575.

Tome 1.
1 Homilies on Genesis, in number 67. 2 On the Psalms, 26. 3 On sundry places
of the Old Testament, in number 52. 4 Whereof five out of Esaias.
Tome 2.
1 Homilies on Matthew, in number 89* 2 More on the same. 54. 3 On sundry
places of Saint Matthew, 26. 4 Homilies on Saint Mark, 14. 5 Homilies on sundry
places of Saint Luke.
Tome 3.
1 Homilies on Saint John, 87 2 More or some places of Saint John 6. 3 Homilies
on the Acts, 51. 4 Sermons for Feast days, 32. 5 On several places of Saint
Paul, and many things in commendation of him.
Tome 4.
Commentaries, or Homilies on all Saint Paul's Epistles.
Tome 5.
1 Homilies to the Antiochians, 80. 2 Dialogues of the Priesthood, 6. 3 Of
compunction of heart, 2. 4 Of Gods providence 6 books. 5 Of praying to God, two
books. 6 Against the dispraysers of a Monastic life, three books. 7 Against
the Gentiles, one book. 8 12 Sermons of Penitence. 9 Against Jews and
Heretics, 15 Sermons. 10 Against Concubinists, two Sermons. 11 Of diverse
arguments 48 Tracts. 12 To Innocentius the Pope, two books. 13 To Cyriacus, one
book. 14 To Bishops and Priests in prison, one book. 15 To Theodorus being
fallen, two books. 16 To Eutropius, one book. 17 To Olympia a famous Matron, 1
book. 18 St. Chrysostomes Lyturgie.
I have not followed the Edition of Paris, those who would fully be satisfied,
they may have their choice either of the Venetian, Parisian, or Eaton Edition.

An. Christi 420. Sanctus Aurelius Augustinus.
S. AVGVSTINVS.

IN describing this Fathers life, I follow not any uncertain Relations, but I
follow the method of Possidonius, who in writing the passages of his life
says, such things, quae in eodem vidi ab eodemque audivi, which I saw in him,
and heard from him, two sure witnesses, the eyes and the ears; and therefore
may for succeding times be easily admitted for truth.

This Augustine therefore was an African by birth, borne in the City of
Thagasta, of pious and Christian Parents, Vide in Possid. in vita August.
bred and nourished by their care and diligence, and singularly well learned
and approved for skill in the Liberal Arts, for he taught Grammar in his own
City, and Rhetorique in the head City Carthage; and after going over sea, he
came to Rome, and so to Millaine, where he was appointed to instruct the
Emperor Valentinian, being the fifth of that name, and the Bishop, at the same
time of that City being that worthy Prelate Saint Ambrose, whose sermons to the
people, and public disputations this Augustine did attentively hear and like
of. He was living in Carthage, tainted with the Pestilent Heresy of the
Manichees, but by the providence of God and the wisdom of Saint Ambrose, his
heart was enlightened, and so he was brought safe from that Rock, was confirmed
in the faith, and a little before Easter, did receive the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, and also Baptism, by the ever honored Father Saint Ambrose,
and being in this state so fairly recovered, he set his heart wholly and
entirely to seek the Lord, and to leave the world, not now regarding honors,
wealth, or riches, but sought diligently heavenly treasures, striving with
might and maine to be one of that little flock of whom it is said, Fear not
little flock, Luke 12.
it is your Fathers good will to give you the Kingdom: He was about thirty
years old when he thus began, having only his mother Monica alive, who did
mainly rejoice to see him so entirely converted: His Father called Patricius
was dead before, and now also he left his Scholars whom he taught Rhetorique,
and told them they should provide themselves another Master, for he would
only serve the Lord.

It pleased him, being baptized, to go and live in Affricke with other
faithful Christians; where, when he was come, how speedily did he perform
what he had resolved? for leaving all secular affairs, how constant was he in
Watching, Fastings, and Prayers? and those graces which it did please God to
give him, how did he employ them? so that by his Sermons and Books he taught
those that were absent, as well as those that were present; for he converted
one to the faith in a short time.

At the same time one Valerius was Bishop of Hippo, and having a great care to
provide able men to teach the people, he, with the peoples great desire,
ordained this Augustine a Priest, and being entered into that holy function, he
did strive to grace the Gospel by an holy Life. This Valerius ordained him
being banished. This Augustine did powerfully preach the Word, and had great
conflicts with Fortunatus a defender of the Manichees; who was appointed to
meet Augustine in a public place, and to dispute with him, which with a
great deal of fear he did undertake, but was quite foiled, and so by Gods
blessing and the consent of all the learned men, the Manichees fell, and
sincere Religion was maintained in the City of Hippo.

He also preached and writ with singular care and dextrous learning against the
Affrican Heretics, as the Donatists, Manichees, and Pelagians: so that by his
writings the Affrican Churches did recover the ancient Truth: and he was so
able and powerful in the Scriptures, that the very Heretics were forced to
confess him a Divine Man. He was appointed by the Bishop to dispute of Faith,
which he did, with the approbation of all: but this good old man Valerius,
finding him so rarely qualified, sent to the Primate of Carthage, and certified
him that he was so old and weak, and the charge was so great to manage, and
this Augustine was so learned and pious a man, that he entreated him to be
ordained Bishop of that City: so that Megalius Bishop of Calama, and Primate of
Numidia, coming to visit the Church of Hippo with other Bishops, this Valerius
did obtain of his hands what he desired, with the general rejoicing of all
the Clergy; though Saint Augustine did mainly at first refuse it, and alleged
it was not fitting, neither was it the custom of the Church to ordain any to
be Bishop of a City, before the other was dead: but it was imposed upon him:
and so being ordained, he doubled his vigilance, and not only in that City,
but in every place he taught and writ against the Donatists. There was a sect
of perverse and desperate people, who under the color of great continence were
called Circumcellians, who being not able to withstand the Writings, nor
Preachings, nor Disputations of this Augustine, they did by might and violence,
and force of Arms strive to stop Saint Augustines proceedings* but all their
Actions were in vain: for G^d did still prosper and bless the labors of this
Augustine; for he ordaind Orthodox Priests, men approved and well known to him
for Life and Learning, and did give them promotion in the Church; so that the
sincere Doctrine of Faith, Hope, and Charity was not only taught in the
Affrican Churches, but also in other Transmarin Regions; Books being printed
and sent abroad, which made these Heretics rage; insomuch, that they intended
to have killed this Saint Augustine, had he not by the great providence of God
escaped, by missing that way in his Visitations which they had beset: but such
was their fury and power, that they neither spared Clergy men nor Lay men: but
there was a meeting at Carthage appointed, and one Crispinus was the Donatists
Champion; against whom Saint Augustine opposed himself, who did by force of
arguments convince this Crispinus; and so by the Proconsuls authority he was
adjudged as Heretical, and a fine imposed upon him: and further it was
ordered, that all the Donatists should be accounted Heretics and fined; but
by the Catholic Bishops persuasions, with the clemency of the Proconsull their
fine was remitted, and peace restored happily to the Church, under the Reign
of that glorious Emperor Honorius, though there were some that gave out, that
the Donatists were unjustly condemned by the Bishops at the meeting at
Carthage, because they had not (as these favorers pretended) free liberty to
speak their minds: Especially one Emeritus maintained this; but not long after
this, Saint Augustine going to the City of Caesarea in Mauritania, being sent
for by other Bishops by Letters, to determine some necessary affairs of the
Church, this Emeritus being then a Donatist, and Bishop of the said place,
Saint Augustine told him that he had so given it out, and wished him now before
all those Bishops and all the people, if he could, to defend his assertions,
but he would not, nor could not perform it, only said, that what he should
say: would be by the Notaries Registered at Carthage: what a poor evasion was
this? for if it had been, truth it was the only way to preserve it; if it was
a lie, as indeed it was, it would for ever be his disgrace.

Possidonius reports an admirable passage of Saint Augustine; it so fell out,
that preaching against the Manichees, that there was one Firmus by name, a
Merchant by profession, who was stiff for that side, and had given and spent
amongst them much moneys, hearing Saint Augustine preach, was touched in heart,
and presently came to this Father (other men being then with him) and did
ingenuously confess that he was infected a long time with that Heresy: but by
the blessing of God, he was fully resolved now to forsake it, and with tears
on his knees, he desired Saint Augustine, and the other Catholic Priests, to
pray to God to pardon him, and to give him grace to persist in the true Faith,
which was performed, and he reduced from Heresy, and leaving his former course
of life, and living with the faithful obediently, at last proved an eminent
Preacher of the Orthodoxe Christians, and not only saved his own soul, but
many others: See (says Possidonius) the wonderful goodness of God, Possid.
in vit. August.
that calls whom he will; whom he will, where he will, and how he will to
salvation. God, as he is Almighty, so may he work in all creatures and things
after his own Mind and Will: for there is nothing that God cannot bring to
pass, and that without labor and travail. It was Saint Augustine by the
preaching of the Word, which caused the Merchant to forsake all, and cleave to
the Truth; but it was chiefly the power of God which had that efficacy in that
Word; that by one knock at the door of the heart of this man, that it should
open and receive the seal and covenant of Grace, which he did without any
prorogation or delay, or time to consider of it: for in these cases delays are
dangerous, for the devil, the world, or the Flesh may cast a bait in our way,
and so hinder us. Therefore let all men in this be truly persuaded, An
Exhortation.
that God is the Moderator and Governor of all things both in heaven and in
earth; and that all things are done by his own power, and appointment: and
that he it is, who most clearly beholds every man, both what he does, and
what he admits in himself, with what mind and godliness he does love and
favor Religion; and that he has also a regard both of godly and wicked men.

So likewise one Foelix being one whom the Manichees called Electos, came to
Hippo, and thought to have spread his Heresy there, but Saint Augustine by
public Disputation so solidly convinced him, that he likewise acknowledged
his error, and was joined to the Church.

This Augustine was termed Haereticorum malleus, the Hammer against Heretics:
How judiciously did he overcome those two great Arrians, Pascentius, and
Maximinus, the one being full of wealth and authority at Court, the other a
great Bishop? Pascentius, who was great in Riches, disturbed many poorer
Christians, and boasted in it, that none could object any thing justly against
the Arrians. St. Augustine hearing this, with other Priests went to him, and
desired to have some private conference with him, before they should publicly
dispute it; this Pascentius admitted, but he was quite overthrown, and had no
warrant for his points; but afterward bragged it, how he had confuted this
Augustine: whereupon St. Augustine with speed sent in writing, many great men
being witnesses, the grounds of Faith confirmed by the Scriptures to him, which
he never did reply against: so also dealt he with Maximinus the Arian Bishop,
who had belyed him in the like manner.

The Pelagians likewise politic and subtle Sophisters who did seduce many,
and did great mischief to the Church, how did he the space of ten years
convince and overthrow? that afterward it was determined by Innocent of Rome,
and Zozimus, that their points should be anathematized, and sent Letters to the
Churches of Afric to condemn them as Heretics, and that pious Emperor
Honorius confirmed their Religious proceedings and adjudged them Heretics: so
many of them returned to the bosom of the Church again, and dyed in the
Faith: Always great was the care of St. Augustine for the good of Religion,
not only in Hippo, but in other parts of Affricke, and not only against
Heretics, but also in winning Pagans to embrace the Truth. He was just in all
his Counsels, especially he would determine according to the Truth: He was
not only learned, but also ready to instruct, and to take off differences: he
would not spare likewise to reprove wisely and seasonably the sinners,
admonishing them to obedience, and Christian Devotion: so that as Possidonius
reports it, He may worthily be called a Watchman to the house of Israel, to the
Church of God, preaching the Word in season, out of season, exhorting,
instructing, rebuking, with all long suffering, He was excellent for deciding
temporal causes, and very circumspect to relieve the party wronged: how
divinely did he write to Macedonius, a Priest of Affricke and granted his
desire. As he had liberty, he would be present at the meetings of the holy
Priests, celebrated through diverse Provinces, not seeking those things which
were his; but doing all for the glory of God; doing as Saint Paul writes to the
Corinthians, not seeking yours, but you: taking care, that the faith of the
holy Catholic Church should remain unviolated, and that unworthy men should
be punished: in ordaining Priests, he would always follow the custom of the
Church, and the general consent of Orthodox Christians: For his apparel, it
was neither too sumptuous nor sordid, keeping a fair mediocrity; saying, that
many were puffed up with pride by the riches of their Garments, and so did fall
into sin: He kept a spare diet, and frugall, being Broth and Roots;
sometimes for his guests he would have flesh, or for the weak and sick
folks: He always kept Wine, alleging that of the Apostle, Every creature of
God is good, and not to be rejected, being sanctified by the word and prayer:
Lib. 10. cap. (...)
And as he speaks in his Confessions, He did not so much fear the
uncleanness of his meat, as the uncleanness of his desires: and uses many
fine examples out of Gods Word to prove it: his Utensils in which his meat was
brought to table were either earthen or wood, or Marble: His Table was rather
for disputation and disc^urse, than for any rich Banqueting, or drinking, and
it had this Distich engraven on it.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi.
That is, Who shall their absent friends with words disgrace,
Are guests unworthy of this room, or place.


And therefore he would tell them that were faulty this way, that either those
Verses were to be blotted out, or else he to depart. He was ever mindful of
the poor, and would, either out of the revenues of the Church, or out of the
offerings of the faithful, distribute to their necessities: His House was a
Church: He never bought land. Possidonius speaks, that there was an
Honorable man of Hippo, living at Carthage, would give his possession to the
Church, an act used in those Primitive times, (now it is out of use) and caused
it to be past under Seal, and sent it to Saint Augustine: but a few years
after he changed his mind, and sent his Son to desire the deeds to be
reversed, and in liew of it his Father had sent to the poor an hundred
shillings. St. Augustine was sorry that the man should so suddenly be weary of
well-doing; but withal restored to his Son the Acts, and withal did rebuke
him sharply, and bad him take heed that God did not punish his proceedings. He
did not regard wealth, but counted it combersome, and therefore did as Mary
did, choose the better part: Upon a time he wanted moneys to release some
prisoners and Captives, and caused the holy Vessels to be melted and given for
their freedom. Saint Ambrose says, that in such cases it may be permitted:
He always kept Divines in his house, whom he fed and clothed: he was
wondrous severe against Oaths, so that he abated their portion and allowance
that did commit it. He never did admit women in his house, no not those of his
kindred; He never entertained discourse alone with any, but had some still
with him. In his Visitations he kept the rule of the Apostle, he relieved the
Fatherless and Widows in their distress: Ian. 1. ult
if they entreated him to pray to God for them, and lay his hands on them, he
would presently do it: He praised one, who when he was sick, said to those
that stood about, I have not lived so, that I am ashamed to live with you; nor
do I fear to dye, having so good a Lord to go to. This Father before his
death recounted strictly all his Books, and those which he writ when he was not
experienced in the affairs of the Church, which would not agree with the
Church, he himself corrected and reproved: and he writ two Volumes which
carry this Title, De recensione Librorum, which are his Books of
Retractations: he complained that some of his Books were taken away before
they were well mended; some he left imperfect, being prevented by death: He
writ a Book called the Speculum, in which any one that reads it may find
either his obedience, or disobedience toward God. S. Patrick about this time
began to convert the Irish to Christianity.
He lived in the time of that barbarous invasion of the Goths and Vandals out
of Spain, into Africa and Mauritania, in which were Cities and Churches,
Monasteries laid wast, Virgins defloured, Matrons abused, the Altars pulled down,
the Priests slain, the faithful hiding themselves in Holes, Dens, and Caves:
He saw almost innumerable Churches destroyed, only three escapt their
outrage, Carthage, Hippo, and Cirtis; yet after his death Hippo was burned; it
was besieged fourteen months. Saint Augustine and all the faithful did pray
God either to free the City, or give them patience to endure, or to take him
out of this life, which last came to pass, for in the third month of the siege
he fell sick of a Fever and died, he healed one possessed of a Devil, The
gift of God given to man.
and by prayer dispossessed him. He healed one ready to die by laying his hands
upon him, whereupon they said, if any was sick, Vade ad AUGUSTINUM, That is,
Go to Saint AUGUSTINE, and you will recover: he writ an Epistle to Honoratus
his fellow Bishop, who desired to know whether they might not fly in those
dangerous times or not? It is extant among those 180 Epistles, wherein he
declares largely his mind in this point. He lived to the age of 76 years, he
continued Priest and Bishop almost forty years, he dyed wondrous penitent,
and had David's penitential psalms before him which he constantly read, and
would weep: he suffered none to come to him, but at such times as the
Physicians came with refections for him: ten days before his death and all that
while he prayed fervently: at the time of his death his sight and hearing were
good, and diverse priests being present, and praying with him, he departed this
life in fullness of days, and gave order to them for his burial, and so
offered himself as a sacrifice to God: he made no Will at all, but gave order
that his Library and all his Books should be safely reserved to posterity for
the Church: he left an able Clergy after him: his Epitaph was this Distich.

Vivere post obitum vatem vis nosse Viator,
Quod legis ecce loquor, vox tua nempe mea est.
This does sufficiently show what a jewel this Saint Augustine was in the
Church of God.

Sentences out of Saint Augustine.
What availes it to keep the flesh entire, Aug. in Ps. 26
if the mind be corrupted? holy marriage is more excellent then proud
virginity: Aug sup. Ps. 17.
a solid hope, a firm faith, a sincere Charity is the virginity of the mind.

Of servitude.
Do thou desire to have thy flesh serve the spirit? Aug. sup. (...)
let thy spirit then serve God: that must be ruled, that the other may rule.

Of Prayer.
If it be pure and holy, Aug. sup. Ps. 83.
it pierces the Heaven, it returns not empty: thy prayer is thy speech to
God: when thou read, God speaks to thee; when thou prayest, thou speak to
God.

More of Prayer.
It is the shelter and safeguard to the soul, Aug. in Sermon.
a sacrifice to God, the scourge of the Devil.

Of Death.
There is nothing does more abate sin then a frequent meditation of death: Aug.
I. exhort. Aug. de Doct.
he cannot die ill who lived well; nor seldom does he die well that lived ill.

Of Riches.
If men want wealth, Aug. Ep. 140.
it is not to be unjustly gotten; if they have wealth, they are by Good works
to lay it up in heaven: a Christian must not be proud in their abundance, nor
despair for their absence.

Non verborum flores, sedsequere Mores.
If thou will be perfectly purged from all vices, Aug. in sermon. de Amore.
strive to kindle in thy self the fire of divine love.

For if thou have perfectly tasted the sweetness of divine love, thou will not
care for any temporal sweetness.

The reasonable soul made to the likeness of God may find in this world much
careful distraction, Aug. de d^ct. Christ.
but no full satisfaction; for it being capable of God, cannot be satisfied
with any thing but God.

The covetous man like Hell devoures all, Aug. in ^p. ad Comitem.
and desires that there were no man else in the world, that he might possess
all the World.

The blessedness of this life does consist in the heavenly wisdom, Aug. in
Ep. ad Pro^um.
quietness of conscience, and sublimity of virtue. For not to be without
affliction, but to overcome affliction is blessedness.

Love is as strong as death, for as death kills the body, Aug. de ^ivit* De^, l.
15.
so the love of eternal life does kill al worldly desires and affections, for
heavenly love grown to perfection, grows insensible of earthly affection, and
he that will mortify his body must first mortify his mind.

He is a Christian that at home and in his own house thinks himself to be a
stranger: Aug. sup. Ps* 32.
our country is above, and there we shall not be strangers.

None can separate Christ from thee, Aug. sup. Lu^.
unless thou separate thy self from Christ.

Our Redeemer was born like a child, Aug. de ve^^ religione.
died like a Lamb, rose from death like a Lion, and ascended into heaven like
an Eagle.

If Adam for one sin was cast out of Paradise, O Lord, what shall a poor
sinner be become that has a world of sins?

St. Augustine says, he that gave his son for his enemies, surely he will
give his Son to his friends.

Reject not (o Lord) the work of thine own hand, but be favorable, and show
mercy upon me; who has been a son of perdition, and a child of rebellion.

And though, o Lord, I cannot wear out my tongue with praying, nor my hands
with lifting up to Heaven for my sins; I may wear out my eyes with weeping for
them: And be thou, o my God, more gracious to hear, then the Devil is ready
to be malicious to hinder.

Of Ingratitude.
Saint Augustine calls Ingratitude the Devils sponge, wherewith he wipes out
all the favors of the Almighty.

Saint Augustine was so great a lover and admirer of the seven Penitential
Psalms, (as we call them) those Psalms that express the Prophet David's
sorrow for this grievous sin; that he commanded them to be written in a great
letter, and hung about the curtains of his deathbed within, next unto him: that
so he might give up the Ghost in the contemplation and meditation of them.

Saint Augustine speaking of the conversation of the wicked amongst the godly,
used to say, For my part I am a man, and live among men, how dare I promise to
my self, that my house shall be better than Noah's Arc? for there were in it
both clean beasts and unclean; good and bad.

Saint Augustine says, o let, Lib. ^1. Conf. c. 2.
o let the Scriptures be my pure delight! let me not be deceived in them:
neither let me deceive by them.

Of Prayer.
Saint Augustine says, Lord, give first what thou requirest, and then require
of me what thou will.

And again, says Saint Augustine, he that prays well cannot choose but live
well; and prayers is a private expression of the soul to God; for by prayer
Gods ear is tied to the tongue of man: we speak to God by prayers, and he
speaks to us by preaching.

I have here also set the Catalogue of his Works, which are many and rare, so
that they may be called a little Library.

Tome I.
1 Retractations, two books. 2 Confessions thirteen books. 3 Of Grammar, one
book. 4 Of Logic, one book. 5 Of the predicaments, one book. 6 Principles of
Rhetoric, one book. 7 Of Music, six books. 8 Against Academick, three
books. 9 Of order, one book. 10 Of a blessed life, one book. 11 Soliloquies,
two books. 12 Of a Master, one book. 13 Of the immortality the soul, one
book. 14 Of the quantity of the soul, one book. 15 Of Free Will, three books.
16 Of true Religion, one book. 17 Of the manners of the Church. 18 Of the
manners of Monks. 19 Against the Manichees, two books.
Tome 2.
1 Epistles of St. Augustine, with rescriptions, being 222. 2 Epistles to Deo
gratias, 49. 3 Two to Januarius. 4 To Honoratus, 120 5 To Paulinus, 112. 6 To
Boniface, 150. 7 To Dardanus, 57.
Tome 3.
1 Of Christian Doctrine, four books. 2 Speeches of holy Scripture, 7 books. 3
Of Faith, one book. 4 An Enchyridion, 1 book. 5 Of the Trinity, 15 books. 6 Of
Genesis, twelve books. 7 Of the wonderful things of the Scripture, three
books. 8 Of a Christian fight, one book. 9 Of the work of Monks, one book. 10
Of the spirit and letter, one book. 11 Of Divination, one book. 12 Of
Ecclesiastical tenets, one book. 13 Of the spirit and soul, one book. 14 Of
faith to Peter, one book. 15 His looking-glass, one book. 16 Questions of the
Trinity, one book. 17 Of the Patriarchs blessings, one book. 18 Sentences, one
book.
Tome 4.
1 Of Lying, two books 2 Of Faith and Works one book. 3 Questions, 10 books. 4
Of the consent of the Evangelists, four books. 5 83 Questions, one book. 6 21
Sentences, one book. 7 Questions to Simplicianus, two books. 8 To Dulcitius,
one book. 9 Questions, 65. 10 Questions of the old and new Testament. 11 Of the
care for the dead, one book. 12 Of Catechizing the rude, one book. 13 Of the
word incarnate, two books. 14 Of the Trinity and unity, one book. 15 Of the
Essence of the Divinity, one book. 16 Of the Faith of Invisibles, one book. 17
Of the substance of Love, one book. 18 Of Continence, one book. 19 Of Patience,
1 book 20 Of the good of Widdowhood, one book. 21 Of true and false repentance,
one book. 22 Of wholesome documents, one book. 23 Of Friendship, one book. 24
Of the Lords Sermons in the Mount, two books. 25 Exposition of the Epistle to
the Romans. 26 Exposition of some propositions on the Romans, one book. 27
Exposition on the Galatians. 28 Annotations on Job.
Tome 5.
1 Of the City of God, 22 books. The occasion was by Romes devastation under
Alaricus King of the Goths. 25.
Tome 6.
1 Of Heresies, I Book. 2 Aspeech of 5 Heresies. A Sermon to the unlearned. 3
Against the Jews. 4 Of the Church, and a Synagogue. 6 Of the profit of Faith,
1 book. 7 Against an Epistle 1 b. 8 Of the 2 souls. 1 b. 9 Against Fortunatus
1 b. 10 Against Adimantus. 1 b. 11 Against Faustus. 33 b. 12 Of the passages
with Foelix, the Manichee 2 b. 13 Against Secundinus 1 b. 14 Of the Nature of
God. 1 b. 15 Of Faith against the Manichees. 1 b. 16 Against an adversary of
the Law and Prophets. 1 b. 17 Against Priscilianists, and Origenists. 1 b. 18
Against the Arians. 1 b. 19 Against Maximinus. 1 b. 20 Against Felicianus. 1 b.
21 Against Jovinian. 1 b. 22 Of holy Virginity. 1 b. 23 To Polentius. 2 b. 24 A
Tract of Epicures and Stoikes. 25 Of that saying, I am that I am, a Tract.
Tome 7.
1 Against Donatus. 1 b. 2 Against Parmenianus. 3 b. 3 Against Petilianus. 3 b.
4 Against Cresconius. 4 b. 5 Again Gaudentius. 4 b. 6 Against the Donatists. 7
b. 7 Against Petilianus of Baptism. 1 b. 8 Of the Churches unity 1 b. 9 Brief
Discourses of Donatists. 1 b. 10 Of Emeritus passages. 1 b. 11 Against
Fulgentius. 1 b. 12 Of pardon of sins. 3 b. 13 Of Nature and Grace. 1 b. 14
Of the grace of Christ, and of original sin. 2 b. 15 Of Marriages. 2 b. 16
Against the Pelagians. 4 b. 17 Against Julianus. 6 b. 18 Of the soul 4 b. 19
Of Perseverance 1. b. 20 Of Predestination. 1 b. 21 Of Grace. 1 b. 22 Against
the Pelagians. 6 b. 23 Against Caelestinus. 1 b. 24 Of the Acts of Pelagius. 1
b.
Tome 8.
A Tract upon al David's Psalms.
Tome 9.
1 On Saint John 124 books. 2 On the first Epistle of John, ten books. 3 On
the Apocalypse, 18 books. 4 Meditations. 1. love of God 1. Soliloquies 1. a
Mau^el 1. 5 Of Christian Discipline, one book. 6 The sinners looking-glass. 7
Of the praise of Charity. 8 Of Pastors. 9 A Psalter to his Mother. 10 Of the
Tree of good and evil. 11 Of the profit of Fasting. 12 Of the fight of the
soul. 13 Of the destruction of the City.
Tome 10.
1 Of our Lords Words, Hom. 64. 2 Of the Apostles Words, 35. 3 Fifty Homilies,
1. 4 Of Time, Homilies 256. 5 Of Saints. 51. 6 To his Brethren in the
Wilderness, 76. 7 Of Clergy men's lives, two books. 8 Sermons newly printed,
128.
These are the fruits of this Fathers labor, he who desires to know which are
truly Saint Augustines, and which are suspected for adulterine, let him read
Cardinal Bellarmines observations de scriptoribus Ecclesiasti^is, in the life
of Saint Augustine; but these do show what a painful labourer he was in the
Vineyard of the Lord. He dyed in the year of Grace, 430.

An. Christi 432. Sanctus Cyrillus Alexand.
S CIRILLVS ALEXAND

THis eminent Father of the Church, was Bishop of Alexandria, a Grecian by
Nation, famous for his actions done in the Church. As for his parentage, no
doubt, but that also was in some sort suitable to his breeding; Socrat. hist.
l. 7. c. 7.
for Theophilus the late Archbishop of Alexandria was his own Uncle; whom also
he succeeded in that See: but not without opposition. Some stood for one
Timothy, then Archdeacon of Alexandria, others came in for this Cyrill, Niceph.
hist. Graecolat. c. (...). l. 14.
partly because of his near alliance to this former Archbishop, who they
esteemed highly, and reverenced for his sanctity and holiness of life: but
chiefly because this Cyrill was a general Scholar, and one well qualified with
all temporal virtues: much ado there was on both sides, yet at three days
end, this good man obtained it, and was conducted to the Episcopal Chair with
greater state than ever any Bishop that was at Alexandria: He was vir doctus,
and sanctus: a learned and a holy man of life: Trithem* de Eccles. Scrip.
by Pope Celestines injunction, he ^ate President in the Council at Ephesus,
amongst two hundred Bishops, in which with a great deal of learning and
judgment, he absolutely confuted and condemned those two arch disturbers of
the Churches peace Nestorius and Pelagius: he was admirably experienced in the
holy Scriptures, he flourished chiefly under the reign of Theodosius the
younger ^^ one gives him this fair Encomium. Raphael Volaaeranus lib. 13.
Nestorii omnia occulta venena refellit: he discovered all the secret poison of
Nestorius. There are some who have related that he was a Monk a Carmelite (as
Tritenhem) but Baronius the Cardinal does absolutely hold that to be a
ridiculous opinion: for these are Baronins his own words, Facessat igitur
ejusmodi fabella de Mo^achismo Cyrilli in Carmelo, that fained fable of
Cyrillus being a Monk of Mount Carmel, falls to the ground: and indeed it is
strange that St. Hierome, Palladius, Euagrius, Cassianus, Theodoret, P^ssevinus
in Apparao sacro page 402.
with others, that often mention the Monks that lived in Palaestine at that
time, and yet not so much as once remember this great Father of the Church, and
indeed I do much wonder that the Great Cardinal Baronius would condemn that
Tenet, if there had been but probability of truth in it, it making for their
cause.

But to proceed, this famous Cyrill was so admired for his singular piety,
eloquence, and wit (that Gennadius reports) that the Grecian Bishops got some
of his Homilies by heart, and so recited them to the people with wonderful
delight and approbation; and truly besides many other things which are reported
of him to his praise, let this also be one, that John the third King of Sweden
gives him; when as he was sent into England by his brother Ericus, then King;
When the Commentaries of Saint Cyrill upon the holy Gospel of Saint John were
delivered to his hands, and he had read them, he plainly and ingenuously
confessed, that many new Writers had much swayed him, but now, sordescere
coeperunt, and postea illos, ut novos detestabatur, that all were far short:
nay, in respect of this one man, he detested all new Writers: and to speak
truth, as I do verily think, one main reason why Factions and Schisms have
such great growth of late, is, because most of our younger wits, and hottest
Preachers do not tie themselves to the reading of the Primitive Fathers, but
slightly content themselves and others, with conversing only with some few
Geneva Writers of late; or think to carry it away with the strength of their
own brain: by which means, many of them know but the shell of Theology:
when as (if my advise might take place) I would have them enquire of the
Ancients. Moses does invite them to the same: for says he, Ask thy Father,
and he will show thee; ask the Elders and they will tell thee, Deuteronomy. 32. 7.
They, they (I say) are only the ancient Bulwarks of Truth; they only, and
chiefly, have maintained Gods truth against Heretics, and they are the pure
Wells out of whom our Divines might exhaust wholesome Waters: Give thy self to
reading was Saint Paul's Council to Timothy, and it is not unfit to be
practiced of many young Zelots in our Church: but to return to our occasion.

Many and admirable are the writings of this Father: He writ to Theodosius to
prove the dangerousnesse of Nestorius Heresy. Photius styles this Cyril thus,
when amongst many other Fathers, as he styles Athanasius strenuus Praeful
Infractus Ambrosius, Phot. Bibl. page 890.
Decus Ecclesiae Basilius, and Verborum flumen Nyssenus, and fortis Athleta
Cyrillus. Athanasius, that stout Prelate, Irrefragable Saint Ambrose, Saint
Basil, the grace of the Church: Gregory Nyssen, a River for copiousnesse of
words, and that valiant Champion of the Church St. Cyril: nay, he is styled
Beatus Cyrillus, twice for condemning the Nestorian Heresy. Phot. Bibl. page
818.
He is also called Perstrenuus Cyrillus, and multis modis pietatem corroborans
Cyrillus; that is, Cyrill, who so many ways confirmed, and strengthened piety,
upheld religion, established Counsels, confounded Heretics, defended the
Orthodox Christians: And Eulogius his Scholar praised him, calling* him, Doctum
and pium minimeque vacillantem Cyrillum, Learned, godly, and not fearfully
hearted in the cause of truth: And Photius has registered his praise, Phot.
Bibl. page 311.
Leguntur Cyrilli Thesauri: refertus est liber, and pugnat valide, ac vary cum
Arii and Eunomii furibunda rabie, etenim and Logicis argumentis sapienter
illorum destruit amentiam, quibus dum sacrae scripturae adnectit adtexitque
testimonia, quam sit doctrina illa futilis omni ex part divulgat: adhibet idem
quoque nuda Sacrae scripturae testimonia, ut quo se fastuosi vertant, obsepti
undique atque conclusi non habeant. Est autem inter omnia ejus Scripta liber
hic maxim perspicuus, ijs potissimum, qui Logicorum argumentorum sensum capere
possunt, which is in English thus much, that Book of Saint Cyrils, which is
styled his Thesauri, is plentiful and abounding with wit and learning, and
fights valiantly and diversely with the fury and madness of Arius and Eunomius:
for he does by force of Logical arguments wisely ^verthrow and destroy their
folly, to which, while he joins and annexeth the testimony of the holy
Scriptures, he does divulge to the eye of the world how empty and weak their
Doctrines are; and by using those testimonies of the Scriptures, he does so
hedge those Heretics in, that they know not which way to turn or wind
themselves off, or out from shame. This book of his is so perspicuous for
learning, that it is highly esteemed of all pious and judicious scholars; and
more specially of those who can apprehend the sense and vigor of Logic: and
his scholar Eulogius styles him thus again, accuratissimus autem Doctor
Cyrillus, singul^s Haereticorum pariter execratus est sententias, and duas in
Christo naturas concurrentes indivisas and inconfusas planissime demonstrat.
And again, Cyrillus rerum divinarum sciens: And Phot. bib. pa. 838.
Ardens ille ^eritatis studiosus Cyrillus, and Sapiens Cyrillus, Cyrillus homo
divinus: in English, that most accurate and smart doctor Saint Cyril, hated the
positions of all Heretics, and did most plainly demonstrate the two Natures in
Christ, undivided and unconfused* Cyril had true knowledge of holy things; he
was studious and zealous for the truth, and full of wisedom^, a man plainly
divine: nay it plainly appears, that his authority was great, to whom
Counsels yielded to for his learning, for it is said of him, Sic Concilium and
Cyrillus, so the Council holds, and so does Cyrillus too.

Cardinal Bellarmine calls him, Virum Sanctissimum, Doctissimum, ac praesertim
circa mysterium Dominicae incarnationis a Deo doctum, Nestorium Haeresiarcham
primum scriptis, deinde etiam authoritate damnavit; a most holy man, and
learned, and especially he was taught and instructed of God in the mystery of
Christ's Incarnation: He condemned (as is said before) Nestorius the Heretic,
who was then Bishop of Constantinople, first by his famous Writings, then by
his authority.

This ^Nestorius Doctrine was: That the Blessed Virgin Mary was the Mosher of
Christ, etc.

Christ as he was Man, but not as God, thereby most impiously inverting that
great Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God; this being taught at
Constantinople by Nestorius and his Disciples was a great trouble to the
people; and so much the more, Niceph. Hist. li. 14. cap. 33.
because he had ingratiated himself into the Emperors favor, so that no
means was left for redress, but the calling of a Council; yet in the interim,
this good man took pen and ink, and wrote a brief, and modest Epistle to
Nestorius, wherein he admonished him of the peoples discontents, and what
great danger was in all likelihood to fall upon the Church, through his still
obstinacy and indiscretion, but all in vain: the answer returned, was rather
reprehensory than otherwise. The Bishop in tenderness of his dignity, and as
he was Caesar's friend, writes again, and again; but still answered with the
same success as before, if not worse: hereupon several Councels were called,
Niceph. Hist. l. 14. ca. 34.
one at Rome, the other at Alexandria; but that Oecumenicall one at Ephesus,
called by the Emperor, Hit the Nail on the head, Bellarm. de (...) Eccles.
Trithem.
where the reverend Prelate of Alexandria sat as President amongst two hundred
Fathers of the Church: much ado there was on all sides, and there wanted not
some that sided with Nestorius in his errors; Niceph. (...). lib. 14. c^p 34.
but such was the grave carriage of our reverend Father, and strength of
argument there used, that the very sinews of Nestorius Doctrine were again
cut in sunder; he himself deprived from all spiritual promotion, digraded from
all Ecclesiastical function, and his positions condemned as most blasphemous
against the Son of God, Christ Jesus. Thus the Council closed, but with
applause unanimously conferred on their learned President. Anast. Synaita in
Hodeg. c. 5.
Blessed for ever be the memorial of Cyrill Archbishop of Alexandria: many
were the Epistles commendatory sent unto this renowned Prelate from all the
parts of the Christian World: No general Council for a long time after,
wherein the very name of Cyrill was not precious; as in that of Chalcedon,
after the repetition of the Nicene Creed, Synodus Chalcedon.
they all cried out: This was Saint Cyrils Doctrine, thus he believed, this is
true faith indeed, and thus we all believe; blessed be the memorial of Cyril
of Alexandria.

Yet the perfidious Nation of the Jews dwelling within this City, grew very
tumultuous upon this second blow, Niceph. Hist. lib. 14. cap. 14.
where after many mutinous uproares, much slaughter having drawn a great party
to their side: to maintain their tenants, they took a Christian Boy, and in
derision of Christ, they hung him on a Cross, mocked at him, spit on him,
bu^ffe^ed him, and at last cruelly whipped him to death: the Christians
hereupon made head against the Jews, and the good Bishop himself all on fire
with zeal, for the Name of Christ, leads on to their Synagogues, where some
of them were put to the sword, the rest banished, and all the spoil of their
goods divided amongst the people; and yet this is not all, sedition and privy
conspiracy of the Jews false Doctrine, and Heresy of the Novatians, and
Anthropomorphites being thus removed, he looked more near home, by reducing
those Christians that were any way dissolute, into better order, by information
of the simple, by comforting the afflicted, and by relieving the poor and
needy; as may appear by his Sermons to the people upon several occasions.

This, and much more (not unlike a Ship in the midst of a tumultuous Sea) was
the state of this reverend Prelate, during the first four years of his
government at Alexandria. So we may perceive that his pains were great, and
his care for the Churches good deserves perpetual commendation. Socra. l. 7.
c. 29
And who shall read his Works, will find them well stored with all sorts of
Learning.

And here I can but observe two passages, worth observation: first, that the
Devil does at all times strive to destroy the Church of of God, and labors to
sow Heresies and Schisms in the midst of it: Secondly, that it has always
pleased GOD to stir up at all times, and upon a^l occasions some men who have
resisted the malice of all opposers, and have proved themselves resolute
Champions in the truths cause: so Athanasius against the Arrians, so this Saint
Cyrill against Nestorius and Pelagius, Magna est Veritas, and praevalebit. Hell
gates shall not prevail against it, this House the Church being the Pillar of
truth shall stand, because it is builded on a rock, which rock is Christ.

After forty two years government, this Noble and Orthodoxe Father, this great
star of Alexandria, began at last to twinkle; and yielded to death; having
sweat hard, and labored extraordinary for the space of twenty two years in
that Vineyard: he received the earnest penny of salvation in the year of
Christ 448, Baron. in An. Tom. 4.
and in the Reign of Theodosius the younger.

Cyrillus his Sayings.
Cyrillus Alexand. de Fest. Pasch. Homil. 16.
We must, as it were, graspe any occasion of doing well in both our hands, nor
let slip those precious opportunities wherein we may do good.

If a Seaman lose but the opportunity of a good gale, he is cast behind in the
Voyage: if the Husbandman neglect the season of the year, he may sit at home
and pick straws; and if any who has a Christian calling, shall be a cunctator
in Religion, and procrastinate those more special employments, I judge him fit
for all reprehension, and to undergo such inconveniences as shall be conducible
to such a negligent, and careless condition.

Idem in Fest. Paschal. Homil. 27.
Admiration! the Rich man wants in the midst of his abundance, is more
tormented with care than other; takes up the beggars note, and cries out, O,
what shall I do? yea, rather how shall I dispose of my goods? Where shall I
lay them? I have a plentiful crop this year, and there is now a world of
laborers in my harvest: my Vineyard swells with store of Grapes, and the Wine
press runs over with abundance; here is all things in plentiful manner, yea but
then life fails him, what becomes then of his goods? nay, what becomes of
himself? better had it been to have made the bellies of the poor his barns,
succored the fatherless and needy, to have laid up his treasure in heaven,
that so he might have been received into everlasting habitations.

Idem adversus Anthropomorphitas, cap. 2.
Where the Scripture wants a tongue of expression, we need not lend an ear of
attention: we may safely knock at the Council door of Gods secrets; but if we
go further, we may be more bold then welcome.

Idem de vita hom. justificati.
The devil runs with open mouth upon Gods children seeking to devour them:
they manfully resist him: he thinks to weaken their faith, and they by his
assaults are made so much the stronger: he fights against them, but they gain
ground upon him: and so by this means whatsoever he intends for their
destruction, full sore against his will makes for their advantage.

Idem, contra Julianum. lib. 3.
The great Creator of all things forcing what would come to pass, steps in
between life and death, how he nips one in the bud newly grown ripe for
heaven; there an other to prevent the evil to come: this man he frees from the
miseries of a sinful life, that man he suffers to go on that he may fill up
the measure of his wickedness: thus to God the Lord belong the issues of
death: but thanks be given to God that affords us this comfort through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Idem, de Fortitudine quae in Christo est, lib. 5.
He that is taken up with the pompes, and vanities of this wicked world is one
of the Devils Champions not worthy to be listed under the Regiment of Christ
Jesus the Captain of his salvation.

As for his Writings, Photius in Bibliothec. Graec. in Maenolog. Iunii 9.
Matyro. Romans Ian. 27.
they were such as the whole Christian World at that time approved, in so much
that the Grecian Bishops got his Homilies by heart, and so repeated them to the
people: his name became memorable, for the Eastern and Western Churches have
made room for it in their Calenders with this adjunct: The Champion of the
Catholic Faith.

But his Writings have the more eternized him, such as were printed at Paris
1605.

Tome 1.
1 Explanations to the literal and mystical sense on Genesis, eleven books. 2
On Leviticus, 1^ books. 3 On Esaias, five books. 4 On Saint John's Gospel, 12
books. 5 Sayings on the old Testament Anagogically explained. Collected out of
Cyrill, Maximus, and others. 6 A book against the Jews, with questions. 7
Short explanations of those who flourished before the Law.
Tome 2.
1 Epistles of Saint Cyrill to diverse with their answers to him, 39 books. 2
Homilies of the Incarnation, being 10 books. 3 An Apology to Theodosius the
Emperor. 4 A Declaration of the twelve Anathematismes. 5 An Apologeticall book
for his Anathemaes. 6 Another Apologeticall book to Euoptius against
Theodoret. 7 Exposition of the Nicen Creed. 8 School Notes on Christ's
Incarnation. 9 Two Epistles to Succensus the Bishop. 10 Twelve Synodall
Epistles. 11 Nestorius Tenets gathered out of his own Works. 12 A speech of
the going out of the soul, of the second coming. 13 A famous Work called
Thesaurus, containing fourteen books. 14 Seven books of Dialogues with
Hermias. 15 Of worshipping in spirit, and in truth, 17 books. 16 Against Julian
the Apostate, ten books. 17 Of the right Faith to Theodosius and his Queens. 18
Against the Anthropomorphites. 19 Of the Trinity.
Besides these, there are extant printed at Ingolstadt, his Commentaries on the
lesser Prophets, Greek, and Latin, in Folio, and five Books against
Nestorius, Greek and Latin, in the end of the first Tome of the General
Council of the Roman Edition. And there shortly are expected thirty Paschall
Sermons.

In these Works, you may find Learning, Wit, and Eloquence, in all which this
Father excelled. So that if a man call him the Magazine and store house of
divine perfection, he shall not mistake himself, nor transcend the bounds of
modesty. But of him -- ne me Crispini scrinia lippi
Compilasse putes, verbum non amplius addam.


An. Christi 440. Sanctus Petrus Chrysologus.
S. PETRVS CHRISOLOGVS.

THis Worthy Fathers Birthplace was at Imola a village near Revenna in
France, sprung from Parents, who are commended for their uprightness and
sincerity, not of mean or dejected fortunes, but having ability of means to
support them with credit and reputation: and they are prayse-worthy for their
great care that they had to see their son virtuously brought up in study and
good Arts.

This Chrysologus had institution for good manners and learning, from
Cornelius, who was Bishop of that City: so likewise from the same Bishop he
received holy Orders, and was found wondrous able for that holy function;
insomuch, as not long after, he was by Sixtus the third of Rome, chosen to be
Archbishop of Ravenna, and was the two and twentieth that had successively
managed the affairs of that Sea. He deserves high commendation for his rare
parts, and indefatigable pains, and various studies. He was present at two
Councels, the one was held at Ravenna, the other at Rome, by the authority of
Caelius Symmachus, then Pope of Rome, and Theodori^ns, King of the Ostrogoths.
He sent Letters full of learning to the Synod of Calcedon against Eutiches the
Heretic, which are yet extant; but what a copiousnesse of wit he did enjoy,
may easily be perceived: as also what a measure of Eloquence he possessed, by
the number of his Homilies and Sermons full of Elegancy and matter, being above
176. He sat Bishop the space of sixty years, and governed the Church of God
with admirable wisdom and industry. Trithemius amongst his Ecclesiastical
Writers, speaks thus of this Chrysologus, Trithem. de Scrip. Eccles.
Petrus Archiepiscopus Ravennas vir eruditus, atque Sanctissimus, etc. that is,
Peter, who was Archbishop of Ravenna, a man full of learning and holiness,
performed many worthy actions in the Church of Christ.

He was so powerful in Eloquence, especially in his Sermons to the people, and
so holy in his conversation, that he by both these did daily bring some to the
embracing the truth, and did set forth many rare pieces pro edification^
fidelium, that is, for the edification of the Faithful. You have this Father
sufficiently commended for his excellent parts in an Epistle set before his
Works, which were printed at Paris with the Works of Leo the Great, the first
of that name, Pope of Rome, as also of Maximus, the Bishop of Taurinum, and
Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspa, with the Works also of Valerianus, Bishop of
Cemelium in one Volume, where this Chrysologus is commended with these words,
En tibi Chrysologum, etc. that is, behold this Chrysologus, not only famous
for his Divine Eloquence, and solidity of Learning, but also for his honored
antiquity, and faithfulness in the Episcopal function. He lived within a
while after Saint Chrysostom, and other famous pillars of the Church. He got
this name as Chrysostom got his; for he is termed of all Divines (...), that
is, the Golden spoken man; for who will but read his Works, shall find a lofty
Majesty of style and phrase, absolute and profound Learning, such purity of
Divinity, not stained or tainted with any vain affectation, nor any rigid and
harsh Interpretation, no obsolete deductions, or conclusions, but direct and
even Natural: so that if you compare Neotericks, either Commentators, or as my
Author speaks (...), that is, Homily Writers with this man, you shall find
them as Pigmies to another Atlas, for where have you a more modest Interpreter
of the sacred Scriptures? Where can you find one so conspicuous for pious
Eloquence, or Eloquent PIETY? Who opens the most obscure places of the Text
with a more apt, consonant, ingenuous sincere interpretation? so that he does
not wrest the sense, nor corrupt it, nor unfitly expound it, but with
judgment, integrity, exact Learning and industry, so that in these respects,
he does well deserve to be ranked with the most eminent Fathers, he does not
rashly or childishly heap together a few places of Scripture, but does (where
the place or matter wants testimony) wisely and discreetly exhibit his proofs
for confirmation. As he was studious in his preachings, so always before he
pend any thing he would with great ardencie, and humility set himself to
prayer. Cardinal Baronius in his Annalls does commend this Petrus Chrysologus,
Card. Baron. Tom. 6. p. 88. 89.
for his Epistle writ to Eutyches, dignam plane tanto viro, and Episcopo
Epistolam, that is, An Epistle indeed worthy such a great Bishop, and it does
begin in these words, Tristis legi tristes literas tuas, with grief of heart, I
have read thy heavy and doleful Letters: as the peace of the Churches, the
concord of the Priests, the tranquillity of the common people makes our joy to
abound, so no less does the dissension of brethren arising out of such causes
deeply afflict and torment us: oh now why should the actions of Christ done so
long since, allowed and approved in all ages, by your pen be called to question?
How Origin too nicely searching into Divinity, and how Nestorius disputing too
curiously of the Natures fell, your wisdom cannot but know; the Wisemen
c^nfesse him to be a God, though at that time laid in a Cratch; by presenting
their Mystical presents: the Priests do acknowledge him that should be borne
of a Virgin, the heavenly Army of Angels sing at his Nativitie, Glory to God in
the Highest: And when as at the Name of JESUS every knee should bow, both of
things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, what a strangeness is it,
that your pen should move a question of his beginning, we do (Beloved) with the
blessed Apostle safely conclude, that though we have known Jesus after the
flesh, yet now know we him no more, nor is it safe to search too far, when
as we are commanded to honor and fear him. It is not the wisest course to
gaze too much upon this resplendent Sun, lest we be justly by his glorious
beams beblinded; it is easy to collect by the words, and advise of this
Epistle to judge what a singular man for Learning this Peter Chrysologus was:
Baronius says, that having with great pains long governed the Church; and
having been always studious of his ways, he died in December, the second
day, which, says he, has a fair probability of truth, in that because Leo
then Bishop of Rome in the Consulship of Martianus, a year after this, is said
to have sent Letters to Leo this Peter's Successor: as appears in the Epistles
of Leo, he was by all likelihood an upright man, and of courage in matters of
Religion: For he and Laurentius the Bishop of Millain, Leo Epist. 37.
would not communicate with Symmachus, lest they should be suspected to side
with him, against the other Orthodox Bishops, when the Council was held in
Rome: and Cardinal Baronius shall conclude all in a word. Sed and qui post
Laurentium sequitur ordine Petrus Ravennas Episcopus, his temporibus eximia
sanctae vitae nituit claritudine, that is, but amongst those other worthy men
after Laurentius, in order is to be reckoned Peter Archbishop of Ravenna, who
in these times excelled for the conspicuous fame of his holy life: and because
many Students may the easier find upon what subjects Chrysologus has written,
known to be all his own Labors, and not fathered upon him by them that were
admirers of him: I have here set them down in order as they are registered in
the Parisian Edition in the year 1623, which you shall find after his Sayings.

Chrysologus his Sayings.
Of an unprofitable Servant.
He is like the fig tree that was well looked to by the Master, yet was
unfruitful, only cumbred the ground, sucked virtue from others; troubled and
grieved the Master, Pet. Chrysostom. ser. 106. p. 279.
was a disgrace to the Garden, and at last cut down for the fire: and what else
is he who has Natures endowments, the benefit of Reason, of Sense, of
Judgment, of good Education and Example, but yet brings forth no fruits of a
sanctified life, but as that Tree who hindered others and hurt it self.

Of uncharitable Rich men.
Remember that, Ch^ysol. sermon. 104. p. 275.
Thou Fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul: perplexe not thy self
what thou shall leave behind, but be sure to send thy alms before thee: be
rich in good Works: Let not thy care be to have thy hands always full, and the
poores always empty. The only way to have full Barns is to have charitable
hands.

Upon Mildness and Meekness.
The Apostle Saint Paul has, I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God: A
good man uses entreaties rather than commands: the heavenly Physician rather
cures our wounds with divine salves, than makes them with his punishing rods:
God had rather men should love him than fear him: He had rather be called
Father, than Master: Idem in sermon. 108. p. 283.
He winnes by mercy, that He might not punish by Justice. If thou will be
like thy Father, do likewise.

Of the means to grow in grace.
As neither in the flint alone, nor in the steel alone, any fire is to be
seen, nor extracted, but by collision and conjunction; Chrysol. sermon. 96. p.
251.
fire and light is brought: so nor by faith alone, nor by good works alone is
salvation attaind: but if ever you intend to come to that infinite light, join
both together.

Against Drunkenness and Gluttony.
Variety and satiety of dainty meats and drinks weakens the vitals, spoils
the stomach corrupts the blood, Chrysol. sermon. 42. p. 106.
poisons the humors, kindles choler, ends in the scar-fire of burning fevers:
as the clouds darkens the Heavens, so intemperate banquetings the mind: as the
violence of wind and waves drown and sink a ship into the bottom of the sea:
so does drunkenness and gluttony our souls and bodies to the depth of Hell.

Who sinned more grievously then Paul? who offended more grievously than Peter?
yet they by repentance deserved not only the ministry, Pet. Chrysol^g* in
qu^dam se^
but also the mastery in holiness: remember there is mercy with the Father in
the Gospel showed to the prodigal son returning home: judge not therefore
before the time* before the Lord come, etc. for men know not the judgments of
God, for that which they praise he does condemn, and that which they
condemn, he does praise.

In God, piety is not without justice, nor justice without piety; (...)
nor equity without goodness, nor goodness without equity. Virtues being
separated are annihilated, and perish. For equity without goodness is
severity: and justice without piety is cruelty.

Some have lived commendably before their attaining to dignity: Pet. Chrysol.
in quodam ser. 1.
but being set upon the Candlestick of the Church, they turn their light into
darkness, and their fame into infamy; and it had been better for such Lights
to have been still hidden under a Bushel, than with disgrace to have got into
the Candlestick: for their wickedness which was obscured by their poverty,
was manifested and divulged by their dignity: As they increased in dignity, so
they did also in disgrace and infamy. A private sinner is often spared, but if
a Prelate offend, all tongues are sharpened to speak his disgrace.

Discretion should be used in making promises; Pet. Chrysol. in quadam Epis.
for a vain promise does often make friends become enemies.

Where greatest loss is feared, there greatest wariness should be used.

Chrysologus his Works.
1 Homilies for Christmasse day. 2 Upon Saint Stephens day. 3 Upon Innocents
day, or Childernmasse day. 4 Upon New-yeares day. 5 Upon Twelfth day. 6 First
Sunday after Epiphany. On the Second, third, and fourth Sondayes after
Epiphany. 7 Upon the Septuagesima. 8 Upon Ash Wednesday, 9 Upon the first
Sunday in Lent. 10 Upon all Lent Sondayes. 11 Upon Good Friday. 12 Upon
Easter Day. 13 Upon all the Sondayes till Whitsontide. 14 For Ascension day. 15
For Sondayes after Whitsontide. 16 Upon St. Andrews day. 17 Upon St. Thomas
day. 18 Upon our Lady day. 19 Upon St. John Baptists day. 20 Upon Saint Peter's
day. 21 Upon St. Mathews day. 22 Upon the beheading of Saint John Baptist. 23
Upon St. Luke the Evangelist. 24 Upon some Martyrs. 25 Upon one Confessor. 26
Upon a Virgin Martyr. 27 Upon the day of the Dedication of the Temple. 28 A
book against the Heretic Eutyches. 29 Some learned Epistles.
The time of this Fathers Life was long; he did, as Trithemius reports of him,
flourish principally under Martian the Emperor, and dyed in the year of Jesus
Christ's Incarnation 500. His body (as was fitting) was with great solemnity and
lamentation buried hard by the body of that renouned Martyr Cassianus, and does
with him expect a glorious resurrection amongst the just and upright men. His
Works are of great esteem amongst the learned, and are to be reserved in the
Church of Christ, as Monuments of his great labor and learning.

An. Christi 445. Sanctus Prosper.
S. PROSPER.

THis famous Writer was of the same time with Hilarious Arelatensis, and was the
Amanuensis to Leo; His parentage is not amongst the Church Historians fully
known, and therefore not to be mentioned; but certainly they were both of
ability and religiously careful, because their son had such virtuous
education, some say that he was Bishop of Rhegium, a City of Emilia in
Italy; others do hold that he was Bishop of Rhegium in Gaul. Card. Bellar.
de scrip. Eccles. page 98.
Cardinal Bellarmine does in his Ecclesiastical Writers, suspect the former
opinion, as not consonant to truth, and gives two reasons for his assertion;
for he finds Saint Prosper to have subscribed to the Vasensian and
Carpeuctorete Provincial Council, which are in Gaul, not Italy: so that
hence it is probable, he was Bishop in a Province of Gaul: Moreover, Saint
Faustus succeeded St. Prosper in his Bishopric: now all have concluded Faustus
to be a French Bishop, not an Italian, and that his Diocese was subject to
the Metropolitan of Aquitain, not to Ravenna: but I will not insist upon this.
He was in his time famous for his learned and judicious Writings, and showed
himself to be a true Scholar to so great a Master as Saint Augustine was: For
He, as well as his Master, had learnedly confuted and overthrown the dangerous
Heresy of the Pelagians, and as Johannes Antonius Flaminius of Imola, who
writes his Life, says, that he was Bishop of Rhegium, Vir multiplici doctrina
and sanctitate insignis: A man eminent for his sanctity and multiplicitie of
Learning: but in what place, or of what parents he was borne, non satis
compertum habemus, we have not sufficiently known: but it does appear to
all, Aquitanum fuisse, That he was of Aquitaine; but while he lived in his
Country, he did lay a sure foundation, that in after times he would be a
shining Lamp in the House of God: for he was assiduous in reading, and most
conversant in the Scriptures, and usually had the four Evangelists in his
hands, in which meditating, it was by divine providence so ordered, that He
should meditate upon that place of our Savior, where it is said, If thou will
be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and come
and follow me, which place of holy Writ, He did so strictly apply unto
himself, that willing, not to be only a Reader, but a devout practitioner of
Gods Word, He presently without any delay, put this in practice, and made sale
of all his Lands and Goods, and distributed them freely to the poor members of
his Savior, that so being disburthened of his earthly estate, he might the
more easily and comfortably follow his Savior, to get an heavenly inheritance
which will never fade, but is everlasting. So setting his servants free both
men and maids, and yielding them a competencie to live on, he went to Rome,
that he might see the servants of God in that famous City; At the same time
that most holy and sweetly eloquent Bishop Leo ruled that Church, who hearing
of the coming of such an excellent man as this Prosper was, left not till he
had got him into his household, and it is not to be conceivd with what humanity
and courtesy, and with what joy and rejoicing he received this Jewel, as sent
to him by Gods special Blessing: so highly was piety and learning esteemed in
those days, though much slighted in these looser times: this learned Leo
rejoiced at the approach of Prosper, even as Saint Peter is said to have done
at Saint Paul's coming, for amongst other things Leo did perceive what an able
Engine God had sent him to oppose that Heresy of Eutyches, which holds but one
nature in Christ, which every day began more and more to take root in several
places; but especially in the City of Chalcedon: to overthrow which Leo
afterward sent this Prosper with many other Roman Clergy men: Such cares
there always has been in the Governors of the Church, to keep down Heresies
and Schisms, and were it not for the vigilancie and dexterous Learning of
Pious Governors, and Reverend Bishops, how soon would obstinate Heretics and
hot-spirited Schismatics overthrow the grounds of Divinity and order of the
Church?

These pious men being sent by Leo, unanimously maintaind the Nice^ Creed, and
did learnedly and divinely by infallible arguments defend the two natures, and
took away the aforesaid Heresy, and by their hand writing sent to Martianus
the Emperor, with full consent condemned the said author Eutyches as an
Heretic. So this Prosper being overcome by the prayers of this good Leo,
stayed there a good while, and when he had struck off the heads of many
Heresies, by sending to diverse Churches his learned Epistles, Leo being
inwardly warned by Gods Spirit, made him (though for his part with a great
deal of reluctancie) Bishop of Rhegium, for he said his shoulders were not
able to undergo such a burden: But Prosper being overcome, he took his
journey, and the former Bishop being worn out with age, and troubled with a
grievous disease, gave up his spirit into the hands of God: for the loss of
which good man, the whole City did grieve exceedingly: but suddenly their
mourning was turned into joy, for the old Bishop before his death willed them
not to grieve for his death: for said he, God in especial love to you, and
the Bishop of Rome, out of his care has provided you another man to succeed
me, a Deoelectum, Chosen of God, famous for holiness of life, and ability of
judgment, who is now coming to you. Which words comforted them exceedingly;
for when the same of his coming had extended it self to the gates of their
City, all the Citizens went out to give him honorable entertainment. Such
reverence in ancient times did men give, even to the persons of their
spiritual Rulers.

Being thus (with the general acclamations of all men) called to be their
Bishop, and seated in his Episcopal Chair, that he might give them a
testimony of his parts, and what a worthy Light he would be to his charge, his
Speech which he made to them does sufficiently express, which does begin in
these words; Video, Fratres Charissimi, quantum meis imbecillibus humeris onus
impositum fuerit* etc. that is, (which for the sweetness both of style and
matter I have translated) I see, (dear brethren) what a great burden will be
put upon my weak shoulders: For can there be a greater than the charge of men's
souls? and that which makes it the weightier, is the expectation of men, who
look for things to be performed by us, even beyond man's ability; or at least
such gifts a^ are given but to few: for is it not a difficulty to turn men's
judgments? to alter their ^etled opinions? and even now I see plainly, that
such is the expectation of men: Wherefore I plainly see, that I must omit
nothing which does any ways belong to the care of souls. But knowing the
burden will be the lighter if it be laid upon many men's backs, I entreat you
(oh my beloved sons) to partake some part of the burden with me. Which you
do, if you will (remembering your own salvation) keep Gods Commandments, and
live in unity and godly love; from which, as from a most plentiful Fountain,
will flow out abundantly wonderful virtues, viz. Humility, mutual love,
settled peace and concord; which virtues, if they do as they should do, abide
and abound in you, Christ will be always amongst you, and all things will have
good success. This is it (as I said before) to divide the burden with me, and
so he divinely goes on, exhorting them to have God in all their thoughts:
these are the things (said he) that I thought fit to admonish you of at my
entrance.

This was a fair demonstration what a worthy Bishop he would be to them: His
special care was to take away all strifes and contentions from amongst them:
and therefore in his speeches to them still commended peace and unity, which
were so full of native and genuine Eloquence, and strengthened by Gods Word, and
his beautiful Life, that they took deeply, and did work powerfully; for what
he said, that he did: his Heart was adorned with charity, his countenance was
composed of meekness: He was wondrous affable, he was temperately severe:
What a care had he of the poor? How did he support poor Orphans and Widows?
Was he not a Father to all Ages, Sexes, Orders, that were in that City? how
careful in his Sermons to excite men not only to hear, but also to work out
their salvation? How watchful was he in his Episcopal charge, lest the
Devil should cause any of his flo^^^ to go astray? What admonitions gave he
to his Clergy? and lest while he preached unto others, he himself should be a
cast away: how did he addict himself to watching, fasting, prayer, and
Meditation? Did he not likewise send Letters to other Bishops, his
fellow laborers, to entreat them not to forget their charge? which actions and
deportments as they did deserve love, so they did gain him the love and
reverence of all about him: He sat Bishop two and twenty years in Rhegium,
unto the 466. year of Christ. He flourished chiefly under Leo the 1: Having
done his work so well, so long a time in the Church, the time of his
dissolution came, and he fell sick and dyed: But before he yielded up the
Ghost, he called diverse unto him, and made a heavenly speech unto them, all
weeping for the fear of losing so good a Bishop, and so worthy a Father: It
begins Video, dilectissimi, etc. I see, most dearly beloved, how you all
grieve, and I wonder not, for it is hard for true lovers to part without
tears, but you must bear it, for to have stayed longer here, might seem
better for you, for me it is better to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Consider that man's life is weak and frail, heaped with many froward and
troublesome businesses, providing things needful to save his body from misery
and want; for the life that I have enjoyed was but given me upon condition, to
render it again, not grudgingly, but gladly, and with a cheerful heart;
for^^^^th is the only easement of all our trouble and anguish: the longer I
live, the longer I live in sin; the more time I spend, the more I err and
go astray, each hour purchasing to my self a new pain and punishment: For
it is not the man which lives longest, but he that lives justly and
virtuously shall attain the promise and reward of heaven. He it is, that is
worthy to be honored and lamented of all good men: and so divinely goes on,
certifying them of the resurrection to glory, and entreating them to live in
love, and keep peace unbroken.

These dying words melted them into tears; for what can make sooner or deeper
compassion into ones heart, than to hear the dying words of a good man? So
after Psalms and Hymns sung by his friends, he praying lifted up his hands to
God in the sight of them all, and departed. His Corpse with the Citizens and all
his Priests was with great pomp interred in the Church, which he had
consecrated to the honor of God and the blessed Saint Apollinaris; he dyed
the eighth of the Calends of July, Hilarious the second being Bishop of Rome,
and Martianus tuling the Empire. Faustus succeeded him, a worthy and pious man.

Saint Prospers sayings.
1. Of being with God.
It is the greatest misery of man, Prosp. ^n lib. sent* p. 174.
to be without Him, without whom He cannot be: but whosoever does not
meditate of Him, nor rightly conceive of, Him, nor yet truly love Him, is for
certain without Him.

2. How wicked men should be hated.
He hates perfectly who hates in righteousness and knowledge: that is, Idem* p.
^75.
that thou shall neither hate the man for his vice, nor love the vice for the
man's sake. We may rightly then hate the wickedness of wicked men, and yet
love the Creature: so that man is not to be blamed for the sin, nor yet the
sin to be loved for the man.

3. Of the hope of the faithful.
Let it not (good Christian) Idem lib. sent. p. 178.
affright thee, that thou do not presently enjoy what thou believe: be sure
that thou continue thy prayer in Hope; though the thing promised be as yet
hid: Work still and increase in virtues; for while the constancy of thy Faith
is tried, the Mercy and Glory is augmented.

4* Of Riches and Honors.
Thou boastest thy self of thy wealth, Idem in lib. sent. 225.
and braggest of thy honor, and triumphest in thy strength and beauty.
Consider what thou art by sin, and consider what thou shall be in the grave,
and thy Plumes will fall: for every proud man forgets himself.

5. Of being in Christ.
The branches are so in the Vine, Idem in lib. sent. 364 p. 219
that they add nothing to it, but receive from it their life and liberty: the
Vine is so in the Branches, that it gives nourishment to them, takes none from
them: and so to have Christ dwelling in us, and we in Him, is profitable to
us, not to Christ: for though one branch be cut off, another may spring from
the living tree: but that which is cut off, cannot live without the Vine.

6. Of a twofold life.
Life is twofold, Idem in lib. 236. p. 197.
of the body, of the soul: as the soul is the life of the body, so the life
of the soul is God: and as when the soul departs, the body dies, so when God
departs, the soul dies.

Prosper, lib. 1.
The poor eat the fruits of their labors, but the rich eat the fruits of
their sins.

Prosper, de vita contemplativa.
He is ignorant of his sins, which he should know and bewail, that does
curiously consider others offenses. But if he turn to himself, and behold his
own manners, he will nor reprehend others, but lament his own sins.

Prosper, de vocatione Gentium.
Those things which God would have hidden, are not to be searched into: but
those things which are manifest are not to be neglected, lest in those we
become unlawfully curious, and in these damnably ungrateful.

Prosper, pro vita contemplativa.
The Churches treasure should be communicated to those which want; but to those
which have sufficient, nothing should be disbursed: for to give to the rich, is
to defraud the poor.

Prosper, de vita contemplativa, lib. 4.
The proud man would be accounted constant, the prodigal liberal, the
covetous diligent, the rash valiant, the inhumane sparing, the slothful quiet,
and the fearful wary.

Prosper, de vita contemplativa.
The life to come is blessed eternity, and eternal blessedness, where there
is certain security, secure quietness, quiet joyfulnesse, happy eternity,
eternal felicity: where there is perfect love, no fear, eternal day, and
one spirit attended on by Angels, where the blessed are not rejected, nor no
sinner admitted.

Prosper, lib. 5. de Vitiis, and Virtutibus.
The envious man has so many torturers, as the envied has praisers. It is the
justice of envy to kill and torment the envious.

His Works are here truly registered by Bellarmines computation.

1 Of Predictions, 3 books. 2 Of the contemplative life, 3 books. 3 Of the
calling of the Gentiles, 2 books. 4 Of Grace and Freewill. 5 Answers to the
Chapters, of the objections of the French, Vincentians Gemensians. 6 Of Grace,
one book. 7 Of St. Augustines Sentences, one book. 8 Of Gods providence. ^ one
book. 9 Of predestination an Epistle to S. Austine. 10 Commentaries on the
Psalms from the 100, to the 150. 11 A book of Epigrams against ingratitude. 12
A continuation of Eusebius and Hieroms Chronology.
An. Christi 525. Saec. 6. Sanctus Fulgentius.
S. FVLGENTIVS.

THere is amongst Ecclesiastical Writers mention made of two of this name, the
one was Bishop of Vtriculanum, memorable for his holiness and sincerity of
life, and flourished under the reign of Totila, King of the Goths, Justinian
being Emperor, and Vigilius Pope. Saint Gregory in his third book of
Dialogues, in his twelfth Chapter describes him completely. This is he, who was
one of those two hundred Bishops; which King Trasamund, King of the Vandals,
Lib. Romans Pon. in hist. Sym. hist. Miscel. l. 15.
sent bound into the Island of Sardinia, to whom Symmachus the Pope sent
sufficient daily provision. This was equal in Holiness and Learning, if not
excelling the other. This famous Fulgentius, whose life I describe, was an
Affrican by birth, sprung of noble Parents, and ^o much the more honored,
because they were Christians: His Grandfathers name was Gordianus, a Senator
of Carthage, and it fell out so, when Gensericus was King of the Vandals, that
this Gordianus, with diverse other Noblemen, and Counselors, were expulsed
Carthage, and stripped of all their means and revenues. Upon this, Gordianus
sailed into Italy, for fear, that as he was cashiered from his Estate, so
likewise he should lose his liberty, if not his life; where dying, two of his
sons returned into their Country, and obtained some part of their fathers
inheritance; where, one of them, called Claudius by his wife Mariana, an honest
Matron in the Town of Leptis, had born unto him this worthy Fulgentius: but
his Father dying, committed the care of his little son to his Wife, which
with great care brought him up both to the knowledge of the Latin and Greek
tongues, wherein he proved most excellent and expert.

Being young he is commendable for his obedience to his Mother: so that she
committed the charge of her House to his circumspection; and in this charge He
showed such an example of modesty, obedience, and diligence, that as one
speaks of him, he was Matri praesidium, domesticis solatium, Reibadei (...)
vit. S. ^ gen^i^.
externis quibus conversabatur, exemplum: that is, a safeguard to his Mother, a
comfort to the family, to those without, with whom he conversed, a rare example.

But God had laid and appointed him out for higher employments, and so stirred
up and enlightened his understanding, that He knew and shunned worldly delights
and vain pleasures and profits, and so left the company of young men, and gave
himself to prayer, to ^astings, watchings, and reading, and meditation. So
having exercised himself in these duties, he goes to a certain Reverend
Bishop called Faustus, and humbly prayed him to admit him into his Cloister,
and afford him a religious habit: The Bishop at first doubting whether he was
fit to be admitted or not, because he was but young, tender, rich, and noble,
and therefore not yet able to undergo that strict course of life, telling him,
how that before he did resolve of it, to take a trial and surveigh of his own
strength, and seriously bethink himself of that charge which he went about to
embrace, seeing usually that many do presume too much upon their own power,
and many times attempt more than their ability are fit to undergo: But at last
noting well his eagerness, and hoping well of his constancy and continuance,
he yielded to his request.

But as soon as it was known that Fulgentius had undertaken this state of
life, all good men rejoiced, and bad men fretted: nay, his very mother in all
haste comes to recall him, and dissuade him from it, fearing that she should
lose much by this departure from her she cried, complained, and grieved deeply,
but her son would not alter, and indeed she gained well by this his
departure, for he gave himself wholly to virtue and holiness of life. His
diet was spare, and he took no Refectories to please his palate, he
subjugated his flesh, so that with this abstinence, he fell into a deep
sickness, and yet during his disease, he kept the same strictness of diet,
saying, that this sickness proceeded from the hands of God, and that it was
for his good, which so fell out, for he speedily recovered. He gave his
Heritage to his mother, not to his younger brother Claudius, lest it should
make him too proud, and because he should give the more respect to his Mother
during life.

About this time the Devil raised up a great storm of persecution against the
Catholic Christians by Thrasimund King of the Vandals, in which the good old
Bishop Faustus was driven from his government, and this Fulgentius also from
this Cell: but he got into another, where one Felix ruled, here he showed
admirable parts of modesty and temperance. But the Barbarians entering this
Country with violence of arms, this Fulgentius and Felix consulting for their
safeties fled from their places, but fell into the hands of the Arrians, who
were more inhumane and cruel then those Barbarians. For it happened* while
they stayed at Barbadilia, one Felix an Arrian Priest, being a cruel
persecutor of Orthodoxe Christians, tried all plots how to apprehend this
Fulgentius and ^elix, and having misused some by shaving them, and sending them
away naked from their lodgings, he so displeased the Bishop of Carthage, though
an Arrian, that he prosessed he would punish that Priest if Fulgentius would
accuse him, for this fact: but this good man would not accuse him, lest he
might seem to revenge his own wrongs, saying, plura pro Christo toleranda:
That he ought to suffer more then so for Christ. Well, he resolves to retur^e
into his own country, hoping to find more mercy amongst the Barbarians then
amongst the Arrians, so going for Sicily, he was driven into Syracuse, where
he was kindly entertained by an old Bishop called Eulalius, and by one
Ruffinianus, who were fled from the Arrians: so past he to Rome, and so into
Sardinia, where he was received with great joy. Here having settled himself,
there resorted to his Cell great store of Christians, whom he daily taught and
instructed; but he intended to lead a more private life, but he was forbidden
by Faustus a Bishop, who made him priest, and not long after made him Bishop of
Ruspa, a great and populous City, though Fulgentius was unwilling to accept
this great preferment: being thus invested, he kept his ancient Humility,
Piety, and Constanci^; but was the same in the height of Honor, as he was in
the deepest ebb of Adversity: and where so many graces as humility, etc. are
connext with meditation, they give an edge unto the soul, and make it
unpierceable as steel, hardly to endure the sharpest point of envy.

He was much addicted to study, for he would rise in the night to read and
pray: he obtained ground of one Posthumianus a Noble man, to build a place for
Religious Monks. But now Thrasimund King of the Vandals proscribed all the
Orthodoxe Bishops: and so this Fulgentius was banished with the rest: where
what good he did, is easily seen, for he resolved all doubts, relieved the
poor, reconciled the differences of many, made friendship between those that
were at difference, reduced those that were fallen into sin, gave
instructions to some, encouragements to others: none wanted that good, that he
could supply with all.

At the same time, Apud. Euod^^^* Ticinensem. p. 318.
Symmachus was Pope, who hearing the wasting of the African Churches, sent
provision to these Fathers that were fled, and a worthy Epistle of Comfort,
which begins thus, Ad vos specialiter dictum est, Nolite timere pusillus Grex,
etc. to you it is specially spoken, Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

But now Thrasimund the King dealing politikely intending to overthrow the
Church Orthodoxe, made as though he was turned Orthodox himself, and so he
seemd to desire to have some eminent and Orthodox fathers by him to resolve all
doubts and questions, and so hearing of the ^ame and learning of Fulgentius,
he sent for him to come to him to instruct him: whither when Fulgentius was
come, he effected much, and converted many Arians to the Faith, And writ a
book of the Trinity, which was so soundly and judiciously written, that it
astonished the King; and yet by wicked Councels he did command him to return
by night to Sardinia, lest the people should mutinere: but yet it pleased God
by contrary winds to bring him i^ again into Harbor, by which means all the
people did lend him prayers and praises, and wept for his departure: and great
numbers went along with him; but not long after, Thrasimund dying, Hildericus
succeeded him, who recalled the banished Bishops, and restored them to their
places: but this Fulgentius, of them all is said to be, Decus, Ornamentum,
Corona: the Grace, Ornament, and Crown: Here he reformed many abuses in the
Clergy, gathered together the scattered flock, was highly honored of all good
men.

He had an admirable dexterity in preaching, and was powerful in convincing,
and reverend in his carriage. In the time of his sickness, this was his
familiar speech, Da Deus mi, hic patientiam, post indulgentiam: Here, o God,
give me patience, and then pardon and mercy: falling sick, he lay so forty
days, and calling the Clergy about him declaring his faith, and exhorting
them to stand in the same, he quietly gave his soul into his Creatours hands,
in the year 529, and of his Bishopric the five and twentieth, aged sixty
five, and was honorably buried, and greatly lamented of all Religious
Christians: and was buried in a Church called Secunda.

Fulgentius Sayings.
Of Christ's Death.
He died for Men and Angels: for men, Fulgent* ad Thrasimund Reg. l. 2. cap. 3.
that they might rise from sin: for Angels, that they might not fall into
sin, for them that they might not be wounded: for man that he might be
healed of his wounds. He took infirmity from man, gave confirmation to them:
Certainly, he was the wisdom of the Father to enlighten, the virtue of the
Father to uphold.

Another of his sufferings.
It was necessary he should be both God and Man to work our Redemption: Idem
ad e^nd. l. 2. cap. 2.
as he was God he was able, as he was man he had aptness: no Man nor Angel
could have effected it: not man, for how could he who was dead in sin give
life to others? not the Angels: for they had not sufficiency to stand upright
themselves.

Of Prayer.
Though thou boast in the dark, Idem l. ^ c 16.
yet pray, for thy Father is Light: thou can not lie hid from his eye: and
therefore neither faint in thy devotion; nor dissemble in Hypocrisy, for thy
God hears thee in secret, as well as sees thee.

4. Of suffering persecution.
Though thou be banished, Lib. 2. c. 17. ad Trasimund.
yet Christ is thy associate: though amongst Thieves or wild beasts: though at
Sea in tempests, or on Land in troubles; though in hunger, cold, and
nakedness; Thy Captain stands and sees thee combating: hold out then, for he
will Crown thee.

5. To incite to good Works.
If they go to hell, Lib. 2. c. 14. de remissione peccatorum.
not because they took away the garment from the naked, but because they did
not cloth them; not because they took away the bread from the hungry, but
because they did not give their bread to them: what shall become of them who
do not give nor cloth, but do strip off and rob the indigent? Remember the
torment of the rich man, and relieve Lazarus, that thou may escape damnation.

Of Divine Love.
The thoughts and affections do follow loves direction; Fulgentius in quodam
sermon.
wherefore the truth says, Where your treasure is, there will your heart be:
Therefore if our treasure be in Heaven, our affections will be in heaven. To
lay up this Treasure, mark thy thoughts; so thou shall know thy Treasure by thy
love, and thy love by thy thoughts.

Of Covetousness.
If Barrenness be cast into the fire, Fulg. sup. illud* Mat. omnis arbor. etc.
what shall Covetousness deserve? or what shall covetous capacity receive,
when want of Charity shall be tormented in Hellfire? And if he shall have
judgment without mercy, that has not showed mercy; what judgment shall he
receive that has done others injury?

Of Charity.
Stephen, that he might deserve the Crown, as his name does import, Fulgen* in
ser. de Sanct^ Steph.
used no weapons but Charity, whereby he obtained the victory: by Charity he
resisted the Jews cruelty: by Charity he reproved and corrected others
impiety: and by Charity prayed for those that stoned him cruelly.

He writ many famous works, but some were lost by the injury of time, and
malice of adversaries. Those that are really his, and extant, are here
registered by Antwerp Edition. 1574.

1 Three books to King Thrasimund. 2 Of Christ's incarnation one book. 3 To
Monimus three books. 4 Against the Arrian objections. 5 To Donatus 1. 6 To
Erithymius. 2. 7 To Ferrandus questions, two books. 8 Of Faith to Peter, to
be read amongst St. Austines works. 9 Seven Epistles. 10 Ten Sermons on sundry
arguments. 11 Some other Treatises of the truth of Predestination, of the
Trinity, etc.
So having thus faithfully discharged his Calling, he rests with other such
famous Champions of the Church, and expects a happy Resurrection.

An. Christi 604. Sanctus Gregorius Magnus.
S. GREGORIVS MAGNUS.

THis bulwark of the truth Saint Gregory may well be placed amongst these
Reverend Fathers, for he has not only equaled many, but excelled most in
pious performances and hardness of studies: he was by birth a Roman, his
Fathers name was Gordianus, a great counselor, and a devout Religious man, and
noble by descent, his mothers name was Silvia. Felix once Bishop of Rome a man
admired for his devotion, was his Grandfather: but this Gregory excelled his
progenitors for holiness of life, and he so little respected his descent from
such great personages, That with tears he would often confess and say, that
all earthly honor and glory was miserable, If the possessor of it did not
seek after the glory of God; He said, that the chiefest pleasures here below
were but torments, unless the mind did resolve upon those never fading
pleasures in Heaven, nay, he was such a rare man for mortification, that he
feared not death, because (he said) it was the gate to life eternal, and the
only way to obtain the reward of the faithful, a crown of righteousness.
He was a strict regarder, how he spent his time, as knowing what a severe an
account he was to render to GOD for it.

Venerable Bede calls him, Apostolum nostrum, that is, our Apostle, and he gives
the reason for it, Bed. in bist. Eccl.
Quod nostram, id est, Anglorum gentem, de potestate Sathanae, ad fidem Christi
sua industria convertit, that is, Because he by his labor and industry did
convert the Nation of the Englishmen from the power of the Devil, unto the
faith of Christ: so that (as Beda says) we may well say of this Saint
Gregory, as Saint Paul speaks of himself, That though he be not an Apostle
to others, 1 Cor. 9.
yet he is one to us, for the seal of his Apostleship are we in the Lord: and
it fell out that this Saint Gregory had such a desire to bring our Nation to
the faith thus. On a time c^rtain Merchants coming to Rome, and exposing their
commodities to sale, amongst the rest they had some youths also to sell,
amongst many Chapmen, it pleased God that this Gregory should pass by that
way, he beholding (as Beda does testify) inter alia, pueros venales positos
candidi corporis, ac venusti vultus, capillorum quoque forma egregia, that is,
amongst other Merchandise, certain pretty youths expose likewise to sale, who
were of sweet personages, comely countenances, and beautiful hair; asked
presently from whence they came, it was answered, from Brittany an Island,
whose inhabitants were most of such fair and comely countenances; then he
again asked whether the inhabitants of that Island were Christians, or not; it
was answered, that they were Pagans; at which words this Gregory did deeply
sigh, and said it was a great pity that the prince of darkness should keep
in subjection such sweet natured people, and demanding further, what was the
proper name by which they of that Island were called, it was answered Angli:
and so they may, q^ia vultu nitent ut Angeli, and Angelorum in coelis decet
esse cohaeredes: that is, they may well be called so, For they have faces like
Angels, and no question but they will be coheires with Angels, and asking
their names, it was answered Deiri, and truly may they be so called said
Saint Gregory, for by gods blessing they are come de ira Dei, from the wrath of
God: and forthwith he went to the Bishop of Rome, and did earnestly desire to
send some able men into that Island to convert the people, and to instruct them
in the knowledge of Christ, and told him that he (by Gods grace assisting him)
was ready to undertake the task: but at that time this Gregory was so beloved
of the Citizens, that though the Bishop would have permitted him to have gone,
yet they would not have lost such an eminent man as he was. But within a short
time the Bishop of Rome dyed, and this Gregory was chosen Bishop of the same
See: He presently with great care did provide sufficient and able men to effect
this his long desired work: and that then Preaching might be the more
effectual, he gave them admirable instructions and exhortations, and joined
himself in prayers with them, desiring God to give their labors good
success, and so sent them. The names of some of them that were sent were
these; Martyrolog. Martii 4.
Melitus, Augustinus, John, with some others, whom he knew to be pious men; as
Ado, Archbishop of Triers does testify, in the life of this St. Gregory.

This man was singular for parts and Arts; when his parents were dead he
builded six Monasteries in Sicily, and one within the Walls of Rome, and laid
as much means to them as was sufficient for their maintenance, and what was
overplus, He sold and gave it to the poor; and whereas He was before rich in
Cloth and Jewels, Poverty is a punishment, not a sin.
now he went in poor Habit, and pauper i^se ministrabat pauperibus, and in
poverty and lowliness of Spirit, He ministered daily to the poor.

For His learning, all that read his Works, will ingenuously confess that
speech of Possevinus concerning Him, which is taken out of Sixtus Senensis in
his fourth Book Bibliothecae Sanctae. Possev. in sacro ^ppar. p. 659.
Gregorius eruditione insignis, and explanatione Divinorum voluminum etc. that
is, Gregory, famous for learning and the explanation of the holy Scriptures,
illuminated by the light of the holy Spirit, has partly by Eloquent Homilies,
and partly by able Comments, explained the whole Scriptures, of which the
greater part after his death, by the Devils malice, and the envy of wicked men
were burnt: Veriti (as Sixtus Senensis has it) ne Sanctitatis and doctrinae
gloria scriptorum monumentis ad posteros perveniret: fearing least the glory of
his Holiness and Learning should by his Writings be known to posterity.

In his Homilies, especially those to the people, he did always use a brief
and succinct method to lay open the text: but in his Commenatries, he delighted
in a more rich dress: He laid open the Scriptures, with a most copious and
full explanation both of the words and sense. Photius does highly extol this
Gregory, calling him, (...), Photii (...) page 139^.
Most grateful to God, and terms his Dialogues, quatuor libros vitae
utilissimos, that is, four Books, most profitable to our lives, and styles
him, for his pious government of the Churches affairs, especially that of
Rome, qui caeteris pietate praeivit, that is, who out-stripped others for
piety, and doing other things which made him admired, that was his Charity and
Writings: ^irtutibus vitam instituit, Eleemosynis claruit, that is, ordering
his life in virtues paths: He shined in Alms-deeds, and of his charity to the
poor, I must not let slip what is recorded of him by Photius, Photii biblio p.
1398. and Symeon Metaphr.
and Simeon Metaphrastes. On a time there came to him a poor man, who made his
moan to him, that he had endured ship-wracke at sea, and had lost all his
goods; insomuch, that he had not any thing to relieve himself nor his family
withal. Gregory presently moved with compassion, gives him forthwith six
Ducats: So he having received them departs; and yet the same day returns to
this blessed Father, and told him, his necessity was so great, that what he had
received, he had paid away, and so desires some more of him: Saint Gregory
gives him other six Ducats: well, he the same day came the third time, and
desired relief, which was given him without gainsaying by this Father
proportionably: but this poor man coming the fourth time, and Gregory having
no more gold to give, yet unwilling to send him away empty, he remembered he
had a piece of Plate in his House of a good value, and presently commanded that
to be given, and it was performed according to his desire. Here was compassion,
that was beyond the bounds of a common man, four times in one day, and of the
same party to crave, and at every request to receive a reward, without
reluctance or repining. Here was Charity and Liberality bestowed the right way:
for whom perverse Fortune, long sickness, threats and oppressors have brought
unto poverty, to those let men extend forth their compassion and charity. This
Saint Gregory by the wisdom of God so disposing it for his admirable
endowments, being made, as I have said before, Bishop of Rome, by the suffrages
of all good men: it was a custom, that upon the first day of his enjoying that
preferment, there should twelve poor men be called in to dine with him: so he
that was chief over-seer that way, did, as was enjoined him. Well, this father
being sat with these twelve, he presently counting them reckoned thirteen,
and asking his Officer why he had transgressed the custom, he presently
replied that there were but twelve; but Gregory affirmed there were thirteen;
so looking well upon them, he saw one of their Countenances often change and to
shine: so after dinner he took the thirteenth into his study, and seriously
demanded of him who he was: he replied, that he was the poor man, which he
four times in one day so bountifully relieved with gold and plate; which
almsdeeds (says he) of yours are so well-pleasing to God, that I am sent
(being an Angel) to you, to preserve your life, and to direct you in your
studies. At which words, Saint Gregory was struck with fear: but the Angel
vanished immediately, and Saint Gregory fell devoutly to prayers, and gave God
thanks for his great favor showed to him. Here I may say as it is of
Cornelius, Act. 10. Thy prayers and thy Almsdeeds are come up before me, and
I wonder where can we find such a pattern of Charity in these days; Rich men
do debar themselves of many a great blessing, for not exercising themselves in
Almesdeeds (as Photius says) here was that saying of Saint Paul verified, Heb.
13. 2, 3.
Harbor and entertain strangers, for so many have received Angels, so did
Abraham and Lot. But I will not insist longer upon this.

Now I will proceed, This Gregory was of that acuteness of wit, that he easily
overthrew Eutyches the Heretic in a public disputation concerning the
resurrection, and did so confirm it, that the Emperor caused Eutyches his
books to be burned as heretical, as you may see and read in his Works, Lib.
4. Moral. c. 29. Beda l. 2. c. 1. Hist. Angl.
as also in Beda. Read Johannes Diaconus in the life of this Gregory in his
first book, and four and twentieth Chapter, where he shall find with what
solid places of Scriptures, and invincible arguments he does establish it.
When as the plague did rage so furiously in Rome, that the living could scarce
bury the dead, and when Pelagius was dead of it, how worthily did this Gregory
behave himself during that heavy visitation and judgment? how did he stir up
the hearts of the people with all speed to turn to God with fasting and prayer,
and by serious and unfeigned repentance? What an elegant speech did he make
unto them is easily to be seen, Ioh. Diacon. in vit. S. Greg. c. 41. l. 1.
it is so full of piety and wisdom that it deserves to be registered in Letters
of Gold, and is able to make the hardest heart to weep and lament his sins,
and to set himself to seek the Lord. How powerfully did he by dextrous
Counsels establish the Churches? How did he cause the Ligurians, the Venetians,
and Spaniards to be drawn from Schisms, and to embrace the authority of the
Chalcedon Council? How did he reduce the African Churches from the Heresy of
the Donatists? Sicily from that of the Manichees? Spain from that of
Arianisme? Alexandria from that of the Agnoetans, by his deep learning and
judgment? And did he not likewise free France from Symoniacks, which did grow
up in every place? Did he not so powerfully prevail with Brunichilda the
Queen, with Theodoricke and Theodobert Kings of France, that he procured from
them a general Council against these persons, and anathematized all that
should dare to practice that sin? Yet in these Heroic proceedings, the Devil
did all he could to oppose him by calumniation, but he left not off to proceed,
maugre all their malicious conclusions, to effect that good to the Church of
God, for which he thought he was set up: how Christianlike did he speak to the
Emperor Mauritius against his making that unjust Law, that none of those
soldiers which were marked in the hand should ever be converted to the faith
of Christ: Johan. Diacon. in vit. S. Greg. l. 3. c. 50.
Did not this Gregory answer the Emperor in these words; Ego te de Notario
Comitem Excubitorum, de Comite Excubitorum Caesarem, de Caesare Imperatorem,
nec solum hoc, sed etiam Patrem Imperatorum feci, Sacerdotes meos tuae manui
commisi; and Tu a meo servitio milites tuos subtrahis? that is, I have (meaning
God) made thee of a Notary to be Captain of the Watch from that, I have made
thee Caesar from Caesar: have advanced thee to be Emperor, and not only so,
but I have made thee a Father of Emperors; Have not I given thee my spiritual
Soldiers which are my Priests, and do thou take from my service thy
Soldiers? Answer, I beseech thee, o Emperor, to thy servants? What will thou
answer to thy Lord and Judge, when he shall demand this at thy hands? a worthy
speech, and savouring of a generous and religious spirit.

How severely did he reprove the Bishop of Constantinople, Johan. Diacon. in
vita S. Gregor. l. 3 c. 53. and 54.
who would have been called Vniversalis for his prid^? and does he not
directly call it, No men istud blasphemiae, that name of blasphemy? How did he
wisely stop the fury of the Longobards, and reduced them to peace by writing
his book to Theudalinda the Queen? in a word, having with great care and
piety, amongst a world of troubles governed the Church thirteen years, six
months and ten days, in the spite of all oppositions, he died quietly and
comfortably, rendered up his soul into the hands of his Maker, in the second
year of Phocas the Emperor, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Saint
Peter; in which, Leo, Simplicius, Gelasius, and Symmachus were formerly
interred, with a large Epitaph in commendation of his labors and studies. His
Deacon is highly to be praised for preserving some of his Works from the fire,
even to the hazard of his own life.

Hear but what a man he was by the testimony of Paulus Diaconus, Paulus
Diaconus in vita.
Iisdem diebus sapientissimus ac beatissimus Papa Gregorius Romanae urbis
Episcopus, etc. that is, In these days that most wise and blessed Father Saint
Gregory Bishop of the City of Rome, which, when he had written many things to
the profit of the Church, composed four famous books of the lives of the
Saints which he called his Dialogues, which books he sent to Theodelinda the
Queen, whom he knew to be a Protector of the faithful, and which did much good
to the Church, for she persuaded her husband to give means and Revenues to
the Church, and caused those Bishops which were in misery, and cast out to be
restored, and peace was by her means procured to Gods people.

Sabinianus was the man that did succeed him in his Bishopric, Paulus Diacon*
and as one testifies, there was a great dearth the next year after his death,
and (he says) debuit enim mundus famem sitimque pati, etc. The world, must
needs suffer a famine and thirst, when such a Doctor as was both spiritual
food and drink to their souls, was taken away.

He wants not diverse to afford him commendations, and indeed there was a cloud
of Witnesses who do extol him; Sidor. Hisp (...).
Isidore calls him timore Dei plenus, and humilitate summus: that is, full of
the fear of God, and chief for Humility, endued largely with the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and says thus in conclusion, Foelix tamen and nimium foelix, qui
omnium studiorum ejus possit cognoscere dicta: that is, Happy is he, nay,
thrice happy that can know all his Works and Sayings.

Honorius Augustodunensis terms him no less then Organum spiritus Sancti,
etc. that is, The Organ of the blessed Spirit. Incomparable for his wisdom,
Trithem. de scrip. Eccles.
who writ many things more precious than the refined Gold. Trithemius calls him,
Theologorum princeps, splendour Philosophorum, and Rhetorum lumen, vita and
conversatione integer and sanctissimus, etc. the Prince amongst Divines, the
beauty of Philosophers, and the light to Rhetoricians, of life and conversation
most upright and holy.

And to shut up all: Ildep. Tolet. de viris illustr.
hear but what Ildephonsus of Toledo says of him, Vicit sanctitate Anthonium,
Eloquentia Cyprianum, Sapientia Augustinum, that is, he exceeded Saint Anthony
in Sanctity, Saint Cyprian in Eloquence, and Saint Augustine in Wisdom: and
so hear only what Cardinal Bellarmine relates of him, Card. Bellar. in
script. Eccl. p. 110.
who calls him, Doctorem eximium, and merito magnum: that is, a most egregious
Doctor, and well deserving the name of Great. He died in the year of Christ
Jesus 604.

Sentences out of Gregory Magnus.
Of Poverty.
He is poor whose soul is void of grace, Greg. super Ezech. Hom. 6.
not whose coffers are empty of money: the contented poverty is true riches.

Of the holy Scriptures.
The holy Scriptures are direct, Greg. super Ezech.
and right for admonition, lofty for promises, terrible for threatenings.

Of God.
God is never absent, Greg. in hom. 8* in Ezech.
though the wicked have him not in their thoughts: where he is not by favor,
he is by punishment and terror.

Of conversion to God.
Every convert has a beginning, Greg. in Moral. 24.
a middle, a perfection: in the first there is sweetness to allure him, in the
second bitterness to exercise him, in the third fullness of perfection to
confirm him.

Of the Incarnation.
Will you observe our Saviors motions, Greg. 20. homo super Eva^g. ecceiste
venict saliens.
he came from Heaven into the womb, from the womb to the cratch, from the
cratch to the cross, from the cross to the Grave, from the Grave to Heaven.

On the Cross of Christ.
Christ showed patience in his passion, Greg. in hom.
commended humility, fulfilled obedience, perfected Charity: those were the
four Jewels that adorned his Cross.

Charitatis and Humilitatis jubar.
These are only true riches which make us rich in virtue: Greg. hom. sup.
illud, exiit qui seminat. etc.
therefore if thou desire riches, love true riches. If thou aspire to honor,
seek the Kingdom of Heaven. If thou affect glory, strive to be enrolled in
the high Court of Angels.

He that loves this present pilgrimage, Greg. l. Moral.
in the midst of sorrow, knows not how to show sorrow: for the words of a just
man are full of sorrow: for in regard of present sufferings, his speech and
sighs aspire to heaven.

He is most perfect in piety, Greg. ibid.
that does most perfectly feel another misery.

The best eloquence and expression, Greg. l. 6. Moral.
is to declare the mind by good action, for conscience does not check the
speaker when his life is better then his speech.

He that lives obscurely, Greg. super Eze. hom. 1.
and does not profit others by his example, is like a burning coal, but he
that imitates holiness showing the light of uprightness to others, is like a
lamp burning to himself, and shining to others.

True Faith does not only consist in verbal profession, but in actual
operation. Greg. hom. 29.


The fortitude of the Just; Greg. l. 8.
is to overcome the flesh, to contradict the will, to forsake the delights of
this life, to love affliction for an eternal reward, to contemn prosperity
and to overcome adversity.

Joy does discover the mind, Greg. l. 28. Moral.
but adversity as it does outwardly oppress, so it does inwardly suppress the
thoughts, and make us more close and cautious.

Gregory Magnus would say of himself, that he could never read those words
in the Scripture, which Abraham spoke to Dives, Son, remember that thou in
thy life time receivedst good things, without horror and astonishment, lest
having received such good things of this World, meaning such dignities and
honors as he had, he should be excluded from having any part and portion in
the happiness or good things in the world to come.

Of Gods Word.
Saint Gregory says, and wishes all men that hear the Word of God, to taste
the Word of God with the palate of their hearts.

Not to have a slavish fear.
Fear not man who must die, nor fear the son of man who is but grass.

Of godly Desires.
Our desires, says this Father, do sound more powerfully in the secret ears
of God, than our words.

Again, the more earnestly God is desired of us, the more sweetly is he
delighted in us.

Saint Paul says, He that searches the heart knows what is the mind of
the spirit, Romans 8.

I have here set down his Works as they are set before his Books printed at
Rome 1588, distributed into six Tomes.

Tome 1.
1 Saint Gregory's Life contained in four books, by Joannes Diaconus. 2
Testimonies of sundry men given to him, as Gregorius Turonensis, Paulus
Diaconus, Venerabilis Beda, Ado Viennensis, Symo Metaphrastes. 3 Eulogies and
testimonies of his Works. 4 The argument of all his Works. 5 The argument on
the second book of the Kings by him expounded.
Tome 2.
1 Moral Expositions upon Job in thirty five books. 2 Exposition on the
seven penitential Psalms. 3 Exposition on the Canticles. 4 Twenty two
Homilies on Ezechiel, in two books.
Tome 3.
1 A book of forty most learned Homilies to Secundus a Bishop upon diverse
readings on the Gospels. 2 A book of the Pastors charge to the holy Father
John Bishop of Ravenna. 3 Four books of Dialogues. 4 Those translated into
Greek by Pope Zachary.
Tome 4.
1 Twelve books called his Registery of Epistles of several subjects.
Tome 5.
1 Containing Anthems and a book of the Sacraments. With certain Hymns, for
Mornings and Evenings, to give thanks. For Lent. For Palme-sunday. For Good
Friday.
Tome 6.
1 On Genesis, in seventy nine Chapters with expositions. 2 On Exodus in sixty
two Chapters, with Expositions. 3 On Leviticus, in fifteen Chapters with
Expositions. 4 On Numbers with twenty four Chapters. 5 On Deuteronomy, in
twenty eight chapters. 6 On Josuah in two chapters. 7 On Judges, in eight
chapters. 8 On the first book of Kings in 15 chapters. 9 On the second of
Kings in fifteen chapters. 10 On the Chronicles, twenty four chapters. 11 On
the Psalms, two hundred eighty seven chapters. 12 On the Proverbs, thirty
seven chapters. 13 On the Canticles, 49 chapters, by Paterius. On the New
Testament. 14 On Matthew a hundred and four chapters. 15 On Saint Mark, 54.
16 On Saint Luke, 99 chapters. 17 On Saint John, 59 chapters. 18 On the Acts,
forty chapters. On the Romans, thirty chapters. 19 On the 1 Corinthians, 52
chapters. On the 2 Corinthians, 29 chapters. 20 On the Galathians, nine
chapters. 21 On the Ephesians, 14 chapters. 22 On the Philippians, 11 chapters.
23 On the Colossians, six chapters. 24 On the 1 of Thessalonians, 7 chap. 25 On
the 2 of Thessalonians, 4 chapters. 26 On the 1 of Timothy, 13 chapters. 27 On
the 2 to Timothy, 4 chapters. 28 On the Hebrews, 12 chapters. 29 On Saint
James, 9 chapters. 30 On the 1 of S. Peter, 8 chapters. 31 On the second, six
chapters On the 1 Epistle of St. John, 12 chapters. 32 On the second, two
chapters. 33 On the Apocalypse 69 chapters.
And so I will conclude this famous St. Gregory his life with St. Damasce^s
commendation. Gregory was Bishop of the ancienter Roman Church, a man admirable
for his singular uprightness of life, and purity of learning, who had as he
labored in the sacred Mysteries of Gods Word, an Angel to direct him, and was
inspired by the Spirit of the Holy Ghost. Damascenus in Oratione de iis qui cum
fide dormierunt.

An. Christi 630. Isidore Hispalensis.
S. ISIDORVS HISPALENSIS.

HE was by birth a Spaniard, of good and honest parents, such was their
condition, that they had always an especial care in the educating of this
their young son, in virtue in his youth, that he might be the more endued
with it, when he came to maturity: For many teach their children the liberal
Sciences, not because those Sciences may give any virtue, but because they make
the mind apt to receive any impression of virtue: for many men's children be
diverse and of sundry conditions: some be of nature not prompt and forward,
wherefore by education they must thereunto be formed. This Isidore was of a
quick wit, and of an able memory (pointed out by heaven) in so much that he was
admired and respected of all for his Learning and Eloquence: And being come to
years, and taken notice of by the Bishop (who then sat in that See) and other
learned men, gained much love and respect from them for his constancy,
descent, and piety; whereupon he was called to be a Priest: which he
performed with a great deal of piety, circumspection, and care: To be brie^e,
the old Bishop falling sick and dying; many stood for some, and more friends
for the obtaining of it; but at last it came to a general election, and by
that means, it was bestowed upon this Isidore: who was successor, and also
Cozen to Bishop Leander; He flourished in the Reign of the Emperor
Mauritius, In vita Isidor^ a^te ejus ope^^
and of King Rivaredus, and was so generally eloquent, that he could
accommodate the quality of his speech fitly to discourse with the Ignorant or
Learned. His works were most famous for humane and divine Learning, he was of a
subtle, sharp wit, a clear apprehension, and a composed speech, excellent in
verse and prose, shining with the refulgent beams of sanctity and learning, so
that all those natural gifts which lie scattered in others, were in him
collected into one subject. He was called the younger, to distinguish him from
the senior Bishop of Corduba, or from another Bishop of Civil his predecessor,
In Epist. (...)
When he perceived that he was near his end, and did foresee by the quick
sight of his soul, that his body was spent wearied and decayed by continual
sickness, he gave such liberal Alms daily to the poor for six months
together, so that they tarried all day to receive his charity: afterward his
sickness increasing, and his stomach through weakness refusing all kind of
sustenance, he desired to make his reconciliation with God by prayer publicly,
and amongst the Congregation: and so was carried to S. Vincents Church, where
he confessed himself and said, Thou, o God, which know the hearts of men;
and did forgive the poor Publican that stood afar off, and knocked his
own breast, who on the fourth day did raise dead Lazarus from the grave, and
would have him received into Abraham's bosom, receive at this hour my
confession, and remove from thy sight the innumerable sins I have done:
remember not, o Lord, the sins of my youth; and because thou say, Quod in
quacunque hora peccator a viis suis reverterit, omnes iniquitates suas traderes
oblivioni; I am mindful of thy gracious promise, I call unto thee with hope
and confidence, being in regard of my sins unworthy to look up unto Heaven:
but, o Lord, I beseech thee, receive my prayer, and pardon me a sinner. For if
the Heavens be not pure in thy sight, much more am I impure, who have drunk
iniquity like water: Then he asked pardon of the Clergy and Citizens,
saying, I beseech the whole Congregation of the Clergy, and people here
present to pray unto the Lord for me a wicked sinner, that I who am through my
own merit unworthy to obtain mercy; may by your intercession receive pardon of
my sins, Forgive me, I beseech you, all the offenses I have committed against
you, if I have contemned any one, been uncharitable, if I have corrupted any
one with bad counsel, if I have wronged any one in anger; I desire you pardon
me that am penitent, for my offenses. After he had made this prayer and
confession, being brought home again, he died four days afterward, in the
Reign of the Emperor Heraclius, and of Chintilan the most Christian King of
the Goths, in Spain; being exceedingly famous for soundness of doctrine, and
for abundance of charitable works. Many mellifluous Sentences fell from his
holy mouth and pen, some whereof collected out of his writings, are these
following.

Of Affliction.
Thou seeekest rest and condemnest ease, Comment. in Cant. cap. 3.
but remember that affliction, and greater is the fruit of preaching then of
silent quietness, as Christ says to the Church, Sicut Lilium inter spinas,
sic amica mea inter filios: As the Lily among thorns, such is my beloved among
the daughters of men.

Of Christ.
He came from Heaven into the Virgins womb, In Cant. chap. 5
from the womb into the manger, from the manger unto the Cross, from the
Cross unto the Sepulcher, from the Sepulcher he returned into Heaven.

Of the Church.
The Church is a fenced Garden, In Cant. cap. 4.
because it produces many fruits of spiritual works; it is a Fountain
because it flows with the Doctrine of Salvation, Armed because it is defended
by the Lords protection, and sealed by the word of Faith.

Of Wisdom.
Wisdom is above all things, Chap. 1.
neither can there be any justice without wisdom, and none can fully receive
the wisdom of God, but such as withdraw themselves from worldly cares.

He is more to be blamed that knows what he ought to follow, and will not
follow that which he knows.

Knowledge and a good life are both profitable; but if both cannot be obtained,
a good life is to be sought rather than much knowledge.

Of Perseverance.
The reward is promised to those that begun, Chap. 7.
but it is given to those that persevere. As it is written, He that shall
persevere to the end shall be saved.

Of Converts.
New converts should not trouble themselves with outward cares, Isidore sent.
Cap. 7.
for if they be entangled in them, like new planted trees not well rooted, they
are suddenly shaken and do wither.

Of Compunction.
Compunction of the heart, Sent. cap. 12.
is the humility of the mind accompanied with tears, arising from the
remembrance of him, and the fear of judgment.

Of Repentance.
His repentance is acceptable, Chap. 13.
that does bewail his sins, condemning himself and lamenting for them, being
as profuse in weeping as he was forward in sinning.

Of thought.
As the Viper is killed by the young ones in her belly, Chap. 1^.
so we are betrayed and killed by our own thoughts, nourished in our own
bosoms, which do both poison and consume the soul.

Of Conscience.
All things may be shunned, Chap. 26.
but a man's own heart. For no man can run from himself, for a guilty
conscience will not forsake him wheresoever he goes.

Of speech.
The evil speech of the heart are hurtful cogitations and meditations, Chap.
28.
of the tongue punishable speeches. The evil speech of action is an ill life
corrupting others by example.

Of pride.
Every sinner is proud, for by doing that which is prohibited, Chap. 29.
he contemns divine precepts. Therefore pride is the beginning of all sin,
for the disobeying of Gods Commandments is transgression and sin.

Of Diet.
Diet should not be luxurious nor wanton, Chap. 31.
but sufficient to sustain Nature: for as Philosophers say, the belly should b^
so meated, that it may keep life and soul together, not corrupt both life and
soul together.

Of the Soul.
The life of the body is the soul, the life of the soul is God: and as the
body is dead without the soul, so the soul is dead without God.

As Angels had a beginning, but no ending, so also have souls. For some things
are temporal, perpetual, and eternal. Temporal matters have a beginning and
ending. Perpetual have a beginning, but no end. Eternal have neither
beginning nor end.

Of the Saints glory.
As white compared to black is more beauteous, so the glorification of the
Saints compared to the damnation of the wicked will be more glorious,
therefore the damnation of the wicked is an augmentation of the Saints glory.

After the Resurrection, the Saints all bodily ascend into Heaven, as Christ
says to his Father, John 17.

The Devils have a threefold prescience or foreknowledge; Isidor. l. 1. de
summo bo^o.
namely, by natural subtlety, temporal experience, and supernatural
revelation.

The Devil in deceiving any one observes his nature, Isidor. ^. 3. de summo
bo^o.
and does apply such temptation as will draw his natural inclination to sin.

Good done with discretion is virtue, Isi^or. in lib. de syn^d.
and any action undiscreetly done is vice: For even undiscreet virtue is
accounted vice.

Philosophy does show the order of causes, I sidor. l. 2. Etymol.
Morality the order of ^iving, and Logic the reason of understanding.

Drunkenness is a vice which makes the mind forgetful of it self, (...). ^.
3. E^ymol.
through superfl^ous drink^ing.

It is impiety to spend on the rich, Isidor. l. 3. de summo bono.
that which should be given to the poor, and by peeling the poor, to obtain
the favor of the powerful. As to take water from the thirsty ground, and
power it into Rivers that have no need thereof.

He that begins to amend and grow better, let him beware lest he grow proud of
his virtues: lest vainglory give him a greater overthrow than his former vices.

When the poor are fed for ostentation sake, Isidor. de summo bono l. 3.
a work of mercy is turned into a sin.

Do good in secret if thou can, Isidor. de conflict. vitiorum.
but if not have a desire to do it in secret, and so thou, shall: avoid
ostentation.

Avoid anger or moderate it, Isidor l. 1. soli^quio.
shun fury or restrane it, for a wise patient silence does overcome an enemy
sooner than impatience.

An. Christi 731. Beda.
VENERABLE BEDE.

THis Venerable Bede was a Benedictine Monk, of the Monastery of Saint Peter
and Paul, in England: He was an English Saxon, borne in the year of Christ's
Incarnation 671. in the time of Deodatus P^pe: He was deprived of both his
parents, when he was but seven years old: He was delivered into the Monastery
of Saint Peter and Paul by the care of his Neighbors, and was brought up there
under Benedict and Cealfrid then Abbots, and men famous for Piety and learning;
where in short space he showed what parts he had gained by virtuous education
in his youth; for he was a man most studious in the holy scriptures, and
wondrously learned, skillful in all secular occasions; a great Philosopher,
Astronomer, Musician, and Poet, skillful in the Greek Tongue, a mellifluous
Rhetorician, Arithmetician, and a famous Divine. He practiced these three
things himself, and taught others to do so too. O rare! scribere and docere,
to pray, to write, to preach: at nineteen years of his age, he was by
Ceolfrids appointment ordained a Deacon, Sergius the third being then Pope, and
at thirty he was ordained Priest; from which time he wholly devoted himself
to the study of the sacred Scriptures in meditation and interpretation of them;
for he speaks so much of himself in the end of the History of England, in
these words, Beda Dei famulus and Presbyter Monasterii Apostolor. Petri and
Pauli, quod est ad Wirimudam and Ingiruam, etc. omnem meditandis scripturis
operam dedi.

He was sent for to Rome by Pope Sergius, that he might discourse with him,
Bid being so famous in all parts for his virtues and science. The Epistle of
that Pope is to be seen in the third Tome of the general Counsels, and
begins in these words, Opportunis ergo, etc. the subject of it was, that there
was a great need of the advice of learned Divines to settle* the Churches
peace, and he was known to be able in the study of Theology, and therefore was
desired to repair to Rome with all convenient speed; but it is concluded by
the best Historians, that he stirred not out of England.

He was wonderfully modest, and did never hunt after preferments, but contented
himself with that life and daily study: in his readings oftentimes he was so
devout, that he would shed tears abundantly: and after he had done reading,
he would fall to prayers; for he would say, that prayer was of great force to
get the true understanding of Gods Word. O famous instrument to Gods glory! who
not only was fervent in his prayers, but exceedingly both by life and
learning, edified the Church of Christ.

He hated idleness, and would say, he thought there was so much work to do
for a Divine in so little a space of time, that he ought not to lose any of
it; it is employment keeps the soul safe and sound. He did not begin to take
this task upon him when the Sun was setting, in his old age; or begin to live
when he should dye: no, he offered God his youth, and began in the strength and
prime of his age. He was a Be in his own hive; he dressed his own Garden; he
managed his own affairs, forgetting all desire of honor and riches, which
brings with it miserable and stupendous effects. And for pleasure and
delights of the World, we must deal with it (says he) as men do who buy and
taste honey, only touch it with the tip of the finger, not with our whole
hand, for fear of surfeit. He had many famous Scholars, which he provoked to
study by his own example; in a word, he was full of knowledge, charity,
devotion, and chastity.

For his person, he was of a comely stature, grave in his going, of a lofty
voice, pleasant of speech, comely of countenance, and pleasantly severe.

Being aged 59 years, in the year of Grace 731 he finished the Catalogue of
his Works; but it is not on all parts resolved justly what year he dyed in.
Marianus Scotus says in the year of o^r Lord 729. Sigebertus says in the
year 731. Trithemius says in the year 733. Some have much erred, who say
that he dyed in the year 700: but Baronius he approves them not. How he
departed this life, is to be seen by an Epistle of one of his Scholars, who
after great commendations of him for piety, learning, patience, and the like,
says, Gravatus infirmitate anhelitus, hardness of breathing a little after
Ascension day, he was sick of it, and had a tumor in his feet: in his
sickness he was not any whit disturbed to appearance, but would often exhort
his Scholars to be quick in gathering notes from him: for he had not long to
stay with them. For my life (said he) is uncertain at the best; and that man
which goes on wandering without any faith or constancy, feeds his thoughts
and cogitations with vapor: no man knows what will happen in time to come;
howbeit God governs all men in the midst of all perils and dangers: and many
times on the contrary he blows upon us a strong wind, or tempest of
adversity: And that life is good, and best to be esteemed, which is led in
honesty and virtue; for at the day of death it will try it self: for the day
of death is the Master and judge of all other days, being the trial and
touchstone of all the actions of our life: then do we make our greatest
assay, and gather the whole fruit of all our studies: and he that judges of
the life of a man, must look how he carries himself at his death: for the
end crowns the works, and a good death honourerh a man's whole life.

There was a young man one Witberch, that spoke to him and said; Loving Master,
there is something left to write; to which he answered and said it was
finished, and so called him to hold his head, and then singing Gloria Patri,
Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, with cheerfulness he breated out his Spirit, and
slept in the Lord. Many famous men have praised him as Hildwines, and Marianus
Scotus: Albinus Flaccus terms him, Eximium Doctorem, and Amalarius calls him
Venerable, according to that Verse.

Hic sunt infossa Bedae venerabilis ossa. So also St. Boniface the German
Apostle calls him, sagacissimum scripturarum Indagatorem.

I should be too large, should I reckon up each particular praise that is
given to this Father; yet I cannot let pass that which Trithemius speaks of
him in his Ecclesiastical Writers. He was (says he) incorrupt of life, devout
in heart, full of knowledge, wondrously industrious, excellently acute; usually
reading the Scriptures, adorned and graced with all sorts of virtues; a witty
writer. Possevinus speaking of him, uses these expressions, Ingentibus Dei
d^nis, doctrina and sanctitate ornatus, etc. that is, adorned with the great
gifts of Gods Spirit; with learning and sanctity; a diligent Writer, full
furnished with wit and wisdom, wondrous charitable, devout, humble, patient:
in a word, a pattern to Preachers, a lantern shining into all parts, etc. So
does Cardinal Bellarmine extol him also. But I shut up all in these word^:
He did much, and suffered much to defend Gods Truth, and to propagate the
Gospel of Jesus Christ.

He flourished in the time of Gregory the Great, and long after, to the year
750. being the ancient glory of our English Nation, and a man of greatest worth
and learning of any in his time. So after he faithfully showed himself a
worthy Steward, a careful Watchman, a painful husbandman, a powerful
Labourer; a learned Priest, in the thirteenth year of his Primacy God called him
from hence.

His Sayings.
He is a sluggard that would reign with God, and not labor for God. Bed. sup.
Pro. li. 2.
In the promised rewards he takes delight, but the commanded Combats do him
affright.

Flattery is the nurse of sin, Bid sup. Luc. l. 2.
which like Oil does feed the flames of sinful affections.

True love does love truth, judge in truth, strive for truth, and finish Works
with truth.

None does ascend into Heaven, Bid sup. Joan. 3.
but he that does descend from Heaven. Therefore he that will ascend into
heaven, must join himself by true faith and love unto him that descended from
Heaven; knowing that he cannot ascend into Heaven, but by him that descended
from heaven.

It is less labor to resist carnal pleasure unknown, Bed. sup. Esd. l. 4.
than after experimental knowledge.

The rich man is not reprehended for ploughing his lands, Bid. in glo. sup.
Luc. 2.
and gathering his fruit into his Barnes, but because he put his confidence in
them, and did not bestow them on the poor, that so his soul might be
received into heaven.

Through Riches and Liberty, Bid sup. Esd. l. 1.
man's heart does commonly grow dissolute; but by trouble and poverty it is
recollected.

Anger does languish by suppressing, Bid sup. para lib. 1.
but flames higher by expressing.

The pleasure of Fornication is but a breath, Bid de templo S^l.
but the punishment thereof is eternal death. Wantonness is a Bestiall
languishing of the Body, arising from carnal Conceits and Cogitations.

And for to declare unto the World the great pains this worthy man took, in
propagating the Gospel of Christ, I have here annexed the Works, which are
only known to be his.

1 Upon Genesis. 2 Exodus. 3 Numbers. 4 Leviticus, Deuteronomy. 5 Of the
Tabernacle, and questions upon the Kings. 6 Iosuah. 7 Judges. 8 Chronicles. 9
Proverbs. 10 Ecclesiastes. 11 Canticles. 12 Esdras, and Nehemiah. 13 Tobias. 14
Esaias. 15 Jeremiah. 16 Ezekiel. 17 Daniel. 18 Twelve lesser Prophets. 19 On
Mark. 20 On Luke. 21 On the Evangelists. 22 On Paul's Epistles. 23 On the
Canonical Epistles. 24 On the Acts of the Apostles. 25 On the Apocalypse. 26 Of
Times and their Nature. 27 Some sparks out of the Fathers. 28 Deeds of the
English Nation. 29 Flowers out of Gregory the Great, on the Canticles. 30 The
actions of diverse Saints. A Cronologie of his own Monastery. 31 A Martyrology.
32 Hymns in sundry sorts of Verses. 33 Epigrams in Heroicke verse. 34 Of holy
places. Readings of the old Testament. 36 On the new Testament. 37 Distinctions
on Ieremaih, Job. 38 Of Christ and his Church. 39 Of Abaccucks song. 39 Of
making of Verses. 40 Of Scheames. 41 Of Orthography. 42 Epistles to diverse.
So having been laborious in the Church, he departed, Leo being Emperor, Anno
Christi 732. Of whom I might speak much more according to his deserts; but let
this suffice.

An. Christi 731. Sanctus Damascenus.
S. DAMAZEN.

IT is no small comfort to proceed from the loins of worthy Progenitors, when
not only we are enabled by our own virtues, but also made the more
conspicuous by our parents. In this respect, this worthy Father challenges a
double honor, for he was not only well descended from parents of worth and
piety, but also was himself a grace to them and the place of his Nativity.
He was borne in Damascus a City well known, if it were but for that very one
cause that is registered in holy Writ, and was as it is to be read in the
ninth of the Acts of the Apostles, a place of refuge for the persecuted Saints
which fled from Jerusalem, and were prosecuted by Saul, who was converted in
his journey to this place; for his parents, though they lived in dangerous
times, and in the midst of barbarous people, yet they as Lilies among thorns
retained their beauty and integrity, not losing their piety in the midst of a
perverse generation, and when the Agarens subjected that City by the sword, and
used cruelty toward the Chri^^^ans, yet these worthy pair (by Gods
providence) were preserved, (as it might seem) to produce to the World this
their son, nay, their very enemies admired their constancy, and gave them
reverence: and as God who kept Daniel among the Assyrians, though a captive,
yet made him a Ruler and a Commander, and likewise Joseph, though sold and
imprisoned, yet was by the same providence set up a chief Ruler in the midst
of his adversaries: so likewise did God give this Damascens Father such credit
and respect, that even those Saracens made him for his worth and conspicuous
piety, Administrator of their public and most weighty affairs, and he is
called, Vt lucerna in nocte, signum in monte, scintilla in cinere: that is, As
a Lantern in a night, as a Beacon on a Hill, as a spark amongst ashes, as a
Diamond among dust for his justice and integrity: and what he got in wealth by
his Offices, he did with liberal hands distribute, in the relief of captives
in slavery, nay, he gave his estate and land which was a great quantity in
Judea and Palaestine, to the maintenance of the poor Christians in bondage,
and his Father by his purse did not redeem so many from captivity, as his
son did from the snares and slavery of the Devil; this Damascens father had
a special care, that as soon as his son was borne, he should be christened,
and made a member of the Christian Church; a dangerous thing in those times,
when to be but suspected to be a Christian was matter enough of bonds or death.
He likewise had an especial care to his education, which is commendable in
parents, and chose him a Master, not a man of the sword, but eminent for
austerity and holiness of life; and it fell out thus: It was the custom of
the Barbarians, in ships and boats to rove about, and to take prisoners, and
often they brought Christians with them, whom they inslaved, or put to the
sword, or made sale of them: and bringing in many, amongst the rest there was
an ancient old man an Italian in an Hermits habit, of a comely gracious aspect,
called Cosmas: they that were put to the sword gave great respect to this man,
so that the Barbarians seeing the Christians so to reverence him, conceived him
to be some great man, and demanded of him what he was, he answered, he was a
poor, old, unprofitable man; and thereupon wept, only he was a Philosopher,
as he confessed, which Damasecns Father standing by and hearing him, and seeing
him weep, asked him why he wept? Who told him it was because he had gained the
knowledge in all the liberal Arts, but as yet he had not bred up any in the
same knowledge: whereupon this Damascens Father presently went to the Captain,
and humbly on his knees begd him to be given to him, which was granted him, and
so he brought him to his house, and having refresht him, told him he had a son
which he would commit to him, Billius in vita Ioannia.
which was this John who (as my Author testifies) Naturae praestantia atque
animi studio and industria, by the excellency of his natural parts and
endowments quickly attained to a perfect knowledge in Grammar, and Logic, and
Philosophy, Rhetoric, Music, Astronomy and indeed in all the Liberal
Sciences, and, what is admirable, was not for all his knowledge and learning
tainted with pride or vain glory, but still retained his humility: His Master
seeing such forwardness in so young a Scholar, and such a promptitude and
promising abilities to future performances, spoke these words to his Father; En
quod cupiebas plene consecutus es; puer enim me eruditione antecellit, that is,
What you have desired, you have fully obtained: for he which you call a youth
excels me in Learning. Wherefore seeing I have satisfied your desire in this
respect, give me leave to end the rest of my days in a solitary course of
life, so that I may be also skillful in the study of heavenly matters,
whereunto all these Sciences and gifts are but servants and subalternate; which
words the Father of this Damascen grieved at, being loath to lose such an able
man whom he so loved, yet because he would not seem so to requite his pains
for his sons tuition, gave him a large reward at his farewell, and so
dismissed him in peace; so he going to Laura a solitary place, spent the
remainder of his life in heavenly meditations, and in fullness of days dyed,
and so did Damascens Father likewise: his Father being dead, the Prince of the
Saracens called this John to possess his Fathers place, which he at first
refused, but it was imposed upon him, which he administered with singular
fidelity. He lost his right hand, which was cut off by the policy of the
exhibition of certain fained Letters which were showed and read to the Emperor
Leo Isauricus, that if it pleased him to come with an Army into those parts,
he would procure him the City of Damascus to be yielded to him; he having (as
he said) almost all the rule and pre-eminence in those parts; Leo receving the
letters, sent one presently back unto the Prince of the Saracens, wherein he
signified how far it was from his thoughts to make any hostile invasion into
his D^minions, though he had fair hopes of success by such a man's promise to
assist and direct him: Hereupon Damascen was presently sent for by the Prince,
and the Letters were showed to him, he wondered at the matter, and said the
hand-written was some thing like to his, but for the fact or intention he
never harbored such an one in his soul: but the Prince being enraged,
commanded his right hand to be cut off, which was, as my author relates,
restored to him again, to convince by this wonderful act, the heart of the
incensed Prince, and to manifest to all men the innocence of this John: it
wrought so effectually, that he had all his Offices and preferments bestowed
on him again, but he intended another course, for he desired the Prince to
acquit him of all his places, and to give him leave to live retiredly: after
much debate the Prince yielded, and so immediately this John did sell all his
goods (except such as he gave to his Kindred) for the avoiding of suites and
strifes, and made distribution to the poor. And so going to Jerusalem, he
went to be admitted into the same Monastery into which Cosmas had been before;
whither coming the President of the place finding him to be full fraught with
all sorts of learning, appointed a famous member of that Society to be his
Instructour in the study of Gods Word, but he, as also a second and third
refused it, holding themselves not able to teach such a learned man, the fourth
takes him into charge, and gives him precepts and rules both how to order his
body and soul, to whom this John, perceiving his directions to be sweet and
wholesome, gave special obedience and singular respect, though afterward he
was by his said Master ejected out of the Monastery, for a matter of
disobedience, but by his sorrow and submission he was restored, he was full
of Divine Hymns; and having by Gods blessing gained much in the knowledge of
Gods Word, he was by the Governor of the Church of Jerusalem ordained a
Priest, who having that charge laid on him, he did with great care and p^ety
undergo it, so that it is said of him to his eternal praise, Cum religiosae
vitae curriculum confe^isset, etc. that is, when he had consummated the course
of a religious life, when he had kept the Faith, or, as my Author speaks, when
he had propagated the faith in his Sermons, when he had graced it with his
Writings, he was after much labor and travel called to rest. His praises are
large which are afforded him: they style him pietatis Ath^etam, Ecclesiae
ornamentum, veritatis ducem, certatorem, religiosae vitae cultorem, dogmatum
peritum, insipientes sapientia instruentem, prophanorum institutorem, that is,
the Champion of Piety, the Churches ornament, the Captain for Truth, the
imbracer of a religious life, skillful in his doctrines, instructing the
unlearned in Wisdom, reducing the profane to Holiness.

Suidas speaks thus of him, Suidas.
Johannes Damascenus, surnamed Mansur, was a most eloquent man, behind none of
his time for various learning. His Works are many, and those accurate, he was
so skillfull in Music that none ever did or will parallel him. Trit. de
scrip. Eceles.
Trithemius terms him, Virum sanctum and doctum, A learned and holy man of
life, of whom there are wonderful things reported for his doctrine and
sincerity of life.

He writ divinely many things in Greek; in Constantinople he was highly
esteemed, he brought many from sin and impiety to embrace the truth: He was a
stout Antagonist against Heretics.

He flourished under Theodosius that worthy Emperor, in the year of Christ's
Incarnation, 731.

Damascen his Sayings.
If therefore there be no Resurrection, Damascen. l. 4.
there is no God, nor any providence, but all things are governed by chance and
fortune: For we see that the just are in necessity, and do suffer injury; but
sinners and the unjust have abundance of riches and pleasures: but who shall
imagine that this is not the work of a just judgment and wise providence:
therefore there shall be a resurrection; for God is just, and of those that
trust in him is a merciful rewarder.

Worldly wisdom is to disguise and cover the heart, to dissemble in words,
Damasce^^. ^. ^
to make falsehood appear truth, and to make truth appear falsehood: this
wisdom young men learn by experience: those that know it grow proud and
despise others, those that know it not are subject and fearful, and admire it
in others: being obeyed, it makes men climb to the highest degree of Honor;
being gotten, it commands men to rejoice in the vanity of temporal honor,
to requi^e wrongs with advantage, and having power to yield to no opposition,
and being destitute of ability to express malice, to counterfeit a peaceable
goodness of disposition.

An Angel is an intellectual substance, Damasc. lib. 2. cap. 3.
always moveable, free, incorporeall, ministering to God by Grace, not nature,
and immortal: whose specificall kind of substance is known only to the
Creator.

The Name of Christ does express the unity of person in two natures, it
expresses also his Regal dignity, and fullness of grace by the prerogative of
anointing.

I have here placed his Works as they are set down in the Parisian Edition,
1619.

1 Of Parallells, three books. 2 Of the Orthodoxe Faith four books. 3 Of some
who have died in the faith. 4 A speech of Christ's Transfiguration. 5 Of the
birth of the blessed Virgin. 6 Of her Assumption. 7 Divine Iambi^kes, Greek and
Latin. 8 Various Hymns. 9 Damascens Logic. 10 Institutions of Decrees. 11
Physics. 12 Of Heresies. 13 A Dialogue against the Manichees. 14 Of Nature. 15
A learned Epistle. 16 Of the two wills in Christ. 17 How we are created in the
Image of God. 18 Of Images, three speeches. 19 St. Stephens life. 20 A dispute
of a Christian and Saracen. 21 A fragment of Sentences. 22 Of the eight naughty
thoughts by Euagrius. 23 Of the same by Nilus. 24 Of the day of judgment. 25
Damascens History. 26 Of the holy Sabbath. 27 An Oration by Damascen.
Cardinal Bellarmine, amongst his Ecclesiastical Writers, calls him a man of
great Holiness and Learning. And as Beda was admired in the West, so was he in
the East. He suffered many things for the Faith under Constantinus Copronymus,
wrote many famous things before he died, whom the Master of the Sentences and
all the School Doctors have imitated for his worth and wit.

An. Christi 828. Sanctus Nicephorus.
NYCEPHORVS.

HAving drawn the pictures of so many famous Fathers, eminent in the Church
for their piety, sanctity, and learning, it is necessary leviter tantum vitam
S. Nicephori adumbrare, lightly to shadow out the life of St. Nicephorus; for
indeed, what praises can reach the height of his perfection? who like a bright
lamp of learning and of religious life, shined forth in the Horizon of the
Church in the year 840. for then he lived in his brightest luster, like the
East star, leading both the vulgar by his Doctrine, and the wise men by his
writings to the knowledge of Christ: for sapientes faciunt and loquuntur
sapienter omnia, wise men do and speak all things wisely: and Nicephorus
being really religious, must needs be wise in words, wise in actions, and,
which is the highest wisdom, wise to salvation. Neither was he inferior to
most of the Fathers for profound judgment and learning, both in Humanity, and
Divinity, having read much, and spent many hours to adorn his soul with Art
and Grace, that so he might inform others in the Doctrine of Salvation, and
illuminate the world then being in great darkness, and under the shadow of sin
and death. He was a Physician to cure the miseries of humane life, and
especially those which are incident to the soul: namely, tenebras intellectus,
errores mentis, vitia appetitus, irrectitudinem voluntatis, the errors of the
understanding, the viciousness of the appetite, and the crookedness of the
will: for all these maladies of the soul he cured by his powerful Doctrine,
and religious exemplary life; so that those that were blind through spiritual
ignorance, he made them see and abhor their sin: the lame in Charity and
good works, he made cheerful and forward to do good; the stubborn he
convinced and confuted by Arguments; the weak he comforted and instructed. And
as the Sun does with his cheerful beams soften wax, refresh the drooping
flowers, and cherish the new sown seeds, so with the beams of his life and
learning he did warm and soften the obdurate hearts of men, refreshed wearied
souls, groaning under the burden of their sins, and by his Doctrine
cherished the seeds of Grace, to bring forth in others the fruits of good life
and conversation.

The Philosophers were derided, quia in librossn^s, quos de gloria contemnenda
scripserunt, nomina sua inscripserunt, because to those books which they writ
of contemning glory, they set their own names, showing themselves thereby most
vainglorious. But Nicephorus Works are a glory to his name, living to
eternity in his learned Volumes. If therefore his great wisdom and learning,
which attracted general admiration, may deserve commendation; If the gifts and
graces of his soul were so wonderful and divine; If his life were so
sanctimonious and exemplary, he being a spiritual Physician, and a Sun to
illuminate the ignorant world; if all these may render his life perfect and
glorious, then Nicephorus may be acknowledged amongst the most famous Fathers
of his time, who after this Pilgrimage of life, peregre constitutus properabat
in Patriam regredi, being a stranger on earth, made haste to return to heaven,
leaving to the world his Sentences and Works.

He lived in the time of the Emperor Andromicus senior, to whom he dedicated
his Ecclesiastical History, containing eighteen Books, and survived after the
year of our Lord, 1300. not long after exchanging this life for eternal glory.

His Sayings.
Of Example.
The natural man cannot attain to the height and perfection of active virtue,
Nicepb. Eccles. Hist. cap. 22.
or contemplative, unless he propose unto himself our Saviors example, as
perfect God and man, equal in power and virtue to God the Father, and beseech
him to give him the power of operation and contemplation.

Of Security.
He that lives in security, Cap. 2. lib. 7.
is so far from thinking of appeasing Gods just anger toward him, that he
heaps sin on former sins, as if God did not behold them, and would not
require an account of them.

Of Providence.
God does behold, Cap. 5. lib. 3.
and moderate our actions, using the scourge of affliction for our castigation
and conversion; and after due correction, shows his Fatherly affection to
those that put their trust in him for salvation.

Of the Scriptures.
The Scriptures rightly conceived, Cap. 3. lib. 5.
make us cheerful and active in the performance thereof; also good, just,
quiet, upright, and conformable to our great example of righteousness Christ
Jesus.

Of Christ.
The Wisdom and Divinity of Christ, was seen by his words and actions,
drawing his Disciples to divine contemplation and imitation, and working
Miracles for their Faiths confirmation, so bringing them to perfection which
consists in the love of God.

Of Martyrs.
The ancient Martyrs would not be so called; though they suffered Martyrdom,
yet they would not be called Martyrs: ascribing that title only to Christ;
and so by their humiliation deserved a glorious exaltation.

Of Faith.
None of the ancient Fathers and Patriarchs did please God, but by Faith in
Christ, as appears by Abraham; his faithful obedience being his
justification.

Of Peter's denial.
Christ asked Peter three times if he loved him; not for his own knowledge or
information, but that by his threefold profession, he might help and heal his
threefold negation of him.

These are those things which he writ.
Namely his Ecclesiastical History, which he composed, both for style and
words, in elegant Greek. Also a Synopsis of the whole divine Scripture,
digested into Trimeter Iambicks, wherein he briefly contained the arguments of
all the books: Possev. appa^rat. Sac^r. p. 139. cap. 141.
This Work begins: (...). And Gulielmus Esingr. in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers does add, that he did write of the Acts done after the
Maccabees even to Christ, and the destruction of Jerusalem. The Genealogy of
the Patriarchs unto David. Of Mosaicall Rites. A Catalogue of the Judges of
Israel. A description of tbe Kings of Israel: and of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, The Genealogy of Christ. Of our Saviors Miracles, according to
the four Evangelists.

An. Christi 1071. Sanctus Theophylactus.
THEOPHILACTVS.

THe birth place of this Father was the famous City of Constantinople, which
once was the glory of the Roman Empire, and the bulwark of Christendom
against the Turks, but by fatal divisions of Princes, and Christians among
themselves, it is now the seat and residence of the Grand Signior, the arch
enemy of the Christians. I do not read anything of his parents, what sort or
condition they were of, neither is it declared by Historians, it seems that
this Theophylact had liberal education, or else he would not have been
admitted to sueh dignity in the Church of God, nor trusted with such a
pastoral charge. I will therefore principally follow the passages that are worth
observation of him, as they are registered by Cardinal Baronius.

Cardinal Bellarmine has placed him in the year of our Lord, Bellar. de
scrip. Eccles. p. ^33.
1071. when as Alexander the second was Bishop of Rome, and when as Diogenes
was Emperor of Rome. There have been great mistakes concerning the time in
which he lived, some having reckoned him 200 years before he was, which error
he himself does openly confute in his Epistles which he writ to several
men, who lived at the same time. They have placed him (though mistaken) to have
flourished in the Reign of Basilius the elder Emperor, Panvium vide in
fastis. Sixtus Senensis in Biblioth.
in the year 883, so Panvinus reckons. Sixtus Sonensis puts him in the year
842, when as Michael began to reign with Theodora his Mother, but his own
Epistles which are to be seen in the Vatican Library, Card. Baron. Annal. romans
11 p. 402.
being 59 in Greek not as yet printed, but translated into Latin, and
preserved from perishing, by the care and industry of Iacobus Syrmondus, do
evince that. And first that Epistle to Mary the Empress, takes away all
controversy in this point, for from the time of Michael who reigned with his
Mother Theodora, unto the time of Isacius Comne^us, nor any Empress was called
by this name Mary: but to clear this point a little more, for the discrepancie
of Times disi^ynts Histories, and therefore it is profitable truly to know the
series of the times directly.

Therefore if you do but look into his thirteenth Epistle to Johannes Duca,
Kinsman to the Emperor, which begins thus, Nunc demum agnovi, etc. At length
now I know, wherein he calls this Duca the principal man, and of the
Imperial Line, Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. 403.
now it is manifest that he writ this when as the Lineage of the Ducae's
swayed the Imperial affairs of Constantinople, who is of so little judgment,
as to maintain that he lived under Basilius, and to these may be added, that
in the same Epistle, Bulgaria was not governed by her own Kings at that time,
but by such Governors as it pleased the Constantinopolitan Emperors to send
to them; for in the Reign of Basilius (as Baronius speaks it) Constal Bulgaros
proprios habuisse Reges, that is, it is apparent that the Bulgarians had then
Kings of their own: and in his eight Epistle it does plainly appear, that he
was Archbishop of Bulgaria, when either the Family of the Ducae's, or the
Comnens did sway the Scepter. But to let this pass, it does seem, that this
Theophylactus had (being made Archbishop) a special regard of the Churches
prosperity, a good sign of a nobly qualified and religious soul, to have a
care to beautify and reedifie the Houses of God: it was the wicked speech of
those in the Psalms, Let us take in possession the houses of God that he in
the land, nay, worse then so, Let us destroy the houses of God that be in the
Land: but that this Theophylact did respect the Churches Maintenance, appears
by his learned Epistle, which he wrote, and sent to the son of
Sebastocrator, being the seventeenth, wherein he laments the ruin of some
Temples which were famous, but by the injury of time, and the violence of
war, as also the neglect of men, were ruined and decayed; and is not his
letter wondrous perswasory, and full of Eloquence and Piety, which shows he
was not only a great Scholar, but also a zealous man for Gods Honor? I have
here set down the words of the Epistle how it begins, as they are also
recorded by Cardinal Baronius: Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. p. 4^^
Oro igitur, and his litteris tanquam corpore supplex procumbo, ut misercaris
foelicissimae quondam Ecclesiae, quam Christianissimus ille Borises Bulgarorum
Rex, unam, and ipsam e septem Catholicis, tu renova: that is, I therefore do
beseech thee, and as upon my knees beg of thee to reedifie and renew that one
of the seven Catholic Churches, which that most Christian King of the
Bulgarians Borises did build. Oh! take pity of that once most happy Church,
etc. in which truly he does declare also a great and Heroic spirit; for he
that will solicit Kings and Princes this way to show their bounty, must not
be faint-hearted: oh, where shall one find now such a spirit? many do strive
to hinder the decoring or enlarging of Temples, few men plead for them; but it
shall be my prayer to God, to stir up some to stand in the cause of the
Church, and to bless them for ever with happiness for their endeavors, Sions
carved stones, and seiled work will for ever speak their praise and worth.
But to proceed, It seems the state of the Church was but deplorable, for he
departed from thence to Constantinople, and in his (...) age when he departed
from Constantinople to Acridia, the Metropolitan Church of all Bulgaria, he
wrote an Epistle to the Empress Mary, in which he shows elegantly the
despicable condition of the Churches in these parts, and prays God for ever to
preserve the Empress from all evil and dangers. He underwent this charge a
long time, Baron. Anal. Tom. 11. p. 404
though (as Baronius says) aegro animo veluti dur^^^ exilium, quo se tandem
liberari vehemente^ (...), atque patrio solo reddi: that is, With an
unwillingnesse, counting it in a manner no better than an hard banishment, from
which he did wish to be discharged, and to return to his native soil to which
he was drawn, as it seems, not for any unwillingnesse to undergo the charge,
but by reason of the wickedness and barbarousnesse of the Natives, as appears
in his Letter sent to Johannes the great Courtier, in which he relates his
misery in that place most sweetly by the fable of Omphales: it begins thus; Non
servio Reginae diviti, mundaeque and pulchrae, sed servis barbaris, impuris,
etc. that is, I serve not a rich, comely, beautiful Queen, but I am inslaved to
barbarous and impure slaves, smelling of nasty skins, and living a beggarly and
base life, who are only rich in villainy, and who admit of no civil
government, and he calls those of Acridia, men without heads, because, New
Deum, nec homines revereri norint, that is, They neither reverenced God nor
man. Yet for all this he in this deplored estate, proved himself, Vigilem
operarium, persever avitque in Pastorali cura diligenter: that is, A watchful
workman, and stood stoutly in his Episcopal Charge.

I cannot but remember his Letter which he wrote to the Emperor; who desired
that one of the Dukes of the Scopians, whom he commended should be preferred to
one of the Bishoprics of Bulgaria, when this Theophylact with a great deal of
sanctity and wisdom returned this answer to the Emperor. It begins, Quoniam
ergo de accepta Domini mei Scheda, Vide Baron. Annal. Tom. 1^ p. 404.
quae de Episcopatu agebat respondi, etc. that is, I have therefore not only
answered the Letter of my Lord which treated of the Bishopric, but also I
have written to him some things concerning the condition of the Bishopric it
self. It is not for my Lord to intrude into this sacred Function, which
contains great and fearful things, for they, who have by us as yet been
preferred to Bishoprics, some of them when as they ministered in this Church
had good Testimony of their piety and gravitie, before they obtained that
weighty charge, as the Morobians, and Prisdians, and some were before eminent
for reaching and eloquence at Constantinople, as the Castorians and Belegards.
And others were renowned for their austerity and sanctity of life in
Monasteries, and either well known unto us, or else sufficiently by Letters
recommended, as the Triactitzae: now if the man whom my Lord speaks of be such
as any ^f these we shall be bound not only to admit him, but also to give
wonderful thanks to your Majesty, for the care you have of Gods Church; but if
he be neither known to us, nor yet approved of at Constantinople, for life
and learning, do not most mighty Emperor too rashly offend God, nor lay
unfitting burdens upon us, for in this case it is better to obey God than man.
And beside, there is no Bishopric at this time void except that of Bydin,
which is scarce worth acceptance; and yet of all others it requires a man that
must be well experienced in Spiritual and Secular affairs. This very Letter
is testimony sufficient what a Reverend Prelate this Theophylact was, in that
he would have none admitted, but such as were furnished with gifts and graces
suitable to that charge.

And when as by war the Churches in Bulgaria suffered much misery by the
Armies of the Servians, which came to bring Bulgaria into subjection; does not
this Archbishop deplore and deeply lament the devastation in his seventeenth
Epistle to Sebastocrator: Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. p. 437
ab omnibus praetergredientibus viamspoliatur, etc. that is, It is spoiled by
every one that passes by, neither has it any Bishop resident, for his back
shall be wounded with blows, and his cheeks with buffe^ings, so that the Bishop
is fled, and none will supply his office: but the people are fled into Caves
and Woods from the violence of the sword, and no Priest nor Deaeon ( o miserias
meas) says he, (the more is my grief) to officiate in that once renowned
Bulgarian Church: so I went to see it, and when I beheld it, I wept, and
weeping asked the cause, and learned it, and know it, and do certify this to
be truth.

Did he not likewise write a consolatory Letter to Camaterus Gregorius Bishop
of a Church, which was buried by the fury of war, which begins, Tempusest,
Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. p. 438 439.
ut pro^heticum illud dicam frater Reverendissime, etc. that is, The time is
come, that I may say with the Prophet (most Reverend brother) Woe is me, for
fire has devoured the beautiful places in the Land, what place more specious,
more decore, more pleasant, than the Temple of God, and so wishes (as Jeremy)
that his head were a fountain of tears, and withal tells him that it was for
sin, yet bad him be comforted, since it proceeded by Gods permission, and
perhaps for the best, and says to him, Exurge igitur charissime frater, etc.
that is, stand up therefore most dear brother, stand show your constancy and
Christian valor, for you must comfort others, make others valiant, and
therefore not to droop your self, remember that once renowned Temple, and the
wonder of the World built by King Solomon; yet laid waste by the Babylonians,
and rebuilt, and did not the Prophet Aggee then comfort the people mourning,
and told them the glory of the latter house should be greater than the first:
and so it may please God to deal with your Church: and did he not likewise send
consolations to the Bishop of Bydin, who was in the same misery, and did he
not send a most divine Epistle to the Patriarch of Constantinople, wherein he
declares the fearful vastations of the Church? And did not the Patriarch,
write back again to comfort him, and did he not highly praise him? What a
worthy Epistle did he write to Nicholaus Sebastus Pagurianus, wherein he
rejoices for his happy victory over the Persians and Franks: who desires to
know the elegantnesse and learning in it, Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. page 440. 441.
may read it in Baronius at large, it being too tedious for this Treatise.

So this Father having endured the miseries that a barbarous Nation could
offer, and having seen most lamentable destruction of many Churches, the
killing of Christians, he having proved himself a painful Labourer in these
hazardable times of persecution, did yield his spirit to his Maker.

Cardinal Bellarmine in his History has blemished this Theophylact for his
opinion about the proceeding of the Holy Ghost: Bellar. in scrip. Eccles.
But I suspend to censure of it: only I would advise young Divines to read his
Works cautelously.

Theophylactus his Sayings.
D. Theophylactus in Matthew. cap. 12.
When thou hear any foul-mouthed man prating of that which he has nothing
to do withal: then conclude with thy self, that there is more rottennes
inwardly in his heart, then he vomiteth outwardly by his words, for out of the
abundance within does he vent himself outwardly, but still keeps the mine of
his mischief undiscovered.

Idemin cap. 18. Lucae.
God is truly good, the very fountain, and principle of all substantial
goodness; as for us men we may be called good, but not in a proper sense: for
we only participate of that goodness of God, have it in a promiscuous
manner, and are daily subjected to vicissitude, and change of condition.

Idem in Marcum, cap. 14.
The day of judgment is hid from our knowledge, for it that now (the time being
so uncertain) we make so little use of it, what would we not do if we knew
the same? Even slip over all precious opportunities, and then think to leap
into Heaven with a Lord have mercy on me, at the last gasp of time.

Idem in Job cap. 11.
Satan drives us from God, and many ways divides us, in so much that one man
upon the least punctilio of Honor is ready to stab his brother; another by
reason of his riches swells against his poorer neighbor: but Christ gathers all
into one Church, puts all under one and the same yoke, and makes them all as
well those that are near, as those that are afar off to be one body, so that
he which is at Rome believes him that is in the India to be a member, and
confesses that Christ alone is the head of them all.

Idem in 1 Epist. ad Timoth. cap. 6.
All men may be termed the men of God, but the just are more particularly so
called, not by the reason of creation or generation, but of that interest they
have in him by the way of regeneration; if therefore thou be a man of God,
look not after those things which may draw thee aside from the love of so good
a God, and gracious Father.

Idem in 2 Epist. ad Timoth. cap. 3.
Let it not trouble thee if this man live in tranquillity, and thou thy self
in tribulation: God will have it so; it is he that has put thee into the
combat, thou must therefore sweat hard before thou come off with victory; Where
as he that comes forward in the World, goes backward in grace; and miserable
must that man's estate needs be that goes laughing to destruction, as a Fool
to the stocks for correction.

I have here set them down as they be registered Bellarmine.

1 Upon the lesser Prophets, Hosea, Jonah, Nahum, Abakkuck. 2 Upon all Saint
Matthew 3 Upon Saint Mark. 4 Upon Saint Luke. 5 Upon Saint John. 6 Upon all the
Epistles of Saint Paul. 7 In his Commentaries on the Evangelists, and on the
Epistles, he has so imitated Saint Chrysostom, that he is styled Saint
Chrysostomes Abbreviator, that is, Saint Chrysostomes Epitomiser, or
Abbreviator.
An. Christi 1080. Sanctus Anselmus.
ANSELMVS.

THat the Reader may reap the more satisfaction, concerning this famous Father
of the Church, St. Anselmus, who was Archbishop of Canterbury, I think it
very fit to speak something of his Country and Parents. His fathers name was
Gundulphus, and his mothers name was Ermerberga, both of them well and nobly
descended, and both of them abounding with wealth, lived in the holy state of
wedlock a long time, in the City Augusta. Which City lying on the confines of
Burgundy, and of the Longobards, was the birthplace of this noble Matron: and
she made Gundulphus of a stranger a Citizen of the same place: she was the more
devout, for her husband followed his secular affairs, and has bin censured of
some as too profuse and prodigal: But Ermerberga, with great care and
providence looked to the government of her family, and kept all things in comely
order, of an upright, modest carriage, and sweet behavior to all her
neighbors: Yet Gundulphus before his death despised the world, and the
affairs of it; and so entered into a Monasticke course of life.

This Anselme being put to learning, proved excellent in it, at fourteen
years of age; and then his Mother dying, he lost the best Anchor to his ship;
and so having want of good council, and mother-like instructions, he began to
fail of his former good intentions, and did give himself a while to the vain
sports of this world, and neglected his learning and former studies; so soon
does youth, if not well governed, follow fast to its own ruin: But God, who
had otherwise disposed of him, and intending to use his labors in the Church,
did by the good motions of his blessed Spirit, speedily reduce him: for his
father did prove wondrous strict unto him; and the more humble this Anselmus
was to his demands, the more did he seem to be exasperated against him; so
that Anselmus did fully resolve to travail, and not to live under his father
who was so severe against him: and he was so hard put to it, that in his
travail fainting, and being without any refection, he was forced to eat snow
to quench his thirst.

So having spent some three years in Burgundy, and France, he came into
Normandy, where he hearing of the holy man Lanfrancus, desired to see him, and
speak with him; and if he could so far prevail, intended to put himself
under his government, and tuition. Well, he obtained his desire, and so was
admitted for one of his Scholars, and being now held hard to his study night
and day, his body was brought down with Watchings and Fastings, so that he did
begin to repent this hard course of life, and thereupon resolves to turn a
Monk, intending (as he said) to dedicate himself wholly to the service of
God: And so having well pondred the case with himself, he comes to Lanfranck,
and desires to know which of these three courses were the best; for he intended
to follow his father-like directions, and his prescriptions should be a law
unto him, either to enter into some Monastery, or to live an Hermit, or else to
enjoy his fathers means, and to distribute it to the poor, his Father now
being dead? Lanfrancus deferres to resolve himself; but he advised him to go
to the Bishop of Rhone, and to follow his grave Counsels, who was called at
that time Mauritius* Anselmus comes to the Bishop through the great Woods rhat
are hard by Becc: he having here propounded his mind, the good old Bishop
commends unto him the Monasticke life, as most sit and profitable for him;
whereupon this Anselmus resolves to enter himself a member of the Monastery of
Becc, being now seven and twenty years old, and one Herlvinus being Abbot, an
old honest man, and had settled that Monastery with his own revenues: into
this, Anselmus being entered, set himself studiously to imitate the virtues of
the chiefest and holiest men; and was so strict in holiness of life, that in
three years space he was admired and beloved of all. What shall I speak of
his Watchings? his Fastings? his Meditations? How wisely and prudently did he
convert one Osberne, a wild young man? how careful was he in the visitation of
the sick? How vigilant to confirm men in that course of life? What famous
Treatises did he write? What Questions and doubts did he resolve? How mainly
did he contemn the World? How bitterly did he repent him of his sins? How
constant was he in prayer? So that living thus holily, not only Normandy took
notice of him, but all France and Flanders; and his fame was spread into
England: so that many of all sorts resorted to him for Counsel. Thus by his
worth and piety, that Monastery increased within, and without, within with
Piety, Learning, and good Discipline; without with fair and large possessions
and means given to it.

And now this old Herlvine being not able to undergo the weight of that
charge, committed the administration of it to this Anselmus, who having this
imposed upon him, how wisely and fai^hfully did he perform it? Did he not
distribute, with discretion, means to such as wanted, did he not settle good
Orders in it?

And now at this time the old Abbot Herlvine yielding to death, all the
Brethren with one consent resolved upon this Anselme: but he with words and
tears denyedit; but at last, their eagerness, and the Archbishop of Rhones
exhortation prevailed, and so he is made Abbot, the inferior matters and
causes of the Monastery being referred to the care and charge of the Brethren:
Ipse Dei contemplationi, monachorum eruditioni, admonitioni, correctioni,
jugiter insistebat, that is, He was daily in Divine contemplations, and
instructing the Monks, with admonitions, corrections, and comforts, as
occasion served. How full of Hospitality was he to strangers? How humble, how
cheerful, and how liberal, not only refreshing their bodies, but comforting
likewise their souls with spiritual directions? Did not all men, knowing his
excellencies, send in relief to the Brethren? either by shipping out of
England, or by Wills of men dying, still was this Monastery supplied. There did
likewise belong fair revenues to this Abbey out of England, to bring in which
to the Cloister, this Anselmus came over in the first year that he was
ordained Abbot; and not only for that reason, but also to see and speak with
Lanfrancus, who was from being an Abbot preferred to the Arch-bishopricke of
Canterbury.

Whither, when Anselmus was come, with what a confluence of all sorts of people
was he entertained at Canterbury? so there was Discourse had betwixt Lanfranck
and himself; and this is said of them both to their commendations, Non erat
ullus eo tempore qui aut Lanfranco authoritate vel multiplici rerum scientia,
aut Anselmo praestaret in Sanctitate vel Dei sapientia, that is, There was none
at that time that did exceed Lanfranck in authority and variety of knowledge;
nor Anselme in holiness, nor heavenly wisdom.

He proceeds now to effect that for which he came, and takes an account of all
the means which did belong to their Monastery: but it is to be wondered at,
with what expressions of joy and love was he every where entertained, what
grave Counsels and directions he gave to all sorts of people, especially to
the Clergy; there was not a Lord or a Lady in England at that time, but did
strive to express their loves to him, by presenting him with rich presents;
nay, William the Conqueror, though otherwise stern and rigid, yet how did he
express his love to this great man. So having been joyfully received of all
sorts in England, he intends his journey for his Monastery again, having
gained large means for his fellows.

But now the Conqueror dying, and leaving his son William King of England,
Lanfranck also the Archbishop being dead, this William began fearfully to
waste the Churches throughout England; which Anselme having with grief heard
of; did he not at the solicitation of Hugh Earl of Chester, and other Nobles,
come again into England? and coming to the Court, did he not modestly and
divinely tell the King what wrongs he had done? and how such things would draw
down Gods, heavy judgments upon him and his posterity: but the King was for
the present unflexible: so this Anselme went to this Hugh Earl of Chester; but
the King falling sick, all men cried up this Anselmes fame, and that he was
the only man to be Archbishop of Canterbury. By the Kings authority, and the
whole Kingdoms love he was consecrated the first Sunday in Lent, in the year
of Grace, 1093.

But he found this place, at that time, to be full of troubles, and cares; yet
he being sent for to Court, did meekly beseech the King to cease from
afflicting the Churches: did not this man perform his charge with patience,
industry, and with expressions of learning and fidelity: he was not any ways
addicted to pride, not ensnared with covetousness, neither was he tainted with
idleness. He committed the administration of his household affairs to one
Baldwine: He did mainly lament the abuse that was offered to the Church by
profane covetous men, who took the means of them into their own possession.

The King returned from foreign parts, Anselmus humbly entreats of his
Majesty, that he might have license to go to Rome; but at this the King was
incensed, and told him there should no Pope have any Authority over his
subjects, nor any power within his dominions; hereupon, there was a general
meeting of all the Bishops and Lords at Rothingam to decide this: Here most, to
gain the Kings favor, were directly against this Archbishop: only the
Bishop of Rochester stood with him: But the King was so vexed, that he told
him, he would not hold him as an Archbishop, unless forthwith he would deny
the Popes authority: and again at Winchester desiring of the King the same
thing, the King told him that he should never have that liberty, nor any
other, if he did persist in that mind. So Baldwine was driven out of England,
and Anselmes servants misused, and his lands alienated, and he himself
derided and hated; yet in the depth of this storm he retained his piety, and
said that of our Savior, By patience possess your souls: at last he was
forced by secret means to fly, and so came to a place called Whitsands, and
so to Saint Bertine, being glad that he was out of England: but then the King
hearing, presently ceized upon all his lands and goods, and so Anselme came to
Lions, and was kindly entertained by the Archbishop of that place, and so
being weak in body, and unfit to travail to Rome, he sent his cause thither,
but stayed in Lions till they returned. They coming back, told him, all
excuses laid aside, he must himself go in person to Rome. So they came to
Secusium, and presented themselves to the Abbat of that place; there were three
of them, Anselmus, and Baldwine, and Edinerus, which writ this his life. So
after much travail and danger we came to Rome, and it was bruted abroad of
this Fathers approach, and all men desired to see him: but it being extreme
hot in the City of Rome, this Anselme lived in a Village, seated pleasantly,
called Schlavia: a great deal of time was spent in deliberating for the
Churches good: but it was thought safest for Anselme not to return into
England while William lived, neither did he: but his successor Henry came into
Normandy, hearing that Anselme was there, and did reinvest him into all his
state and honors again, and he came into England, and was entertained with
great reverence of all the Lords of the Kingdom, and the love of all the
Common people. So King Henry was very glad that he had gained the peace of
Anselme; but he was even spent with age, labor, and watching; for age brings
to us experience in one hand, and death in the other; and so did not live long
after his return, but with a great expression of holiness and comfort did
commend his spirit to God.

Time deals with man Arithmetically: First, he adds to beauty, multiplies his
graces, and then he subtracts all these, and makes a long lasting division
between him and Nature: And now he is dead, it is high time to cover this sweet
and heavenly Father with his first mother the Earth; who (being honorably
attended to the grave) with the Rose and the Violet is laid to sleep in the
bosom of the earth; and shall enjoy, though not so suddenly, yet as certain a
Spring as they; and which is more, an everlasting one.

His Sayings.
S. Anselm. de Malitia, and foeditate peccati. Cap. 190.
Saint Anselme was wont to say; that if he should see the shame of sin on
the one side, and the pains of hell on the other side, and that he must of
necessity be cast upon one of them, that he had rather be thrust into hell
without sin, where the drowned are tormented, than go to heaven, clothed
with sin, where the Saints only enjoy everlasting life.

Idem de Venatione Diaboli. Cap. 183.
The Devil goes out every day a hunting: First, he seizes on them that never
sorrow for their sin: but he begins to let them go, that he perceives to be
cast down in the sight of their offenses; yet there is a third sort that upon
repentance are healed from their sins, those he loses altogether. Let the
first sort lament, and mourn, let the second grieve on still, but let the
third rejoice for evermore.

Id. de quadrato lapide. Cap. 173. de similitud.
Every four square stone has six equal sides, let it fall upon which it can
it lies fast; so must a just man persist in his integrity; for he has six
sides to fall upon too: Prosperity, Adversity, Liberty, Subjection, Private and
public employment: Now upon which of these soever the Dye turns, let him
stand fast and immovable, maugre the Devil, and all his opposition.

Id. de Iustitia.
Justice is the freedom of mind, giving to every one his due: To betters,
reverence; to equals, love; to inferiors, instruction; to God obedience; to
it self, sanctity; to enemies, patience; and to the poor, works of
compassion.

Such was the detestation which this good man had of sin, that he would use
to say; If I could see the horror of sin, and the dolor of hell, both with my
bodily eyes before me, In vit. ejus apud Surium cap. 19.
and must of necessity pass through one of them, I would rather choose Hell
than sin.

Another saying of his was, I had rather enter Hell, being free from sin, (if
it were possible) than reign in Heaven with the pollution of sin upon me.

Likewise humane frailty made this good man thus to cry out: O durus casus!
Heu! quid perdidit homo? quid invenit? perdidit beatitudinem, ad quam factus
est, and invenit mortem, ad quam factus non est: O hard hap! alas! what did man
lose? what did he find? He lost the blessedness to which he was made; and
found death to which he was not made.

His Works are thus registered by Cardinal Bellarmine.

Three Books.
1 Of Truth. 2 Of Free Will. 3 Of the fall of the Devil.
then 3 more of
1 Grammar, and prose. 2 Enarrations on St. Matthew. Explanations on some of
the Evangelists. Upon the Canticles.
Tome 2.
Upon all the Epistles of St. Paul. On the Apocalypse.
Tome 3.
Of the contempt of the World. Hymns. 4 Soliloquies. 5 For an unwise man. 6
Against an unwise man. 7 Of the Incarnation. 8 Why God was made man. 9 Of the
Virgins Conception. 10 Of the Sacrament 11 Annotations on the same. 11 Of the
proceeding of H. G. 12 Of Similitudes. 13 Of Gods will. 14 Of the concord of
Praescience and Predestination. 15 Of man's misery. 16 Of members and actions
attributed to God. 17 Of the measuring the Cross. 18 Of Meditations. 19 A
meditation of our Redemption. 20 Of the Passion. 21 Pricks of divine Love. 22
Homilies on Saint Luke. 23 Of the Virgin Mary's excellence. 24 Of the Image of
the World. 25 Dialogues containing the sum of Christian Religion.
Tome 4.
Diverse Epistles in three books.
An. Christi 1119. Sanctus Rupertus.
RVPERTVS.

HE that reads this man's life must expect, that nor my pen, nor any other can
completely in each particular act, fully delineate it, but yet as Authors have
publicly blazoned his worth, it has been my care to register it in our
native tongue, and I hop^ not in vain; for good examples prevail much, and
are to an ingenuous spirit, as a whetstone or pattern to imitate. To begin
therefore with his parents, He was borne in Germany, as Trithemius and Cocleius
do testify, but they were not so able for wealth as virtue, they had an
especial care that this their son should be virtuously educated: our
birth-places, nor our parents cannot diminish the worth that we practice, the
house is never the worse for being little in Israel, the Family disparages not,
so there be a David in it, we are not bound to answer for other men's faults,
neither is it to be concluded, because our Fathers have halted, that therefore
we should be lame, Virtue deserves commendation as well in the Cottage, as in
the Court, and many times is not accommodated with the affluence of worldly
endowments. The greatest Rivers flow from Springs, and the Tree is not to be
disliked, because it is low, if the fruit be good, it makes not whither it
grows on an Hill or a Valley: According to that of Ausonius.

Non obstare locum cum valet ingenium.
Question not the Tree,
When the mind you good do see.
This Rupertus was in his youth brought up in all offices of piety and duty in
the Monastery of Liege, under the tuition of Heribrandus, an upright and
prudent man, of whom he acquired the principles of those Arts that were
fitting his age, and it seems, his Tutor did not neglect his charge, but
finding him to be an ingenuous youth, mildly imposed some duties of Religion
upon him, which he performed as carefully and reverently: an admirable
pattern, the only way to have men prove absolute, is to have them well at
first seasoned, seldom falls that fruit by storms which is cherished by a
mild spring. There are few that fail in age, whose youth have been accustomed
and inured to pious performances, being by this good Instrument so fitted, now
he proceeds to higher actions, he made godliness the very food of his soul,
and profited in the practice of it daily more and more, so that following that,
he gained knowledge and reputation as it is said, I bone, quo virtus tua te
vocat, I pede fausto
Grandia laturus meritorum praemia --
That is, Proceed, o Goodman, with an happy pace
In tracks of virtue, take the rewards with grace.


He was not careless of any kind of Learning that might conduce to Religion,
so was he admirable for divine poetry, as may appear by his expressions of
the Holy Ghost in excellent Verse, as also the life of Saint Augustine and
Odolia a Virgin, as also his Hymns upon Severus the Confessor, so likewise he
always thought upon that of Saint Paul, give attendance to reading. Did he
not also restore the Greek Tongue at this time almost decayed in Italy? nay,
did he not fairly recover them from their Barbarismes that were then
encroaching upon the Latin? so that it appears, this Rupertus was not only
famous for Poetry and the Greek tongue, but also for Oratory in the Latin
phrase; a rare thing living in those barbarous times to restore Languages to
their Genuine beauty. And if I should but a little digress, it would not be an
error, a little to insist upon the praise of Divine Poetry, if there were
nothing else but the diligent practice of so many Fathers as have been renowned
for this, it was enough, and I cannot let some of them pass without a due
respect and reverence, they having been, some of them so highly in Gods
fav^ur, and registered in sacred Writ, as Moses, David, Solomon, Jeremiah, and
of the famous Fathers of the Church, as Saint Cyprian, Lactantius, Iuvencus,
Saint Hillarie, Marius, Victorius, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Saint Ambrose,
Hillary, Sedulius, Synesius, Paulinus, Ausonius, Paulus Diaconus, Rhabanus
Maurus, with diverse others; neither can I let pass his care to keep the
virtue of a good Orator, for in this also he deserves an eminent
commendation; for take a way or diminish the luster of that, and what spurious
and barbarous proceedings will there not be admitted? How soon will not the
pure fountains of Eloquen^^ be stopped, and Rhetoric neglected? and ind^ed,
how soon will all good literatu^e and painful studies be c^unted needless,
if once this be slighted? have not so many of the Fathers of the Church been
studious this way? and indeed take away this jewel, and how shall men's hearts
be wrought upon? are not Origin, Saint Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, Gregory Nyssen, Saint Augustine, Chrysologus, Saint Gregory, Beda,
Damascen, Bernard, with many others admired for their excellency this way,
that with their Oratory, they have wonderfully wrought to the stopping of
Heresies, and the advancing of truth, to the convincing of errors, and the
converting of souls to Religion. But I leave this as known, and proceed to
his further increasing abilities. As he increased in years, so in gifts; when
he came to man's estate, he settles upon Philosophy, and so to Divinity, then
he fits himself by prayers and other duties required in such a choice, and
here he found that sweetness, that it was not satisfactory to him to spend the
day in these, but the night also, and that not without fasting, prayers, and
tears, he was long gone in years before he was made Priest, in respect of
the dissenti^ns of the Roman Church, and in regard that the Armies of Henry the
Fourth, at that time wasted Germany, by reason of those Thunderbolts sent from
Rome, so that it was an hard case for a Student to read Divinity, amongst
Horsetroops, and to addict a man's self to the Muses, when Mars was Commander:
yet even in these times did this Rupertus follow his worthy intentions, and did
not abate, bur rather double his diligence, even in these boisterous storms,
and especially he was sheltered by the protection of Frederick Archbishop of
Collen, from the hazards of the intruding sword, and was made Abbot of a Dutch
Dorpe in lower Germany, seated upon the Rhine, a little below Collen, called as
my Author testifies, Tuitium, or Divitense Mompientum, (...). and (...). F
errar. in lex. Geogr^.
from a Cloister builded there by this Rupertus himself, and dedicated to
Saint Lawrence: and here he wanted not adversaries to calumniate him, and
those that did accuse him of Heresy; but he cleeres these oppositions, and in
short space confutes the Authors, though for a time he ceased writing, and as
the Devil was malicious to hinder goodness, much more propitious was God to
this Rupertus, for it pleased him to raise up great men to protect him as the
aforenamed Archbishop of Collen, who did make him one of his Clients, and Cuno
an Abbot, afterward Bishop of Ratisbone, eminent men, and both of them equally
intending to preserve the fame of this Rupertus: and they do deserve their due
Encomiums for their pious sheltering of him: never has it been known that
God has left his Church; of Enemies he will make friends, if a man's ways
please the Lord, he will make his enemies to be at peace with him; and so this
Rupertus escaped the mouth of that Lion: Will you but hear this man's praise,
Dum quidem stabit Ecclesia Catholica, etc. that is, As long as the Church
Catholic stands on earth, so long shall the worth of this man be celebrated,
which more then any one has ennobled the Church of Collen, in whose Writings
there is nothing but gravity, sanctity, and solidity, who by the instinct of
the blessed Spirit of God did search out many mysteries, who handled the points
of Faith sincerely and judiciously, who with wit defended the Ceremonies of the
Church against all Opponents, who played the parts of an absolute Divine, who
settled dexterously all differences in Religion, and for humane Learning who knew
it more expertly, or did practice it more substantially, yet so as he would
call them Dona Dei preciosa, sed ancillas, and Theologiae Ministras: that is,
The precious gifts of Gods Spirit, but yet Handmaids, and attendants to
Divinity: and so speaks another of him, Sivitae sanctitatem inquiras,
religiosissimus; si scientiam undecunque doctissimus; si mores, omni honestate
insignis erat: that is, If you desire to know whither he was an holy man or
not, I testify he was wholly addicted and devoted to Religion: if you enquire
of his knowledge and Learning, he was every way accomplished; if you look into
his manners and course of life, it was at all times, in all places, upon all
occasions decored and graced with honesty, who can express his Humility iu the
height of his prosperity? Erat fide firmus, Ioannes Abbas Spa^he^m. in laudem
Ruperti.
spe certus, charitate repletus, sapientia clarus, etc. that is, he was settled
in the Faith, grounded in hope full of lave, famous for wisdom, truly valiant,
honest in his actions, of a sober life, patient in the deepest affliction, a
fit Shepherd for Christ's Lambs, meek, courteous, devout, frequent in praying,
deep in meditations, studious in his readings: so as it is said of him, semper
legit, semper scripsit, semper oravit: He always was reading or writing, or
praying, nay (as the said Author has it) Non erat virtus, quam Ruperti
conversatio nesciret, that is, there was not a virtue, which this Rupertus in
his life did not practice. How did he instruct the ignorant? reduce the
wandering? confound Heretics? How did he hate pride, abandon covetousness,
trample on luxury, tamed anger, expelled envy, and detested idleness?

Hear but the short commendations of Trithemius, Trith. in scrip. Eccles.
Vir erat in divinis Scripturis doctissimus, etc. that is, He was a man most
learned in the Scriptures, whom Envy it self cannot but praise; whose Labors
all the Learned rejoice to read, who as he lived as an Angel here, so he
shall be as an Angel in glory. Will you know him further, then take his
Epitaph cut upon a stone, Anno Domini 1135. 4. Non. Martii obiit Venerabilis
Pater ac Dominus Rupertus Abbas hujus Monasterii, vir doctissimus at que
religiosissimus, ut, in libris suis, quos edidit, apertissime claret, that is,
In the year of our Lord 1135, on the fourth of the Nones of March, died this
most Reverend Father Rupertus, Lord Abbot of this Monastery, a most Learned and
Religious man, as is easily to be seen in his writings; He lived long till he
was very old, and in this his old age he did with abundance of tears lament
and bewail the vanities of his life, still desiring God to pardon his sins, to
omit his errors, and to make him one of those of whom it is said, Come ye
blessed children of my Father, etc. all his desire was to be loosed from the
Tabernacle of corruption, so that it appears he had hopes of a better
possession in that City, whose builder and maker is God. So in fullness of
days, after many tedious labors and travels he was struck with a Fever, of
which he died, with great expressions of joy and comfort, that at the day of
accounts he should rise to live with the just and upright men made perfect.

I have here set down his Works as they are registered before his books
printed at Mentz, in the year of our Lord 1631, in two Tomes.

Tome 1.
Commentaries of the Works of the sacred Trinity in forty two books. 1 On
Genesis, nine books. 2 On Exodus, four books. 3 On Leviticus, two books. 4 On
Numbers, two books. 5 On Deuteronomy, two books. 6 On Josuah, one book 7 On
Judges, 1 book. 8 On the Kings, five books. With the Psalms annexed. 9 On
Esaias, two books. 10 On Jeremiah, two books. 11 On Ezekiel, one book. 12 On
Daniel, one book. Haggay, Zachary, Malachy, being added. 13 On the four
Evangelists, one book. 14 On the Works of the Holy Ghost, nine books. 15
Commentaries on the twelve lesser Prophets, one and thirty books.
1 On Osee, five books. 2 On Joel, one book. 3 On Amos, four books. 4 On
Abdiah, one book. 5 On Jonah, two books. 6 On Micha, three books. 7 On Nahum,
three books. 8 On Abacuck, three books. 9 On Zephaniah, two books. 10 On Aggee,
one book* 11 On Zachary, five books. 12 On Malachie, one book. 13 Of the
Canticles, of the Incarnation, seven books. 14 On Ecclesiastes, one book. 15 On
Job, one book. These are of late annexed.
Tome 2.
1 On Saint Matthew, of the glory of the Son of God, thirteen books. 2 Of the
Trinity, nine books. 3 On Saint John, thirteen books. 4 On the Apocalypse,
twelve books. 5 Of the victory of Gods Word, thirteen books. 6 Of divine
Offices, twelve books. 7 Of the misery of his Monastery, one book. 8 Of the
meditation of death, two books. 9 The life of Heribet, Archbishop of Collen.
To these now are added.
1 Of the loss of Virginity, one book. 2 Of the Divine will, one book. 3 Of
the Omnipotency of God, one book.
These are the demonstrations of the Labors of this man, which are large
enough to prove him an eminent man; and so I end and shut up my discourse of
him, desiring those that read his Life or his Works, both to imitate his
Learning and Holiness, that they with him may receive comfort at the second
coming of our blessed Savior. Happy are they then when our Lord shall come,
shall be found so doing.

An. Christi 1130. Sanctus Bernardus.
S. BERNARDVS.

IT is not fitting that this great Light which God did set up should be hid
under a bushel, but that his piety and virtues should be celebrated to all
posterity: He was borne in those parts of Burgundy, in which his Father held
much land and large possessions. His parents were noble and religious. His
Fathers name was Tecelinus, a great Soldier, and such a one as Saint John
wished others to be, laid violent hands on none; but kept himself within the
bounds of civility and sobriety, and so followed his Commanders here, that he
did not neglect his chief Commander in Heaven: his mothers name was Aleth,
sprung from a Town not far from the mountain called Barrus: she following
the rule of the Apostle was subject to her own husband, and ruled her family
with wonderful care and religion; she bare to her husband six sons, all
devoted to God and religion, and one daughter which was also addicted to
piety: all these she lovingly did give suck to from her own breasts, the third
of these was this Bernard, whose Life I will now set forth.

In his minority he was very obedient and dutiful to his parents, wonderful
apt to learn, and quick to conceive, of an admirable memory, accute wit, ready
apprehension, ingenious of nature, flexible to discipline, of an excellent
feature, comely personage, sweet behavior, courteous, meek: all these
showing what a rich Harvest this Spring would produce, when he was young he was
troubled with a great pain in his head, which a woman having long time used
that way was brought to him, who said she would remove that pain by certain
verses by way of enchantment; but when she came before him, he utterly
rejected her and her devise, rather being willing to endure the hand of God,
then the hand of the Devil, and God in short time after in great mercy did
acquitt and free him of this pain, and did comfort him and confirm him as he
did Samuel in Shiloe; being put forth to learning, he was not only as forward
as the rest, but exceeded, and even in his youth did learn to mortify his
headstrong affections: he was as well by education as nature addicted to a
solitary life; he was also full of charity, for if he had any money he would
privately give it away to the poor: his master dyed in his youth, and was
honorably interred: this Bernard was to be admired for his chastity, and for
quelling of lustful thoughts, so that he did often use that speech of Job, I
have made a covenant with mine eyes not to look upon a maid, Job, 32.
which will appear if you consider those two eminent demonstrations of it; the
one was thus by the instinct and suggestion of the Devil, there was a young
beautiful maid laid in bed, which thing when Bernard perceived, though then in
height of blood, and she an object to incite him to violate his chastity, yet
he never so much as took any notice of her, but lamenting her impudency, lay
on the other side remote from her; and so kept himself continent to the
astonishment of that bold intruder. And the other passage is this, It so fell
out, that Bernard with some other of his associates should lodge at a Matrons
house, but the woman being overcome with tentation, viewing the comely
countenance of Bernard, and the beauty of his eyes, and graceful deportments of
his person, when night came, did prepare a more sumptuous Chamber for him, than
for the rest, and she burning in lust toward him, in the middle of the night
came to his bed, which thing Bernard suspecting suddenly cried out, as if there
had been Thieves in his Chamber, so the people awaking, and the woman fearing
to be taken, fled; well, they all go again to rest, but the woman not being
daunted with this, approached the second time, but he, as before, cried
Thieves, so the household rose again, but found non, nay, she was so impudent
that she adventured the third time; but being by his cry, either struck with
shame or despair, left off her enterprise: Upon this thinking it not safe to
dwell with Serpents of this nature, he intended to remove, and though the world
seemed to flatter him with hopes of honors, wealth, preferment, pleasures, and
the like; yet he was desirous rather to take the yoke of his Savior on his
shoulders, and thereupon enquired what place would best fit such a practice,
and at that time there being an order of Cistercians come up, and having as
yet, by reason of their poverty of life and austerity, there were but few that
followed this course of life, and as yet few or none admitted; It so fell out
that after long debate with his associates, he resolves upon this, to enter
himself a member of that society, and so in the year of our Lord 1113, and of
his age the two and twentieth, with thirty more he entered into this Monastery;
under the government of Stephen then the Abbot, and from that time it pleased
God to show him singular mercy and favor, and he made good use of it, not
turning the grace of God into wantonness, but did set himself wholly to the
work of the Lord, and often would say to himself, Bernarde, Bernarde, ad
quodingressus es? that is, O Bernard, Bernard, to what purpose entered you in
hither? and when by the appointment of Stephen he was made Abbat of
Claravallis, his fellows have heard him say often, ye that do enter in here,
leave the fruits of the flesh, and bring in the fruits of the spirit, for this
is a school to exercise grace in, not nature. This Claravallis was in the
Territory of Lingonia, and was once called Absynthialis, for the abundance of
Wormwood that grew there: it was a Den of Robbers, and was not far from the
River Elbe: but now this Bernard and those that came with him made this Den of
Thieves the House of Prayer, where these professors lived in great want and
penury, in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, in Watchings, fastings,
and prayers, spare in their diet, especially this Bernard, lying often on the
ground, and this did he only to mortify the deeds of flesh, Plenus autem
erat (says my Author) devotione, mansuetudine, charitate, humilitate, he was
full of devotion, imitating the Apostles rule, be instant in prayer, and pray
continually: endued he was with the spirit of meekness, so that he had
learned to practice that of our Savior, Learn of me for I am humble and
meek, and as he knew meekness to be a fruit of Gods holy Spirit, so he put it
upon his soul; abound he did likewise in charity, knowing it to be the bond
of perfection, and the chiefest above Faith, or Hope, and would fast himself
to give to others that were in want: he could never endure to keep any wealth
by him, but all that he could spare, charity disposed of: God crowns the
intent where he finds not the faculty: true charity proceeds not from a full
purse, but from a free bosom.

His humility was likewise admirable, for he said he had learnt it of so good
a Master, that he should not be a good scholar, if he should forget it. Nay,
he was so devout in prayer, that as it is said of him, Orabat stans die
noctuque, donec genua ejus infirmatae jejunio corpus sustinere non potuere; He
prayed standing night and day, until his knees were so weary with fasting that
they could not uphold his body; for prayer is the chiefest thing which a man
can present God withal: he seldom did drink wine, and when he did he was
very sparing, and mixed it with water, because he said as Solomon, it was a
mocker, and that strong drink was raging: and being ordained Minister, this
luster of holiness of life and frugality, how did they procure him reverence,
authority, obedience, how happy were they that could be admitted for his
auditors? and the first thing he took special care of, was to have decent
and reverend carriage used in Gods house, and had an excellent gift and grace
in preaching the Word to the people.

I^ is reported of him, that being in the Priesthood, and having remained some
years in the said Monastery, that it happened one Iosbertus a noble man, who
lived in the next Town to that Monastery, was taken speechless, and was as it
were void of reason; which thing being related to Saint Bernard by his son,
he said thus, Notum est vobis, quod homo iste in pluribus gravavit Ecclesias,
oppressit pauperes, offendit Deum: that is, it is known to you how in many
things this man has burdened the Churches, oppressed the poor, and offended
God: Now if he will restore what he has taken from the Churches, and leave
off to oppress and vex the poor, and pray heartily to God, and confess his
sin, and repent him of it, he will by Gods mercy be restored, so all things
were promised to be performed: and this Saint Bernard did servently pray and
cry unto God to restore him, that they which thought it impossible might see
it, and so believe in all saving mercy: it fell out so, that this Iosbert
performing what was enjoined him, he was restored; and Bernards brother who
did not give credit to his words, was convinced, whose name was Gerrard, so was
his Uncle Gardricke: His fame spread far and wide, and abundance of people
came to hear his Sermons; so that Pope Innocentius got him to Rome, and how
was he there admired for his abilities? did he not work upon the Emperors
heart, and for his Holiness; were not all Church businesses moderated by his
only advise and counsel? and how did he repel the intention of the King who
intended to have made Theaters of Churches? and did not he reconcile the
Religious men of Millain to him, and pacify all things that then were in
combustion^ where were not his counsels held as Oracles? and what did he fail
to effect which he undertook? and what Bishoprics were not offered him? The
Church of Lingonium, the Church of Cathalaunia, did seek for him with tears
and petitions to be their Bishop.

How many Cities in Itali^, especially Millain, did thirst after his doctrine,
and desired his government? Did not Rhemes do the like by all solicitations
that could express reverence and love? With what tears was he welcomed after
his journey to his old Monastery^ What fears were there that he would be
made a Bishop, and so leave them Yet how humbly did he in the midst of all
these offers demean himself? How untainted was he from the sins of the
times? How zealous for Gods glory^ Was it not he whom Theobaldus a Prince gave
large means to, for the due sustenance of the Society? Was it not he that by
his sincerity of life, and purity, and efficacy of preaching, made men of all
estates willing to afford relief for the repairing and enlarging their seat?
How did he stop the fury of the Schismatics, and restrained the persecution?
Did not he being sent for to Rome oppose the Schismatics, that he stopped their
mouths? and so by his care and diligence peace was restored to the Church? Did
he not so gain the love of Prince The obaldus, that he was joyful and ready
to part with all his titles, and dignities, and means, for the maintenance of
Gods Church^^ Oh should I, or could I indeed reckon up all his eminencies and
gracious endowments? How incredible, nay, how unimitable are they? For God
brought mighty things to pass by this Saint Bernards means. Take his
commendation as one gives it him, Serenus vultu, modestus habitu, circumspectus
in verbis; in sacra meditatione assiduus, etc. that is, Of a gracious
countenance, a modest habit, circumspect in his words, assiduous in meditation,
devout in prayer, strong in the faith, patient in hope, made up of charity,
chief for humility, principal of all in piety? in counsels provident,
powerful in deeds, never idle, rejoicing when reproached: modest to
petitioners, flowing with abundance of wisdom, virtue, and grace with God and
men, apt in speech, fitting himself to his auditory, admired for his diet, and
not affecting any earthly promotions, nay, he is termed, Olivaspeciosa, Vitis
fructuosa, Palma florida, Cedrus multiplicat^, vas Electionis, vas Honoris in
domo Dei, vas auri solidum, etc. that is, A beautiful Olive Tree, a fruitful
Vine, a flourishing Palm Tree; a lofty Cedar, a vessel of Election, a vessel
of Honor in the House of God, a pure vessel of solid Gold set with precious
stones.

He foretold his death, and he that desires to read copio^sly of each
circumstance, there is an Epistle extant to Arnaldus an Abbot: thus much in
brief, after so many great labors in the Churches cause, having happily
finished his ^ayes, being the first Abbot of that place, at the age of sixty
three years, having settled above a hundred and sixty Monasteries for Religion,
He sickned and commended his soul devoutly into Gods hands, a great concourse
of people shedding tears for the loss of such an Angelike man.

This happened in the same year that Eugenius the third of that name an holy man
departed this life, Anastastus succeeding him in the Roman See, then reigning
that illustrious Frederick over the Romans, and Ludovicus that godly Prince,
the son of Ludovicus, governing France: He was buried on the Calends of
September, with great state and pomp, Anno 1130.

Bernard his Sayings.
Of sloth.
Sloth is a certain languishing sluggishnesse of the mind, Bern. 1. sermon.
whereby one neglects to begin that which is good, or to finish that which is
begun.

Of brotherly love.
Then self love is just and temperate, Bern. de dict.
when that which is withdrawn from pleasurable vanity, is bestowed to relieve
our brothers necessity: for true love regards the common good.

Help is in vain expected, Ibid.
where punishment is deserved. Expectation from others must be according to our
dealing with others.

Of Ambition.
Ambition is a gilded misery, a secret poison, a hidden plague, Bern. in sermon.
quadrages.
the Engineere of deceit, the mother of hypocrisy, the parent of envy, the
original of vices, the moth of holiness, the blinder of hearts, turning
remedies into diseases, and medicines into sickness.

Of Gods love.
God loved us sweetly, wisely, and valiantly; sweetly, Bern. super Cant. sermon.
20
because he put on our flesh; wisely, because he was blameless; valiantly,
because, he suffered death. Learn therefore, O Christian, from Christ how to
come to Christ: Learn to love him sweetly lest we be allured, wisely lest we
be deceived, and valiantly lest we be subd^ed and vanquished.

The Souls three estates.
There are three estates of holy souls; Bern. ser. 107
the first in the corruptible body, the second without the body, the third in
the glorified body. The first in warfare and unperfectnesse, the second in rest
and quietness, the third in perfect felicity and happiness.

Of the hearts Ascension
There are four degrees of ascension, Bern. super Cant.
first, to the heart; secondly, in the heart; thirdly of the heatt; and
fourthly, above the heart: In the first God is feared, in the second his
counsel is heard, the third is the desire of Christ's coming, the fourth is the
fruition of Gods presence.

Saint Bernard, when he entered the Temple, or any other holy place, when he
came to the door of entrance, said thus to himself: Stay here all my worldly
thoughts, all vanity, that I may entertain heavenly meditations.

His Works are these that follow, registered by his own Scholar who wrote his
Life, and by Cardinal Bellarmine.

Such as are reckoned by Godfrede, his Scholar, are these.

1. Homilies in praise of the Virgin Mary, 4 books. 2 Of the degrees of
Humility, one book. 3 Of loving God, one book. 4 Apology to William one book.
5 Of Precept and dispensation, one book. 6 Exhortations to the Soldiers of the
Temple. 7 Of grace and Free will. 8 Of consideration, five books. 9 Sermons on
the Canticles, 86 books. 10 Epistles to diverse, 351. 11 On Saint Malachies life
the Bishop of Ireland.
These are of the second order, and no doubt to be made of them, as Bellarmine
Writes.

1 Of the Lords coming, seven sermons. 2 On the Vigils of Christ's Nativitie, 6
sermons. 3 On Christmasse day, 6 sermons. 4 On New years day, 3 sermons. 5 On
Twelfth day, 4 6 On the first Sunday after the Epiphany, two sermons. 7 On St.
Paul's conversion, two sermons. 8 On Candlemas day, three sermons. 9 On
Septuagessima, two sermons. 10 On Quadragessima seven sermons. 11 On St.
Benedict, one sermon. 12 On our Lady day, three sermons. 13 On Palme-sunday,
three sermons. 14 On Easter day, four sermons. 15 Sunday after Easter, two
sermons. 16 On Rogation week, one sermon. 17 On Ascension day, one sermon. 18
On Whitsontide, one sermon. 19 On St. John Baptists, one sermon. 20 On Saint
Peter and Paul, four sermons. 21 On David and Goliath, one sermon. 22 On the
seven hours, three sermons. 23 On St. Victor, two sermons. 24 On St. Mary
Magdalen, one sermon. 25 On our Lady day, five sermons. 26 On these words, it
is a great sign, one sermon. 27 On the Virgin Mary's birth day, one sermon. 28
On Saint Michael, two sermons. 29 On All Saints day, five sermons. 30 On St.
Malachies, one sermon. 31 On Esayes words, five sermons. 32 On St. Martine, one
sermon. 33 On St. Clement, one sermon. 34 On Saint Andrews Eve, one sermon. 35
On Saint Andrews day, two sermons. 36 On Humbertus, one sermon. 37 At the
Dedication of a Church, six sermons. 38 On the 90. Psalm, seventeen sermons.
39 On diverse Arguments. 35. 40 Of the depth of the heart, four sermons. 41 Of
conversion to the Clergy, one sermon. 42 Short sermons, 66. 43 Of the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, one sermon. 44 St. Bernards sentences. 45 A Declamation on that
saying, We have left all.
Those of which there is some doubt made, are these.

1 To his Brethren. 2 Meditations. 3 Of the inward house, the soul. 4 Of the
order of life. 5 Of the Ladder of Monks. 6 Form of honest life. 7 The Monks
Looking Glass. 8 Diverse sermons. 9 A description of his Monastery. 10 The
lamentation of the blessed Virgin. 11 The doctrine of St. Bernard. 12 Homilies
on them that went to Emaus. 13 Of Gods love. 14 Of the nature, and dignity of
divine love. 15 On the Lords Passion. 16 A Tract of the Passion. 17 St.
Bernards Rhetoric. 18 Of the manner of living well, to his sister. 19 Of
Conscience. 20 Sermons on diverse Arguments, 15. 21 Upon that, Salve Regina. 22
An Epistle to one to show what God does require of us. 23 Of Burthe^s.
Cardinal Bellarmines judgment of these, is this: some of these are known
manifestly not to be Saint Bernards, yet are full of weight and profit; Some of
them have their Authors names noted, some are so slight, and not any ways
relishing Saint Bernards style nor spirit: and some are so like his Works, that
it is hard to make distinction of them: those, that either for curiosity or
satisfaction desire to know, may see the Cardinals observation upon each Tract
in his book of Ecclesiastical Writers, page 142. 143.

An. Christi 1145. Peter Lombard.
PETER LOMBARD

HEaven has been pleased to send many famous Divines into the world, who, like
Ambassadors, coming from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, have expounded
the Gospel of Salvation, and defended it from the schismatic interpretation
of Heretics. As therefore Solomon says, memoria justi cum laudibus, the
memory of the just is precious and praiseworthy: it must needs follow, that
the praises of these deceased holy Fathers, will encourage others to give God
thanks for raising up such worthy instruments in his Church, and also in their
lives and conversations to follow their example. Amongst the other renouned
Fathers, famous for Learning, soundness of Doctrine, Piety, and integrity of
life, Peter Lombard deserves a prime place: For as it is a Divine gift, above
the nature of man, to instruct men concerning God and Religion, and to move and
incline their mind to piety and sanctimony of manners, so it is necessary that
Divines should be furnished with Ecclesiasticke Eloquence, and sentences, to
bring about this great work; which famous men, even from the first infancy of
the Church have endeavored and labored to effect: And from hence proceeded so
many Greek and Latin Commentaries, Meditations, Homilies, Precepts, and
Ecclesiastical instructions, written by the holy Fathers, who that they might
by their laborious writings illuminate the Church in mysteries of salvation,
were all brought up to scholasticke learning; that some by Commentaries, some
by Sermons, and some by Sentences, might all help to edify and build up the
Church of God.

And this Father, the most renowned Peter Lombard, of Novaria, Bishop of Paris,
was (as Sixtus Senensis and others have written) by all School Divines, for a
certain singular excellence of Veneration, called the Master of the Sentences;
upon whose compendium of Divinity, and Volumes of innumerable disputations, the
most learned Divines of the most famous Universities in the whole Christian
World have elaborately written.

He was contemporary with Gratian, and as he gathered Canons, and was the
Master of the Canons, so he collected out of the sentences of Ambrose, Hillary,
Augustine, Cassiodorus, and Remigius, suppressing their names, most learned
sententious Commentaries on all David's Psalms, and on all Saint Paul's
Epistles, inserting some things of account of his own. The Commentaries on the
Psalms begin, Cum omnes Prophetas Sancti spiritus revelatione constat esse
locutos. The Commentaries on Saint Paul begin; Principia rerum sunt inquirenda.
So that this Peter Lombard, being endowed with all natural qualities, improved
by education and learning in the schools; and being also painful and
industrious to advance Religion, to increase spiritual knowledge, and to
furnish Students in Divinity with most exquisite and mellifluous sentences, so
sweet, so admirable, and patheticall, he I say, to this end collected the
Sayings and Sentences of the Fathers, which may be thence gathered and cited to
various and diverse purposes, either to confirm any Doctrine, to amplify
matters, or to delight the audience; Sentences being the Cream of wit, the
abstract and epitome of words, for instruction necessary, easy to be retained
in memory, as brief rules of Life and Religion. How ought then posterity to be
thankful to this famous Father Peter Lombard, who out of so many learned
Divines, painfully collected so many Sentences out of their Gardens, gathering
Divine flowers which are all bound together in his Works?

And therefore although Laus est or atio bona alicujus enumerans, praise is but
the repetition of particular virtues and goodness; Yet the life of this worthy
Father would deserve a whole volume of praises, filled with Encomiums and
sententious Eulogyes: but because they cannot reach his desert both for Piety,
Religion, and Sanctity, it will be his best commendation to read some of his
sweet Sayings, collected out of his own Works.

Peter Lombard his Sayings.
Of Sin.
Every sin that is not speedily by Repentance discovered, becomes a new
Sin, and the punishment of former sin.

Of the Will.
There can no good dwell in us that cannot will good; Comment in St. Paul Epist.
nor can we perfect good that cannot desire good.

Of the Law.
Death is not by the Law, but by the fault of man; but sin is the procurer
and efficient cause of Death, because it turns that which is good into evil.
For so Physic is not the cause of Death, though it discovers deadly poisons,
nor the Law discovering the poison of sin in reprobate men.

There are in us evil concupiscences and desires, which are the Devils
weapons, whereby when God for sakes us, he overthrowes us, and gives our souls
a deadly wound.

Of Predestination.
God condemns none before he sins; he crowns none before he
over-commeth; but he has a definitive prescience of every ones will, whereby
he shall be condemned or crowned.

If God be for us by predestinating us before our being, by our vocation when
we were enemies, by justifying us when we were sinners, by glorifying us when
we were mortal; nothing can hurt us, but all things work for our good.

Of Gods Love.
If nothing can separate us from Gods love, what more certain and greater good
can there be? For he that loves God cannot dye; but it is death not to love
God, or to prefer any thing before the love of God; therefore the love of God
is a right affection of the mind, which joyneth us to God; and God shows his
love to us in Christ, whom for us he delivered to death.

Of gifts.
Let none glory in the gifts of Preachers, or men, in that they edify more by
them; for they are not authors of grace, but ministers.

Of Love.
The real virtue of Piety is the love of a pure heart, Comment. in 3. cap. in
Paul.
a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. This is virtue which nothing
overcommeth; no fire or winds of persecution; no flames of temptations can
extinguish: of this virtue it is said, Love is as strong as death, by a
contrary comparison: For as death is violent in destroying, so love is violent
in preserving.

Of Corporal Exercise.
Corporal exercise, as Fasting, watching, and abstinence, which bridle the
flesh, are little profitable, unless piety be added thereunto; for it makes us
shun vices, and so to be excusable for some vices, but not for all, but piety
and good works are grateful unto God.

Of Christ's Love.
There came one without sin, that saved us from sin; for the Son of man
came to seek and to save sinners, because he came in love as he was man, and
was from eternity as he was God.

The instruction of words is not so powerful as the exhortation of works: for
if those that teach the truth well do neglect to do well, they shall hardly
profit their audience. For works persuade more than words.

The Writings and Books of Peter Lombard may be known by the Epitaph on his
Sepulcher, which is in Saint Marcels Church in Paris, where these words may be
read, Here lies Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, who composed the Book of
Sentences, Commentaries on the Psalms, and Saint Paul's Epistles. Moreover,
there are four books of Sentences, which are the chief works of Master
Peter. The first contains sentences of the Fathers concerning the Trinity and
Unity of God. The second of the Creation of the World, and especially of Angels
and men, and of the grace of God. The third of the incarnation of the Word, and
of virtues and vices. The fourth of the Sacraments, and of the last things, the
Resurrection and Judgment.

An. Christi 1245. Alexander Hales.
ALEXANDER HALES

THis Irrefragable Piece of Learning was borne in England, in a place called
Hales in Norfolk; where having had liberal and free education bestowed on him
by his friends, he wholly addicted himself to literature: it seems he had
not only an excellent wit, but as forward a will to study; for he proved
famous in a short time, which argues, that he was wondrous painful in his
studies, and so gained the height of learning by his indefatigable care, and
labor: And although England bred him, yet he travailed into other Countries,
and was as famous abroad as he was at home: for as it is testified of him;
Magno tempore Parisiis legit, (id est) He read a long time in Paris: Bartho^ de
Pis^is. li. 1.
He it was, that made the sum of Divinity, and divided it into four parts,
which he performed so accurately, profoundly, judiciously and learnedly, that
he was called in Paris, Fons vitae, the Fountain of life. So likewise others
termed him Doctor Doctorum, the Doctor of Doctors: But the most general Title
of worth that was given him was this, Sixth. Sen. li. 4. Bibl^. Sanctae.
that he was Doctor irrefragabilis. Sixtus Senensis says, that for his
knowledge in all the liberal Arts, and for his wisdom in Schoole-Divinity,
he was not only not inferior to any, but indeed did far excel all others,
so that he may well be termed the guide of Schoole-Divinity. Another entitles
him, Trithem. Catal. Scrip. Eccles.
Virum in Divinis Scripturis eruditissimum, and in seculari Philosophia, nulli
suo tempore secundum; ingenio subtilem and clarum Eloqui^, (id est) a man most
absolutely experienced in the Scriptures, and inferior to none of his time for
Philosophy, most acute in Wit, most renouned for his Eloquence. Possevinus
says of him, that he writ the sum of Divinity Ea Methodo quam antea nemo
unquam attigerat, Possevinu^in Appar. Sacro.
(id est) in that dainty Method which never any before had done. But ab^ve all
the pens that have writ in his praise, Petrus Rudolphus has gone the highest,
whose Encomium of it self is sufficient to cause this Author to be esteemed:
And since he was so famous a Writer, I cannot let his name and fame dye without
adding something of mine own knowledge to perpetu ate him to posterity. There
be three or four remarkable things in him, which praise him sufficiently; as
first his general Learning; secondly, the Scholars of note that he was Tutor
unto: thirdly, the various Works that he writ: fourthly, the honest and
sanctified life that he always led: and lastly his death.

For the first, who can suspect his ability for any kind of Learning, when as
he is rather admired of all, than yet equallized by any? Who that is of solid
judgment, but do allow of his authority? who but subscribes to his
Conclusions? Who desires not to register his undeniable Sentences? Who but
spend themselves at the Lamp to have resolution of difficult points from his
Treasury? What Case does he leave unresolved? what Science does he not handle?
Is he not absolute for Grammar? fluent for Rhetorique? deep in Philosophy*
expert in Metaphysics? made up complete for Divinity? Who almost can reckon up
the number of his scholasticke Questions, with their wise and learned Answers?
satisfies he not any man in any point or head of Divinity? Is not he the
Garden that is variously decked with most sorts of sweet Flowers, and wholesome
Herbs? so that while some have endeavored to be eminent in this or that
Science, and with great difficulty have scarce attained their desired
perfection, is not he made up of all? as though Natures endowments and graces
blessings attended him, and did both strive to the utmost to enrich him. And
then secondly, do not those worthy Instruments of learning, who proved such
solid Scholars afterward, speak this Alensis praise? especially those two more
eminent Lights, to wit, Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure; the one being for his
admirable parts styled Doctor Angelicus: and the other for his rare knowledge
in Divinity, is called Doctor Seraphicus: of the first it is said, Toll Thomam
and dissipabo Ecclesiam: take him away and the Church will be weakened; and
take away both, and how will the Schools be darkened, and their glory eclipsed?
and were not both these, by their own confessions, instructed and tutored by
this Alexander of Hales? the Master sure was an able man, who gave learning in
such a measure to two such Champions.

And thirdly, do not his numerous unparalleld Works sufficiently renown him?
Did not all the chief Divines, and Masters of Paris, to the number of sixty,
approve and seal to the allowance of his sum of Divinity? Did not the same
Alensis decore and illustrate the old and new Testament with Marginall Notes,
which Work was called Postills on the whole Bible? Are there not in
Manuscripts, in four Tomes, Expositions and Commentaries of his upon Saint
Mark, Saint Luke, and upon all the Epistles of Saint Paul? Did not his pen set
forth the sum of virtues? Has not he writ likewise on the Pentateuch,
Commentaries on the Book of Iosuah, on the book of Judges, on the books of
the Kings, as also on the Psalms? has not his labor set forth Annotations on
the lesser Prophets? Are not those his Commentaries on Aristotle's Metaphysics
known by the name of Alexander ab Alexandria? Did not he write learnedly
likewise on the four books of the Master of the Sentences? has not he made
many sermons to the people? and did not he compile that worthy piece that is
termed Vitiorum Destructorium? which is indeed the very undermi^er of the
Kingdom of sin and darkness: these works are so able to defend themselves,
that I need not spend time to lend praise to them.

Fourthly, as his learning was great, his pains wonderful, his Scholars
famous, his Works unreproveable, so his life and conversation was as upright
and honest. Certainly he, who did take such labor to kill vice in others,
would not harbor it in his own soul. Are not those his remedies which he
has prescribed against the Capital sins, demonstration sufficient, that his
aim was to kill them? are not all his arguments against them, as so many
Engines unresistable? who is so ignorant of his pious intention, that knows
not the reason why he entered into that strict course of life, but that he might
be the more free from the snares of the world? and that he might have the more
time and space to give himself to prayer, watching, fasting, meditation, and
godly writing? and what ingenuous spirit but knows, that writing many books is
weariness to the flesh? (as Solomon speaks) and did not he write many, and
those solid ones, which must needs take up most part of his time? add moreover
the set hours of his public exercises, which could not be performed with that
general applause as they were, had not he in private spent much time in
molding them; so that these things considered seriously, who can find almost
in all his life any time for to be idle, or ill employed in? did he not all
his life rather choose to live poorly, as holding that to be the less subject
to any incombrances: was he not always a friend to the poor, as well knowing
whose Members they were, and to whom they did belong? And as his Life was full
of Charity and labor, so it was as spotless and innocent, free from suites
and needless contentions: so that in all his deportments he showed himself a
pattern of meekness, temperance, and sobriety: And to conclude, when it
pleased God to call him from earth, was not his heart and soul ready to be
offered? Saint Paul's Cupio dissolvi was his resolution; and at his death was he
not of all learned, pious, and devout men, generally lamented, as well knowing
what a great labourer was then called to rest? so after a religious, devout,
humble, and laborious life, he departed quietly in the Lord, being in his time
the glory of the Pulpit, the Father of scholars, and the light and grace of the
Schoolmen* He departed in the year of our Lord, 1245. in the reign of
Frederick the second, then Emperor.

Some of Alexander Alensis his wise and religious Sayings, collected out of his
Works.
Of Charity.
Charity in the soul of a man is like the Sun in the Firmament, which
spreads his beams upwards, downwards: upwards toward God, the Angels,
Saints; downwards to the Creatures, especially to the poor that are good: and
as the Sun shines upon the good and bad, so true charity dilates its beams
to its enemies. Destruct. vitior. pa. 7. cap. 12. Number. 3.

Of Patience.
A soul patient for wrongs offered, is like a man with a sword in one hand,
and salve in another; could wound, but will heal. Part. 6. cap. 26.

Of Faith.
What the eye is to the body, that is faith to the soul; it is good for
direction, if it be well kept: as Flies do hurt the eye, so do little sins
and ill thoughts the soul. par. 6. cap. 32.

Of the detestation of Covetousness.
It deserves hate of all men for six reasons: First, because it is a sin
against Nature, making the desires of the soul terrene, whereas they should be
Celestial. Secondly, from the many curses that are laid against it in Gods
Word. Woe to them that join house to house, Esaias. 5. Thirdly from the many
evils it subjects a man to: it is the root of all evils. Fourthly, it makes
a man a fool: Thou fool, this night, etc. Fifthly, it causes strifes and
contentions: From whence are strifes, etc. Sixthly it brings men into snares,
which drown them in perdition. Destruct. vitior. page 44.

Of the Sin of Lying.
Every lie is odious, but that most which is against the points of Faith: as to
say that Jesus Christ was not borne of the Virgin Mary, etc. Faith must be
defended, not opposed. Dectruct. page 52.

Of good Counselors.
Such should be holy in their lives, true in their words, righteously zealous,
and wise by experience. par. 4. cap. 44. in Destruct.

Of the danger of customary sins.
Custom in sin enticeth, and invadeth youth, ties fast, and binds age,
deceives and infects the affections; subverts the judgment, and is hardly
cured. par. 5. cap. 2. number. 11.

Of Humility.
An humble man is like a good tree, the more full of fruit the branches are,
the lower they bend themselves. par. 4. cap. 48. number. 6.

Of tears and weeping.
Shed tears of compunction, of compassion, of devotion: weepi^g availes not if
it be feigned, for vain things, immoderate for the dead, or the crying of the
wicked in Hell torments. par. 4. cap. 52. number. 5.

An. Christi 1264. Bonaventura.
BONAVENTVRVS

IN many Authors this Seraphick writer was called John, Petrus Galis^us hanc
vitam scripsit Lat. Gerso. part. 1. tit. de laudibus Bonaventurae.
Gerso the Cardinal of Paris thinks that he was called Eustachius, some have
termed him Eustathius, others Eutychius, but the most call him Bonaventure: the
reason why he was termed Eustathius, or Eustachius, was because in all his
disputations had at Paris with the Grecians, he still was constant and resolved
to defend the truth with all solidity, and gravity.

He was borne in Etruria, of the Greeks called Tyrrhenia, 2 His Country and
Parents.
one of the most flourishing parts of all Italy; called at this day Tuscany:
his fathers name was Ioannes Fidantius, his mother Ritelia, both of great
Descent, wondrous devout, and full of charity: who had this son borne to
their mutual joy in one of the ancientest and renowmedst Cities of all
Tuscany, called Balneo-Regium, in English, The Kings Bath.

This Bonaventure in his youth showed what he would prove afterward; for as he
was mainly addicted to study, so he set himself to follow that way and those
men, which were most holy and learned in those times, principally Alexander of
Hales, the glory of that age, as also Ioannes Rupellius, with many others, and
for certain it is, that age was as active and full of Disputations as any
could be: so that Bonaventure could not want occasion or opportunity for
exercise.

For his feature and proportion of body, though, Nazianzen. Orat. 30.
as Nazianzen said in the life of Saint Basil; his mind was so adorned, that
he would pass over all the praise of his outward parts; yet he does plainly
say, that Saint Basil when he was young; was of an able, strong, constitution,
comely proportioned, grateful in his behavior, of an heavenly aspect. So I
may say of this great Doctor; though his soul was richly decked with graces,
his body did not want it is persections: for he had a proper stature, a grave,
pleasing, and winning countenance; and he was so healthy by nature, that
seldom or never did any disease or sickness torment him. But I pass from all
those outward decorements, and will take a view of the gifts of his mind.

Being entered into a devout course of life, who can but admire his innocence
and integrity of life? it was so eminent, that Alexander Alensis would say, Non
videri Adam in Bonaventura peccasse, that is, that Adam seemed not to have
sinned in Bonaventure. And was not his meekness and humility as great, which
indeed is the Basis and groundwork, the Mother and Mistress of all virtues,
and that he might not forget the practice of it, did he not ingrave in his
study that sweet saying of our LORD JESUS, Learn of me, Mat. c. 11.
for I am humble and meek: Does he not in all his Writings lively express it;
for with what simplicity is his style composed off, only for that he writ for
the good of simple men, as he says, and was not he as careful to keep his
conscience unspotted and pure? Did he not use ordinarily to say? He could not
forget his appearance before the great and terrible Judge? And they that please
may read the commendation that Gerso, Opusc. de pur. conscien. c ult.
Chancellor of Paris, gives him for the care he had of it.

Nay, such was his study of humility, that lest at any time his mind should
swell with pride or ambition; he would put himself to servile and inferior
offices, as to sweeping of rooms, washing of vessels, and making of beds*
which many thought too base to be performed by such an holy and Religious man:
yet nor any nor all these seemed so to him, he knew how to bring good out of
them, for he would say, they kept his body from pride and idleness.

Who when he thinks of Bonaventures care for the poor and sick, but will
admire him; how cheerful was he in ministering to them? how diligent in
visiting them, though their diseases were noisome, and in some sort dangerous:
it may be said of him, Naz. Orat. 30.
as Gregory Nazianzen said of Saint Basil, qui hominum lepra laborantium,
vulnera and curavit, and osculatus est, that is, who both healed the Lepers,
and kissed their sores: he spent much time in these actions; yet performed the
hours at his study: so that he seemed to be one who had a care to redeem the
time: if he knew any troubled in mind, he would not leave him, till he had
given him comfort: if any was poor, what care would he have to get him
provision? where any was falling from the truth, how earnest would he be to
recover him?

To come to his spiritual exercises of Meditation, Contemplation and Prayer?
Did he not make his head a fountain of tears? Was it not his chiefest care
in all his Meditations to inflame the hearts of his Readers; to kindle the fire
of devotion in their breasts? Has he not showed the virtue, matter, form,
end, and distinction of Contemplation, and Meditation? Has he not laid forth
the parts, effects, fruits, times of prayer? And in all his labors is that
saying true of him, Trith. de scrip. Eccles.
that his words were not inflantia, but inflammantia, that is, not high
swelling, puffed up, but inflaming: such as moved compunction, stird up zeal,
did work mortification, and produced repentance in the hearts of his auditors?
What might not I say of his patience in bearing injuries? Of his true valor in
undergoing labors? Of his contentedness in refusing great Honors? Of his
wisdom in managing himself in all public meetings? Of his prudence in
government.

But let us take a short view of excellent learning, and admired Scholership:
who in this kind flowed more than he? it is without all question, that he
attained not to such an height only by his labor, but also by the help of
the blessed Spirit of God. Yet his labor was great and constant; he hated
idleness. He read over the whole body of the Fathers, and made that famous
piece which he calls his Pharetra, by the Works and Sayings collected out of
Saint Gregory, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Hierome, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Isidore, Anselme, Bernard, Cassiodore, and diverse others: he was
so diligent in holy Writ, that he did write two Bibles out with his own hand;
he was so conversant in the sacred Scriptures, that he had most of them by
heart. One of his Bibles is at the place of his birth kept as a treasure in the
Church, the other reserved in a famous Library, as a testimony to future ages
of his labor.

Now observe his happy progress which he made in Paris, and indeed how could
such a diligent Be as Bonaventure was, but gather honey from such able
Instruments as there then was; to omit many others, these two were of note,
Albertus Magnus, and Alexander Halensis: so that by the Learning of these men,
Paris was to Thomas Aquinas, and Bonaventure, as once Athens was to Saint
Basil, and Nazianzen. After the study and pains of three years in Paris,
Bonaventure was by the good liking of all held fit to be public Reader in
Divinity there; which he so divinely performed, that Gerso says of him,
thus: Nescio, si unquam talem Doctorem ac Bonaventuram habuerit studium
Parisiense. I know not (says he) whether ever the Universitie of Paris had the
like Doctor as Bonaventure was.

The first Work he set out at Paris, was Expositions and Comments on the
books of the Master of Sentences: He also made an Hexameron on the first
Chapter of Genesis, which all men lament, that he brought it not to
perfection: but it was so well liked, that he had the Archbishopricke of York
in England offered him for his labor, which Dignity he modestly refused:
Annal. Franc. part. 2. 4.
when as he was made and appointed Chief of his Order, he stopped the mouths
of all Adversaries by his example, wisdom, moderation, learning, and good
constitutions: he was meek and courteous to all, rather working men to
obedience by fair exhortations and entreaties, then by force and rigor. His
general Learning is divided into three parts, his exposition of Scriptures,
his Tracts, his interpretation of the Sentences. In all his Works appear
Learning, study, exercise: Tri-themius says of him to his eternal praise,
that he was matter, not words; subtle, not curious; eloquent, not
fantastical.

His actions were as renowned as his Works, what journies did he undertake to
relieve the poor, to profit the Churches, to reconcile differences: this I
cannot omit, that when as by the death of Clement the fourth, at Viterbium
there was no Pope, but a great dissension amongst the Cardinals for three
years together, when as they had so ordered, that the choice of the Pope
should be put to Bonaventures choice, he contrary to all their expectation,
chose a stranger, a man of excellent parts, one Theobald, Archdeacon of Liege:
whereby he stopped a great quarrel, and withal showed his great wisdom and
integrity. And who knows not his admirable comportment in the second Council
of Lions, how forceably he convinced all that opposed him? so that for his
labor, he was made Cardinal and Bishop of the Church of Saint Alban.

So having spent himself in pious actions, and continued studies, he gave up
his spirit during that Council, in the year of Grace 1274, and of his age the
three and fiftieth, in which year also Thomas Aquinas his loving friend
departed.

There are many Miracles ascribed to him, but I force no man's belief.

His Works are many, and counted rare pee^es, divided into eight Tomes: allowed
by the authorities of all learned men.

The first Tome contains Expositions on the Scriptures, so the second.

The third Tome contains Sermons, and of the Saints.

The fourth Tome contains Commentaries on the Master of the Sentences, so the
fifth.

The sixth Tome contains various Tracts of several things.

So the seventh and eighth, all full of piety and devotion, few having come
near him, none gone beyond him.

An. Christi 1265. Thomas Aquinas.
S. THO. AQVINVS.

THe thing principally for which the memory of men is celebrated with praise
and Commendation is wisdom that (in whomsoever found, though mean of
parentage and birth, or obscure by Country or Nation) deserves perpetuity of
honor and reverence: for his wisdom that erects our minds to the
contemplation and practice of divine things, it is wisdom that differences men
from men, and makes man like to the Angels, it is wisdom that rectifies all
that is perverse and naught, either in the will or in the affections. Wisdom is
that which steers all our actions to an happy conclusion.

This worthy Divine then cannot without great injury be left out from the
Fathers of the Church; his Name deserves an everlasting remembrance; for who
had abler indowments than this Aquinas? Who ever was more sedulous for study,
and more desirous of true wisdom than this great Doctor, which, as Bonaventure
got the title of Seraphicus Doctor, and Alexander Alensis, of Doctor
Irrefragabilis; So this Thomas Aquinas not undeservedly is called, Doctor
Angelicus, that is, the Angelicke Doctor? For scarce any of the great Fathers
of the primitive times shined more gloriously in the eyes of the whole world,
then this eminent man did for sanctity of life, and purity of Learning.

He was an Italian borne, (as Cardinal Bellarmine has it) not far from
Naples, of parentage it seems great and famous: in the story of his life, it
is said he was borne in Campania or Samnos, all hold he was not borue far
from these places; some others think he had his name of the City where he
was born, being called Aquino, which in former times was great and populous,
though long since made a heap of dust and rubbish by the barbarous invasions of
other Nations; but it not only bred up our Aquinas; also it was the birth
place of Pescenius Niger the Emperor of Iuvenall, and diverse other learned and
famous men. However, if he cannot receive any credit from the place of his
birth, yet he adds Honor to it, and though it be now overthrown and laid
waste, yet his name and renown every day does more increase and augment: and
his Works generally approved of all Scholars, nay, indeed admired.

There is great doubt concerning his parents, some who lived a long time with
him, and were daily conversant with him, report that he drew his Lineage and
Kindred from the Counts of Apulia, and Kings of Sicily: and the Cassinian
Chronicles do verify and confirm this same thing, which for every particular
act and circumstance would be too tedious here to insert.

It is reported, that an holy devout man, who lived in a place called Rocca,
meeting Theodora his Mother when she was great with child of this Thomas,
bade her be joyful, for her womb carried one in it, and should safely deliver
him into the World, that would be heard of, and speak through the whole World:
and indeed the issue proved true.

His youth was spent, for the most part, in a learned Monastery of Cassine; it
being customary and usual for those times, to put into the Cloisters great
men's sons, to give them generous and holy education: and it said of this
Thomas, that he needed not so much tutoring to make him a Monk, for he
naturally inclined to that course of life; He was humble of mind, modest,
bashful, obedient, grave, industrious, witty, all great furtherances to his
intended resolutions: at his first entrance and admission, (as my Author says)
Caute, apt, sancte, verba protulit: that is, he discoursed warily,
congruously, holily: and that there was in him, ardens orandi consuetudo, a
zealous and inflamed desire of praying to Almighty God.

It so came to pass, that his parts began to be taken notice of by the Abbot
of the place, who diligently observing the young man's deportment, did presently
say of him, that there was some great expectation of him in time to come.
Whereupon the said Abbot went to his parents, and declared unto them how happy
they were in him, and related to them his excellent endowments, as well
natural, as those acquired by study, and did earnestly beg of them that they
would not remove him from his course begun, nor yet bring him up in Secular
affairs, or to follow the Wars; but to keep him at his study, and he said, he
would warrant them that they should find him to be in short time eminent and
famous: but however he was by their advice and direction sent to Naples, to
make trial of him, which way, and what course he would follow: which City,
though often molested by wars, yet it was at that time full of great Scholars
as well for Greek as Logic, and indeed it was the seat of all the seven
Liberal Sciences.

Not only Italy at that time did abound with Learning, but all Europe: amongst
diverse there was one Dominicus, whose life and doctrine, manners and
institutions were highly praised: Thomas resolves to be one of his followers,
but by reason of the commotions and wars in those Countries, he was
disappointed for a time: and this Dominicus, though dead in the time of those
troubles, yet he left many excellent men which professed his way; above all
one Ioannes which was so called from a Town where he was borne: this man's
learning and piety did so sound in all men's mouths, that amongst diverse others
Thomas Aquinas heard his public Lectures and Disputations, and that with such
great ardencie, that there wanted nothing in him to be his Disciple, but
acquaintance only. Well, this learned Ioannes took notice of Thomas Aquinas
diligence in hearing, and seeing more than ordinary parts to be in him, at last
by the motion of Gods blessed Spirit, discoursing with him, strove to make
Thomas what he formerly desired to be, and thereupon relating unto him the
glory and felicity of true wisdom, and withal the vanity, instabiliy, vility,
contemptiblenesse of terrene objects, asked him whether or no he had any
desire or bent to follow the one or the other? to whom Thomas readily and
shortly replied, think me not (good Sir) to be so backward or negligent to
follow virtue, lay you down the method and rule, and I will presently, (though
through many dangers and hazards) follow you.

Whereupon this Ioannes did go to the Master or Father of his order, which at
that time was called Thomas Lentinus, to whom he said: Good Father make no
delay, but give ad-admittance to a young man, which is endued with all parts
requisite for study, you need not doubt him, take him upon my word, he will in
short time prove the mirror of your house. To whom Thomas Lentinus replied,
that he was much engaged for bringing him such a rich Jewel to be of his
Society: so presently all things being rightly ordered, as Thomas Aquinas was
admitted into his sacred way of life.

As soon as he was entered he slighted all worldly desires, and ruminates
with himself, which was his best method to make a fair progress in divinity,
so he resolved to read the writings of the fathers in which he was watchful,
and to hear others wherein he had an excellent retentive faculty, for he did
seldom forget any thing which he saw was profitable and excellent, but he
aimed to get one grace above all the rest, and that was humility, for he was
suspicious of himself for fear as he said that the Devil should poison all
his good gifts, by making him proud of them, a common infection, and by him
well prevented, and secondly he said 'twas not fit for young men to rule, but to
obey the precepts and commands of Superiors, and therefore he strove to
demean himself modestly to others Judgment, so that he thought nothing was
to be spoke, done, or meditated which had not been by holy men in former times
practiced.

To these he joined a third grace, and that was Sobriety, giving himself
daily to fasting, and in the night to watching, at all times to prayer for
these (said he) are the conquerours of all lusts and pleasures of the flesh; it
is impossible for a man to please God, if his lusts be not subdued and
conquered. These were the primordiall exercises of this hopeful youth.

But in a short space, his name being up, so it came to pass, that either some
of his familiar friends, or some other coming to Aquinum, told his Mother
where he was, and what a worthy Divine he would prove; she bearing a good
mind to Religion, and now remembering the words had been told her by the Monk
of Rocca before, intended to go to visit him, but they who kept Thomas,
fearing lest by the sight, the tears and speech of his mother his mind should
be altered from his good intendments, secretly convayed Thomas away from that
place to Rome; and from thence to Paris. She finding their policy turned
angry; and presently went for Rome, but missing her son there likewise, sends
to her other sons which were soldiers in Tuscany under Frederick, that they
should beset all ways and passages, and if by any means they could recover
their brother Thomas, and bring him to her; they desiring to please their
mother, and being commanded by Frederick to do so, at last find him sitting all
weary by a fountain, they presently apprehend him, and bring him along with
them: whom when his Mother saw, she received him with tears; and withal saw
him put into that defenced Castle called Racca, intending to tempt and try
what he intended; and there were no small complaints urged against his brethren
with the Roman Bishop, showing what an ill example of such violence to a
religious man might produce, and urging, that if such insolences went
unpunished, there would not want them, who would rob and injure the consecrated
Cloisters; and moreover, that it was not fit his brethren should be strictly
dealt withal for their fact.

But now his Mother having his person sure, set upon him with a learned, deep,
grounded, and eloquent Oration, mixed and parenthized with tears, and all to
draw him from that course: and when she saw she could not prevail, she set
her two Daughters to persuade him, which used all their power to alter his
mind, but they were unable to effect what they were sent for; nay, they were
rather persuaded to follow a religious life themselves, when they heard the
divine exhortations that came from their brother.

To be brief, his brethren Bore him great spite, and as much as they could
strive to lay plots to shame him; insomuch, as they hired a young C^urtezan of
a singular feature to go to him, to see if she could entice him to her desired
lust; which she endeavored to have done: but this divine instrument of
Chastity shunned her allurements; and when she saw her hopes lost she
departed, made relation to his brothers of his constancy and integrity; and
Thomas afterward gave himself to prayer, intrearing God to pardon his frailty
of nature, and to give him grace and power against such forcible tentations,
that he might keep his body and mind holy, clear, and undefiled, that so he
might present them with comfort to his Lord at his second coming.

He continued two years in this Castle imprisoned, in which time he gave
himselfo to divine Contemplations and Prayer, and spent the rest in reading and
writing; for he read the whole books of Sentences, and the word of God
diligently: But when his Mother saw, that she, nor her Daughters could divert
him, fearing lest she might seem to strive against God, sent to some of his
brethren that they should fetch him away privily: which they did, and carried
him to Naples, so to Rome; and for the more safety to Paris: but he stayed not
long there, but went from thence to Collen, desiring to hear that renowned
Albertus Magnus.

He had two Masters, John, aforenamed, and this Albertus; which, because he saw
a kind of unwillingnesse in Thomas for disputations, called him Bos mutus, the
dumb Ox; but when he had heard him twice or thrice in his public exercises,
said of him, that his lowing would one day be heard through the whole world.

He taught the Sciences principally in four places, in Paris, Rome, Bononia,
and Naples, and that with abundance of wit, and plenty of reading; and when he
was publicly allowed by Albertus, and Hugo Cardinalis, yet he never exercised
his p^rts before he had fitted himself by prayer, fasting, and watching: and
that God did bless him in his Labors appears, for (as it is said of him)
acute, graviter, copiose, dilucide, erudite disputarit, that is, he disputed
smartly, gravely, copiously* clearly, learnedly, semper er at (says my
Author) inter Libros, Disputationes, and Meditationes veratus, that is, he was
always either at his Books, Disputations, or Meditations. Insomuch, that
supping at Court with Lewis the French King, while other Lords were discoursing
of pleasant matters, Thomas was so high at his thoughts of disputation, that
he forgetting himself struck the Table with his hand, and said, ja^ contra
Manichoeos conclusum esse, that now the Manichees were foiled.

He was one that may be a perpetual pattern for refusing and contemning
worldly honors and wealth; for though he was young, and had great ways to
help himself, yet he regarded them not: nay, insomuch, that when Clement the
fourth, Bishop of Rome, would have made him Archbishop of Naples, he did
refuse it, and when great promotions were offered to him, his usual answer
was, Chrysostomi in Matthaeum Commentarios mallem, that is, I had rather have
the Commentaries of Saint Chrysostom upon S^int Matthew.

He desired three things principally: First, that he might not be weary in
well-doing: Secondly, that he might not dislike that calling, though with
poverty, which he had chosen: thirdly, what became of his brother Rainaldus,
who endured such a bloody death for the good of the Church; and in this last he
said, he was sure that his brother, for that temporal death, enjoyed eternal
life.

In his teaching he always strove to frame his speech to the peoples
capacity; and that he might avoid all pride and ostentation: nay, in his
disputations, he would seem to yield, that he might rather show his humility,
than height of learning: He had abundance of Auditors, as Doctors, Bishops,
Archbishops, Cardinals, who counted themselves happy in being his hearers: He
was of spirit wondrous mild, in his corrections and reproves, he would hate
the vice and spare the person. When as he was deputed to be at the Council of
Lions, he fell sick and was carried on a Mule to Severinum; where, when he
was entered into a Cloister, he writ his Commentaries on the Canticles; and
perceiving his death to draw nigh, received the blessed Eucharist prostrate on
the earth. After when his sister asked him if he would have any thing?
answered, he should within a little space enjoy all things: This was his
fiftieth year of his age.

He had many witty sayings, as one asking him, why he was so long silent under
Albertus? he answered, because he had nothing of worth to say to him. Another
asked him, what was the most pleasant thing to him? He replied, to understand
all he had read. One telling him, he was not learned, as he was supposed; he
answered, I will study the more to prove his words false. A woman reproved him,
that seeing he was borne of a woman, he should so shun them: Yes (said he)
even therefore because I was borne of them. One asked him how he might live
without blame? he told him, if he would remember his reckoning to the great
Judge of Heaven and Earth.

So when, after great pains and studies, he had approved himself to the
Church of God, he yielded to Nature, and was honorably interred with all the
Rites and Ceremonies due to so great a person as he was. His Works are of that
value, that he who has them in his study, is furnished for all manner of
learning.

His Sayings.
A day will come, Aquinas de Humanitate Christi Art. 25
when fair dealing shall be found a jewel, and false dealing shall come to
nothing; when a good conscience shall be better than a good purse; for the
Judge will not then be put off with fair words, nor drawn aside with hope of
reward.

He that is armed for the wars, Id. de eruditione Principum lib. 7. cap. 3.
let him consider who it is that gives him strength, and teaches his fingers
to fight; then let him employ that strength to his glory; so that by this means
come life, come death, all is welcome that God sends.

In all thy undertaking make much of time, Id. ut supra. cap. 6. lib. 5.
especially in that weighty matter of Salvation: O how much would that man,
which now lies frying in Hell, rejoice, if there were but possibility to obtain
the least moment of time wherein he might compass the favor of God, and so be
freed from those torments which seize upon him for evermore.

Thou that art young have death at thy back, Id. cap. 8. lib. 5.
whereas the old man has it before his eyes: and that must needs b^ a more
dangerous enemy that pursues thee, than that which marches up toward thee
face to face: Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth, and
remember withal, that though God promise forgivenes to repentant sinners, yet
he does not promise, they shall have to morrow to repent.

I have set down his Works as Cardinal Bellarmine has registered, according to
the Roman Edition.

Tome 1. Contains his life upon the Perihetmenias, and the Analatickes. Tome 2.
Contains Commentaries upon the 8 books of Physics; Upon the fourth book De
Coelo, and Mundo: and of the generation. Tome 3. Contains his works upon the
books de Meteoris. Tome 4. Upon the Metaphysics 12 books. Tome 5. Upon the 10
books of Ethics, and upon the 8 books of Politics. Tome 6. Upon the 1. and 2.
books of the Sentences. Tome 7. Upon the third and fourth of the Sentences.
Tome 8. Upon Disputa^ions and Quodlibets. Tome 9. Contains his sums against
the Gentiles, with the Commentaries of Franciscus Ferrari^nsis. Tome 10. The
first part of his sums of Divinity, with the Commentaries of Card. Caietan,
and the Exposition of divine names by St. Denis. Tome 11. Contains primam
secundae, and secundam secundae. With Cajetans Commentaries. Tome 12. Contains
the tertiam partem summae. Tome 13. Contains Commentaries on Job, on the 57.
Psalm, on the Canticles, Esaias, Jeremy, Lamentations. Tom. 14. Commentaries on
St. Matthew, and St. John. Tom. 15. Contains his golden chain on the 4
Evangelists Tom. 16. On all the Epistles of S. Paul. Sermons de tempore, and of
the Saints. Tome 17. Contains 73 little Tracts, and a little book upon the
four book^ of Sentenc^s.
THus far have we brought the lives of these holy Fathers and Doctors, in
every Century of years wherein they lived, down to our own Modern Writers,
whose virtues have shined on Earth, like stars in the firmament, by
illuminating the darkness of the blind world, with the light of the
Celestial Doctrine. These holy men, I say, did willingly and chearefully
offer their lives and bodies as a living sacrifice to God; not grudgingly or
piningly, but with alacrity of spirit: for though by the hand of envy and
tyranny they were judged to death, yet they willingly dyed for his cause, and
yielded their bodies as a debt due to Nature: for they thought so long as the
soul was in the body, it was no better than in prison: for the body at the
best is is but a Coffin of the soul, as the grave is a Coffin for the body.
Therefore let us strive, by their examples, to go to heaven like them, through
persecutions, tribulations, and all worldly temptations: for we ought to
desire with ardency, (as these holy Fathers did) that joyful day which all the
Elect have, and do still long to enjoy: For when Death and Time shall both
cease, and tender down their S^epters of authority (as I do now my self:)
prostrate before God Almighty, then shall I, and never till then, be truly
and really happy.

FIN^^^

