A Persuasion from Papistrie: VVrytten chiefly to the obstinate, determined,
and dysobedient English Papists, who are herein named and proved English
enemies and extreme Enemies to England. Which persuasion, all the Queens
Majesty's Subjects, favoring the Pope or his religion, will read or hear
aduisedlye and thoroughly, especially such as would be counted friends to
ENGLAND, that wish our Princes prosperity, the safegarde of the Nobility,
the concord of our Comunalty, and the continuance of this our happy state and
tranquillity.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Bynneman dwelling in Thamis Street near
Baynards Castle. ANNO. 1581.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the most merciful and prudent Princess, Elyzabeth, by the grace of God, of
England, France, and Ireland Queen, Defender of the faith, etc.
AS heretofore (my most gracious Sovereign) I troubled your Highness (not
without some travel to my self) in a thing that was necessary, reasonable,
and commodious to many, and hurt to none: Even so I have now (not troublingly,
but lovingly) framed an earnest persuasion to such of your subjects, as fear
not God as they ought, regard not his word as they should, nor obey your
Highness as they are bound, naming them English enemies (as I may very
well) for English friends I am sure they are not: which persuasion is
necessary, reasonable, and very profitable for the^, and not hurtful to any.
And as that which before I made to your Majesty, was by your Grace only to
be aucthorized, for the great relief and succor of your subjects: So this
that I have now written to your subjects, is to be allowed and practiced by
them, to the great comfort and joy (I hope) of your Highness. And though I
have penned it for them to perform: yet I have dedicated it to your Grace to
peruse. Beseeching your Majesty therein to pardon my boldness (or rather
presumption) for though it be not so learnedly, so cunningly, and so finely
framed, as is requisite for your excellency: yet it is so plainly, so truly,
and so zealously done, as is meet for your subjects. Not doubting, but
stedfastlye trusting, though al thereby be not allured from their error, that
many will be won to the truth: though it make not the^ see, that wincke for
the nonce, it will cause the^ to see, that will open their eyes. And though it
procure not the obstinate and determined Papists, from being English Enemies:
yet it will enforce thousands (I hope) of the simple seduced sort, to become
English friends (or rather friends to England.) And though there might
seem in me, too much boldness, to crave of your Majesty, to read this
presently: yet I beseech your Highness to view and peruse it at your leisure
conveniently. For as the reading thereof, I trust will much profit them, to
whom I have written it: so your Graces reading of it, would not a little
rejoice me, to whom I dedicate it. And whereas I firmly believe, that God
thereby will be better honored, the Gospel more embraced, Papistrie more
contemned, your Majesty better obeyed, your Highness of many more loved,
your power more augmented, treason less practiced, foreign foes more
discouraged, your loving subjects more comforted, English enemies more
diminished, English friends more increased, and this your Realm of England
the better strengthened: yet the only thing that I crave therefore of your
Grace, is, well to accept it, and in good part to take it, Beseeching your
Majesty not to respect the mean estate of the person, but the meaning of the
party, not the cunning of the contriuer, but the intent of the writer, neither
how it is couched, but to what end it is framed. And if there be any thing
therein that shall mislike your Majesty, I most humbly beseech you therefore
to pardon me, protesting to God and your Grace, that I wrote the same, not
purposely, but negligently: and not willingly, but ignorantly: Hoping besides,
that the godly and wise will construe all things therein to the best, and not
wreast them to the worst. And as for other, that have an ouerweening in their
own wits, and that are rather curious carpers, than profitable doers,
(whereof there are not a few) I do not much weigh, for it is impossible to
write so circumspectly, to satisfy or please every precise head. And therefore
I have chosen rather to write truth and goodness for fools to mislike, than
toys and tryfles for the wise to deride: not ignoraunte, that there are more
finde-faultes than mende-faultes, and more that are ready to detract other men's
doings, than able to make the like of their own: whereof some think they
deserve more to be commended (so much they fancy their folly) for
discommending of that, in a minute of an hour, which the Writer with great
study and pain for their great profit, and the continual commodity of many
thousands has been a framing and finishing two or three years. And as a
great sort for this will favor me, and not hate me: Even so (I am sure)
that some therefore will hate me most spitefully, that rather ought to love
me earnestly. Whose malice the better to withstand, I have chosen your
Majesty (as one that is best able under God) to defend me. Under whose
protection, this may the more safely pass abroad, and thereby be the better
accepted, the more desired, the gladlyer received, the more willingly perused,
the more advisedly scanned, the less detracted, and the better credited. And
thus omitting any further to trouble your Highness, I, (as one of your most
true and faithful subjects) unfeignedly and from the bottom of my heart, do
beseech God, to preserve you from perils, to shield you from sorrow, to
confound al your foes, to defend you from Traitors, to reveal their
conspyracies, to frustrate their attemptes, and to protecte you in peace.

Your Graces most dutiful and obedient subject THOMAS LVPTON.

A persuasion from Papistrie.
IF this our famous realm of England has many English enemies, if it breed
and nourish such as lokes and hopes for ye subversion of the good and peaceable
estate thereof: And if many that are carefully defended therein by our most
gracious and merciful Princes, are apparaunte enemies to her grace, and to this
our country: Then no marvel though it should have a great sort of foreign
foes: Then it is unlike that strangers (borne and bredde out of it) do wish
that it should prosper: and the^ how may it be thought, that strangers (not
defended by her majesty) should be faithful friends to her, and to her realm?
for if one hate his natural mother yt nourished and brought him up: The^ it is
not like yt one should love his stepmother that never did any thing for him.

And now for that it is well known by trial (not surmised by hear say) that
there are such mentioned english enemies, as well dwelling among us, as also
rainging abroad in other Countries, (which is no less grief to her grace,
than sorrow to her loving subjects) I, (for the zeal I owe to my prince, for
the love of my Country, and for the ^are I have of the the careless case of
many, and as one more willing than meet,) have written unto al you that are
such English enemies, as well in England as elsewhere, this earnest persuasion,
which if you will as advisedly read, as I have willingly written, I doubt not
but that you will (or many of you at the least yt God has not clean given
over, or who^ the devil has not utterly blinded or bewitched) of english
enemies, become English friends, and of disobedient people, true and obedient
subjects. Besides yt, you shall plainly an^ perfectly see, the wrong way you
walk in, how you wish your own woe, seek your own sorrow, and desire your
destruction. Al which if you avoid thereby, I hope you will not be unkind and
unthankful to him, that is so zealous and careful for you. Yet for all that, I
look for none other, but that some of you (more wilful than wise, and more
churlish than courteous) will hate me spitefully, for that you ought to love me
faithfully. But such shall have no more cause to do so, than the thief to hate
him yt persuades him from stealing. If any be angry because I name English
emies, it is a great presumption, such are not of them who^ we count to be
English friends. As I have written to many of you, and yet do not know you: so
I wish you may know your selves when I touch or justly reprove you.

They that are English friends and friends to England, will not be angry because
I name English enemies, for that I do not touch them: but they yt are English
enemies, and are such enemies to England, will stur because I do pinch them. But
be not angry, for if we have such English enemies (as I am sure we have) then I
must needs call them English enemies, if I call them by their right name: for
if I should call a thief a true man, or a harlot an honest woman, I should
misname the^. Therefore I know no fitter name for a traitor than a traitor,
for a drunkarde than a drunkard, for a Pyrate than a Pyrate, and so for an
English enemy tha^ an English enemy. But if it grieve you to be called thus,
then let it grieve you to deserve to be called thus. And when you do change
your conditions, we will then change your name. For if you will obey lovingly and
willingly your merciful and peaceable prince, then you shall be called true and
loving subjects: And if you will unfeignedly wish and procure the quietness and
commodity of England: we will then call you English friends. But being now
clean contrary, we cannot choose (and yt with grief of heart) but call you
English enemies, English for yt you were born and nourished in England: and
enemies for yt you envy the peaceable and quiet government thereof, wishing and
seeking an alteration of ye same. How prove you yt? may some of you say (as
some have said already) yt we do so? howso^uer I prove it, your own words proves
yt do say so, that you take your selves to be of ye same number: for as your
stinging does cause you to kick, so does your kicking make you be known. And
that there are such English enemies yt do envy this our peaceable and quiet
government of England, and wish an alteration of ye same, it is not hard to
prove, unless it be hard to prove yt the sun is up at noone. Therefore mark me
well, for I will now prove it. We have (thanks be to God) a most wise and
merciful Princes, under whose government (through Gods goodness) we have had
such a plenty and peace, as never has bin ye like in this realm: And yet
there are a great sort (I fear) within this Realm, that love not her majesty
as they ought, fear her not as they should, nor obey her according to their
duty. For how can they love her that despise her godly proceedings? how can
they fear her, that contemn her decrees? and how can they obey her, yt
obstinately break her good orders? Now it is well known, yt there are many born
and bred within England, yt despise and obstinately refuse to follow her godly
proceedings, set forth according to gods word, and they yt despise and refuse
these her proceedings, are sorry they continue so long, and they yt are sorry
therefore, would gladly have other orders (much worse) in their place, and they
yt would have other, wish yt her graces proceedings were displast, and they yt
would have the^ taken away (which they know will not be so long as her grace does
reign) do wish her (being our head) to be cut off, or else hopes of her short
life. But al their heads yt would have it so: (how many soever they be) I wish
stood on one neck, yt they al might be cut of at one stroke. Now you may see,
yt I have proved yt there are such English enemies wtin this realm, for if
these be not English enemies, yt love not their princess, yt ar sorry she lives
so long, yt wish her death or short reign, and yt would have an alteration or
rather subuertio^ of this our most happy and quiet state: if these I say be not
English Enemies, yea and great enemies to England, then I know not what to name
them, unless I should call the^ English Rebels, for English friends or good
subjects I am sure they are not. Therefore to you English enemies that are
wilful, obstinate, and determined Papists, I chiefelye do write, for no other
English enemies have al these aforesaid marks or conditions but only you.

I doubt not but that some of you will be offended with me, for calling you
English enemies, for yt you would seem to be as good English friends as ye
best, because you are great enemies to England, therefore I cannot well call you
English friends, or friends to Eng. Which I am most sure to prove hereafter,
if that be not sufficient yt I have proved before.

It is well known, yt the Pope is enemy to our Queen, his laws are repugnant
to her laws, and his religion is contrary to her religion, (which is the
Gospel and Gods word) now if any that is borne within England does earnestly
love the Pope, then they cannot faithfully love the Queen, if any of them
obey the Popes laws and decrees, they must needs disobey the Queens laws and
orders: And if they embrace and love the Popes religion, then they must needs
forsake and de^pise Gods word, the Queens religion. Now for that you yt are
Papists are such, then you are rather the Popes loving servant than the
Queens true subjects. And if you be not true and loving subjects to our
Queen, who under God is the chief staff and stay of the peaceable and
prosperous state of England: then you cannot be friends but enemies to
England. And thus I trow I have proved that you are English enemies.

Mark again, Christ says (who is to be believed) No man can serve two masters,
Ma^^* 6.
for either he shall hate the one and love the other, or else lean to the one
and despise the other. By these words of Christ (who cannot ly though the Pope
may err) al English persons that love the Pope and his religion, must needs
hate the Queen and her religion: or if they lean to the Pope and his religion,
then they despise the Queen and her religion: Therefore (if it be construed to
the best) all you that are Papists, for that you do lean to the Pope and his
religion, do despise the Queen and her religion. And I think you owe no great
love where ye despise. And so if you hate or despise the Queen (whose life as
I said is the prosperity of England) then you ca^ not be friends to England,
but enemies to England. And thus (by Christ's own words) you must needs whether
you will or no be english enemies. I grant there are many other English enemies,
yet all that may properly be called English enemies, are not enemies to England,
for all they that are born in England, that hate the devil, wickedness and sin,
and that are enemies to them that are enemies to England, may in a right sense
be called English enemies, of whom I neither mean, neither have I any just
cause to write (for though they may be called English Enemies, yet they are
friends to England.) But I mean yt they are English enemies yt are hurtful to
England, whereof there are many besides you, but not such as you. Our thieves
are English Enemies, whereof many steal for necessity: Unthrifts are english
enemies both to themselves and to other, for that they spend wastefully on
themselves that other have need of: Drunkards are english enemies, but are
most of al their own foes, (unless they kill or hurt any in their
drunkenness) besides many other such like enemies: yet al these with many
other, are not such english enemies (unless they be Papists withal) but yt
they love their Prince, obey and follow her godly proceedings, wish her a
prosperous reign, and would fight (if need were) for her grace, and help to
defend this their country from her foes: which may be counted as friends in
comparison of you that are such papisticall enemies. For though there are many
English enemies, as thieves, murderers, pirates, coyners, clyppers of money,
and counterfayters of the Queens seal, with diverse other: yet you that are
obstinate, disobedient and determined Papists, are the most earnest enemies to
England of al other, for if the Queens Majesty should enrich, set in
authority, or promote, the said thieves, murderers, pirates, coyners, clippers
of money and counterfaiters of her highness seal (unless they be Papists
withal) they would thank her, love her, obey her, and observe her laws, and
so of English enemies become English friends, which you that are perverse and
determined Papists, would never do, though her Grace should do so to you: For
as Harlots that love other better tha^ they love their husbands (though their
husbands love them never so well) set al their whole mind, devises, and
studies, how to be rid of their husbands: Even so you that are obstinate and
determined Papists, (that are spiritual fornicators) though the Queens
Majesty should give you great livings, set you in authority, or highly
promote you: yet for all that your chief mind and study would be, how to be
rid of her Grace, how to displace her, and how to have a Papist to rule in her
room: whereby you might at your own liberty commit spiritual whordom with
Idols, Images, and the Mass, which you love better than your own loving
husband Christ the son of God. And thus let the Queens Majesty do for
you never so much, yet you will not be English friends, but utter enemies to
her Grace and to England your ^wne native country: until of perverse Papists
you become perfect Protestants, which is altogether my drifte. Yet I beseech
you mark this, and consider it well, though very need compel the aforesaid
(for the most part) to be thieves, murderers, pirates, coyners of money and
such like, to be English enemies, which may and do daily become english
friends: yet there are such laws for them, as therefore they are put to death.
But for you that are obstinate and disobedient papists (that are so great
enemies to England without need) and that nothing can reclame to be friends to
England: our most mild and merciful Queen as yet, has made no such law to
put you to death, nor greeuosly to punish you, though you deserve death a great
deal more (al things well weighed and considered) than any of the other english
enemies do. For if one that clippeth or diminishes ye Queens coin, whereon
her Image or picture is but printed or stampte, is worthily called a Traitor,
and by law therefore is hanged, drawn and quartred. Then, are not you worthy to
be called Traitors, and deserve death, which procure, wish, or desire by any
mean, the displacing of your Prince, the destruction of her person, the
alteration of our most quiet and happy state, the calamity of your country
men, the confusion of the common wealth, and the ruin of this our worthy
reaime of England?

If he that counterfeteth the Queens Majesty's seal for some private profit
(breaking thereby but one part of her laws) is a traitor, and is therefore put
to death: then are not you that are obstinate and disobedient Papists,
traitors, and deserve death, that hate your Prince without any cause, and that
withstand and disobey al her god^y laws and proceedings? in the loving and
obeying of whom, and the keeping and observing of whose laws and orders, her
Graces safety, the preservation of her person, the conservation of the common
wealth, and the prosperous state of this realm does chiefly depend?

If hereby you will not willingly see what you are, I fear against your
wills you will feel hereafter what you are.

Open your eyes therefore, and see what a merciful Queen you have, that ever
since she began to reign, has rather mercifully without law sought to win
you, than cruelly by law to enforce or wound you. Think not, because she
suffers you, that therefore she cannot punish nor execute you? (which if some
of you stick not to say openly, many of you (I believe) think the same
privily.) Think not, because she has made no law for you, that therefore she
can make no law for you? for the Queens Majesty has as great power to punish
the Idolatrous Papists in her Realm, 4. King. 23
as King Iosia had to burn the Priests of Baal in his realm.

King Asa and his people made a covenant and swore not only to seek the Lord
to cleave unto him and to hearken unto his voice, but also, that who soever
did not so, should be slain whether he were small or great, man or woman:
which covenant he performed and broke not. And is not our Princess Queen of
England as well as Asa was King of Judah? And has not she as great power in her
kingdom as he had in his? And if God was well pleased with King Asa for making
and performing that covenant (as he was indeed) would he then be angrye
(think you) with Queen Elizabeth if she made the like and performed it? I
think not. But our merciful Queen (though she has set forth the very true
law of God as speedily, as earnestly, and as zealously, as either king Asa or
any other Ruler has done, to be followed and observed throughoute her whole
Realm) has not made any such covenant or law to slay or kill them that do
not follow and obey the same.

But consider this well, if the Pope (not appointed by Gods law to reign and
rule as he has done and does) may murder and kill, (as many of you think he
may) the professors and folowers of Gods word (being not his subjects) for
disobeying his law devised and invented by man on earth, and procured by the
Devil: Then may not we think, that our Queen appoy^ted by God and allowed by
his word to reign over us, may lawfully kill and put to death the Idolatrous
Papists her subjects for wilfully disobeying and withstanding the law of God
that came from heaven, being long sin^e taught us by the Prophets, by Jesus
Christ the son of God, and by his Apostles, moved and procured thereto by God
the holy ghost?

Therefore I beseech you weigh the mild nature of our gracious Queen, (the
mother of Mercy) that does not use the justice she may: and mark your holy
father the Pope (the Captain of Cruelty) that uses ^he iniusticie he ought
not.

I pray you, is not our Elizabeth Queen of England as well as Queen Mary was?
what power, what jurisdiction, what authority, what superiority, what
excellency, and what else had Queen Mary, that this our Queen Elizabeth
has not? Queen Mary was King Henry the eights daughter, so was our Queen
Elizabeth: Queen Mary was King Edw. sister, so is Queen Elizabeth: Q. Mary
succeeded her brother King Edward, so did Queen Elizabeth succeed her
sister Queen Mary: Queen Mary was lawful Queen of England, Queen Elizabeth
is as lawful Queen of England, (I will not say more) Queen Mary put down Gods
word planted by her brother, and set up Papistrie and Idolatry and obeyed the
Pope: Queen Elizabeth put down Papistrie and Idolatry planted by her
sister, and obeys God: Queen Mary used her harmless and obedient Subjects
cruelly, and put them to death that professed Gods word: Queen Elizabeth
uses her wicked and disobedient Subjects mercifullye, and suffers them to
live that profess and stiffely defend Papistrie and Idolatry the doctrine of
the Devil.

These comparisons duly considered, your Queen Mary did not much excel our
Queen Elizabeth, (unless in cruelty and burning her harmless subjects.)
Now, if Queen Mary might put to death her humble and harmless subjects for
professing of Gods word: then I can not see but that our Queen Elizabeth may
as well execute her stubborn and disobedient subjects (which she as yet never
did) that withstand Gods word, and will needs follow Papistrie and Idolatry.

And further, if Queen Mary had a law to burn the servants of God, that
were obedient to her, concerning their worldly duty, and never meant her harm:
Then why may not our Queen Elizabeth make a law to execute the Popes servants,
(that are bound to be her loving subjects) which are disobedient unto her, and
that seek, procure, desire, and wish her death and destruction?

Therefore be thankful to God that has given you and us such a merciful*
Prince to reign over us, and love and ob^y her that gives you, for Justice
mercy, and for extremity, lenity. And now, as her Grace does refrain fcom
that she may do: so provoke not her highness to that she can do. And as I
said, think not that her Grace can not use the sword against you, because
she has not used it: for, if you think so, you do not only deceive your
selves, but also do much abuse her Majesty, in that you seem thereby, to make
her a Prince without power: whereby you are unworthy of the great mercy she
shows unto you.

What servant is so foolish to think (much more to say) that because his
Master does not beat him for his fault, therefore he can not beat him?
Because the merciful father does not beat his son for his offense, that
makes not that he can not beat him for the same. Shall her clemency and
mercy make you think in her disabilitie? Therefore, if any of you think so,
(as I believe some of you have said so) you are not worthy of such a merciful
Maistresse that uses you so. And I am sure that it is the spirit of
unthankfulness, the spirit of blindness, the spirit of error, or rather
the spirit of the devil that makes you say so.

Think not I beseech you, that I have written this for that I would have the
Queens Majesty to withdraw her mercy from you, and to use you with cruelty
(which is contrary to her mild and merciful nature, if any other way would
serve) for I do it (as the Lord knows my heart) to make you to see and
understand her great mercy, lenity, and gentleness toward you, thereby to
win and allure you from obstinacy to obediencie, from ingratitude to
tha^kfulnesse, from ignorance to knowledge, and from error to truth.

It may be, that some of you will say, that you love the Queen as well as we,
and wish the commodity of your country as well as we: If you do so, then you
will not procure nor wish any foreign foes to come into any of her Graces
dominions, to help, aid, or succor any rebels or traitors against our Queen,
neither will you be glad when you hear that any such are aryued or come into
any of her highness dominions to fight against her: neither will you rejoice
if they and the rebels should prosper against our Queen and country. But if
you hearken for their coming in to fight against her Majesty and her loving
subjects, or to aid rebels against her: or if you rejoice that they aid or
help traitors against our Queen: or if you desire, that they and the rebels
may get the victory of her, and her loving subjects (as I fear many of you
have done, and yet do) then whatsoever you say you are, I am sure you are not
true subjects, but traitors to your prince, and no friends, but enemies to
England.

Did none of you rejoice that the foreign foes arrived in Ireland of late? were
none of you glad that they aided the rebels there against our Queen and her
loving subjects? And were none of you sorry for their evil success and
overthrow? you in your consciences know whether you do thus or not, whether you
are such or not, whether you rejoiced that the foreign foes aided the rebels
in Ireland or not: And whether you were sorry that the Queens Majesty and her
subjects did vanquishe them or not.

And if you be such English enemies, then why should England harbor her
enemies? why should England foster her foes? why should England maintain them
that mean her mischief? And why should our Queen defend them that desire her
destruction? Nay rather, why does she not cut them off that would be a
confusion to her and to her country?

The fewer such were in England, the happyer were England: the sooner they
were rid out of England, the better it would be for England: And if there were
none such in England, then God would be well pleased with England: Therefore
they that will not be true to the Queens Majesty, and to England, God send
them short life or soon out of England: for England were better have their
room than their thro^g, their absence than their presence, and their death
tha^ their life.

Therefore to you I chiefly write that the devil has bewitched with Papistry,
that fond and ridiculous Romish religion, whose blindness I bewail, and whose
folly I lament.

Consider I beseech you, if you be such as before I have described, are you
not then English Enemies? your practices have proved it, your murmurings do
manifest it, your disobediencie declares it, your obstinacy does open it,
and some of your treasons have tried it. Therefore how can you think well of
your selves, that envy the prosperous reign of so peaceable a Prince, that
wish the sorrow of your Sovereign, your selves, and of al her subjects:
that to have your peevish pleasure performed, would have the quiet state of
your country subverted, and that would prefer and plant papistrie, and displace
the pure word of God. But if you be so wilful (which is incide^t to your
religion) yt you will not yield yt you are English enemies, yet I trust you will
not deny yt you are English Romanists, which is, yt you have English bodies,
and Romish hearts (wishing rather you had Romish bodies and English hearts) so
that it appeers, though your bodies be in England, your hearts are at Rome.
Therefore we should be in good case to trust to such fellows to fight against
our foes (if need were) that have their hearts and bodies so far asunder: for,
if a souldior be in the field and his heart at home, he will fight but faintly:
so I think we should find but faint-harted soldiers of such of you (if it
came to fighting) (nay I pray God you change not then your cowardly hearts into
courageous stomachs, and become furious fighters on our enemies sides against
this your own country.)

Well, though our Queens quiet governing of you, her merciful using of you,
and her longsuffring of you, can not allure you* to love her, yet I think you
would like her a great deal the better, upon condition, that she would give
you leave to use the Romish religion, and to have your Masses, Trentalles,
Dyrges, and Pylgrimages, and such trumperie, without controllment. Yea but
that were as though Pirates and thieves should say unto their King or Prince,
if your grace will give us leave, to spoil whom we will, to xoaue where we
list, and to steal what we can, we will love you and obey you, or else we will
not, or as though scholars should say to their scholemaister: sir if you
will give us leave to play when we list, then we will take you for our
scholemaister, or else we will not: do you not think that these are reasonable
conditions for Pirates and Thieves to make to their Prince, or for scholars to
make to their scholemaister? of truth as reasonable and more reasonable than
yours, that you would in this case require of thee Queen, and more meet to be
granted. For if men did know that Pirates and thieves had such a plackard of
their prince, then merchauntes would purposely prepare themselves to withstand
them with strong ships, well furnished with men and munition, and would go in
great fleetes together. And also true men would make the^ strong houses,
having guns and crossebowes, to withstand the thieves, whereby the Pirates and
thieves might come to there cost and be killed, and the most harm that Pirates
and thieves could do, were but to take their worldly goods, and perhaps their
lives from them, having no power to hurt their souls. And the scholars that
should have such a license of their scholemaster, should themselves have the
worst, which when they were men would bewail, that for vain unprofitable play
that lasted but a while, they had lost most profitable learning, which they
might have had all their lives.

But if the Queens majesty should grant your condition, that is to use
Papist^ie and Idolatry at your pleasure: that were such a commission for the
Devil against you her subjects that thereby he would destroy you both body
and soul for ever. Whose guns, Ingins, and darts, you were never able to
resist, and all for want of Gods word, which is our chiefest armor and defense
against him. And so of her grace you wo^lde demand your own destruction. If
her majesty had granted that condition in the first beginning of her reign,
to all that would have required it, I am sure that thousands at this day, had
bin blind and ignorant Papists, that are now perfect protestants, prof^ssors of
the Gospel, and her most faithful and loving subjects: for though her godly
orders and restraint has not brought all from Papistry: yet I am certain that
of them it has diminished a great sort. For as some of you are altogether
wilful and obstinate, and will not hear the word of God: so some again are
more tractable and come to the Church, where, they hearing the word of God, are
brought from their blindness. And further, if the Queen should grant you
this liberty, and suffer you not to have or hear the word of God, according
to your desires, then her grant would be the cause that you should be unhappy:
for Christ says, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it,
Luke. 11.
now if all they that hear the word of God are not happy (but they that
keep it) then all they that hear not the word of God, must needs be unhappy*
and so your desire of your Prince is to be unhappy: and they that are unhappy
are not the children of God, then they must needs be the children of the Devil:
and thus you would love or like well of your Queen, so that she would give you
leave to be the children of the Devil.

But perhaps you will say, that you do not despise the word of God, nor
disdain to hear it, but you would hear it of such as you like of, and not of
our Prechers: is that al you can say? very well, I am sure that our Preachers
appointed by the Queens majesty, do preach salvation only by the death of
Jesus Christ to such as do believe in him, they teach that good works are most
necessary, as true tokens and signs of a perfect faith, they cry out
against sin, they persuade the Queens subjects to obey and love her
majesty, all which I am sure agrees with the word of God: but if your
preachers that you should hear, preach contrary, that is, that you may be
saved by some other means, as by Masses, Trentals, Dirges, or by the Popes
pardons, and if they will animate and bolden you, to disobey your lawful Queen
and sovereign, and will preach remission of sins to all men that will fight
in the Popes quarrel, whether it be right or wrong, yea though it be against
their own King or country, you may call it ye word of God, but I am out of
doubt it is the doctrine of the Devil. Therefore (the premises well wayed and
considered) if you should require at the Queens hand to use freelye the
Romish religion, without check or controlemente, truly you know then no more
what you ask of her grace, than the said Pirates or thieves do know what they
ask of their king: or the fond Scholars of their Schoolemaister.

But if the Queens majesty could not have your love but upon that condition:
then she were better to have your hatred in denying you, than your love in
granting you. But what if a king should grant such a liberty to Pirates and
thieves, (as Mogallus did once king of Scots) and the scholemaister to his
scholars, Hollenshead Chron.
might not wise men judge that the one were more meet to be a Cobbler than a
King, and the other more fitter to be a Crow-keeper than a Scholemaister? yes
truly. But though you would most gladly have such a liberty: yet at her
graces hands you are never like to have it, which you know well enough, for her
grace is too wise and too goodly, to grant for uncertain love a certain
mischief. For if her highness should grant you this liberty, yt is, to use
your Romish religion freely, only to have your good will and love, would you
then love her unfeignedly? I hardly believe it, for it will skant stand with your
religion, to love faithfully a pure Protestaunt (who ever he be) which loves
gods word, yea though he live never so godly, (nay perhaps therefore you will
hate him the more) for if he be a Papist indeed, (that is a sound and perfect
Papist) he will not stick to carry fi^e and faggots, three or four miles, yea
and further if need be, to burn a Protestant, though it be his brother,
sister, or the nearest kin or best friend he has, or else an haulter to
ha^g him withal. Therefore you may say what you will, but surely I think, that
you will never love her heartily, unless she should become a Papist, (which the
Lord forbid) or unless you become Protestants, (which I beseech God to
grant.)

Is not this a godly religion trow you, that breeds such charity in your
breasts, making your hearts so warm, that you can find in your hearts so to
warm your Christian brother, that never after he shall feel any cold? That
same religion is it that has taught you neither to care for king nor Country,
that religion is deep in your breasts that has wrought this in you, is it
not worthy to be embrased, followed, and honored, that teaches true subjects to
be untrue to their prince, and that persuades men to be foes to their Country,
you may look a good while in gods word, or thereby you can learn any such
lesson. Therefore how can your doctrine be good that maintains such
mischief?

Wherefore I beseech you be not wilfully blind, but open your eyes and willingly
see, fly unto gods word that will only teach you truly, and clean not to
the Pope for he will teach you falsely.

I remember that Christ says, that we must forsake father and mother, Mark.
19.
sister and brother, and clean unto our wife, but I never read in any part of
the Scriptures, yt we must disobey our prince, refuse her laws, hate our
country, wish or procure our Princes death, and clean to ye Pope, whose law is
as clean contrary to Gods word, as black is too white, evil to good, and as
the devil is to God.

King David was no Papist, as appeared by his obedience, ^. Samuel. 24
for if he had been so, King Saul, when he was privily with him in the cave,
(I believe) had not escaped so as he did: but he being a pure Protestante (be
not angrye because I call him so, for he favored Gods word) would not lay his
hands on him, or hurt the Lords anointed, yet he was as heir apparaunt then
to the croune, and was King after the death of King Saul. Now if worthy David
being such a great estate would not hurt a wicked King, being his enemy, and
one that sought his death, but honored and obeyed him, then why should any of
you to him far inferior, procure or wish any harm, or disobey your most
loving, merciful, and peaceable Princes, that tenderly loves her subjects,
and carefully defendes them, being the chief and only proppe, stay, and
pyller, of our safety, quietness, and flourishing common wealth.

I beseech God keep her from being in such a snare with some of you, as King
Saul was with his servant David. For then your close meaning would be openly
spyed, I fear her grace should not find then half the favor at your hands
as you have found mercy at her hands: for you that are of the Popes
Religion, would not think it an offense (as godly David did) to hurt the
Lords anointed. For the Pope is so far in your Books, that you think
there is no offense, but that he can pardon, and that nothing is an offense
that would please him. So that to please him withal, where he bids you
strike, you will not stick to kill, and to kill where he commaundes, you
would think you did a godly Act, yea if it were the ruler of a Realm. As
though he had a commission, to kill Kings and others at his pleasure.

Mark how the Pope and king David differs, The Pope will bless you, pardon
and forgive you (though God will not) and reward you, for killing them that
never did him harm: But King David caused him to be killed, 2. Sam. 1.15.
that killed his mortal enemy King Saul, yea and that at King Saules
request. Now which of these two were of the better Religion think you, the
Pope or King David? which of them will you choose? though you love the Pope
never so well, yet I hope you will not utterly cast off king David and Gods
Prophet. Therefore by Christ's doctrine choose the better of them, who says,
you shall know them by their works. Matt. 7.16.
Now it plainly appears, that herein the doings of king David, is better
than the Popes, (unless murder be better than mercy) then if David's doings
be better, then David himself is better, and thus to conclude, if you would
follow the better and leave the worse, then you must follow David and forsake
the Pope: Who contrary to the Pope does teach you mercy for murder,
humbleness for hautinesse, and clemency for cruelty, and he calls him
blessed that delights in the law of God, Psalm. 1.
and exercises himself therein day and night: whereas the Pope curses them
that exercises themselves in the word of God, and hydes and burns the word of
God.

But say what we will, and prove what we can against the Pope, you are so
far in love with him and his holy laws, and especially his Mass, that you
care not though al run on wheels, so that you might have it here in
England. You may have it if you will, there is no penalty of death on it:
Marry they are some thing dearer than they were wont to be: for the day has
bin that you might have had one for a groate, but now they are so dear, that
I think you had rather steal them privily, than buy them openly. And I will
not say, but that you may steal a Mass in a corner, as diverse have done: but
if you do so, you are very thieves to God, to your Prince, and to your selves:
for thereby you rob God of his glory, the Queen of her duty, and your own
souls of heavenly felicity.

O how are you bewitched with blindness, do you know what mischiefs the
Mass would bring with it, if it might be suffered openly and freely again in
this Realm, I know well you do not: for if you did, you would not be so
desirous of it, you would feign have the drink, but you consider not the
poison yt is in it. I may compare you to thieves which construe the best, but
consider not the worst. For thieves before they steal, do say among
themselves: we shall have a jolly booty, it will make us men for ever, it will
buy us trim apparel, we shall fare like Lords, and we shall live like
gentlemen: and so they stay there, and reason no further, but therewith they
consider not how thereby they shall offend God (than which nothing can be worse)
they cast not aforehand, that they may chance to miss of their purpose, and
may pay as dearly as though they had it: they do not consider the great shame
they may reap thereby: they quite forget, that if they be known and taken,
that therefore they shall be hanged. Thus thieves use to debate aforehand of all the best that may happen, and leave out all the worst that most commonly does
happen: even so, you cast in your heads what great comfort and joy it would be
to your mind and fond fancy, if you might once enjoy here your Mass again,
but you respect not the manifold mischiefs that your Mass would bring with
it, as the great idolatry you should commit thereby, the heavy wrath of God
you should procure thereby, and the torments of hell fire that you should
gain thereby, for seeking salvation therein, which can be found in nothing,
but in the death of Christ, and by believing in him.

Here is enough I think, but yet here is not all, for if the Mass come in,
she must have her waiting men come with her also, and what are they I pray
you? if you say you can not tell, yet I am sure that I can tell, these they
are, mark them well: wars, troubles, discordes, contentions, cruelty,
misery, bondage, loss of goods, yea, and loss of lives and liberty, which
some of you may happily like them before they are come, but none of us all I
think would like them, if they should come.

The Lord keep that monstrous Mass, her relickes, and her retinue out of this
Realm. And I beseech God prosper our Queen that has banished her, and will
by Gods help keep her out during her life, yet you doat so much of your
Mass, and of the Romish religion, that you think, if you had it here, that
then you should have more plenty, quietness, and peace, than you have.
Believe it who will, for I will not. But if we had it, (as the Lord keep it
from us) you should then know it better by feeling, than you will believe me
by telling. What? do you think yt the Popish Mass can bring us more plenty,
quietness, and prosperity by Idolatry, than our worthy Queen or Maistresse
has brought to us with Gods word? if the Devil does persuade you, that it
will be so, Gods word does assure us, that it cannot be so. Marry, if you
could prove yt any one prince of your religion has reigned so royally, so
quietly, so peaceably, so plentifully, so prudently, so politikely, so
prosperously, and so mercifully, with such treasons uttered, such dangers
escaped, such mischiefs discovered, with subjects so loved, of the enemies so
feared, with such league united, and each where so famed, so long together, as
our worthy Queen (a professor, maintainer and defender of the word of God)
has done: the better we might believe you: but that I am sure you never can
do. Therefore as Papists and we are contrary in religion: so, if a Papist
should reign over you after our Queen, look for contrariety in regiment,
and not for the like, as trouble for quietness, wars for peace, penury for
plenty, folly for prudencie, unadvisedness for policy, adversity for
prosperity, slavery for equality, bondage for liberty, and cruelty for
mercy, and so be sure for contraries in all the rest of this our most blessed
and happy government.

How fond are you that believe that you shall still enjoy this your happy
state, though you change Gods true Religion, and your merciful gouernesse?
what woman is so foolish, that lived quietly and merrily under her first husband
that was godly and virtuous, that will think to live as quietly and merrily
after with a wicked shrewde and crabbed husband? who will think, that if he
change the bright day for the dark night, that yet for all that he shall keep
the right way, and go without danger? none unless mad men or fools. For
change your day for the night, then change your safe going for dangerous
stumbling. If a woman change a good and v^rtuous man for a crabbed and shrewde
husband: then she shall change her merry life for a sorrowful life. Even so
if you change your godly and merciful Princess, for a wicked and cruel
tyrant, then be sure to change your joy and prosperity, into misery and
calamity. And so likewise, if you change Gods true and most holy word, for
false Papistrie, superstition, and Idolatry, then assure your selves, you
shall change these your wonderful benefits and blessings of God, into his
manifold plagues and cursings. This assuredly look for, if you shall have any
such change as you look for.

They that are not content with a fair hot Sunne-shining day, without Wind or
clouds, but are desirous of change of weather, then they must look that their
change of weather shall be wind, rain, clouds, frost, snow, storms,
tempests, or lightning and thunder (for fayrer weather tha^ they had before
they can not have) so your goodlye change that you desire and hope for, must
needs be wars, troubles, penury, adversity, cruelty, and such like as
before is mentioned.

Now if you will not believe me, believe ye word of God, that cannot lie, which
plainly declares what prosperity and blessings they shall have, that follow
his word and keep his commandments: and also the plagues that shall happen
to them, that change and turn from his word, which are written by Moses the
Prophet, and the servant of God, as follows: Deuteronomy. 28.
If thou shall obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy GOD (not the voice of
the Pope) and observe and do al his commandments, which I do command thee this
day, then the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all the nations of the
earth, and al these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou
shall obey the voice of the Lord thy God, Blessed shall thou be in the City,
and blessed in the field, blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the
fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle, the increase of thy Kine,
and the flocks of thy Sheep, blessed shall be thy basket and the Dough,
blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed also when thou go
out. The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise against thee to fall before
thy face, they shall come out against thee one way, and shall fly before thee
seven ways. The Lord shall command the blessings to be with thee in thy
storehouses, and in all that thou se^st thy hand unto, and will bless thee in
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. The Lord shall make thee an holy
people unto himself, as he has sworn unto thee, if thou shall keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways. The^ all the people
of the earth shall see that the name of the Lord is called upon over thee, and
they shall be afraid of thee. And the Lord shall make thee ple^teous in goods, in
the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy Cattle, and in the fruit of
thy ground. The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, eue^ the heaven to
give thee rayn unto thy land in due season, and bless all the works of thy
hands. And thou shall lend unto many nations, but shalt not borrow thy self,
and the Lord shall make thee the head and not the tail, and thou shall be
above only, and shalt not be beneath, if thou obey the commandments of the
Lord thy God; which I command thee this day to keep and to do them. But
thou shall not decline from any of the words, which I command you this day,
either to the right hand or to the left, to go after other Gods to serve
them. But if thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and do
all his commandments, and his ordinances, which I command thee this day,
then all these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee. Curssed shall
thou be in the Town and curssed also in the field, curssed shall be thy basket
and thy Dough, cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy kine and the flocks of thy sheep, cursed shalt
thou be when thou come in, and cursed also when thou go out. The Lord
shall send upon thee cursing, trouble, and shame in all that which thou
set thy hand to do, until thou be destroyed and perish quickly, because of
the wickedness of thy works whereby thou have forsaken me, the Lord shall
make the pestilence cleave to thee, until he has consumed thee, etc. The
Lord shall smite thee with a consumptio^, and with the fever, and with a
burning ague, and with fervent heat, and with the sword, and with blasting,
and with meldew, and they shall pursue thee until thou perish: And thine Heaven
that is over thine head shall be brass, and the Earth that is under thee,
Iron. The Lord shall give thee for the rain of thy land dust and Ashes, even
from the Heaven shall it come down upon thee until thou be destroyed. And the
Lord shall cause thee to fall before thine enemies, thou shalt come out one
way against them, and shall flee seven ways before them. And shall be
scattered through all the kingdoms of the earth. And thy carcass shall be meat
to all the fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and none
shall fray them away. The Lord will smite thee with the botche of Egypt and with
the Emrods, and with the scab, and with the Itche, that thou canste not be
healed. And the Lord shall smite thee with madness, and with blindness, and
with astonnying of the heart. Thou shall also grope at the noone days as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and shall not prosper in thy ways. Thou shall
never but be oppressed with wrong, and be polled evermore, and no man shall
succor thee. Thou shall betrouth a wife, and another man shall lie with her.
Thou shall build a house and shall not dwell therein, thou shall plant a
Vineyarde, and shall not eat the fruit. Thine Ox shall be slain before thine
eyes, and thou shall not eat thereof. Thine Ass shall be violently taken away
before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee. Thy sheep shall be given
unto thine enemies, and no man shall rescue them for thee. Thy sons and thy
daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall still look
for them even till they fall out, and there shall be no power in thine hand,
the fruit of thy land and all thy labors shall a people eat which thou know
not. Thou shalt never but suffer wrong and violence always, so that thou shall
be mad for the sight that thine eyes shall see. The Lord shall smite thee in
the knees and in thy thyghes with a sore botch, that thou can not be healed,
even from the sole of the foot to the top of thine head. The Lord shall
bring thee and thy King, which thou shall set over thee, unto a nation, which
neither thou nor thy Fathers have known, and there thou shall serve other Gods
even wood and stone, and thou shall be a wonder, a proverb and a common talk
among all people whether the Lord shall carry thee: Thou shall carry out much
seed to the field, and shall gather but little in, for the Grassehopper shall
destroy it: Thou shall plant a Vineyard and dress it, but shall neither drink
of the Wine nor gather the Grapes, for the worms shall eat it: Thou shall
have Olive trees in all thy coasts, but shall not anoint thy self with the
oil, for thine Olives shall fall: Thou shall beget sons and daughters, but
shall not have them, for they shall go into Captivity, etc.

Here you may see the great blessings of God, promised to his people that
hearken to his voice and obey his laws and commandments, so that they
decline neither to the right hand nor to the left hand, to go after other Gods
or to serve them, which blessings most plentifully he has poured on this
Realm of England ever since our gracious Queen put down Idolatry and
Papistrie, and set forth the Gospel and word of God.

And also here you may plainly perceive and understand the marvelous curses
and plagues promised and threatened to them that will not obey the voice of the
Lord our God, and keep his commandments and ordinances, which plagues and
cursses have aboundantlye lyghted on those Countries and Kingdoms that embrace
and maintain Idolatrous Papistrie, rejecting the Gospel, and persecuting the
Professors thereof. Which is a manifest argument, that this Religion that we
have, is the true Religion, wherewith God is well pleased, and your Papisticall
doctrine, is a false and wicked religion, wherewith God is highlye displeased,
For as God did prosper and bless the Jews, his people, to whom Moses
pronounced the said blessings, so long as they hearkened to his voice, and
obeyed and followed his word and commandments: and as his said plagues and
cursses fell upon them, when they harkened not to the voice of the Lord, but
committed Idotrie: even so ever since he has and does bless and prosper, the
professors and followers of his word, and poures his said plagues and cursses
on them that despise his word, that are enemies to the Gospel, and persecute
the professors of the same.

Mark well and you shall see, that in all ages, God guided, protected, and
blessed, the Kings and Rulers that cleansed their Countries of Idolatry, and
that did set forth and obeyed his law.

What famous victories did he give to Joshua the Duke and Captain of the
Israelites, which obeyed God and harkened to his voice? to whom God spoke as
follows: Moses my servant is dead, now therefore arise, go over this
Jorden, thou and all thy people, Joshua. 1.
unto the land which I give them, that is, to the children of Israel, every
place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, have I given you, as I
said unto Moses, from the Wilderness, and this Libanon, unto the great river
Perath, all the land of the Hettites even unto the great Sea, toward the
going down of the Sun shall be your coaste. There shall not a man be able to
withstand thee all the days of thy life. As I was with Moses, so will I be
with thee. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Be strong and of a good
courage, for unto this people shall thou divide the land for an inheritance,
which I swear unto their Fathers to give them, only be thou strong and of a
most valiant courage, that thou may observe and do according to all the law
which Moses my servant has commanded thee. Thou shall not turn away from
it, to the right hand nor to the left, that thou may prosper whersoeuer
thou go, let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall
thou have good success. These were the words that God spoke to Joshua.
Therefore mark ye promises of God to him, if he follow and do according to the
law of God, then his way should be prosperous, he should have good success,
none should withstand him all the days of his life, and God would be with him,
which in deed God performed wonderfully, and kept promise with him, for that
he hearkened to ye voice of the Lord, and directed al his ways according to the
law of God. Joshua. 3.
For was not God with Joshua, when miraculously he departed the water of Jorden,
and the children of Israel went dry over the same, Iosu. 6.
straight toward Jericho? did not God wonderfully deliver Jericho to Joshua
and his people, when after the sounding of the Trumpettes the walls thereof
fell down through his power, and so Joshua and all his people went into it, and
took the City? and so they destroyed all the Idolatrous people, the enemies
of God that were in the same. But see how suddenly the Lord went from them,
Joshua. 7.
and suffered the men of Ai to kill.xxxvj. of the Israelites, and made the rest
of three thousand of them fearfully to flee away: because Achan in the spoil
of Jericho took that for a pray, which the Lord directly commanded to the
contrary.

Thus you may easily perceive, that the harkening to the voice of God, and
following of his word, is the cause of good success and victory, and the
disobeying of his word, and following of their own fancies, was the cause of
evil success and overthrow. But God blessed Joshua still, because he was not
co^senting to Achans fact, who stoned him therefore to death: for after yt, the
Lord made Joshua to vanquish and overcome the five Kings of the Amorits, Joshua.
10.
in which conflict, the Lord threw stones from heaven upon his enemies: and at
Iosuas bydding, the Sun and Moon did stand still a whole day together, that
he might have time to overcome his enemies.

These wonders did the Lord for his servant Joshua and his people that harkened
to his voice, and obeyed his word. Many other kings did Joshua overcome through
the strength of the Lord that fought for him and his people. And when Joshua
waxed old, then he called all Israel, their elders, Joshua. 23.
their heads, their Judges and their officers before him, giving them then the
same warning that Moses and God gave him, to hearken to the voice of the
Lord, saying, I am old and stricken in age, also you have seen all that the
Lord you God has done unto all these nations before you, how the Lord has
fought for you. Behold I have divided unto you by lot these nations that
remain (that as yet were not overcome) to be an inheritance according to
your Tribes from Jorden, with all the nations that I have destroyed even unto
the great sea Westward. And the Lord your God shall expel them before you and
cast them out of your sight. And ye shall possess their land, as the Lord
your God has said unto you. Be ye therefore of a valiant courage to observe
and do all that is written in the Book of the law of Moses, that ye turn
not there from to the right hand nor to the left, etc. But stick fast unto
the Lord your God as ye have done unto this day, for the Lord has cast out
before you great nations and mighty, and no man has stand before your face
hitherto. One man of you shall chase a thousand, for your Lord your God he
fyghteth for you as he has promised you. Take good heed therefore unto your
selves, that ye love the Lord your GOD: Else if ye go back, etc: know ye
for certain, that the Lord your God will cast out no more of these nations
from before you, but they shall be a snare and destruction to you, and a
whippe on your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish out of this
good land, which the Lord your God has given you, etc. Therefore as all good
things are come upon you, which the Lord your God promised you: so shall the
Lord bring upon you, every evil thing, until he has destroyed you out of this
good land, which the Lord your God has given you: when ye shall trangresse
the couuenant of the Lord your God which he commanded you, and shall go and
serve other Gods and bow your selves to them, then shall the wrath of the Lord
wax hot against you, and ye shall quickly perish out of the good land which he
has given you.

This was the lesson that Joshua a little before his death gave unto the
Israelites his people. And thus may you see that all the charge that God and the
godly gives, is to harken to the voice of the Lord and obey his law, which is
his word, and he will defend, prosper and fight for us no longer than we abide
in the same. So that the prosperous success, victories, and other great
blessings of Kings and Rulers that know Gods word, and profess the same, is
a manifest Argument, that they walk rightly in his ways, and that he is well
pleased with them. And such Kings, Princes, and Rulers, as have troubles,
wars, evil success, and are overcome in battle of their enemies, though
they say they have the true doctrine of God, and that they follow it, and
observe it most truly of all other: yet it is an infallible token, that they
do offend their Lord God, that they do not walk rightly, nor observe his
laws and word as they ought, and that he is not well pleased with them.

And thus as God did bless and prosper Joshua and all other before him, that
hearkened to his voice, and obeyed his word: even so he did to other that did
likewise after him: For God gave such wonderful success to Judah the Captain
of the Israelites, Iud. 1.
(who feared God, and obeyed his word) against Adoni-Bezek, and the Cananites,
as he gave to Joshua. And Judah did cut off the thumbes off his hands and off
his feet, according to the just judgment of God, for his great tyranny used
to other: for the said tyrant Adoni-Bezek confessed, that he had used
seauentie Kings before in like manner, and they gathered bread under his table.
And then he was compelled to say thus: As I have done, God has rewarded me.

God also blessed the said Judah and the Israelites, and gave them many
wonderful victories after that, against their enemies, the Cananites and
heathen Idolators. But when the Israelites hearkened not to the voice of the
Lord, and disobeyed his word, Iud. 3.
and worshipped the Gods of the Cananites, and did wickedly in the sight of the
Lord: then the Lords fury and wrath kindled and waxed hot against them, so
that he suffered them to be overcome, and he delivered them into their enemies
hands that spoiled them, and he sold them into their enemies hands, so that
they could stand no longer before their enemies, Iud. 2.
and whether soever they went out, the Lord was against them, according as
before he had promised. Iud. 3.
And God suffered the king of Aram to prevail against them, and to carry them
away wi^^ him. And so served him, and were captives under him eight years.

Consider also how wonderfully Gedeon the Captain of the Israelites (that
hearkened to the voice of the Lord) with three hundredth men, through Gods
power and might, Iud. 7.
did overcome the huge army of the Madianites, that were as Grassehoppers in
number.

What a victory did God give to little David his servant against the mighty
Giant Goliath his enemy? Sam. 17.
how did he prosper him, bless him, and fight for him against the
Philistines, whose Images he burnt, which pleased God? Sam. 7.8.
And as God has and does daily give victory to such Princes, Kings, and
Rulers, that hearkened to his voice and obeyed his word: so he has given and
does give marvelous quietness and peace to such Kings, Princes and Rulers, as
do the same. 2. Chro. 14.
For God did prosper and bless king Asa King of Judah, which hearkened to his
voice, and observed his law, making him reign in a marvelous quietness and
peace the space of five and thirty years, because he took away the Sodomites
out of the land, and put away all the Idols that his father had made, and
took away the Aultars of strange Gods, and the high places, and brake down
the Images, and cut down the Groves, and commanded Judah to seek the Lord God
of their fathers, and to do according to the law and the commandment. And
he took away out of all the Cities of Judah, the high places and the Images:
therefore the kingdom was quiet before him, and the Lord gave him rest on every
side.

And as the Lord did prosper and bless King Asa with such a quietness and
peace, for breaking down the Aultars of the strange Gods, and destroying the
Images set up by Abija his father: even so he has blessed and prospered our
most gracious Queen with a most plentiful peace all the time of her reign,
which is three and twenty years, (beseeching God to triple it with the quiet
reign of King Asa) for plucking down the Aultars, for breaking and destroying
the Images, for abolishing the most Idolatrous Mass (the Popes invented
sacrifice) committed and done on these Aultars, and for the extirping and
rooting up the abominable law and religion of the Pope, erected and planted by
her sister Queen Marie, to the great dishonor of God, and the derogation of
the passion of our savior Jesus Christ: setting forth in stead thereof, not
only in every City, but also in every town and village throughout her whole
Realm of England, the pure and perfect word and law of God.

And thus it is plain, that the cause of the quiet reign of King Asa, and the
peaceable and quiet reign of our Queen Elizabeth is all one. Which is, for
the putting away of Idolatry, which God does most abhor: and for the setting
forth of his law and word, which he does chiefly desire.

But though King Asa had peace all this while, because he abolished Idolatry
and hearkened unto the voice of God: yet after when he did slide from God, and
put not his whole trust in him, the case was then clean altered, for the Lord
took his peace away, and God sent to him the Prophet Hanani, who spoke unto
King Asa as follows: 2. Chro. 16.
Because thou have rested upon the King of Aram, and not rested in the Lord
thy God, therefore is the host of the King of Aram escaped out of thine hand.
The Aethiopians and Lybyanes, were they not a great host with Chariots and
horsemen exceeding many? yet because thou did rest upon the Lord, he
delivered them into thine hand. For the eyes of the Lord beheld all the earth,
to show himself strong with them, that are of perfect heart toward him. Thou
have then done foolishly in this, therefore from henceforth thou shall have
wars.

Thus we may see, that King Asas peace and quietness was turned into wars
and trouble, because he slidde from the Lord, and hearkened not to his voice:
even so if your Idolatrous Mass should be planted and used here as you
desire: then our prosperity and peace would be turned into adversity and
wars.

And then King Asa to mend the matter withal, did imprison the Prophet for
telling him so, and did not repent and turn to the Lord, as King David did
when the Prophet Nathan reproved him, which increased the Lords displeasure
the more against him. Here it is manifest, as before, and as it is through the
whole Scriptures, that God does bless his people with victory, quietness and
peace, so long as they stay upon him and obey his word, and no longer.

Mark how God did bless that good and virtuous King Iehosaphat, the son of
King Asa, with victories, peace, 2. Chro. 17.
and great riches, because he walked rightly in the sight of God, and abolished
Idolatry, which godly and virtuous King in the third year of his reign sent
his Princes and Rulers and learned men with them, to set forth Gods law, and
to teach it in the Cities of Judah. And they did teach it in Judah, and had
the Book of the law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the
cities of Judah (his kingdom) and taught the people. And the fear of the
Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah.
And they fought not against Iehosaphat.

Now weigh the comparison, and consider the like or more. Has not the Lord
likewise blessed our gracious Queen Elizabeth with an vnfoughten victory,
without any bloodshed, against her rebellious subjects the Papists, and has
not he besides blessed her with such a plenty, quietness, and peace, all the
rest of her reign, as before was never seen in England? because she has
hearkened to the voice of ye Lord as Iehoshaphat did: who staid not until the
third year of her reign, but in the first year, and in the beginning thereof,
abolished Idolatry, and did set forth the word of God, the holy Bible in the
English tongue, throughout all England, not only in Cities, but also in all
towns, villages, and other places, and commanded, and gave commission, to all
her Bishops, Doctors, Preachers, Curates and Ministers, to preach, teach,
and use the same purelye and rightly, and all other her Magistrates to defend
it. And accordingly, all the time of her worthy reign it has been, and is
daily preached and taught throughout all England.

And as the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that
were round about Judah, and they fought not against King Iehoshaphat: even so
the Lord our God has feared all the Countries and Kingdoms round about
England, and therefore they have not fought against our Queen Elizabeth. Thus
you cannot choose but grant, that if Iehoshaphat was blessed and prospered of
God, then our Queen Elizabeth is blessed and prospered of God: if Iehoshaphat
was a good King and did please God, then our Elizabeth is a good Queen and
pleases God: and if that were Idolatry that Iehoshaphat did abolish out of
Judah, then papistrie was Idolatrous that our Queen has abolished out of
England: and if that were ye law of God that Iehoshaphat proclaimed, published,
and caused to be taught throughout Judah, then this is the very law and word
of God, that our Queen Elizabeth has set forth throughout al her Realm of
England.

If this and all the rest that I have written, can not persuade you that this
our religion is the very true religion, and that God does both like and allow
it: then I think you are determined not to be persuaded. But yet to win you
if it will be, 2. Chro. 21.
mark what followed of wicked Iehoram, (though he was the son of godly
King Iehoshaphat) This king Iehoram, when he was placed in the kingdom of
Judah after his father, slew and killed his brethren and ye princes of Israel,
he walked not according as Iehoshaphat his father did, but wrought evil in gods
sight. And he caused the inhabitaunts of Jerusalem to commit (spiritual)
fornication (that is, Idolatry) and compelled his people of Judah thereto,
whereupon the Prophet Eliah spoke to him by writing, saying: Thus says the Lord
God of David thy father, because thou haste not walked in the ways of
Iehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah, but haste walked
in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and haste made Judah and the inhabitaunts
of Jerusalem to go a whoring, as the house of Ahab went a whoring, and haste
also slain thy brethren of thy fathers house which were better than thou:
Behold with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy children,
and thy wives, and all thy substance. And thou shall be in great diseases, in
the disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out for the disease day by
day. Then the Lord stirred up against Iehoram the Philistines, and the
Arabians, and they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was in the Kings house, and his sons also and his wives, so
that there was not a son left him, save Iehoahaz the yo^gest of his sons. And
after all this, the Lord smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease, and
in process of time, even after the end of two years, his guts fell out with
his disease, so he died of sore diseases, etc.

And again you may see, unless you do wilfully wink, that the abolishing of
Idolatry, and setting forth of the law of God, was the cause, that God did
bless and prosper good King Iehoshaphat: and contrary, the committing of
Idolatry, and the compelling of the people of Judah to sin therein, and the
forsaking of the law of God, was the cause that God did thus plague and punish
wicked Iehoram his son, with wars, with the taking away of his sons and wives,
and spoiling his house, and with ye falling out of his guts whereof he dyed.

Here you may easily perceive, that God spared not wicked Iehoram, though he
were the son of godly King Iehoshaphat, whom God loved so well, for it is not
the person or place, but the truth and the godliness of the person whatsoever
he be, and whersoeuer he be, that God does respect. Therefore, as God does
now bless us and this realm, with prosperity, quietness, plenty, and
peace, above all other kingdoms that are round about us, (as he did
Iehoshaphat, for abolishing Idolatrous Papistrie, and for setting forth,
obeying, and preaching his holy word: Even so assure your selves, and look for
none other, but that God will curse us and plague this Realm of England, with
troubles, wars, with coming in of strangers, spoiling of us and our goods,
with the loss of wives and children, and with incurable diseases, or such
like, as he did Iehoram and Judah, if we forsake the word of God, commit
Idolatry, receive again Papistry, worship Images, set up aulters, crouche
and kneel to an Idol in the Mass, and force and co^pel (with threatening,
punishing, emprisoning, racking, famishing killing and burning) the people of
England so to do.

Also, what a mighty king did king Iotham become, and how did God bless him,
2. Chron. 27.
and make him victorious over his enemies, because he walked uprightly
according to ye law of God?

What good success and prosperous reign had that godly king Hezekiah* Esai.
37.
and what a wonderful victory did God give him against the blasphemous king
Sanneherib, and his huge and mighty host, by sending his angel to fight for
him? because he hearkened to the voice of God, and did walk rightly in his
sight.

But now, if GOD did bless and give victory, plenty, quietness, peace, and
prosperity to these godly kings and Rulers before mentioned (besides many
other) for harkening and cleaving to his word, and for setting forth and
obeying his law, that was delivered by Moses the prophet: then it is not to be
doubted, but that he will, and does give victory, plenty, prosperity,
quietness, and peace to al godly kings and rulers, that shall put down
idolatry, superstition, and al heretical religions, and shall plant in stead
thereof, the pure word of God and the Gospel, which was preached and delivered
to us by our savior Jesus Christ, the only and very son of God. And if God did
send troubles, wars, hunger, incurable diseases, thraldom, and captivity,
with many other curses and plagues, as well to these kings before mentioned, as
also to king Saul, king Solomon, Rehoboam, Jeroboam, Baasha, Elah, Omri, Ahab,
Ahaziah, Ioash, and Ahaz, with diverse other, and to them that they governed
(being the chosen people of God) for committing of idolatry, and rejecting ye
law of God delivered to them by Moses the Prophet: Then we must needs think,
that God will send troubles, wars, hunger, incurable diseases, thraldom and
captivity, with other plagues and curses upon al those kings and their people,
that were not his chosen people, but once gentiles and heathen, that commit
idolatry, worship Images, and embrace Papisticall superstition, and despise,
and obstinatly and wilfully withstand the very true and pure word of God the
gospel, that at the first was taught and delivered by our savior Christ ye
very so^ of God, which is more tha^ either apostle or prophet.

Therefore, if you be not blind, dumb, deaf, and altogether senseless, you
will with all speed flee from your Papistrie, superstition and idolatry, on
the professors and followers whereof, the aforsaid curses and plagues do daily
light, and embrace the true word of God, and the comfortable Gospel of Christ,
which bring the great blessings of God, as quietness, peace, plenty,
prosperity, and victory in this world, and endless joy in heaven after this
life to the professors and followers thereof.

I hope you are not foolish, but that you have some understanding, not so
blind but yt you have some glimmering, and not so senseless but that you have
some reason. Shut not therefore your eyes purposely, because you will not see.
If you knew how sweet our law the Gospel is, as I know how sour your
papistical law is: if you knew what certainty of salvation is in our law the
Gospel of Christ, as I know what certainty of damnation is in your law of
Papistrie the doctrine of Antichrist: and if you knew and felt how this our
law the Gospel of Christ, does make the wicked to be godly, and to be the
children of God, as I know that your law of Papistrie makes the godly to be
wicked, and to be the children of the Devil: you would then I think embrace
our Gospel and forsake your Papistrie, unless you love darkness better than
light, the devil better than God, and hell better than Heaven (which I trust
you do not.)

Perhaps some will say, if they that get the victory over their enemies are
blessed of God, and so they are the people of God: Then ye Heathen Idolaters
are blessed of God, and are Gods people: for they have had and have daily good
success and victory over their enemies, yea, and have many times overcome the
people of God, yt had his law and his word. I grant it, as before it appears,
but therefore they were not Gods people and blessed: For the heathen and
Idolatrous people, because they have good success and do overcome, are not
blessed and godly, but the children of God are scourged and overcome by them,
because they are evil and wicked, and forsake the law of God. The rod is not
good because it does beat the child: but the rod does beat the child
because the child is evil. It is manifest before, that the children of Israel
were overcome and carried away Captive of King Aram, an Heathen Idolatour, yet
King Aram and his people was not blessed of God, Iudio. 3.
nor yet were the people of God, neither their law was the law of God, although
they got the victory. But God delivered the people of Judah into their hands,
and suffered them to be carried away Captives by them, because they did forsake
the Lord, disobeyed his word, and committed Idolatry, for so God did
promise. The scriptures are full of the like examples.

It is most manifest throughout the whole Scriptures, that God has chieflye
blessed those Kings and countries with wealth, prosperity, and victory, which
mightily and speedily pluckte down Images and false Gods, and did extirpe and
destroy Idolatry, and set forth earnestly and zealously the word and law of
God: though they in some other particular things sometimes offended, as King
David did ^n numbering of his people, and committing aduoutrye and murder: as
King Asa for putting confidence in the King of Syria, and leand not wholly upon
the Lord: 2. Samuel. 24 and. 11. 2. Chron. 16. 2. Chro. 18.
and as King Iehoshaphat did in going to fight with King Ahab, and diverse other
committing such like, whose faults, though God punished, yet he never
therefore delivered them into their enemies hands, nor to be carried away
captives. But those Kings that cast away Gods word, and hearkened not to his
voice, but fell to Idolatry, and worshipped Idolles and strange Gods, (though
they were never so godly before) immediately the Lords wrath kindled against
them, and stirred up enemies to fight with them, and sold and delivered them
into their enemies hands: and suffered them either to be killed, wonderfully to
be plagued, or to be carried away prisoners and captives. So that hereby it
plainly appears, that the most safety, quietness, prosperity, and
victory of a Prince and his people, and to be most assured to have God on
their side, and to defend them, is to set forth and maintain the true law
of God, and the Gospel of Christ, and to pluck up, put away, deteste and
abhor all Idolatry, superstition, and all religions whatsoever, that are
contrary to Gods word. But as all the Kings and people that did set forth and
obey Moses law, and suppressed and put down Idolatry before Christ, were
then the people of God, and so blessed, prospered, and defended of him: Even so
all the Kings, Princes, and Rulers, and their people that since Christ have and
do profess and set forth the Gospel, were and are the people of God and
Christ's flock, and are likewise blessed, prospered, and defended of God. For
how did God bless and love that worthy and godly Emperor of the Weast
parts, Acts and Monuments.
called Constantine, that vanquished the army of M^xentius the Tyrant that
horribly persecuted the Christians, who flying out of the battle was drowned
in the river of Tiber. And also he overcame Licinius the Emperor that
persecuted the Christians. And also God did maruellously bless and prosper
Frederike the godly and Christian Emperor (though the Pop^ did curse him
never so much) for he subdued almost al Italy, Cooper in Epit. Chro. fol.
223.
except a few Cities that favored his enemies, whereby you may plainly see
that God blessed this Christian Emperor with victory: and contrary, curssed
the Pope with overthrow, they both professing to be Christians. But seeing God
stood with the Emperor and gave him the victory, and overthrew the Pope, and
gave him the foil: Therefore it is manifest according to Gods promises before
declared, that the Emperor was of a true religion, that God was well pleased
with him, and that he was the better christian: and that the Pope was of a
wrong religion, and walked not rightly according to Gods law, and so no good
Christian, and therefore displeased God. Thus you may perfectely understand,
that as God before the coming of Christ, did bless and give victory, to
the Kings and Rulers that set forth and followed Moses law, plaguing and
destroying their enemies: Even so now God does bless and prosper the
Christian Princes and Rulers that set forth, favor, and defend the gospel
of Christ, and does plague and destroy the enemies of the true Chrystians that
embrace and follow the same. And as God (before Christ was borne) did
prosper and defend none but the Jews that followed Moses law, and called
them only his people: Even so since the time of Christ, he does prosper and
defend none, but only them that profess and follow Christ's gospel, named
Christians. And as the often reading, hearing, and perusing of the same law of
Moses was the chief way for the Jews to know it: and to know it perfectlye,
the next way to follow it: and to follow it truly, the chief mean for God
to bless and defend them: Even so our often reading, perusing, and hearing of
the Gospel, is the chief way for us to know Gods will and pleasure and to
know it perfectelye, is the next way for us to follow it: and to follow it
truly, is the chief mean for God to bless, prosper, and defend us, in this
world, and through Christ to save us everlastingly in the world to come.

Now, if there be none other way for us to be blessed and defended of God,
than by hearing, reading, and perusing the Scriptures, (as most certainelye
there is not) then they must needs be unhappy, have evil success, and be
subject to all mischiefs, that will not read it, peruse it, hear it, nor know
it. Therefore these Papists are unhappy and accurssed, that will not read,
peruse, hear, nor know the Scriptures, the knowledge and following whereof, is
the fountain of all blessedness and happiness.

Perhaps some of you will say, Were all our fore-elders unhappy, curssed or
damned, that did not hear, read, and believe this law that you now teach?
whom I aunsweare thus: Are all the Apostles and Martyrs that dyed for
professyng this our Law or Gospel, and all the holy old Fathers that never
heard of the Pope nor of his Law, and also all our and your Fathers,
breethren, sisters, and kinsfolks, besides many thousands that have refused
the Pope and his law, unhappy, curssed, or damned?

What particular persons or people are saved or damned, I refer that to God,
but thus much I dare be bold to say, (for Christ himself said it) He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, Math. 16.
but he that believes not shall be damned: not meaning, that he that believes
in the Pope and his doctrine, but he that according to the Gospel does believe
in Christ, and that he is the only savior of the world, shall be saved.
Wherefore, whatsoever the Pope teaches, there is no salvation without
believing in Christ. Therefore all you that cleave to the Pope and his law, and
refuse the gospel which is Christ's law, do highly displease God. If the Jews
that follow Moses law, that was delivered and commanded by God, do
maruellously displease God, then, do you think that you that follow the
Popes law that God never commanded, can please God? It can not be so.

Therefore how unwise are you that would be thus curssed, plagued, and be
unhappy to have your Idolatrous Mass here again, which God does deteste and
hate?

I beseech you consider, that the word of God which we have, and the Mass
which you would have, are so contrary the one to the other, and are such
Enemies, that they can no more dwell together quietly, than the Ark of God
could with Dagon: 1. Samuel. 5
So that the Queens Majesty (as a most prudent Princess) has with all her
power and might, kept out that Idolatrous Mass, and all other the Popes
trumperie, thereby to obtain Gods favor, and his said great blessyngs, and
to keep her Realm in concord and quietness. And as her Grace does keep
the same out by force, so, if you have it again (in her life time) it must
be brought in by force. And as the Queen is the champion of Gods word, to
keep out Idolatry: so must some Papists be champions to bring in Idolatry.
And who would they be I pray you? Forsooth, your procured or wished soldiers
of the Pope, enemies to our Queen and country, yea, and perhaps some of them
disobedient to their own Prince, coming without their leave or license, that
would not come to maintain or defend you as you think, but would come to
destroy you as we know, that would not succor you, but spoil you, and
would make you rather slaves than subjects.

Perhaps some of you may think, that the strangers you wish to come hither
(though they be foes to the Queen, and come to fight against her Majesty and
us) will not misuse you, for that you and they are of one religion. Uerye well,
trust you to that, and we will trust to God. (But if they be her foes, and
fight against her, me thinks they should not be your friends that ought to
fight with her) yet, do you not see every day, that the son being of the same
religion that his father is of, does poison, destroy, and kill his own father
to have his living after his death? Do not many kill their very friends for
their goods and money, though they be of their religion? Do not many rob
and spoil their own country men, though they be of their religion. If this
be true (as you cannot deny it) then do you think that the Popes cruel
soldiers, that should come to destroy your Prince and her loving subjects
(though you be of their religion) would stick to spoil you, whereby they may
have your lands and goods, and be Masters and Rulers over you? no I warrant
you. And many a soldier and rascal of the Popes soldiers, (the Queens foes
and ours) would not be very religious, nor would be so spiste-conscienced in
Papistrie as you think, but would prowle about for their pray, not sparing
either Protestant or Papist, raking rather about for riches than regarding
religion. I pray God it happen not to you for your discontented minds, as it
did to the Grecians, Cooper Epi^. Chron.
not considering their happy estate after they had expulsed the Persians, who
falling at discord among themselves, did loose at last all their great
liberties, and were brought into marvelous bondage and thraldom of thyrtie
tyrants.

Consider I pray you what happened to the Citizens of Rhegium in Cicilie, being
at contention among themselves* (...)
the one part of them sent for aid to Himera, which strangers of Himera after
they were come to Rhegium, did both kill them against whom they came, and
also most cruelly murdered them they came to aid (although they were of their
religion (for they were all heathen, and Idolators.) And so the strangers that
they sent, for had their City and the Citizens goods to themselves, as the
Queens foes yt you procure or wish to come against our loving Queen, to help
you up with your Mass and Idolatry would use you.

Mark I beseech you, how the cruel Danes did oppress our auncestoures in
the time of King Ethelwolfe, Acts and Monuments page. 140.
though they sent for them to help them (as some of you have procured and
desired the Popes Souldioures to help you up with your Mass, and to fight
against your gracious Prince and your Country) when they were come into
England, they cruelly murdered our Nobles, wickedly oppressed the Commons,
impiously persecuted the innocent Christians, injuriously possessed the land,
and their habitation, chasing the inhabitants out of house and Country, etc.

These miseries, troubles, and thraldomes, then (and at many other times) did
our auncestoures feel in this land by the coming in of their foes, which
(blessed be God therefore) neither you nor we do feel. And I beseech God that
we never do feel, which both you and we should feel, if so many of the Popes
soldiers were here as some of you wish, to help and aid you against our
Queen, to set up your Mass and Papistrie: (though you think they would
be friendly to you for your religion.) For consider this well I beseech you,
what battayles, what murders, what bloudshead, what burning of Towns, what
spoiling of Countries, and what doleful destructions have there bin throughout
al Europe, at one time or other, (no Realm nor Country excepted) in the space
of four or five hundredth years? when every one professed and followed the
Popes religion? and almost few (or none in respect) knew any other religion?
And who were they that did thus murder one an other, spoil one an other,
and burn and consume one another Country? were they not al of the Popes law?
and of his religion? yes truly. Now, if Papists made battles with Papists,
if Papists murdered Papists, if Papists spoiled Papists, if Papists burned
the Countries of Papists, if Papists did win realms and kingdoms from
Papists, if Papists made themselves Lords over Papists, and if Papists made
bond-slaues of Papists, (having no color to suspecte them, but that they were
Papists, and of their own religion.) Then, do you think that the Popes
papisticall Soldiers that you would procure or wish, to fight against our
Queen and her loving subjects, will spare you though you are Papists, and of
their religion, having a great color to take you for Protestants, whom they
utterly envy and hate? believe it not. Therefore neither procure nor wish for
the coming in of the Roman Souldioures against our Queen, to set up
your Mass and other the Popes paltrie. But be true rather and loving Subjects
to her grace, and aid and help her (if need be) to keep both them and it out
of the realm.

We in England have bin so long brought up in the teaching and preaching of
the gospel, that these Papists that are our foreign foes, think we are
almost al Protestants (whom they call Heretics) (for which they abhor us
more than if we were notorious murderers, drunkardes, aduouterers, or
fornicators) for let any of our Papists travail beyond the Seas among
them, if they know once that he is an English manne, straightwaye they say
(or judge him at the least) to be a Protestant, though he be as deep or a
deeper Papiste* than themselves, (unless they know him very well to be a
Papiste.) And thus, though they think there are many Papists in diverse other
countries, yet they think there are few or none in England.

Therefore, seeing now these our foreign foes (such as you wish to come and
fight against our Prince and Country) will not be persuaded that you are
Papists, when they can lose nothing by trusting you: think you then (if they
were here) yt you could persuade them yt you are Papists, when they may have
al your lands and goods by mystrusting you? No I warrant you. Therefore you
may then tell them long enough, that you are of their religion, ere they will
believe you, or at the least favor you.

The Angels of Heaven were and are all of one religion, and had the very
right religion I think, (for if there were any one religion better than an
other, it is very like they have it in Heaven) yet through Pride, Lucifer and
a great number of his fellows, were not content with their estate, Jude in
his Epistle.
but meant not only to be above their fellows, but also to be equal with
God.

Perhaps some of you will say, though the Aungelles are of a pure religion,
they are no Protestants: well, whatsoever they are, I am sure they love and
obey God and his word: And therefore I dare boldelye affirm, that they are no
Papists, (unless those Angels that became Devils and fell out of Heaven, are
Papists, which is very like, for both the Pope and the Devils are quite
contrary to God.)

Now, if the holy Aungelles of Heaven that were of the purest religion, being
all under one King, the best King of al other, and in one kingdom, would
have exalted themselves above their fellow Angels (though they were al of one
religion) disdeining yt their fellows should be equal with them: Then do you
think that the earthlye Papists yt you procure or wish to come and fight
against our Prince and country, that are of a false and wicked religion, in
whom there is neither humility, truth, nor mercy (for the more proud, cruel,
and false they are, the perfecter and righter Papists they are) that are of a
strange country, subjects to the Pope or to an other King or Ruler, of a
contrary language, and of a contrary nature to us, will not be Lords and
Rulers over you, will not exalt themselves over you? and will not be masters of
you and yours? yes be bold of it: though they and you be both of one religion.
For if they be not, it will be because they can not.

Let the cruelty and tyranny done to our neighbors in Flaunders (but even
yesterday to speak of) be a sufficient spectacle, warning and example to you,
for procuring of the Popes soldiers to aid you against your prince and her
loving subjects, to set up your mass and the Popes doctrine: (though they be
of your religion) for was there none spoiled, defloured, ravished, misused and
killed there but only Protestants trow you? Ask Antwerp and it will quickly
tell you: besides diverse other places, that therein can say something And who
were they that used them thus? were they not the Captains of their own Prince
and ruler, (though perhaps they did so without his will)? Now if the Papists
spoiled, defloured, ravished, misused, and killed ye subjects of their own king
and Prince? (for all they were Papists and of their own religion) then will the
Popes soldiers (that you procure or desire to fight against your prince)
spare you yt are not their Princes subjects? (though they be of your
religion?) if you believe it, the^ you are not so wise as I wish you.

And though these the Popes soldiers (that you procure or wish, to enter in
any of the Queens dominions, to fight against her highness and her obedient
subjects, to help you up with your mass and other the Popes paltry) do make
you believe before they come, that it is only to aid and help you against your
Prince, and that (if they get the victory) they will be favorable to you, or
be at your commandment, that are of the Popes religion, and that they will not
spoil or hurt you, but only the Protestants: yet what if they say then (when
they see your great wealth and riches) that you are Protestants? (for wealth,
riches, Jewels, money, lands, and great livings are able to entise them to
make Protestants of Papists) if they then spoil you, cruelly use you, turn
you out of al your goods, lands, and livings, murder you, kill you, make slaves
of you, and neither trust you nor suffer you to be in any authority (though you
cry never so loud unto the^, saying, we are Catholics which hold of the Pope,
we are of your religion, we procure you to come hither, we sent for you to help
us up with the holy Mass) if they use you thus (as no doubt they would if they
could) in what case are you then? what remedy shall you have of them for
mistaking of you? where will you sue them? in what court will you commence your
action against them? no, no, there will be no remedy to be had of them,
unless crying, weeping, howling, and wringing of hands, will remedy the
matter. Mark a preatie example. The Lion made a proclamation that no horned
beast upon pain of death should come within seven miles of the Court.
Whereof when the silly Hare heard, she ran from the Court as fast as ever
she could, to whom the Fox said meeting her, why do thou run so fast?
to whom the Hare said, it is time to run apace I trow: why so said the
Fox? to whom the Hare aunsweared again, do thou not know of the kings
Proclamation, that if any horned beast be found within seven miles of the
Court, that they should dye for it? that is true said the Fox, but that
Proclamation touches thee never a wit, for thine be ears that thou have,
they are no horns. I know that said the Hare as well as thou, but what if the
King say they are horns, where am I the^? Even so if the Popes soldiers (that
you wish to come to fight against our Queen) say that you are Protestaunts
(though you are as rank Papists as they) where are you then? you were then as
good to be protestauntes, for you should pay as deep as they. Think not but
that they could regard rather your riches than your religion, your livings
than your law, and your possessions than their promise. For it is a maxim and
a rule with the Pope and his partakers, that Fides non est seruanda haereticis,
Faith (or promise) is not to be kept with Heretics. Confil. Constan. Session.
19.


Thus you may see (if thou be not stark blind) how foreign foes have used
our ancestors, for all they were of their religion. And think you to have
better luck at the Popes Soldiers hands, if according to your procuremente
or wish they should come hither to fight against our Queen and us, (if they be
able at the least) than our ancestors had of foreign foes, or the Citizens
of Rhegum, of them of Himera, whom they sent for to aid them against their own
brethren and Citizens, before mentioned? you may believe it if you will: but you
shall never feel it if you would.

But suppose that the Popes soldiers that you wish to come hither, to set
up your Mass and Papistrye would favor you, defend and save you that are
Romanystes, for that you should be of their religion, yet you are sure that
they would spoil, burn, and kill us both Prince and Protestauntes, (if their
power were to their pretense) whereof some would be your own fathers, mothers,
sisters, brothers, wives, children kinsfolks, or very dear friends, which (if
you be the children of God) you would not only fear that we should feel, but
also your selves abhor to see.

Alack for pity, how can you persuade your selves to be in the right way, and
that the same that you embrace is the right law of God, which can be content
to see your most loving Prince spoiled, your parents persecuted, your sisters
murdered, your brethren burned, your wives misused, your sons tormented,
your daughters destroyed, your kinsfolks killed, your faithful friends fired,
and your Country folks consumed. The Lord open your eyes, for this is far
wide from Christ's religion, though it be iumpe with the Popes religion.

If you are of God and hearken to his voice, then you must love your neighbor
as your self. And is this to love your neyghbor as your self? to have your
desire with their destruction? to have your wish with their grief and woe? and
to crave your fond fancy with their confusion? if you would be called
Christians, then do as it does beseem Christians. And follow ye law of God
knit up in one short sentence, which was spoken by Christ, the Captain of
Christians. And this it is: Whatsoever you would that me^ should do unto you,
Math. 7.
do ye even so to them. Now mark I beseech you, if we should rack you,
torment you, burn you, and kill you for your religion, I am sure you would not
be well pleased with us for using you so: Then why do you wish and are content
that we should be spoiled, burned, or killed for our religion? Therefore you
that are of the Popes religion, are not of Christ's religion, because you have
rackt us, spoiled us, tormented us, burned us, and murthred us: which you would
not have us do unto you.

Now if your religion be not Christ's religion (as these words and your works
have sufficiently proved:) then I know not whose religion it is, unless it be
the devils religion, whose religion must needs be wicked and evil, for that
Christ's religion is most holy and good. And thus I have sufficiently proved
unto you, that the Gospel that we have is the true law of Christ: And the Pops
law that you follow is the false law of the Devil or Antichrist.

But if your hearts be so obdurate, that no truth can enter into the same: Then
mark this that follows, and deny it if you can, or confute it if you are
able: If god bestowed these his blessings before mentioned, only upon that
people that hearken to his voice and obey his word, (as he has promised) and
if our gracious Queen, we her subjects, and her realm, have had these gods
blessings most plentifully poured upon us, ever since she has set forth this
our religion, the word of God, and put away the Mass and Idolatry: then it
is most evident, that this our religion is the true religion of Christ and law
of God: because of the wonderful blessings that we have enjoyed withal.

And if God send these plagues and curses before rehearsed only upon that
people that does not harken to his voice, but disobeyes his laws and
commandementes, and commit Idolatry (as he has promised, and if these Kings
and Princes, and their people that obey the Pope and his laws, that are
enemies and suppressors of the word of God, have daily these plagues and curses
light upon them: then it is most apparent, that the Popes religion is false,
abominable, and wicked, and that God therewith is highly displeased, because
of the manifold plagues and curses that he daily sendes among them.

And thus for that God does bless us with his foresaid blessings, and that
with such a plenty, quietness, peace, and prosperity as England never
tasted before: And because diverse Countries that obey the Pope and embrace
Papistrie, have been, and are yet still compassed and environed with the said
plagues and curses of God (that is) wars, troubles, scarcity, and such like,
both we striving and taking our selves for Christians, as did the Israelites
and the people of Judah that were all Jews and called the people of God,
whereof the Kings of Judah and their people, for cleaving to Gods law, were
blessed and prospered of God, and the Kings of Israel and their people, because
they committed Idolatry and disobeyed the law of God, were plagued and cursed
of God.) Therefore it cannot be denied by any, unless they be as senseless as
brute beasts, but that this that we have is the true Religion of Christ,
whereby we have our name of Christians, and that Papisticall doctrine which
you have, is a most false and erroneous religion, the professors whereof cannot
justly be called Christians, but rather Antichristians.

Yet perhaps all this will not persuade some of you, though it be never so plain
and true. But if this and the rest will not allure you to ^lye from Papistrie,
and to stick to Gods word. Surely, surely, you are then fully bent to resist
the open and manifest truth. And though thereby you willingly cast of God and
his word, yet I beseech God that he do not cast you of for ever.

It may be that some of you will grant that Gods word, is true, but that we do
mistake it, and that we have not the true meaning and understanding thereof, so
that we misuse it: certainly this I will say to you, if we do misuse it and
mistake it, then God takes his marks amiss, and is maruellously ouerseene,
that blesses us so abundantly that mistake and misuse his word: and sendes his
plagues and curses on those Countries and people, that use it well, and take it
rightly: and so by this it should seem that God does directly against his
promise.

But assure your selves, though your presumptuous Pope, and his obedient
Prelates may be deceived, and ouerseene (as no doubt they are) God and his
dear son Christ, can neither be deceived, nor yet ouerseene, marrye God
ouersees them all look they never so high.

Therefore turn to the Lord and to his holy word, that therefore will bless
and prosper you: and forsake the Pope and his doctrine whereby God does plague
and curse you: and love, obey, and think well of your most loving, natural,
and merciful Queen, that mercifully and myldely does protect you.

If you would mark but her Majesty's power, and knew what she may do, and
weighe your own doyngs, and what you ought to do, truly you would say then
that she is the most myldest and mercyfullest Queen, one of them, that ever
reigned.

You think not amiss in her grace, and count her not unmerciful though she
put Thieves to death for stealing, which God has not commanded to be
punished with death: and can not you see that her majesty is marvelous
merciful, in that she suffers you to live, for disobeyng of Gods word, and
committing of Idolatry, which God by his law has commanded to be punished
with death?

King Josias burned the Idolatrous Priests upon the Altars that committed
Idolatry, 4. Kings. 23.20.
and yet he is reckned for a godly King: but our merciful Queen Elizabeth,
has not burned the Popish Priests on the Altars where they committed Idolatry
in saying of mass, and worshipped a piece of bread for the body of Christ,
which she might have done if she would, and yet you count not her for a godly
and merciful Queen.

You praise and extol Queen Mary to the Heavens, for using cruelty, and for
burning her humble and faultlesse subjects: but if our Queen Elizabeth should
use lawful severity on her stubborn and disobedient people, Gods foes and her
enemies, that desire her death and destruction, the confusion of their
country, and the ruin of this Realm, you would dispraise and slander her,
and say she were a cruel tirant.

Nay for all her highness has used you so mildely and mercifully as she has
done, yet some of you would darken her deserts if you could, in saying most
spitefully, and falsely that this is the time of Tirannie, these are the days
of persecution, this I grant, but not in England though you mean in England,
truly such as do say so, must needs I think speak against their conscience
and their knowledge, unless they take mercy for cruelty, and cruelty for
mercy, and then I may say unto them as Esaias said to the Jews, Esai. 5.20.
Woe be to you that call evil good, and good evil, etc. If this be the time of
tirannie and persecution, when you that are manifest enemies to your Queen and
Country before well proved, are suffered to live peaceably to enjoy your goods
quietly, to go at your liberty, or imprisoned to fare daintilie, and there to
live merrily, or to be releast upon suerty: then what was Queen Mary's time,
when her simple humble and faultelesse subjects were cruelly imprisoned, in
stocks and chains and other Engines tormented, most tyrannously racked, their
friends to come to them not suffered, on the bare boordes and ground lodged,
to have pen and Ink and Candle light not permitted, for want of meat to be
famished, in prisons privily to be murdered, and abroad in every man's eyes to
be burned.

That time of Queen Mary to all wise men may rather seem to be the time of
cruelty, tyranny, and persecution, than this mild and merciful time of our
Queen Elizabeth.

You that thus drownde the merciful doings of our most merciful Mistress and
call it the time of persecution, I pray God for your unthankfulness and
perverseness that hereafter you feel not a time of confusion.

I beseech God to open your eyes to see how her Grace does persecute you, for
if you did see (yet I fear some are blind for the nonce) you would then say
that she persecutes you none otherwise, than the loving father does his child,
and as the good Scholemaister does persecute his Scholar, that he would feign
have to learn.

Therefore your perverse detracting of this most blessed time of the Queens
happy and merciful government, does show that you do not rejoice therein, but
wish the contrary. Coopers chro. fol 21.
And as Donald once king of Scots, did never laugh but when he heard of the
discord and slaughter of his nobles: so I fear, you that are English enemies
before mentioned, are most sorrowful at this most blessed and happy state of
our Queen and this our Country.

Wherefore consider what I of very zeal before have written, and be no
longer English enimyes, to have Gods plagues and curses, but become English
friends, to obtain thereby Gods blessings and favor. But if the truth of
Gods word can not move you, the prosperity of our godly Princes can procure
you, nor all that is said before by foreign foes can persuade you, then learn
at the heathen that knew not God, to love your Prince and to be friends to
your Country.

Zopirus an Heathen that knew not God, did cut off his own nose, ears, and
lips, disfiguring himself, to come in credit with the Babilonians, whereby
he delivered the City of Babylon to Darius his Lord and master: but you (as
it seems) that needs will be Christians, do wish and go about, to deliver
the whole Realm of England, your native Country, into your enemies hands, to
ye confusion of your loving and merciful Prince, and the cutting off the
heads of thousands of your Country men.

Mutius Sceuola an Heathen, and a Senator of Rome, Acts and Monumentes.
(for the love and friendship he bare to his City and Country) went into the
Camp of King Porcenna, purposely to slaye the King, but missing his purpose of
the King, he was apprehended, and threatened therefore to be put to death, who
then looking aside, and espying a great fire, most courageously therein he put
his arm, and there did hold it still until it was burned, saying then very
stoutlye, (to fear the King withal) that three hundredth in Rome had likewise
sworn to slay the King, whereby the said King Porcenna made peace with the
Romans: But you that take your selves to be the chiefest Christians, and of
the best Religion of all other, are such enemies to this your Country, that
you would have our foreign foes and enemies to come into this realm, whom
you would aid and help, to make wars upon us, to displace your Prince, to
get our Country from us, and not only to spoil us, but also to burn our
arms, bodies and all.

Marcus Curtius a worthy Knight of Rome and an Heathen, Cooper Epit. Chron.
was such a special friend to his Countrymen and the Citizens of Rome, that
whereas there was a pit or gulf in Rome, out of which came such a stinking and
horrible smell, that a great sort died daily by ye infectio^ thereof, which
could be ceased by no means, unless the best Jewel or thing in Rome were
cast into it, which Curtius when nothing could be found to cease it, (though
many Jewels and precious things was thrown into it) taking himself to be the
chiefest thing that the Romans esteemed, armed himself at al points, and
riding on a goodly courser richly trapped, leapt into ye gulf for the
safegarde of the people, and then incontinent the earth closed* which place was
called Curtius lake: but you that are obstinate and determined Papists, taking
your selves for pure Christians, would have strange Romanistes the Popes
soldiers, and our Princes enemies to come into her Cities with great horses
and coursers, to make most stinking fumes, smokes and smells, where there is
none to displace her, and to destroy us, and smulder us, that are your
Countrymen and Citizens.

Zeleucus that famous Duke of the Locrenses an Heathen, Cooper Epit. Chron.
made a law that whosoever did commit whordome, fornication, or adultrie (if
he were known) should therefore have both his eyes put out, the first offender
whereof, (after the said law was made) was his own Son: which worthy Prince
by no means would be entreated, but the same law should be kept, and the
offender to be executed accordingly whereby his subjects might well think,
that if his own Son could not be pardoned, it was not for them then to
look for any pardon, if they should offend: and so by the severe execution
thereof, he was assured that the same necessary law would be kept: yet the
said Duke at length by earnest motion and persuasion: mitigated the rigor of
the Law toward his son, but in such sort that the same law should not
be broken, so that he commanded that one of his sons eyes should be put
out, and an other of his own: but you that are the said English enemies
(inferior Papists, not superior Princes) that take your selves to be good
Christians, (yea and would be angry with them that should call you otherwise)
desire and wish the Popes soldiers our foes to enter here into England, to
fight against our Prince, and not only to put out our eyes, but also to pluck
out our hearts, and to destroy and abolish our good laws, the law of God
which is against whoredom, and fornication, and thereby to bring in the Popes
Law, that maintains and allows fornication and whordome?

Now seeing these Heathen, with diverse others such, that knew not God, were
such faithful friends to their Cities and Countries, that for the safeguard
and commodity thereof, did cut off their noses, ears, lyppes, did burn
their own arm, did loose their lives, and pluck out their eyes, will you then
that count your selves Christians, wyshe or seek the sorrow of your
sovereign, the annoyance of your neighbors, and the confusion of your
Country?

Duke Dandalus was content to be tied in Iron chains and submitted himself
under the Popes table (Christ never taught the Pope that lesson) to make the
City of Venice free, Jewel in defens. Apolog.
and to bring the Venetians from bondage to liberty: But you would feign
submit your selves to the Pope and kiss his foot, to bring this your famous
Country, from liberty to thraldom, and your Countrymen from freedom to be
bondslaues.

King Alured once a worthy King in this Realm, Hollenshed, in his Chro.
for the safegarde of his people and Country, changed himself from a King to
a Minstrel, and endaungered himself to go among the Danes his enemies, and
played before them in their Camps, whereby he perceiving their negligence and
weakness, returned privily to his army, and then with a chosen company,
suddenly in the night he did set upon the Danes, and so slew a great number of
them. And will you then contrary, being subjects, living here in your own
Country at pleasure, safety, and quiet, wish or devise ways or means to
bring in our enemies, to spoil your Prince, her loving people and Country?

Mark well and weigh advisedly, I beseech you, that when King Alured did thus
daungerously hazard his life for his Country, then this Realm was vexed and
scourged with three marvelous plagues, that is, with their enemies the Danes,
with great mortality of men, and with murraine of beasts: but now when you
seek or wish for ye spoil and confusion of your Country, God has blessed us
with three special blessings, that is, with the pure preaching of ye Gospel,
with a great plenty of al things, and a wonderful peace, such as this Realm
had never so long before.

Consider therefore the good case that now we are in, and ye evil case our
auncesters have bin in: for this our Realm, was governed once under diverse
Kings at one time, but by the great policy and worthiness of our former
Rulers, as Mulmutius, Dunwallo, Aluredus, and K. Adelstane (or rather by Gods
power and providence) this Realm was brought from the rule and government of
seven Kings at one time, to one Monarch, under the government of one Prince:
but you (if you might have your will or wish) would have us to loose our one
most quiet and merciful governor, to be ruled, governed, and to be in
bondage and slavery under many tyrants.

Therefore I may justly compare you to Uipers: for, as they are conceived by
the devouring of their fathers, Galen. de Theriaca.
and brought forth by the destruction of their mothers, and at last are
destroyed themselves: even so you go about as much as in you lies, to devour
your fathers that begot you, to murder your mothers that did bear you, to
destroy your wives that do love you, to bring your children to thraldom that
obey you, to burn your brethren that benefit you, to suppress your Prince
that defends you, to consume your Countrymen that should aid you, and to
spoil your whole Country that does nourish you: which, if you should bring to
pass (as God forbid) then look to have the reward of Uipers your selves,
which is, short life and destruction.

If you cannot see the good case you are in, I fear you shall feel the evil
case you shall be in: for you are like to a foolish servant that dwells with
a good Maistresse, who being gently reproved (not sharply corrected for her
fault) and therefore weary of her welfare, gets her a shrewd husband in all the
have, who does not only then lead a sorrowful life, but also would be right well
content with the scrappes she was wont with her Maistresse to throw away, and
would be glad of simple clothes that before she disdayned: so you being
governed under a merciful Queen and loving Mistress (not seeing your great
plenty, quietness, and peace you have by her) would feign change her for a
cruel champion of the Popes, whose train would make you their slaves, spoil
you of your substance, ravish your wives, deflower your daughters, and cause
you to fight against your own friends, murder you, and tread you under their
feet: (for if their master the Pope has trod upon an Emperors neck, do
you think that his servant will stick to trample on your backs and bellies?
And thus you are far worse to your selves (though I have proved you evil
enough to us) than the fond maid is to her self: for she for a good
mystresse gets but an evil husband, who may by law be compelled to use her
better, but you for one most mild and merciful Maistresse, would have a
thousand evil and cruel Masters, of whom you shall have no redress.

Now to avoid all these mischiefs before mentioned, cleave unto GOD and his
word, cast off the Pope and his Laws, fear to have Gods curses, care not for
the Popes curses, for ever since the Pope has curste us, Malac. 2.
the Lord God has blessed us, (with quietness, plenty and peace) and they
that the Pope has blessed, it seems that God has cursed them, with troubles
wars, scarcity, and many other evils, Mala. 2.
for so the Prophet said I will curse your blessings.

If our forefathers that esteemed the Popes blessings so greatly, and dreaded
his curses so much, had thought that they should have bin so happy and fared so
well, as we have with his curses: and to be so troubled and molested, and have
such mischiefs, (as other have daily, with his blessings) they would never
have obeyed him, nor feared him so much they did.

Therefore seeing God does bless where the Pope does curse, and also curse
where the Pope does bless: it is a very manifest thing, that Gods law and
the Popes law are contrary, and are not all one, but contrary the one to the
other: and so, if the one be true, the other must needs be false. But I trust
you will not say, that the law or word of God is false, then you must needs be
compelled to say, that the Popes law is false. Now seeing it is so manifestly
proved, that the Popes law is false, I hope you will not be so wilful and
witless, to forsake the true word of God, and follow still the false law and
wicked Religion of the Pope.

Consider I beseech you, how Christ became curssed, to make you blessed: and
will you to be blessed of the Pope, be curssed of God? and seeing Christ was
curssed for our sakes, to lead us to heaven, will you be curssed of God for
the Popes sake, that would bring us to Hell? Truly whosoever believes that
Jesus Christ by his death has performed the whole law for us, as well as
though we had kept it perfectly our selves, and that our salvation is by and
through him: whosoever I say, believe this faithfully, and repent their sins
unfeignedly, without all doubt they are sure to be saved.

But whosoever think that they may merit heaven by their own works, or hope
to be saved by some other means than by Christ, as by Masses, Trentals,
Dirges, Popes pardons, and such trumperie, (which the Popes doctrine does
teach you) let all such be assured, that they shall never be without the
aforenamed great plagues and cursses of God, here in this world, but shall be
damned for ever in hell fire with the Devil and his wicked Angels, if they do
not repent and turn. And this way to Heaven by the only death and passion of
Christ, Christ himself teaches in the new Testament, and the other way to
Hell, the Pope does teach, which is clean out of the new Testament, and never
came there. Therefore, how blind, how senseless, and how bewitched are you,
that will stick and cleave to the Pope and his Law, whereby you shall have all the said plagues and Gods cursses in this world, and endless damnation in
Hell after your death? and forsake the word of God, whereby you should enjoy
al these Gods wonderful blessings, in this life, and the kingdom of Heaven
after your death? Wherefore you were not best to refuse Gods word for
Papistrie, nor Gods sweet blessings, for his dreadful cursses, least you lose
Christ for the Pope, God for the Devil, and Heaven for Hell.

Mark well besides our happy estate, for whereas diverse other Countries have
unmerciful tirants that spoil, murder and kill their own obedient subjects,
we live peacably, plentifully, and prosperously under a most mild and merciful
Queen: and whereas our neighbors and diverse countries have had both foreign
and intestine wars, with great troubles, miseries, and calamities: we have
enjoyed a wonderful peace under our blessed Queen ever since she reigned: And
whereas diverse other Countries and our neighbors have had great penury,
scarcity, and hunger, besides the great dearth in Queen Mary's time (a time
of Papistrie) when thousands of this our country were constrained to eat
Swines meat (which was bread made of Acornes) yet we (thanks be to God) have
had great plenty and marvelous abundance of all things.

And whereas diverse Kings of this realm have called parliament upon
parliament, chiefly for taxes and subsidies, to satisfy their wasteful
expenses, her Grace has proroged her Parliaments from time to time, as the
like has never bin seen in England, showing not only thereby, that she will
have no more than she needs, nor so much as she may, but also that she loves
us so much, and trustes us so well, that she thinks our money is as ready for
her (when she needs) in our pursses, as in her own coffers. All which you
must grant (as is before said) to be the great blessings of God, which God
does not promise to bestow upon Heretics, or that are of a false religion.
And God (no doubt) has endued us with all the said blessings, for the
displacing of the Popes religion, and for erecting his holy Gospel, and for
succouring, chearishing, and releeuing of the poor persecuted members of
Christ, that were driven to flee hither for succor out of their own country.

Therefore I beseech you (once again) become the children of God, in
hearkening and cleaving to his word, love your most merciful and lawful Queen,
in obeying her Grace, and in embracing her godly proceedings, be no more
English enemies, but English friends, and be faithful to your Country, and
seek the quietness thereof, and be friends to your selves in following of
Gods word, as you have bin your own utter enemies in embracing the Popes
doctrine, and flee to Christ, and shun the Pope, and trust not to his
pardons, nor to his Mass, for they will utterly deceive you, and al them that
trust to the same. Look or wish no more for the altering of religion, nor of
our peaceable and quiet government, to the taking away of our most merciful
Prince, to the subversion of this your own native country, to our great
heaviness and quietness, and to our utter confusion.

Let your days go that you have so long hoped for, and yet daily look for,
least they be turned into dark stormy nights, no fayrer days you can have,
than you have had.

Mark what goodlye fair days all these had that follow: the cruel
tormentors of the Christians hoped for a fair and clear day, if they might
once murder and destroy the Christians that profess Christ and his Gospel in
hope whereof, they most cruelly and tyrannously persecuted, murdered and
martyred the^: but what was the good day they hoped for when it came? was not
DECIV'S, MAXIMINIVS, NERO DOMITIAN, IVLIAN the Apostata, HEROD, and all the
rest of those cruel cut-throates, by Gods mighty power destroyed, murdered,
and killed, with other wicked ends?

The wicked Jews, the Pharisees, Scribes, Annas and Caiphas, thought they
should have a goodly and a fair day, if they should once put Christ to
death, and did then think to have destroyed Christ's Doctrine for ever: but
when they had got all their wills and that they wished for, and had put poor
innocent Christ to death: was not their goodly fair day turned into a dark,
cloudie, and stormye night? I think yes: for Vespasian the Emperor, and Titus
his son, not very long after, Josephus.
(by the just judgment of God,) besieged them and Jerusalem their City,
whereby they were so famished, that the mother was enforced to roast her own
child to eat, and that they were glad, if they might have got it, to eat
Horses, Cats, Rats, Dogs, Acts and Monuments.
and other viler things. So that be famine, and by the sword, they were
dolefullye destroyed, to the number of eleauen hundredth thousand, and many of
them carried away by their enemies the Romans, as their slaves and captives.

But mark a marvelous contrariety, whereas the Emperor and the Romans not
knowing God, nor Christ, came on Gods side, and fought and destroyed Gods
enemies the Jews: now the Pope and his Romanistes (making himself to be the
chiefest Christian of all other, and naming himself Christ's Uicar or Deputy)
does take pa^te against God, and kills, murders, burns, and destroys the
professors of the gospel, (the children of God, and brethren of Christ.) And
ever since the Jews for all their fair day that they hoped or looked for,
have been runnagates and roges throughout the World, and have not one Country
of their own to dwell in, and are, and have been since, a people most hated
and despised of all other, which is according to Gods curses promised toe^th,
if they went back from his word.

Was not this a very fair day that they hoped to have by putting of Christ
to death? and what would be the day that you hope for, if you had your
Mass and the Popes religion up again, whereby you would put most cruelly
to death the members and brethren of Christ? forsooth your fair, goodlye, and
calm day you hope for, would be turned into a dark cloudie and stormy
night: for if you look or hope for a better day than they had, you deceive
your selves: for if God spared not the Jews, (being his own chosen people)
whereof many of them did not consent to the putting of Christ to death, but
destroyed them, famished them, killed them, and made them ^^aues, captives, and
runnagates, do you think that he will spare you, and suffer you vnplagued,
and undestroyed, that are but Bastards, and as wild Olives, which cruellye
murder Christ's members, or rejoice in the same (which is as much as though
you had killed Christ himself, or rejoiced in his death.)

And if God spared not the Angels in Heaven, which served him day and night,
(not for hurting of him and his members,) but for their Pride, in that they
would have bin higher, not content with their estate that God called them unto:
do you think then, that he will spare you that are vile earthly wretches,
which regard not his laws, and burn, spoil, and murder the innocent
members of Christ, for the professing of Christ's Gospel* no, no, I warrant
you. Yet Lucifer and his fellow Aungelles looked and hoped for as fair a day,
as you hope for, for they thought to be equal with God (which you look not
to be, though you had your fair hoped day,) but their hope was aslope, and
for their fair ^ndlesse day, they got an everlasting foul, dark, and
stormy night: for the glorious and joyful kingdom of Heaven, they have got the
most doleful, sorrowful, and paineful kingdom of Hell, where the most
furious flames of fire shall never go out, and where shall be wayling, weeping,
howling, and gnashing of teeth for ever, world without end.

Thus you may see what a fair day the tyrannical Emperors (that persecuted,
tormented, and killed Christ's innocent members, the true Christians) and the
Jews that put Christ to death, and also the Angels of Heaven, have got, which
they hoped and looked for.

Therefore, if you had up your Mass and the Papisticall religion again,
and thereby burnte your brethren, killed your countrymen, and embrewed your
arms up to the shoulders in their blood, and drunk so much thereof, until your
bellies burste, what other day could you look for, but only for such a day
as the Jews that killed Christ, the tyrants that murdered Christ's members,
and as the proud Angels of Heaven had, that resisted God, which in stead of
a fair day, is turned into a dark, terrible, and stormy night?

Wherefore I beseech you, abhor and forsake the Mass, and the Popes
doctrine, which will not bring you a fair, warm, calm, and bright day as
you think, but a most dark, stormy, and tempestuous night, as we know, and
not a joyful day as you believe, but a most sorrowful and doleful night, as
we are most certain.

I would you should not think, that either the Queens Majesty does fear
you, or that we dread you, because so vehemently I do persuade you, neither
let this my exhorting you cause you to be more hawtie that ought to make you
more humble, to encourage you to be more obstinate, that teaches you to be
more obedient, and procure you to rebellion, that persuadeth you from treason:
for the Queens Highness, and her loving and obedient Subjects are most
assured, that as God hitherto has blessed and defended her Grace for the
setting forth and maintayning of his holy gospel: so he will hereafter bless
and defend her against you and al her enemies that shall go about to resist or
fight against her to suppress the Gospel.

If you that are her subjects do hope that the Pope will bless you for
disobeying your Prince. Then her Grace being your Queen, may be well assured,
that God will bless her Highness (which is as good as the Popes blessing) for
obeying of him in setting forth, maintayning and defe^ding the doctrine of
Christ, the law of God.

You may perceive (if you will perceive) by the reasons, arguments, examples and
proofs before mentioned, that if the Popes soldiers (that you procure or
wish to come and fight against our Prince, to aid, and help you up with your
Mass, and ye rest of the Popes paltry) should get the victory (which the
Lord forbid) yet they would spoil you, kill you, murder you, as they would
us (though you be of their religion) and would neither trust you nor suffer
you to bear any rule or be in aucthority: for they would think (as they might
well enough) that you that are false and rebellious to your lawful, natural,
and most merciful Princess and Queen, that suffers you to enjoy quietly all
that you have, and that does preserve you in such prosperity, quietness,
and peace, as never any Subjects enjoyed before in England, would not be true
and obedient to them, being foreign, unlawful, and more straighter rulers, that
would daily exact on you, poll and pill you and your livings, to bring you
under and in thraldom to them. Which when you should feel, then their
cruelty would teach you what our Queen Elizabeth was: whom now her
mildness and mercy cannot learn what our Queen Elizabeth is. And on the
other side, if the Queens Majesty should vanquishe you and them, then many
of you should be known for open Traitors, that now are not surmysed to be
her privy enemies, and so therefore to be executed, as you were well worthy.

This were but a very foolish and an unwise match made of you, for which
side soever should win, you should be sure to loose: and which side soever got
the victory, you should be sure to have the overthrow. Therefore give over
your wilfulness, and be persuaded by reason: cease from your devilish devises,
your wicked attemptes, and privy conspyracies against our most mild and
merciful Queen, and forsake your doctrine of the Pope, and embrace the gospel,
which will teach you to fear GOD, to believe and hope in Christ, to obey your
Prince, to love your brethren, and to be true to your country.

Thus I have sufficiently proved you (specially you that are wilful,
obstinate, and determined Papists) to be not only English enemies, but also
the worst enemies to England that can be: and how the Pope is most wicked, and
his doctrine false, that you so much love and follow: and that our religion
is most true, which you abhor and withstand: and that you hate your Prince,
envy her happy estate, contemn our concord, desire our destrustion, and
therefore seek your own sorrow, for that thereby you shall procure God to
power his plagues and cursses on you before mentioned. Al which I have done by
sensible similitudes, by tried testimonies, by infallible arguments, by evident
examples, by inevitable reasons, and by the sacred Scriptures, which, if you
be wise, you will wegh, if you be Christians, you will consider, and if you be of
God, you will regard.

But some of you are so addict to your holy Father the Pope, that be a thing
never so plainelye proved, by arguments, reasons, proofs, similitudes,
examples, learning, and by learned Doctors, and Writers, yea, and by the most
holy Scriptures, yet you will not believe it, unless it be allowed or
confirmed by the Pope, who you think can not err nor lie, and therefore of all
other to be trusted, and al other (besides him and his Chaplains) to be
mistrusted. Wherefore, to satisfy you withal, I will bring a Pope, that shall
ratify and confirm all this that I have said, forsomuche as it is grounded
altogether on reason.

Pope Damasus says: Jewel in de^. Apolog. 360.
Whatsoever wants Reason must of necessity be rooted out. Now by reason I
have proved you to be English enemies, the Pope to be evil, and his religion
to be false and clean contrary to reason, therefore by Pope Damasus own
judgment, you must needs decay and perish, the Pope must needs come to
confusion, and his unreasonable religion be rooted out, and pluckte up by the
roots. And thus Pope Damasus, which could not err (as long as he said truth)
has by his sentence confirmed, that I before by reason have proved.

And because you shall perceive, that of evil will I slander not your Popes, you
shall see manifestly by their livings, deeds and dealings, what godly, holy,
humble, and chaste fathers they are that you so stick to, cleave to, follow,
obey, esteem, believe, and honor as you do: and that you may the better
credit the rest that hereafter you shall read of them, therefore at the first
beginning thereof, you shall hear what the Pope himself says of them.

Pope Adrian bad Cheregatus his Legate to say and confess openly to all the
Princes of Germany at Norenberge^, Johan Sleida^us lib. 4.
about the year of our Lord.1523. at their general assembly there, That the
iniquity of the people grew from the Priests, and that now for the space of
many years there have bin great and grievous offenses committed in Rome, and
that all this plague and mischief has flowed to all the inferior rulers of the
Church, even from the high Throne of the Popes Holiness.

By these words tt seems, that Pope Adrian which was not long since, did
think the Popes lived not altogether so godly as Christ, so holy as the
Apostles, nor so virtuously as many of the ancient Fathers. Nay, if all the
iniquity of the people grew from the Priests, and that all the plagues and
mischiefs then did flow as a fountain from the Pope to his Prelates and
Priests: then it seems none were so evil and wicked as the Popes themselves.

And now, for that many of you hold with the Popes, and take them to be very
holy: therefore now many of you shall hear more of their doings tha^ ever you
did (which by credible authors is written of the^, and yet not so much as I
could reveal of them: wherefore I hope you will set less by them than you do,
and esteem them as they are, and no more than you ought to do. And trust Pope
Adrian which cannot lie by his office, (as his Doctors affirm) in that he
has said briefly of the Popes, and the rather, if that that I write here
more largely of them agree with his sayings.

For, seeing you have believed many Popes yt have told you nothing but lies,
then it is good reason you should believe this one Pope, that herein has
told you nothing but truth. And think this by the way, that neither the
Pope nor his Cardinals do esteem their own religion so much as they
persuade you to do. For truly I do verily think, that if the Pope might be
like an Emperor or a King, and be as much honored, esteemed, and get as
much gain and riches by th^s our religion, as he has and does by his own
Papisticall religion: he would then refuse his and embrace ours. For I believe
verily, that they do regard, maintain, and defend their Papistrie, rather
for the great riches, rule, pomp, and estimation, that it makes them to have,
than for any truth or goodness they know to be in it.

And now consider and mark the great prerogative and power of the Popes, and
their holy lives, Acts and Monument^ page. 378.
and virtuous deeds. Pope Clement in his year of Jubilee, gave such
authority, by his Bulls of lead, as Christ nor his Apostles did ever give.
These are the words that follow: What person or persons soever, for devotions
sake, shall take their peregrination to the holy City (meaning Rome) the same
day when he sets forth of his house, he may choose unto him what confessor
or confessors he lysteth, either in the way, or elsewhere, unto the which
Confessors we grant by our authority, full power to absolve all cases
Papal, as fullye as if we were in our proper person there present. Item, we
grant, that whosoever, being truly confessed, shall chance by the way to die,
he shall be quitte, and absolved of al his sins: Moreover, we command the
Aungelles of Paradise to take his soul out of his body, being absolved, and
to carrye it into the glory of Paradise, and so forth.

And also in an other Bull he says thus: We will, that no pain of Hell shall
touch him: granting moreover to all and singular person and persons, signed
with the holy Cross, power, and authority to deliver or release three or
four souls, (whom they list themselves) out of the pains of Purgatory, etc,

Is not this a goodly large, and friendly pardon think you? yea it is such a
pardon as Christ never granted, neither in nor out, nor beside the year of
Jubilee.

Christ never gave such authority to Saint Peter his Apostle which was the
first Pope (as they say) as this Pope Clement did give to his dead Bulls of
Lead. It is not mentioned in all the Scriptures, that Christ the righteous and
lively Lion of the Tribe of Judah did thus much, as the Popes dead Bulls
have done.

This is such a way to make Rome so full of fools, that there will be no room
for wise men.

Here we may see, that if one be confessed of a Priest, and take but his journey
toward Rome, (though he dye by the way, and never come there) the Angels
must needs (by the Popes commandment) carrye his soul to Paradise, (if
they will do so much at his bidding) and they shall be free from the pains
of Hell.

All the Scriptures (I am sure) have not showed us such a way to come to
Paradise, and to avoid the pains of hell, as this Pope Clement has done. He
was a mild and a merciful Pope I warrant him, he had not his name for
naught. Thus the Pope has set Christ to school, for Christ says: Math. 5.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven, and
also he says Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven: nay says Pope Clement, I know an
easier way to Heaven, and to escape the fire of Hell, than that, for whosoever
goes to Rome, or else dies in his journey going thither, being confessed of a
Priest, he shall be absolved from all his sins, and the Angels shall carry his
soul straight to Paradise, and no pain of Hell shall touch him.

Indeed this is a very easy way to Paradise and to escape the fire of Hell,
if we may believe the Pope, (especially when he tells a lie) I marvel
that neither Moses, the Prophets, Christ himself, nor his Apostles did
reveal this way to escape the fire of Hell, and to enjoy Paradise: truly
either they were very forgetful, or else they knew not so much of Gods
secrets, as this Pope Clement did, or else they had not such an inuenting wit
to provide a remedy for a mischief, as he had.

Well be it so, but what if one of Lucifers devils by their masters
commandment should take by force the said soul away from the Popes
Angel, and so in stead of Paradise carry him to Hell, then the man that was
going to Rome on pilgrimage, and dyed by the way, were in good case, and then
the Pope by his pardon, had served him but a slipperie touch. Howsoever he
served him, ye Pop will so serve them that trust to him and his pardons, for
he promised more than the Angels would do for him.

For if the Popes had the Angels of GOD at there commandment, then why did
not Pope Clement the seventh command the Angels to come from Heaven, to
deliver him and his Cardinals out of prison and Captivity, Asts and Mo. Page
661. Acts of the Apostles. 12.
from the Spaniardes that kept him prisoner for Charles the Emperor?

Peter (that was the first Pope as they say) was delivered out of prison by
the Angel of GOD, (not at Peter's commandment, but at Gods commandment)
whereby it appears, that this Pope thus prisoned, was not so holy and
virtuous, nor so well beloved of God as Peter was, for then God would have
delivered him out of prison, as he did Peter, or else he had not the Angels at
his commandment as the Popes have made us believe: for if the Pope be not
able to keep his own body out of prison, he is scant able to deliver your
souls out of Hell. Mark this Pope well that follows, and you shall find
that the same was a holy, virtuous, and chaste Pope. As the Romish Church is
counted a spiritual Harlot, and called the whore of Babylon, with whom the
Princes of the earth have committed spiritual fornication: even so through Gods
providence to the more manifesting thereof, a very whore indeed did sit in
that whorish seat, called Pope Joan the eight, Acts and Mo. Page. 138.
her proper name was Gilberta, (a Dutch woman of Magunce) who went with an
English Monk out of the Abbey of Fulda, in man's apparel unto Athens, and
after through her dexterity of wit and learning, was elected and promoted to
be Pope, and so she ruled as a Pope, two yea^es and six months. At the last
(that their holy and spiritual dealing might better appear) in a general
Procession op^nly she fell in labor and travel of Child, and so dyed, by
reason whereof the Cardinals until this day, do avoid to come near ye
street, where ye holy sea received that shame, so that then they had no man
Pope but a woman Pope. But though all this while they lackte a holy Father,
yet they were sure they had a holy Mother.

And seeing I have now told you of a virtuous and chaste woman Pope called
Pope Joan the eight: you shall now have as godly and holy a man Pope
called Pope John the thirteenth, therefore mark him well: for though you can
learn but small goodness of him, yet you may shun such mischief as you
shall read of him.

Acts and Mo. Page. 160.
This Pope John from his first bringing up was full of abominable vices, he was
a whoremayster, an adulterer, incestuous, libidinous, a gamster, an
extortioner, perjured, a fighter, a murderer, cruel, and tirranous. Of his
Cardinals, some he put out their eyes, of some of them he cut out their
tongues, of some he cut of their fingers, of some their noses, and many
other like merciful acts. He ordained Deacons in a Stable, he commit incest
with two of his Sisters, he called for the Devil, to help when he plaide at
Dice, he made Boys Bishops for money, he defloured Uirgins and strangers, he
made a Stews of his Palace of Late^ane, he lay with Stephana his Fathers
Concubine, and with other, he put out the eyes of Bishop Benedict, he caused
houses to be set on fire, he brake open houses, he drank to the Devil. etc. Al
these things were laid against him in a general Counsel before Otho the
Emperor wherefore he was worthily deposed, by ye consent of ye Emperor and of
the Prelates. How many of the Prophets or Apostles did you ever hear that was
such a one as this holy Pope John was? It was time for the Emperor to vnpope
him, or else within a while he would have turned all vpside down, whereby
every one would have thought that the Devil himself had bin Pope of Rome.

But I marvel that he commanded not the Angels to come and destroy the
Emperor and Prelates for doing so, and that he made not the said Angels to
guard and defend his body, and to keep him still in his chair of estate:
seeing all the Angels are at his beck and commandment. But belike they were
then either asleep, or else they were otherwise occupied.

It seems that this holy Pope John, did strive with Nero, Caligula, and
Heliogabalus, which of them should be the most likest to the Devil, for
hereby it appears he went not about to resemble Christ, whose Uicar the Pope
makes you believe he is, therefore the Devils Uicar he might well be, for
Christ's Uicar I am sure he was not, unless in this, that Christ was not there
wheresoever he was.

Acts and Mo. Page. 161.
Here follows now a good merciful Pope, Pope John the fourteenth, therefore you
that would learn to be merciful, learn of him, for he has left you such a
pattern of mercy, as Christ never left among the Jews: which Pope John
being taken by one Petrus the head Captain of the City, and two Consuls,
twelve Aldermen, and diverse other noble men, and by them clapte in prison
eleauen months, (not without due deserts) was after delivered by the Emperor,
the execution of which Petrus, the Emperor committed to the discreation of the
said Pope John, which Pope (choosing rather to follow the Devil by
cruelty, than Christ by mercy) caused the said Petrus first to be stripte
naked, then his head to be shaven, and to be hanged by the heir a whole day
together, after that to be set upon an Ass, his face turned backward, and his
hands bound under the Asses tail, and so to be led through the City, that
all men might see him, that done, to be scourged with rods, and so banished
the City.

But yet I can not but muse, that the Pope has al power in heaven and in
earth, and having the Angels at his commandment, that he would be taken
prisoner and suffer his enemies so to use him, but we must think that it was
rather of humility, than for lack of ability.

Here is another merciful Pope, called Pope Boniface the seventh, Acts and
Mo. Page. 161.
he caused Pope John's eyes to be put out, and after to be thrown into
prison, where he was (as some say) famished, Some say he was slain by
Ferrucus.

Now you shall have a very humble, a merciful, and a godly Pope, Acts and Mo.
Page. 181.
of whom you may learn such humility, as Christ never taught, he was called
Hildebrande, who suffered Henry the Emperor, his wife, and his child,
barefooted and bareheaded in the cold frostye wether at the gates of Canusium
three days, before he could be suffered to come in. And this holy Fathers
wrath would not be pacified, nor suffer ye Emperor to rule as Emperor, but
upon most unreasonable conditions, which were unmeet for such a worthy
Emperor to grant unto such a proud presumptuous prelate: thus you may know
these holy Fathers whom they follow, by their fruits.

This Hyldebrand (who might well be called for his deuilish doings a fyrebrand
of hell) was a notable Sorcerer and a Necromancer, Benno. Cardinal.
who on a time had forgotte behind him his familiar Book of Necromancie,
which he was wont to carry commonly always with him: whereupon, remembering
him self, entering the port of Laterane, he called two of his most familiar
friends so fetch the Book, charging them at no hand to look within it. But
they being so restrained, were the more desirous to open it, and to peruse it,
and so did. After they had red a little the secrets of the Sathanicall Book,
sodaynely there come about them the messengers of Satan, the multitude and
terror of whom made them almost out of their wits. At length they coming to
themselves, the sprites were instant upon them to know wherefore they were
called up, and wherefore they were vexed? quickly, said they, tell us what
you would us to do, or else we will fall upon you, if ye retain us longer.
Then spoke one of the young men to them, bydding them go and pluck down
yonder walls, poynting to certain high walls there nigh to Rome, which they
did quickly. The young men crossing them for fear of the Spirits, scarce
recovering themselves, at length came to their master the Pope.

Here you may perceive this holy Pope was a Coniurer of Devils, some say the
Pope has the holy Ghost at commandment, but here it appears that this Pope
had rather the Devil at his commaundment.

This holy Hyldebrand hired one to lay great Stones over the place where the
Emperor used to pray, Acts and Monumentes page 179.
and so to throw them down upon the Emperors head when he was a praying,
and so to kill him: but God so wrought, that the Emperor escaped, and the
wicked hired wretch was killed himself: for as he was busy in removing a great
and heavy Stone to the place (even over the Emperors head) it broke the
planke whereon it lay, and the said wicked fellow, standing on the said
planke, fell down with the said stone, from the Roof to the Pauement of the
Church, and with the same stone was dashed all in pieces.

Was not this a pretty practice for a Pope? he never learned it in the new
Testament: nay if he had applied that Book well, he should thereby rather
have unlearned it.

This Hyldebrand on a time asked an answer of the Sacrament (his Christ of
Bread) thinking because it was the body of Christ (as he took it) it should
have resolved him of the thing he asked, but it would not speak (a good
cause why, because it could not, for it had been a very strange thing to
hear a Cake speak) and then therefore he threw it into the fire, and burned
it.

Thus these holy Fathers can make Christ and burn him when they have done: but
if it had been the body of Christ, it would have leapt out of the fire and
saved himself. It is no marvel though they burn the holy and spiritual
members of Christ, that burn Christ himself.

Mark further what a true Prophet this holy Hyldebrande was: he said openly
in the Pulpet before diverse Cardinals and Bishops, that the Emperor should
dye or be put from the Empire, and that he should not be able to make above
the number of six Knights, and thereof he made himself so sure, that then
he spoke also these words following, never accept me for Pope any more, but
pluck me from the Altar, if this Prophecy be not fulfilled before the feast
of Saint Peter next ensuing. But for as much as the said Emperor was neither
dead, nor deposed by that day, but contrary to this Popes Prophecy, the same
Emperor deposed the said Pope, and placed an other Pope in his room called
Clement. The said Pope Hyldebrand therefore, (seeing he would needs be a
Prophet) he was but a false Prophet, and so not Prophet of God, but the Prophet
of the Devil. So that hereby it plainly appears, that Popes may not only
err, but also that they have erred and lied falsely, yea and are assuredly the
Devils Prophets.

Also this holy and virtuous Father Pope Hyldebrand, judged to death three men
before they were conuicte, (or found or approved guilty) and caused them to
be hanged without delay, contrary to all Law.

And further, this unmerciful Father, (for the Popes may not be called cruel)
did torment one Centius almost to death, in a vessel thick set with sharp
Nails, which Centius after took the Pope, and before he was delivered, he
pardoned the said Centius, and al them that were on his part: but for all his
pardon, he hanged the said Centius after, and nine of his men.

If the Popes pardons be so slender yt he gives on his own behalf, then the
pardons yt he gives on Gods behalf, must needs be of small value. Therefore
you were not best to trust to the Popes pardons too much, least after you be
hanged in hell, as Centius and his men were hanged on earth.

This Pope Hyldebrande did an other deed of mercy: There was at the
apprehension of this Pope, a certain widows Son, to whom and other more,
for their pennaunce, the Pope enjoined a years banishment: which time being
^^ded, the widdowe in token of a more ample satisfaction, (thinking thereby to
have appeased the more the Popes fury) put a halter about her sons neck,
and drawing her Son by the rope to the foot of the said holy Hyldebrand,
said, my lord Pope, at your hands will I receive again my Son, which one
whole year has endured banishment and other pennaunce, by your holiness
enjoined. Then the said Hyldebrand, for that instant because of those that
were with him in company (dissembling his wrath) delivered her son
churlishly, saying, get thee hence woman I bid thee, and let me be in rest.
After this he sent his officers, and apprehended the (said) widows son,
and gave commandment to the Justices to put him to death, who altogether
making answer, said, that they could no more condemn or meddle with him,
for that he had for his crime committed, appealed once to the Pope, and
abidden the banishment, and done the penance by him enjoined. Hereupon this
glorious Hyldebrand, being displeased with the Judges, caused ye foot of the
said widows son to be cut off, notwithstanding he had fulfilled all that was
enjoined him by the said Pope before. And thus his foot being cut off, he
died within three days after.

All you that would learn equity and justice, learn here of the Pope. I
could never read, that Christ after he bad the woman that was taken in
adoultrie, go away and sin no more: John. 8.
that either he commanded the Judges to put her to death, or else caused her
foot to be cut off.

Are not these merciful and charitable acts and doings of the Popes,
sufficient testmonyes, to make us believe, that they are Christ's Uicars, and
men of God? surely they have very hard hearts, that thereby will not be
won, to love, honor, and esteem the Pope, and to kiss his feet.

Benno. Cardinal. Jewel in defens. Apol. page 167.
This same godly Pope Hyldebrande, was charged by the counsel of Brixia to be
an aduouterer, a Church-robber a perjured man, a man-killer, a sorcerer, and a
denyer of the Faith. When he was but a Cardinal, he smote Pope Alexander with
his fifte, and laid him in prison: he poisoned six Popes his predecessors, to
make a way for himself to be Pope: He was a Coniurer, and a rayser of Devils,
and in his fury he threw the Sacrament into the fire as is before declared.

Was not this (trow you) a very fit fellow to be the Uicar of Christ? nay,
he was more meet to be a deputy for the devil, as he was in deed. Yet for all these his detestable doings, one Doctor Harding that lately was a Proctor
for the Pope, was not ashamed to write, that this Pope Hyldebrand was a holy
and virtuous man. Truly, if this was a holy Pope, then the world is full of
holy and virtuous people.

The holy act for Priests chastity, and to live without wives, and that all
married Priests should put away there wives, was first aucthorized and
established by this virtuous and holy Pope: the fruits that this law has
brought, were sufficient enough to know the goodness of him that first made it,
though his conditions and manners had not bin mentioned.

Pope Boniface the eight, a good and holy man (I warrant you) said, If Christ
the son of God, Acts and Monuments page 349.
or Peter the Apostle would come down into the earth, and command him, he
would not believe them.

And also he did say, that he would within short time, make either all the
French men Martyrs, Acts and Monuments page 350.
or else forsakers of their faith, and that he sought not the health of their
souls, but destruction of them.

Christ says, he came to save that was lost: But this Pope came to lose that
Christ has saved.

This is enough (I think) to prove, whether this Pope was of God or not, was
of a right religion or not, and whether he was worthy to be followed of
Christians or not. If darkness be contrary to light, falsehood to truth, evil
to good, and the Devil to God: then this Pope was quite contrary to Christ.
And therefore because he cannot be Christ (though the Popes take it upon them)
yet I will warrant that he was Antichrist.

This Pope Boniface the eight entered into the Popedom as a Fox, he reigned as
a Woolfe, Jewel in defens. apol. page 458.
and he dyed in prison like a Dog. In solemn procession he went attired with
the Crown Imperial and robe of Majesty, as an Emperor, and commanded the
naked sword to be borne before him. Christ nor yet his Apostles never went
after such a sort in Procession, nor out of Procession. This Pope gave pardons
and free remission of sins to all them that came to Rome in the year of
Jubilee, (which he himself first began,) out of all parts of the world, and
by him the Popes pardons were first begun, (not 300. years since) which
pardons must needs be of great virtue, for that they began by such a
virtuous Pope.

Acts and Monuments, page 347.
Nagareta a Knight, testified before the French King called Philip, that Pope
Boniface the eight was a thief, an heretic, his mouth full of cursings, his
feet swifte to shed blood, a tearer in pieces of the Church which he ought
to cherishe, a wicked waster of the goods of the poor, a lover of wicked men
because they gave him rewards, a persecuter of the righteous, a bringer in of
new sects of destruction that had not been heard of, a blasphemer of the
truth, thinking himself to be equal to Christ, a greedy desirer of gold,
getting it by devise of all people: no regarder nor worshipper of God, not
sparing any way to get money, a maker of merchandise of al men, a lover of no
man, a nourisher of wars, a persecutor and a hater of the peace of his
subjects, rooted in all unspeakable sins: a striuer against the doctrine of
God, and the abomination of the people spoken of by Daniel the Lords Prophet.

If (all this notwithstanding) this Pope were Christ's Uicar and an holy and
godly man (as you think the Popes cannot be evil) then we shall have much ado
to find out an unholy or an ungodly man.

Jewel in defens. apol. page 142.
And Pope Bonifacius concluded by solemn sentence, that every creature must
submit it self unto the Bishop of Rome, upon pain of everlasting damnation.

Yea, if we would be so fond as to believe him, here it appears, if we
yield not our selves to the Pope, though we remain in Christ, we shall be
utterly damned: yet S. Paul is of an other judgment, Romans 8.
for he says, there is no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc.
therefore before I credit the Pope in this point, and discredit Saint Paul,
I will see first the Popes honester and godlier men.

Pope Paschalis incensed the Emperors son against his father, Acts and
Monuments, page 198.
and made him to deprive his Father from his Imperial seat, and place
himself Emperor in his fathers room.

Had not this Emperors son a good schoolmaster that taught him to obey his
father so well? I never heard that Moses, the Prophets, Christ, nor his
Apostles, ever taught any man's son such a lesson, and to obey their father in
this order. Surely the Pope must needs be a profound fellow, that could find
out such mysteries for children to obey their fathers and parents, which
neither God commanded, nor Christ ever taught: for he did not only deprive his
father, but thereby drove him to great misery, who after desired to have but a
poor Prebend to serve and sing in the Queere, but it would not be granted to
him. Which Pope Paschalis, was after taken prisoner by the said Henry the
fifth.

For the Emperor thought belike, that it was as lawful for him to take the
Pope prisoner, as to put his own father out of his kingdom. There the Popes
scholar learned one lesson more than the Pope his Schoolemayster taught him.

Calixtus took Gregory his fellow Pope that was appointed by the Emperor,
Acts and Monuments page 199.
and brought him upon a Camel through the streets of Rome, setting his face
toward the Camels tail, and holding the Camels tail in his hand. You may see
this charitable Pope loved his brother the other Pope so well, that he would
not have him go on foot, but would needs have him to ride.

Pope Innocent (but not an Innocent Pope) gave to Philip the French king full
remission of all his sins, Acts and Monuments page 256.
and the possession of all the realm of England to him and to his heirs, if he
either did kill King John (then King of this realm) or expel him. Was not
this a free and liberal Pope that would give whole kingdoms at once? this is
more than ever Christ gave that ever I heard of: for he never gave any
remission of sins, nor yet any Kingdoms for killing of Kings or of any
other, or for driving them out of their own kingdom or country.

Pope Boniface said, that Whoredom is no more sin than the rubbing of the
hands together. Acts and Monuments.


Some of you say that this our religion does give liberty to sin, but these
words of the Pope do not seem greatly to forbid or restrain sin. Saint
Paul says, that neither whoremongers nor fornicatours shall enherite the
kingdom of Heaven. But I never heard, that either he or Christ said, that they
that rub their hands together, shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: and
therefore rubbing of our hands together, is no sin: but Whoredom is a great
sin, if the Scriptures be true: therefore the Pope is a most wicked liar, to
say, that is no sin, that God, Christ, and the Apostles called sin. And as
here he calls whoredom no sin, which is a great sin: so in other places the
Popes call that a great sin, which Christ does not call sin. And thus you
may see plainly, that the Pope is both in his sayings and doings clean
contrary to Christ: therefore if you follow the Pope, you are then contrary
to Christ, and so no true Christians.

Acts and Monuments, page 686.
Pope Sextus at the request of Petrus Ruerius a Cardinal of his own making,
and of Ierom his brother, permitted and granted unto the whole family of the
said Peter the Cardinal, in the three hot months of Summer, June, July, and
August, free leave and liberty to use the sin of Sodomitrie, (a thing most
shameful to be uttered but most horrible and abominable to be licenced or
permitted.)

What a wicked Pope was this that did license and permit that, which God does
so detest, that therefore he consumed Sodom and Gomora and whole countries with
fire from Heaven? And now as these that committed this detestable sin, were
destroyed with fire from Heaven, so I fear this Pope Sextus and other that
license and allow it, shall be tormented with fire in Hell.

Pope Clement the sixthe poisoned Lodowike that good virtuous and godly
Emperor, Acts and Monuments, page 378.
which shows what he was: for evil men have oftentimes poisoned good men,
but good men never poisoned evil men. Therefore you may see, that this holy
Pope was not of God, but of his father the Devil, who was a murderer from the
beginning, who teaches his children to be of his own occupation.

Pope Alexander did set his foot on Frederickes neck the Emperor, Jewel in
defen. Apolog. page 127.
when the said Emperor told him that he yielded that honor, not unto him being
Pope, but unto Peter: yes said the Pope, both to me and to Peter, and so he
placed himself before Saint Peter. Be not here precious Popes to make
Emperors believe that Peter looks for such honor? Surely it is very strange
that Peter should look for that now being dead, that he never desired when he
was alive: nay when he was alive he was most humble, and willingly suffered the
Emperor to put him to death, and now that he is dead, would he so feign tread
in Emperors necks, or take pleasure that other shall do it for him? truly I
can not believe it, nay I am most sure he does abhor it. Therefore if pride
be godly, then your proud Popes are holy.

Pope Marcellinus was an Idolatour, and Pope Siluester the second was a
Coniurer and gave himself wholly both body and soul to the Devil, Jewel in
defens. Apolog. page 162.
and by the Devils procurement was made Pope, must not these be good and
virtuous Popes when the Devil must be feign to make them? Thus you may see if
you will not wink for the nonce, that the Popes that name themselves Christ's
Uickars (to bring themselves in credit) are nevertheless the Devils
Chaplains, for as they only were Christ's Apostles, that Christ did chose and
allow: so they are the Devils disciples that he does elect and authorize. And
now because this said Siluester was made Pope by the Devil, therefore he was
none of Christ's, but the Devils deputy, to determine and order things for the
Devil, as no doubt but he and all other such like and of his religion have
done.

Cooper Epit. Chro. Fol. 235.
Pope John the two and twentieth was a cruel and wicked Tirant, he proclaimed al
them for Heretics, that taught that Christ and his Apostles had here no
possessions.

Because the Pope would not be poor like unto Christ, therefore he would have
Christ to be rich like unto him: and so, because he can not rese^ble Christ,
therefore he would have Christ to resemble him, and therefore he would have it
blased abroad that Christ and his Apostles were rich and had great possessions,
not that he would be like them in virtue, but that they should be like him in
wealth: and thus he makes them Heretics that tell truth of Christ, and them
to be his Catholics that shall tell lies of Christ: thus you may see how the
Pope (Christ's Uickar) is unlike to Christ, for Christ would have us say true,
and the Pope would have us to lie.

Cooper Epit. Chro. Fol. 241
Pope Clement caused certain of the electours to choose a new Emperor, for he
liked not the old, which was Jews.

Truly Christ nor all his Apostles never caused a new Emperor to be chosen. I
marvel that Peter did not cause a new Emperor to be chosen in the stead of
Nero, when he was Pope, for I am sure that the Emperor that the Pope did
depose, was not so evil as he. But whereas Peter was content to suffer an
evil Emperor to reign, our holy Father the Pope will not suffer a good
Emperor to rule.

Cooper Epit. Chro. Fol. 222
Pope Gregory promised the kingdom of Heaven, to all the^ that fought against
the Emperor: thus he set Kings and the Emperor together by the ears, and
encouraged his subjects to rebel against him. But I never read in the
Scriptures that heaven should be gotten by fighting against their Prince, or
for one to murder and kill another. But I remember well that Christ says (but
it is something contrary to the Popes words) Blessed are the peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God. Math. 5.
Now if we may believe Christ, (who is of as good credit as the Pope) the
Pope will hardlye perform this his large promise. For if the peacemakers
shall be called the children of God: then the peace-breakers, (who are clean
contrary to them) shall be called the children of the Devil. And I trust the
Popes authority does not extend so far, to give the kingdom of Heaven to
the children of the Devil: for heaven is only appointed for the children of
God as Christ does testify. Now seeing the children of God, shall be placed in
Heaven, then surely the Children of the Devil (whatsoever the Pope says) must
needs be placed in Hell. Therefore hereby it plainly appears, that all these
rebels, fighters, murderers, and bloudshedders, to whom the Pope promised the
kingdom of Heaven, are more like to have the kingdom of Hell, are not they in
good case think you, and has not the Pope served them well that thus trusted
to his promise and pardons? Assure your selves that you will be so served, if
you resist and rebel against your worthy Queen, and if you trust to his
promise, (yea though he dispense with you for your oath and obedience.)

Vrbane and Clement Popes of Rome, both at one time, Cooper Chro. Fol. 248.
gave free remission of sins, a pena and culpa, to all them that would war
against their enemies, that were against them, (one of them being against
another,) and then both the Popes curssed their enemies that were against them
for Heretics (and so here was all cursing but small blessing) for both parts
were cursed, if the Popes curses may go for cursses. I pray God they were
not all curste of God (as I fear they were, they fought all in so good a
quarrel) now I would feign know which of these Popes pardons was the best,
for both of them could not be good, though they might both be naught, for
both the Popes could not have the spirit of God, though they both might have
the spirit of the Devil, for such proud and presumptuous Prelates, that
strove for the kingdom of this world, might well have the spirit of pride, the
spirit of arogancie, and the Spirit of Satan, but the spirit of God out of
doubt they had not. These holy fathers were so lowly, patient, and humble, that
neither of them would give over, least the one of them should seem to be
more meek than the other.

Was not Gregory the second a good holy religious Pope think you, Cooper*
chron. Fol. 268.
that did not only withstand the Emperors deputy, by force of arms, but
also wrote into all parts, that neither for fear nor entreatie they should
obey the Emperors commandment, in taking of Images and pictures of Saints
out of the Churches for the avoiding of Idolatry, but would have Images
erected, set up, and worshipped, contrary to the word of God, which holy
Father, with his vehement persuasions, withdrewe the people of Italy so from
the obedience of the Emperor Leo, that they would have chosen them a new
Emperor.

This Pope Gregory never learned this of Christ our master (but of the Devil
his master) to withstand the Emperor in evil things, much less in lawful and
godly things, as the plucking down and abolishing of Images, which God does
expressly command, neither learned he of Christ but of Satan, to make
subjects refuse and resist their ruler and governor. Therefore seeing he has
done that, that he has not learned of Christ, he can not therefore be Christ's
Disciple nor the Uickar of Christ.

Was not Pope Zachary a good and virtuous Pope that assoyled Pypin and the
other Frenchmen, and discharged them of their oath and allegiance to
Childericke their lawful King, and authorized and confirmed Pypin to be King
in his masters place? I marvel of whom he learned this, to take a kingdom
from one, and to give it to another: no man may say that he did evil in so
doing, for if one should say so, Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 458.
straight way the Pope would make him an Heretic. Nay, Doctor Harding
seems rather to commend him in it than otherwise, who says that if the Pope
gave away the kingdom of France from the Prince, he did it to the intent to
fear him: a pretty devise to fear a King, to pull the Crown Imperial from
his head, and to make him a Monk and set an other in his place. Christ
himself, nor Peter the first Pope, had never such a trick to fear a King
withal.

And after this Pope Zachary had made Pypin King of France, then he suffered
the same King to kiss his feet, and to go on foot by his horse three miles.
Christ never road but one day in all his life, and yet he had never a king to
do him such service then, as this Pope Zachary had, yet he was as high both
by birth and degree as this proud Pope was.

Pope John the eighteenth, Acts and Monumentes Page* 16^.
was taken prisoner by the Emperor, whose eyes were first put out, and after
put to death by the means of Pope Gregory the fifth. Are not these Popes
worthyly called the Uicars of Christ trow ye, that are so far unlike to
Christ in all their doings? for Christ made the blind to see, but these Popes
put out men's eyes, and made them blind: Christ saved a Woman's life, John. 8.
that ought to have dyed by the law, these Popes put men to death that ought
to live by the law: Christ gave life to Lazarus that was dead, and the Pope
gives death to them that are in health and alive. If the Pope and Christ be so
far at discord at the last day, as their doctrine and doings do differ at
this day, they are not like to dwell both together in one place.

Was not he a mylde and merciful Pope that would not be pacified with the
Venetians, Jewel in def. Apolog. page 466.
until Dandalus that was after Duke of Venice, did humble himself, and did lie
under the Popes table with a chain about his neck: it seems that the Pope
was something furious and hard to please, that by none other submissio^ would
be reconciled. I never heard that any were constrained to pacify Christ's
wrath after this sort all the time that he was here on Earth. Jewel in defens.
Apolog. page 468.


What say you to that Pope that did set the Imperial Crown upon the head of
the Emperor Henry the sixth with his foot, and with his foot did cast the
Crown off again, saying withal, I have power to make Emperors, and to
unmake them again at my pleasure?

Marry it appears so, by the Popes giving away the kingdom of France from
Childrike the King, to Pypin that was but his subject. But whether the Pope
has this power from Christ being his Uicar, or from the Devil being his
Deputy, he does not tell us.

Pope John the twelfth was slain in aduoutrie. Pope Benedict the ninth lived
without law or reason, Jewel in defens. Apolog. page 472.
and defiled the seat of Rome with all kind of shame, and in the end he
took money and sold the Popedom. Platina says, Popes then were elected not
for their learning and holiness, but in respect of money and friendship.

Acts and Monuments page. 174.
If you lack an other holy and meek Pope, lo here is Pope July who is not
worthy to be left out. This same Pope July loved Porkes flesh marvelous
well, whose Physician gave warning to the Popes Steward, for that it was
hurtful for the Popes gout, that he should set no more Porke before him. But
when the Pope perceived the said Porke to be lacking in his accustomed
service, where is my Porke said he? and when the Steward told him, that his
Physician had forbidden any Porke to be served unto him, then the holy Father
burst out in a great rage, and said, bring me my Porke flesh in the despite
of God. A man would think, that these were rather the words of Pluto (the
prince of darkness) than of an earthly prelate, especially of Christ's
deputy or Uicar.

At an other time this same patient Pope sitting at dinner, pointing to a
Peacocke upon his table, which he had not touched, (keep said he) this cold
Peacocke for me against Supper, and let me suppe in the Garden, for I shall
have guestes. So when Supper came, among other hot Peacocks, he saw not the
cold Peacock brought to the table: the Pope after his wonted manner, most
horribly blasphemyng God, f^ll into an extreme rage, etc. whereupon one of
his Cardinals sitting by, desired him, saying, let not your holiness I pray
you, be so moved with a matter of so small weight: then this Julius the Pope
aunsweared again, what if God was so angry for one Apple, that he cast our
first parents out of Paradise for the same: why may not I being his Uicar, be
angry the^ for a Peacock (sithence a Peacock is a greater matter than an Apple?
you may see that the Pope is a good and virtuous scholar, he can learn of God
to be angry, but he cannot learn at Christ to be patient. What a blasphemous
wretch was this, that would make his man's disobeying of him for not bringing
ye Peacocke which he bad, to be a greater offense, than Adams disobeying of God
in eating of the Apple which God forbod: and thus he would teach us, that it is
a greater offense to make the Pope angry, than to provoke Gods wrath. But
hereof we may be sure, that by offending God, we deserve our damnation, but by
displeasing the Pope, we may get our salvation, for if we embrace the
Gospel, we displease the Pope, and please God, and thereby shall attain to
be saved: but if we forsake the Gospel, we shall please the Pope and
displease God, and thereby get our damnation.

Mark here by this Pope, ye holiness of their holy chair at Rome, the
sitters wherein being Popes, can not err (say they) neither can say or do
amiss, say or do what they will: but hereof I am sure, that the Popes before
mentioned, either did never sit in that blessed chair, or else that chair
has no such virtue in it as they would make us believe. And though this Pope and
the rest were rather to be abhorred than honored, yet this wicked and
blasphemous Pope Julius, dying in Queen Ma^ies time, was had here in such
reverence and estimation, that commandment was given, that Hearses, Dirges,
and fun^rals, should be had and celebrated for him, in all Churches.

But mark ye blindness and folly of many then: if he could have pardoned al
other of their sins, he might then have pardoned himself, and so needed
neither Dirges nor Masses. For if his pardons were good, then no doubt he
pardoned himself: and so the Masses and Dirges for him were needless. And if
he had need of Masses and Dirges after his death, then it is manifest that the
pardons that he gave us in his life time were nothing worth. And as hereby all
ye that are wise may plainly judge that the Popes pardons are nothing worth:
Even so his Masses and Dirges, which likewise came from the Popes (and not from
Christ) are as little worth. Yet for all that, there were Hearses set up for
him, and Dyrges sung for him in diverse places. At which time there chanced a
woman to come into Saint Magnus Church at the Bridge foot in London, who
seeing there a Hearse and other preparation, asked what it meant, to whom other
that stood by said, that it was for the Pope, and that she must pray for
him: nay (quoth she) that will I not, for he needs not my prayers: for seeing
he could forgive us all our sins, I am sure he is clear himself, therefore
I need not to pray for him.

Thus you may perceive, that God did not only open the eyes of a simple woman,
to see how men were deceived, and shut the eyes of Princes and great men,
that they could not see how they were deceived, but also gave her courage and
boldness, in that dangerous time, to utter the truth.

Pope Stephen took up Pope Formosus body his predecessor, Platinai^ Steph. 6.
chopte off his forefingers, cut off his head, and threw his naked carcass
into ye River of Tyber. The Pope never learned this of Toby, for Toby buried
the^ that were unburied, but this Pope unburied them that were buried. And
whereas Toby did bury men in the earth, this Pope did bury one in the water.

Vrbanus the first, thrust five Cardinals into sackes, and threw them into the
Sea. Sabellic. Ennead. 9. lib. 2.
The godly Christians use to bury dead men in ye earth* but this holy Pope did
bury quick men in the sea. Is not here a goodly rabble of holy and virtuous
Popes? are they not meet posts and pillars for you to take hold on? would
you have thought, that they that make themselves Christ's Uickars had been
such followers of the Feende, and such servants of Satan? you may think,
that they were not the Disciples of the Devil, but I am sure, they were not the
Children of God.

And because some of you say, that the Popes cannot err, Jewel in defe^. Apo.
page 162
behold well what truth and good religion was in these Popes that follow.
Pope Leo was an Arian Heretic: Pope Celestinus was a Nestorian Heretic: Pope
Liberius was an Arian Heretic: Pope Marcellinus offered sacrifice to Idols,
and was a Nestorian Heretic: Pope Honorius was a Mononethelite Heretic: Pope
John the two and twentieth, was an Heretic: and Anastasius was an Arian
Heretic. Now, if such horrible Heretics as these be, cannot err or go
wrong, then surely I will say with you, that the Pope cannot err: but if
Heretics, Schismatikes, Apostatas, Simoniackes, Idolatours, Coniurers,
Blasphemers, Murderers, Sacrificers to Diuelles, and fylthie Fornicatours may
err, then the Popes have most shamefullye and falselye erred, lied, and gone
clean wrong. Petrarchus says, that Rome is a Sanctuary of all Heresies. And
Lyra says, that many Popes have fallen into Heresies.

If so many Popes have been Heretics, and if Heretics err, or are in the
wrong way: then the Popes have erred, and have been foulye out of the right
way, as is before said. Therefore, that the POPES can not err, is a common
lie, only used, to make fools believe, that all is true that the Pope says.

And because many of you have thought, that the Byshopricke of Rome is the
holiest Bishopric in all the world, assure your selves that no Sea or
Bishopric in all the world, that ever was read or heard of, has had so
many Idolatours, Necromancers, Heretics, Aduouterers, Church robbers,
perjured persons, Murderers, Mo^sters, Blasphemers, and tirants, as Rome has
had: and yet they would make us believe, as they make you and many other
believe, they cannot err, nor go wrong, whatsoever they do, and that they
that sit in the Popes chair there, must needs be Gods fellows, and equal
to Christ.

The Popes disagree and are contrary one to another, (marry in wickedness
they agree all in one) yea, Jewel in defe^. Apol. P^. 1^7
and sometimes the Pope is contrary to himself. Pope Sabianus would have
burned all Pope Gregory's Books: Pope Romanus utterly abolyshed all the acts
of his predecessor Pope Stephen. And the same Pope Stephen defaced and mangled
the dead carcass of his predecessor Pope Formosus, and condemned utterly all
that he had done before. And thus, that that one Pope does like, another Pope
misliketh, and that which one Pope allows, another condemns.

Therefore I would advise you to lay hold on Christ and his Apostles, which are
no chaungelings, and forsake these wicked Popes which are such chaungelings,
for I will never trust them, nor favor their religion, until they be more
virtuous* godly, and honest, and agree better among themselves than they do.

Pope Adrian says of himself, Whatsoever the Emperor has, Auentinus in
Adriano. 4.
he has it of us, it is in our power to bestow the Empire on whom we list:
(It may be so, but one may look all the Bible over, ere he can find it.) And
also the Pope has made it Heresy (though Christ did not make it) for a king
not to hold his kingdom at his hands: It is happy that he named no Queens,
for if he had put the Queens as well as he put in kings, then happily he might
have made the Queens majesty also one of his Heretics.

The Pope, if we may credit his prerogative, being of his own penning, is of
no small power: For he is called Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he
compels Emperors and Princes to swear fealty and obedience to him.

Cardinal Zabarella says: The Pope does what him lists, yea though it be
unlawful, and is more tha^ a God. Stanislaius Orichouius in Chinera. Fol. 97.
And one says, that a priest is so much above a King, as a man is above a
beast: as much as God is better than a priest, so much is the priest better
than a King: he that sets a King before a priest, sets the creature
before the Creator. By this it appears, that Priests are no small fools, if
this be true, then it is no marvel that men were wont to have Priests in
great estimation and reverence.

But I marvel, that king Josias was so bold to burn such a number of
Priests that were so far his superiors, and that were as far above him,
as he himself was above a beast: truly I think it was because they could not
show him their Commissions, belike they left them at home.

As the Popes before used much wickedness, so they have used here a piece of
knauerie, to make the people believe that they and their Priests, are far
above them, thereby to bring themselves vain honor and estimation.

And now mark I pray you, whether these wicked Popes before mentioned, with
many other that call themselves Christ's Uicars, are not more like Lucifer the
devil, in pride, than Christ the son of God, in Humility: I think there
was never such lordlinesse or pride in any worldly prince, as has been in
diverse of these wicked Popes: for the Pope suffers the Emperor, which is
the chief ruler of all Christendom, to hold his styrrope, to hold his
horse by the bridle, to bear his train, Acts and Mo. Page. 176.
and to kiss his feet, yea and the Emperor was shent of Pope Hyldebrand,
because he held the left styrrope in stead of the right, when he got upon
his Horse: there was never Emperor, nor king that ever received any such
service of any of the Popes.

But the Earl of Wiltshire, and the other Ambassadors from king Henry the
eighte to the Pope (far inferior to the Emperor) refused to kiss the Popes
foot, Acts and Mo.
though the Pope held it out purposely therefore: yet the Earl of Wiltshires
Dog, (having a greater devotion thereto than they) did not only kiss the
Popes foot, though something unmannerly, but also snatchte at his great
Toe: thinking belike, that it was more meet to be bitten of dogs than to be
kissed of men.

Jewel in defe^. Apol. Pa. 461 in alto lib. in def. Apol. Page 410. Greg. lib.
4. Epist. 38. Ceremoniar. lib. 1. Sectio. 5. ca. 3.
Consider now therefore the great humilitye and the simple service that the
Pope requires. In the Popes own book of the Ceremonies of Rome, it is written
thus: The Emperor elect going in arraye with all his train, passes up
the Stayres into the Scaffolde, and as soon as he sees the Pope, he
worshippeth him with bare head, touching the ground with his knee.

Again when he comes to the foot of the Popes throne, he kneeleth down:
last of all, when he comes to the Popes feet, he kisseth them deuoutelye,
in the reverence of our savior. Is not this trow you, a trim reuerencing of
Christ, to kiss the Popes feet? John. 13.
Christ washed his Apostles feet, but I never heard that the Emperor did
kiss Christ's feet: nay Christ's Apostles did never kiss his feet, yet if
feet ought to be kissed, truly it had bin as fit for the Apostles to have
kissed their masters feet, as for the Emperor (which is the chief ruler of
all Christendom) to kiss the Popes feet.

Therefore you that lust to learn humility, may learn here of the Pope.

And if this be not sufficient to show you of the Popes humility, you shall
see further, When the Pope takes his stairs to mount on horseback, the
greatest Prince that is present, whether he be King or Emperor, Ceremoniar.
Lib. 1. Cap. 8. Jewel in defens. Apol. page 463. I. in alio lib. page 412.
holds his stirrup, and afterward leads his Horse a little by the bridle:
but if there were two Kings in the presence, the more Honorable of them should
hold the Bridle on the right side, and the other on the left: If there happen
no King to be present, then let the worthiest person lead his horse. But if
the Pope would not ride, but be borne on men's shoulders in a chair, then must
four of the worthiest Princes, yea, the Emperor himself, or any other
mighty Monarch (if he be present) bear the Chair, Pope and all, a little
way forward upon their shoulders.

Again, the Emperor delyuering over his golden Apple and his Scepter to one
of his men, comes unto the Popes Horse, and in honor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (whose person in earth the Pope bears) he holds the Stirrup,
until the Pope be mounted, and afterward he takes the Bridle, and leads
forth his horse. While the Emperor does these profitable services, the Pope
ought modestly a little to refuse the same: and yet afterward with certain
good and gentle words (taking that honor as done unto Christ, and not unto
himself) he holds himself contented. (This is the strangest honoring of
Christ that ever I heard of, to lead the Popes Horse. Further, it is
appointed thus: The most noble man that shall be in the Court, shall bear up
the train of the Popes Cope, yea, though it be an Emperor or a King.

Again, let the most noblest lay man, whether he be king or Emperor, bring
water to wash the Popes hands, and while the Pope washes, let all the Bishops
and lay men kneel down.

Again, While the Pope is yet sitting at the table, the noblest man within the
Court, be he Emperor, be he King, shall be brought to the Popes Credence, to
give him water. Again, The first dish, the noblest Prince shall carrye,
whether he be Emperor or King.

Again, When the Pope is at breakefast, the King shall bear the first Cup:
Ceremoniar. Lib. 2, Cap. 10
And again, Let the Popes Cups be borne by the Noble men or Orators being
present, and let the Clearke of the Ceremonies begin with the worthiest estate,
yea, though he be King or Emperor.

Thus by the Book of the Popes Ceremonies, it plainly appears, that the
Emperor shall hold the Popes stirrup: let the Emperor lead the Popes Horse:
the Emperor must bear the Popes chair on his shoulder: the Emperor shall
bear up the Popes train: let the Emperor bring the Basin and the Ewer to
the Pope: the Emperor shall give the Pope water, to wash his hands: the
Emperor shall carry the Popes first dyshe: the Emperor shall carrye the Popes
first Cup.

May not he be called the Servant of GODS servants, (for so the Pope names
himself) that has the Emperor to his man, and to wayght on him thus at an
inch? The Pope never learned of Christ to be thus simplye served: if the Pope
in this case be a Servant, I marvel then who shall be a Master? Christ was
as good a man as the Pope, and as well borne as he, and yet I never read or
heard, that he rode, was carried, or served in this order.

Christ was a King above all Kings, and yet he was humble and meek, and was
under all Kings: but the Pope is no King, and yet he is proud out of all
measure, and makes himself Prince peerless, and above all Emperors and
Kings. Well though he learn not to be humble and lowly of Christ, yet he
learnes to be stout and proud of the Devil. I marvel by what prorogatiue he
has gotten all this dignity: Christ whose Uicar he says he is, and Peter
whose Successor he claymeth to be, took never such an Emperial state upon
them: alas they were poor Subjects, yea and so poor, that they had no money
to pay tribute to the Emperor, but that they were feign to have out of a
Fishes mawe. But mark though CHRIST^ was tributarie to the Emperor, yet the
Pope is free from it. Nay he makes Kings to pay tribute to him, and thus he is
quite contrary to our meek Christ.

Yet mark the lowliness and humility of the Pope, Jewel in defens. Apol.
page 515. Council. Later. Session. 6. Page 604.
that calls himself the Servant of Gods Servant. In the late Counsel
holden at Lateran, in Rome one Simon Begnius the Bishop of Modrusia said thus
to Pope Leo, Behold the Lion is come of the tribe of Judah the root of David.
etc, O most blessed Leo, we have looked for thee to be our Savior.

In the late Chapter at Trident, Council. Trid. sub Paulo 3. oratione Cornelij
Episcopi Bitontini. Council. to. 2. Decreta collecta per Adrianu^ p. 613. Paulus
Aemilius lib. 7
Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto said thus: The Pope is the light that is come
into the world, but men have loved Darkness more than the Light. Every man
that has done evil hates the Light, and comes not to the Light.

Pope Adrian says: That no man shall judge the Pope: For it is written: The
Scholar is not above his Master.

The Pope suffered the Ambassadors of Cicilia to lie prostrate on the ground,
and thus to cry unto him, as if it had bin to Christ: Holy father that take
away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: Thou that take away the
sins of the world, give us peace,

Pope Sextus says: Who so accuses the Pope, Council. tomo. 1. in purgatio.
Sixti.
can never be forgiven, and his reason is this: He that sins against the
holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world
to come. I never heard so plainly what was the sin of the holy Ghost
before. If this be true, that to accuse the Pope, is the sin of the holy
Ghost, then it is no marvel though the Papists that believe this, dare not
accuse the Pope, but think that he is most holy whatsoever he does, for fear
they shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come.
Surely, they are found and grounded Papists, that believe the Pope to be the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that he is the root of David, that the Pope is the
light that is come into the world, that he is the savior of mankind, that he
is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, that whosoever
accuses him of his wickedness, does sin against the holy Ghost. Oh
horrible, heinous, and intolerable blasphemy: that which is to be applied to
our savior Christ the son of God, and to none other, this vile and most
sinful wretch, the Pope applies to himself.

I trust there is none of you, be ye never so wilful, obstinate, and bent to
the Popes law, but as soon as you hear this, the Popes great blasphemy, and
how he takes that unto himself, that is only due to Christ: but speedily
(except you are determined to be children of the Devil) will fly from this
Antichrist and his doctrine, and embrace Gods most holy word, for if he be
not Antichriste, then there was never any, nor never will be. I grant there are
now many Antichrists: for all they that are against Christ, are Antic^ristes.

All Idolatrous Emperoures, Rulers, and Kings, were Antichrists, that
worshipped Ball, the God Bell, Astaroth, and other Idols, and Nabugodonezar
that made his golden Image to be worshipped, and the great Turk, the great
Chame of Tartaria, and the great Souldan, yet these have not made, neither do
make men worship them selves for Gods, but other.

And though many Emperors and tyrants have made men to honor them for Gods* to
kiss their feet, and to call them Gods, yet the same were Ethnicks and
heathen princes, and knew neither God nor his word: but this man of sin,
the Pope, that professes Christianity, that knows God and his word, that
grauntes the old Testament and the new, and that knows and professes, that
Christ dyed for the sins of the people, and believes all the Artycles of our
Creed, and that is Christened, thus wittingly and willingly to take upon him to
be called the Lion of Judah, the root of David, the light that is come into the
world, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, (whereas he
knows right perfectly, that it is neither, nor can be spoken of him nor of any
other, but only of Christ, neither is due nor can be applied, to any other but
only to Christ that immaculate Lamb, the Son of God) must needs of force,
be the chief and head Antichrist of all other Antichrists, neither was there
ever such an Antichrist before him, neither can there be any such Antichrist
after him.

And whereas he would make you believe, that they that accuse the Pope of any
crime, do sin against the holy Ghost: (whereby to fear you that you should
not accuse him, nor to think he does evil whatsoever he does) it is he, it
is he rather that sins against the holy Ghost, that committes such wilful
blasphemy, and so wittingly (contrary to his own Conscience) takes upon him
to be Christ, and robs Christ of his due honor and glory, who knows most
certenlye, that he is neither Christ, nor that the said Scriptures were meant
of him, nor can be by any means rightly applied to him.

And so, unless the former Popes (which besides this great blasphemy, were
evil and wicked enough, as before is manifest) have repented, and the Pope and
his Prelates, that are now, do repent, this their most horrible blasphemy,
which they cannot choose but know, and commit thus willinglye and wittinglye,
surely they shall never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world
to come. For I believe it is the very sin against the holy Ghost.

And if all this cannot persuade you, that these monstrous and execrable Popes,
are the Servants of Satan, the Devils deputies, and the very Antichrist, and
the Antichrist that the Scriptures means off: you shall have here other
Authors, more credible than my self, that shall so plainly describe the Pope
to be the very Antichriste, that you cannot choose but so to take him, (unless
you be utterly bent not to yield unto the truth, or to say with the foolish
Poet: Non persuadebis etiam si persuaseris, Though you persuade me, I will not
be persuaded.

But yet before we come to that, mark what prerogative the Pope claymeth,
whereby you shall the better perceive, that he is the very Antichriste.

The Pope is above all general Counsels: That his bare word must be holden
as a Law: Extr. de elect. and Electi potest. significa. Jewel in defens. apol.
page 43. in somr books 48.
That whatsoever he do, none may say unto him, why do you thus: That his
judgments are more certain than the judgments of all the world: That if
all the whole world give sentence in any matter contrary to the Popes
pleasure, yet it seems, we are bound to stand to the judgment of the
Pope: And whatsoever he says or does (being Pope) he cannot err.

Jewel in defe^. Apo. page 49.
Yet Pope Pius the second, before he was Pope, said: That the Counsel is above
the Pope, but after, when he was Pope, (being better instructed) I see (said
he) before I was much deceived, now the Pope is above the Counsel. Thus
either the Popes are liars, or else liars are made Popes.

16. q. 1. quicun que in glossa. 15. q. 6. author. in glossa did. 34. lector.
Abbas panor. Extra de diuor. cap. fin. Su^ma Angel. in distin. Pap.
The Popes Canonists say: That the Pope may dispense against the law of God:
The Pope may dispense against the Law of Nature: The Pope may dispense
against Saint Paul the Apostle: The Pope may dispense against the new
Testament: The Pope may dispense with all the Commandments, both of the
old and also of the new Testament.

If the Pope can do all this, then he may put Christ out of al his
authority: then he may curse the merciful, and bless the cruel tyraunte:
then he may damn them that be saved, and save the damned. And then GOD help
the poor Protestants, for they are like to go to Hell, and all the Papists
are like to go to Heaven.

And if Christ and the Angels be no Papists, he will go near to thruste
them al out of Heaven and send them to Hell.

Who would think or believe that these proud Popes would suffer them selves
to be called God: Jewel in def. Apolog. 584. Christopher. Marcel. in conc.
Latera. Sess 4. Extra. Iohan^ 22. cum inter in Glossa. Im. Lugduni Anno. 1555.
or that any would be so beastly or wicked to call them so? The Popes
Canonistes have moved questions, whether the Pope be God or not: and one said
thus presentlye before his face, in the Counsel of Laterane without rebuke:
Thou art another God in the Earth. And the Popes Godhead is published abroad
to the whole world in printed Books: Our Lord God the Pope. If our Bibles or
other Books, contained such blasphemy and heresy, as these your Popes Books
do* they were then well worthy to be burned, but the Pope neither punishes
these blasphemers, nor yet burns their Books, as he burns the Bible and
word of God.

And whereas Saint Augustine writes, Jewel defens. Apol.
Who dare to say thus to God? the Popes Canonistes have bettered it in this
sort: Who dares to say thus to God or to the Pope? Marie I say, Scaira that
took the Pope prisoner, and made him to ride with his face toward the Horse
tail, and had like to have famished him in prison, durst say so to the Pope,
although he durst not say so to God.

The Pope also heard these words spoken before his face: In the Pope is all
manner of power above all powers, Jewel in defe^. Apol.
as well of Heaven, as of Earth. What power is this but even the very power of
God? thus you may plainly perceive that the Pope is contented to be called a
God of the earth. The Pope is Lord and God. The Pope has al power above all
powers, either in Heaven or in earth. And as Zabarella says, the Pope does
whatsoever he lysteth, (yea although it be unlawful) and is more than GOD.
What would you have more? this is enough I think, it is more than ever his
Father had before him (unless he were a Popes son): if they had all this power,
which none has or can have but God (as they would make fools and dawcocks
believe they have) why did popes then suffer them selves to be poisoned,
famished, killed, have their eyes put out? who is so blind, but may plainly
see, that the Popes are horrible and wicked, the children of Satan, and make
men believe, that they are far more and greater than they are.

Abbat Panormitan says out of Hostiensis: Christus and Papa faciunt vnum
consistorium, De elect. ca. licet Abb.
and excepto peccato, potest Papa quasi omnia facere quae potest Deus. Christ
and the Pope make one Consistory, and Sin excepted, the Pope in a manner can
do al things that God can do. Would you have thought, that either any would
have written thus of the Pope, or that the Pope would take this upon him, or
suffer any either to write or say thus? I think, that none of you do
believe, that the Pope can do as God can do, for I am sure, that God can, and
will, burn all the world at once, yea, and that quickly, which I am sure the
Pope can not do, for if he could, then al they that profess Gods word, should
be burned ere to morrow, nay within this hour: besides he would do then many
other things, that he can never do: but though the Pope cannot do whatsoever
God can do, yet I will help him a little: he can do more than God can do,
for he can blaspheme God, he can lie, he can hate them that love him, he can
hurt them that never offended him, he can be unmerciful, he can break his
promise, he can say, that he can do more than he can do, he can be a
false Harlot, he can be the child of the Dyuel, he can be Antichriste, and
he can advance himself higher than he ought to be, al which God can not do.
For, though God be called Omnipotens, Almighty, yet he is not Almighty,
because he can do al things: but because he can do all that he will or would
do, which the Pope can not do, for all he takes himself to be a God, for if
he could, this our realm of England should not have been so long in quiet,
as it has been. And if Christ and the Pope make or have one Consistory or
Judgment seat, then hereby the Pope may be copercioner and fellow Judge with
Christ, at the day of Judgment, and judge both the quick and the dead. But
if then the Pope should be so contra^ie to Christ, and so much his enemy as
he is here, the controversies of all matters and crimes from the beginning of
the World, will not be determined and judged in one day. For one day would
be little enough to try, which of them shall sit the uppermost: for if he
be there then as haughty and proud as he is and has been here, he will
scarcelye suffer Christ to sit above him, for he that has sit^e above
Emperors and kings, and has made the Emperors neck his foot stool, will
be loath (I believe) to sit beneath Christ, that was so poor as he was. Nay,
if his power be above all the powers in Heaven and in earth (as is before
declared) you shall see that the Pope will go near to thrust Christ besides
his seat, and sit there alone, and be Judge and al himself.

And if the authority of the Roman Church and the Pope, is more than Gods
word, Siluester Prierias contra Lutheru^.
as Siluester Prierias does write: Then when Christ shall sit in judgment at
the last day, and has severed the Sheep from the Goats, and bid the
blessed Sheep to come into the kingdom of heaven, and sent the curssed
Goats into Hell, the Pope may come in then by his authority, and say to
Christ, by your leave sir a little, seeing you have given judgment by your
law, I will now give definitive sentence by my law, (which is more than
Gods word.) And then the Pope may say: Come back again ye curssed that
Christ bad to go to Hell, and look that ye go into Heaven, for I have
appointed it for you to dwell in: and you blessed that Christ has willed to
go into Heaven, come back again or I will fetch you, and see that you go
into Hell, for that is the place that I have appointed for you to dwell in. And
thus may the Pope by his authority (which is more than Gods word) as
Prierias says, control and undo all Christ's doings, and send the godly to
Hell, and the wicked to Heaven, and he himself to be in Heaven like a God, that
lived on the earth like a Devil.

What Hel-houndes are these that would make us believe, that the Popes power
and authority is more than the word of God. But if the Pope in a manner can do
whatsoever God can do, or, if he have all power given him in Heaven and in
Earth (as he says) then why did Pope Boniface the eight suffer Scaira with
his soldiers to set fire on the gates of his pallaice, Acts and Monumentes
and to break down the doors and windows where he was in Aruagium, and to
enter upon him, and to rifle him of all his goods, jewels, and Treasure, which
was such a deal, as Christ and all his Apostles never had? And why then did
he suffer them to set him on a wild and unbroken colte, with his face
toward the horse tail, and the colte to run up and down with him until he
was almost breathless? and why did he suffer himself to be imprisoned by the
said Scaira three days, and to be almost famished for meat? this holy
Father that could command the Angels to carry men's souls to Heaven, I
marvel that he did not command them to come out of Heaven, to deliver him out
of prison, and out of his enemies hands. But be bold he would have done it
if he could have done it. And therefore you may perceive that he promises
you more by his Pardons than he is able to perform: for if the Pope has such
power to pardon you, and to forgive you your sins, and to send your souls
by Angels to Heaven: then the Pope would have helped himself out of prison
and thraldom. Therefore you may see (if you will see) that he tells you, that
he can do a great deal more than he can do: for if he could deliver men's
souls from Hell, he were able to deliver his own body out of prison. And i^
he be able to bring other men's souls from Earth unto heaven, where he was
never, then he were as able to bring his own body out of prison to his own
house, where he has bin.

And though the Pope has such great and high authority as he has, he
claims it not but by the authority of the Scriptures, or by excellent and
learned arguments. As thus, the Sun is higher and greater than the Moon,
therefore Pope Innocentius says, that the Pope is gre^er and higher than the
Emperor: this is that holy and meek Pope that said, that either he would
lose his Mitre, or else he would pull the Emperors Crown from his head.
Master Harding, to excuse the Pope withal, said, This is not a reason, but a
similitude: To whom Master Jewel the Bishop of Salisburie answers as
follows: Jewel in defens. Apolog. Page 453.
This thing may easilye be granted, for in deed it is a similitude utterly
void of either Wit or Reason. But who taught the Pope so childishlye to
play with similitudes, thereby to advance himself, and to abase the Emperor
of the World? who told him, that the Pope is the Sun, and the Emperor the
Moon? or that the Emperor is so far inferior to the Pope, as the Moon is
inferior to the Sun? Isodorus that lived 600. years before Pope Innocentius
the third, says quite contrary: In Glossa in Genes. cap. 1.
By the Sun (says he) we understand the kingdom, and by the Moon, we
understand the Priesthood, whereby he gives us to understand, contrary to
the judgment of Pope Innocentius, that as the Moon is inferior to the Sun, so
is the Pope inferior to the Emperor.

And here is another excellent argument to prove the Popes authority, De
mayor. and obedienc. vnam sanctam.
both of the Spirituality and Temporaltie: Peter said to Christ: Lo, here
are two swords, Therefore Pope Boniface says, that the Pope has power both
of the Spiritual Sword, and of the Temporal Sword. Uery well gest Master
Pope: even so one may say (and that by as good authority) Lo, here are two
daggers: And then a stranger to him that has the Daggers, may starte
straighte-way in and say: Marry therefore I ought to be Lord Chauncelor of
England, and the Archebishoppe of Canterbury. The Pope can lack no power, if
such conclusions may serve his turn.

Mark what a trim exposition one of the Popes p^n men, to maintain the Pope
in his Godhead, has made upon a verse of the eighte Psalm, attributing that
to the Pope, that Saint Paul applies to Christ, which though I name not
Papistrie, Psalm. 8. Antoninus in Summa. Par. 3. ^itu. 22. Cap. 5. Hebrae. 2.
yet I may safely call it blasphemy. These are the words: Omnia subiecisti
sub pedibus eius, id est, Papae: pecora campi, id est, homines viuentes in
terra: pisces maris, id est, animas in Purgatorio: volucres caeli, id est,
animas beatorum: which are thus in English: Thou have made all things subject
to him, that is to say, to the Pope: The cattle of the field, that is to
say, men living on thee earth: The fishes in the Sea, that is to say, the
souls in Purgatory: The birds of the Heavens, that is to say, the souls of
the blessed in Heaven. You that hold on the Pope, how like you this expou^ding
of the words of Saint Paul, if Saint Paul had expounded them himself, he
would never have expounded them on this fashion, for there was neither Pope
nor Purgatory when he wrote them: was it not happy that this man was borne,
that thus expounded them? yes I trow, for if he had never bin borne, then it is
like they had never been thus expounded: and so our holy Father the Pope, had
never known the great aucthoritye and power, that GOD by these words of the
Psalm has allowed him. Surely David that wrote first this Psalm, was much
ouerseene, that he named not the Pope therein, for so the Pope might have
lackte a great deal of his power. If the Pope may apply in this sort all the Scriptures to himself, that are meant upon Christ, then he may put Christ
out of all the authority that God his father has promised him, and at the
last day judge the quick and the dead, and make Christ to stand at the
bar and hold up his hand, and as Pilate condemned Christ on Earth, so
the Pope may condemn Christ in Heaven.

Mark further, for here are excellent proofs, Barnard. de consider. ad Eng.
lib. 2.
for the Popes prerogative. Peter lept into the water and came to Christ: The
rest of the Disciples came by boat, Ergo the Pope has jurisdiction of all the
world.

Peter Crab that lately compiled the Books of Counsels, Council. tom. 1 page
^0. Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 463.
reasons thus: Peter paid the Tribute money for Christ and himself: Christ
said unto Peter, Follow thou me, Again he said, Launch forth into the deep:
again, Peter art thou a sleep, could thou not watch with me one hour?
And again, From henceforth thy name shall be Peter: And Peter drew his sword
and cut off Malchus ear. Therefore says he, the Pope has authority over the
whole Church of God. Are not here notable arguments to prove the Popes great
authority? I marvel that Peter Crab had forgotten these that follow, which
serve for the Popes authority as well as the other, Christ said to Peter,
Math. 26. Mark. 8.
Verily before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. And he said unto
Peter, Come after me Satan. If Peter's paying of tribute money made Peter a
Pope, than the Bishop of Rome is no Pope, for he pays no tribute: but the
Kings are Popes, that pay tribute to the Pope. If Christ made Peter Pope and
gave him all this authority because he followed Christ, then the Pope is a
false Pope and has no such authority, because he has clean forsaken Christ,
and follows him never a whit: Marry if Peter's sleeping and because he could
not watch with Christ made him Pope, and thereby had all this great authority:
then I will not deny but the Pope may be a Pope as well as Peter: for he
sleeps in all kind of sin, and he watches never a whit with Christ. And as
Peter did not preach Gods word all the while he slept, so it appears that the
Pope sleeps always, for he never preaches. And if Peter's fighting and the
cutting off of Malchus ear, made him Pope and got him such authority: then I
warrant the Pope is a right and perfect Pope, for he does fight as fiercely as
Peter did for his life, and whereas Peter did cut off the ear of one, the Pope
cuttes off the heads and burns the bodies of thousands. And whereas Peter did
fight with Christ's enemy but killed him not: the Pope does fight with
Christ's friends and killes them outright. Therefore if Peter's fighting made
him Pope, then the Pope is a right Pope as well as he. But it is not to be
found in all the new Testament, that Christ either called Peter the Pope of
Rome, or gave him any such authority as the Pope claymes by Peter. I find (as
I said before) yt Christ called Peter Satan or Devil, but he never called
him Pope.

Marry if Christ had said these words to Peter, Peter thou shall be Pope of
Rome, and all that shall succeed thee in that seat shall be Popes, and shall
never err say or do what they will, I give to thee and them all my power in
Heaven and in earth: thou and they shall be above Emperors and Kings, and shall
tread in their necks and put them down and put other in their places when
thou and they list: Thou and they shall be called God, and shall in a manner do
what soever God can do: and thou and they shall have one place or seat of
judgment with me: you shall have power to give the Scriptures what
understanding and sense you list: thy authority and theirs shall be above the
Scriptures or word of God: and you shall have power to command the Angels of
Heaven to come down to the Earth, and to carry whose Souls you list to
Heaven: And whosoever shall have your pardons, (what offense so ever they have
done, or how wickedly soever they die) they shall be forgiven: and as soon as
they are dead, they shall go to heaven, etc. If Christ (I say) had said
these words to Peter as plainly as he said Come after me Satan, then I
would have granted that Peter and all his successors had been made
perfect Popes, and that therefore Christ had given them a good and large
commission. But sure I never read that Christ gave either him or them, al these
authorities, or made them such Popes.

But if ever Christ made Peter Pope at all, then truly I think he made him
Pope and all his successors, with all the privileges before mentioned, and a
great sort mo, at the same time when he called him Satan, or named him
Devil, which Popedom and privileges belonging thereto (as the Popes use them)
is so fit an office for Satan the Devil to execute: that if all the world
had devised, they could not have inverted a fitter office for him. Well, though
the Pope hold not his Popedom and his power by commission, yet at least he
keeps it by custom. Therefore he will be a God, who ever says nay, for as
he says, he has all power in Heaven and in Earth.

But though he have all the power in Heaven and earth, and over the Angels in
Heaven, yet Hell is left out as hap is, so that it seems he bears no swaye
there. Therefore let the Pope take heed, least he come there among the unruly
Devils, for though he rule on Earth, the Devil will be ruler in Hell: it were
a foul ouersighte of the Pope to go to Hell, and to be ruled of the Devils,
that now does rule both Angels in Heaven and men in earth. Well, howsoever the
Pope has gotten his authority, he has it, and will hold it as long as he
can, and if these two pillars will stay him, he means to sit still in his
seat. The first is, Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 585.
the Church of Rome, whatsoever she say or do can never err, (for the Pope
makes it Heresy, to say so) another is, the Pope whatsoever he do may never
be called to any reckning: if these two points be granted, then he may do what
he list. Johannes de Parisijs says, De potesta. Regia and Papali.
We must expound every fact of the holy Father for the best, and if it be
theft or any other thing, that of it self is evil (as aduoutrie or
fornication) we must think it is done by the secret inspiration of GOD. An
other says, Distin. 40. Si papa.
If the Pope draw infinite companyes of people by heaps together with himself
into Hell, to be punished with him with many strypes for ever: yet let no
mortal man presume to reprove his faults.

You may see that these holy Fathers did not mean to live godly, that allowed
their Doctors to defend their abominable living: as the fruits show what
the tree is, so the Popes doing shows what they are, and have bin, (even the
very Antichrist.)

But to satisfy you, that almost nothing will satisfy: I will prove unto you
yt the Pope of Rome, is the very whore of Babylon, that Saint John speaks of
in his Revelation, eue^ with the very words that the learned Doctor Fulke did
utter in his excellent Sermon made at Hampton Court to that end. Ioha^ Apo.
17. Doctor Fulke in his Sermon at Hampt. Court.
The Angel did expound to S. John, that the seaue^ heads of the beast whereon
the woman sits, do signify seven Hills, and where is there any City in
all the world but only Rome in Italy, that is builded upon seven Hills? and
these are the names of the Hills: Palatinus* Capitolinus, Auentinus,
Exquilinus, Viminalis, Quirinalis, and Caelius. The Angel herein has more
plainly showed this great Babylon, to be Rome, than if he had named it to be
Rome. For the City of Constantinople was once called new Rome, but yet it is
not builded upon seven Hills, as this Rome is. Therefore Rome must needs
be the seat of Antichrist: (if the Woman be Antichriste that did sit on
the beast:) And further, the Angel says in plain words, that that great
whore of Babylon, is that great City which has dominion over Kings of the
Earth. Now it is evident that then the Romans had the fourth Monarche,
spoken of by Daniel, and had rule over the Kings of the Earth. So that without
all contradiction, Rome must needs be the place where that whore does sit.
And Ireneus a most ancient writer, that lived almost fifteen hundredth years
since, writing of the Sea of Antichrist, upon the last verse of the thirteenth
Chapter of the Revelation of Saint John, where the number of the beast is
expressed to be six hundredth sixty and six, shows plainly, that the same
number correspondent to the Greek letters, makes this word Lateinos, which in
English is the Latin man or Roman, and these are his words. Sed and (...)
nomen sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerorum etc: and valde veresimile est,
quoniam verissimum regnum habet hoc vocabulum, this name Lateinos says he,
co^taining the number of 666. is thought to be the name of Antichriste, and it
is very like so to be, for that very kingdom has this name, for they are
Latins that now do reign.

Thus that old and ancient Father Irenaeus, found out by the number of the
beast, that his name is such a one as bears rule over Rome: this is not
devised by any late Author, but by one that is so ancient, that he in no wise
is to be mistrusted, for then in his time there was neither Pope nor Papist,
neither Lutheran nor Zwinglian. Cont. Marti. Lib. 3.
Tertullian a worthy and ancient writer says very plainly, that Babylon does
signify Rome, these are his words: Even so does Babylon of our John, (meaning
the words of S. John in the Apocalips) bear the figure of the City of Rome,
which is as great and proud in reign, and as great a persecutor of the Saints
(as Babylon was.) Thus you hear the opinion of that ancient writer Tertullian
that lived above thirteen hundred years since, who says flatly, that this
Babylon bears the figure of the City of Rome. Saint Chrysostom likewise
says, Antichrist shall invade the principality of the Empire being void,
and shall assay to draw unto himself, the Empires both of God and men. What
can be more manifest than this? for did not the Popes kingdom and rule
increase, by the decaie of the Empire? yes truly, and at the fall of the
Imperial Monarchy, the Pope challenged the rule, both spiritual and temporal.

Mark what Saint Jerome says, writing unto Algasia, Nec vult, etc. which
is, Super. 2. The. 2. quest. 11.
neither will he openly say that the Roman Empire should be destroyed, which
they that govern it think it to be everlasting, wherefore according to the
Revelation of Saint John, in the forehead of the purple whore there is written
a name of blasphemy, which is Rome Everlasting. Here Saint Jerome a credible
author, and one of the Doctors of the Church, names the whore of Babylon, to
the Purple whore of Rome, in whose forehead is written a name of blasphemy,
which is Rome Everlasting. For so the Pope takes Rome, to be that Rock that
can by no means be removed. For the Pope bragges, that Rome is that same Rock
against which Hell gates cannot prevail, but he and all they that trust him
be maruellouslye deceived, for God with his breath (that is his word,) will
overthrow and destroy it. And also Saint Jerome calls Rome the daughter of
Babylon, and takes Babylon in Chaldea for Babylon the Elder, and Rome her
daughter for Babylon the younger. Also Saint Jerome writing in his Preface unto
the book of Didimus, Doct. Fulke. in the same Sermon.
de spiritu sancto, writing to Paulinianus utters these words: Cum in
Babilone: etc. when I was in Babylon says he (meaning Rome) and was an
inhabitaunte of the Purple Harlot, and lived after the laws of the Romans, I
thought to entreat something of the Holy Ghost. Here contemptuously he
calls Rome by the name of Babylon, having no occasion so to do, whereby it
appears he was fullye persuaded that Rome could be none other, but that
Babylon mentioned by Saint John in the Apocalips. And Saint Jerome writing to
Marcella a virtuous Gentlewoman of Rome, persuaded her to forsake Rome, (which
was the Babilonical Harlot, appointed for the birth of Antichrist, which there
should arise and exercise his Tirannie, and from thence should deceive the
whole world with his wicked wiles) and to come and dwell near him in Bethlem,
which was situate in the holy land, and the place consecrate to the birth of
Christ. Here it appears that he did not only know that Babylon is Rome, and is
the very seat of that Purple whore, but also that he did maruellously detest
and abhor it. Primasius also affirms, that the prophesies of the Apocalips
concerning Antichrist, are to be fulfilled in the Roman Empire. S. Augustine
in his excellent work De ciuitate dei, oftentimes calls Rome Babylon, and
Babylon Rome, as in his sixteenth book and seauententh Chapter, he calls
Rome another Babylon in the Weast. And in his eighteenth book and second
Chapter, he calls Babylon of Chaldea, the first Rome, and Rome of Italy the
second Babylon. And the same Augustine in the two and twentieth Chapter of the
eighteenth book calls Rome another Babylon, and the daughter of the first
Babylon. And also he calls Rome Western Babylon. This and much more did the
learned D. Fulke declare in his Sermon at Hampton court. These are sufficient
to prove that Rome is the very seat and place of the whore of Babylon, spoken
of by Saint John in his Revelations. Cap. 27.
And now you shall see whether the Pope be that strumpet and whore of Babylon
or not. Irenaeus says, notwithstanding he be but a slave, Jewel in defen.
Apolog. Page. 484. Irenae. lib. 5. cap. penultimo. Gregor. lib. 4^ Epist. 38.
Sacerdotum paratus est exercit. Jewel in defen. Apolog. Page 411.
yet he will be worshipped as if he were God. S. Gregory says, he is
Antichrist, that shall claim to be called universal Bishop, and shall have a
guarde of Priests to attend upon him. Ioachimus Abbas says, Antichrist is
now borne in Rome, and yet shall he be higher in the Apostolic See. Saint
Barnard says, the beast that is spoken of in the book of Revelations, unto
which beast is given a mouth to speak blasphemy, and to keep war against
the Saints of God, is now gotten into Peter's chair, as a Lion prepared to his
pray. Franciscus Petrarcha calls Rome the whore of Babylon, the mother of
Idolatry and fornication, and that all shame and reverence is quite departed
thence. Baptista Mantuanus says, Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
that is to say: All ye that would live godly, get you away from Rome: for,
whereas al things are there lawful, to be good it is not lawful. Saint
Gregory writing of Antichrist, says thus: whereas he is a damned man by
lying, and not a spirit, Extra Johan. 22. cum inter in glossa. 2. Thessal. 2.
he faineth himself to be God: and thus, because the Pope as is before
declared, is called an earthly God, and our Lord God the Pope, therefore he
must needs be the very Antichrist, all things before well weighed and
considered.

But perhaps you will say, that other have bin called God, as well as the
Pope, therefore why should he be Antichrist more tha^ they? I grant, that
Antiochus sometime King of Syria, entitled himself by the name of God: So the
Emperor Domitian used to assign his Proclamations Your Lord God Domitian:
Hierony. in Daniel. cap. 3 Suetonius in Domitian. Jewel in defen. Apolog. page
592. in an other book of the same. 540.
So the Emperor Caligula called himself the best and most mighty God, and
the great God Jupiter of Italy: Sopores the great King of Persia called
himself the brother of the Sun and the Moon: Nicagoras made himself a
pair of wings, and would needs be called the God Mercurius: And the
Romans in old time, erected an Image in the honor of Simon Magus the
sorcerer, with this inscription or poesy, In the honor of Simon the holy God.

These and diverse more have bin called Gods, but they were heathen, and did
never sit in the Temple of God, as that Antichrist that Saint Paul speaks
of, that he calls the man of sin, that should sit in the Temple of God,
and show himself as if he were God: For which of those before named, did sit
so deep in men's consciences, as the Pope has done, and yet does? did ever any
think that they could not err or do evil whatsoever they did? did ever any
believe in them so much, that, if they had curssed them, they should then have
bin damned? did they ever make the people believe, that they were the Deputies
or vickars of Christ? were they ever so far and deep in men's consciences,
that men thought to be saved by their pardons? did they ever make any believe,
that they could command the Aungelles to come from Heaven, and to carry whose
souls they list to Paradise? did they make ever any man believe, that they had
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven? did they ever sit so deep in men's
consciences, which is the Temple and place of God? that they could dispense
with Whoredom, Murder, Theft, Idolatry or any other Sins? Did ever any
believe, that whatsoever they loosed in earth, should be loosed in Heaven? and
whatsoever they bound in earth, should be bound in heaven? Did they ever say,
that they had all power in heaven and in earth? Did they ever make men
believe, that they could do in a manner whatsoever God could do, and that they
and Christ had one seat of judgment? Did they ever take upon the^ to be
Christ the son of God? were they ever called the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world? or did ever any fall down before them, and say so to them?
Did these before mentioned that were called Gods, make men believe these
things, as the Pope has done, and has sit so deep in men's consciences, the
temple of God, as the Popes have done. No, no, never any, but only the Pope.
Therefore it is he only that S. Paul calls the child of Sin, 2.
Thessalo. 2.
that should sit in the Temple of God, and show himself as if he were God. It
is the Pope only that is that purple Whore of Babylon, that has names of
blasphemy, spoken of by S. John in the Apocalips. Therefore Anselmus says
very truly and well, that Antichrist shall feign himself to be holy, Apocal.
17. Jewel in defens. Apolog. page 593.
that he may deceive men under the color of holiness: yea, and he shall call
himself God, and shall cause himself to be worshipped, and shall promise the
Kingdom of heaven. Now tell me (as I said before,) who ever did al these
things, or attempted to do the^, but only the Pope? The Pope only therefore
must needs be the very Antichrist spoken of by Saint John in the Revelation,
and none other.

If this, and all the rest that I have spoken of the Pope, which is most true,
will neither make you think evil of the Pope, nor fly from him, nor yet
believe that he is the very Antichriste: then according to Esaias the Prophet* I
fear that you have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, Esai. 6.
and hearts and understand not, least you should repent and turn, and the
Lord thereby should have mercy on you.

Thus you see, that you that are so addict to the Pope, I have proved you to be
English enemies, not obedient nor loving subjects to your Prince, enemies to
your Country, and seek or wish the ruin of this famous realm of England.
I have also proved by the Scriptures, by examples, and by other infallible
arguments, that we have the true religion, and how that God therefore has
and does prosper and bless us: I have proved also, that the Popes whom you so
much love and lean to, have been most wicked Murderers, Coniurers,
Aduouterers, Heretics, Blasphemers, Idolators, Sacrificers to Devils, and
Derogators of Christ's benefits, his death and passion, and that they are the
enemies of God, the children of the Devil, yea, and the very Antichrist.

Therefore I beseech you, procure not to your selves the cursses of God for
the blessings of that wicked Antichriste, enforce not your most merciful
Princes displeasure (that does defend you) for that wicked Popes good will that
will destroy you: and seek not your Countries confusion that does nourishe
you, to have your Popish religion that will bring Gods plagues and cursses
upon you.

Perhaps some of you may say, though the Pope be wicked and evil, and
though he be proved to be Antichrist, yet this religion that you and your
fore-elders have had and used, is not therefore evil, nor to be despised: to
whom I answer, if the tree be evil, the fruit cannot be good: can the Devil
set forth a godly religion? no, it is against his nature: then, can the Pope
which is of the Devil, and the very Antichriste, set forth the pure word of
God? no, it is impossible, for as the evil fruit does show the tree to be evil:
so the detestable doings, and wicked religion of the Pope, show him to be
wicked and of the Devil: Math. 12.
therefore make the tree good, and the fruit good, or the tree evil, and the
fruit evil.

But because I will leave nothing undone, that may allure you not only from the
Pope, but also from his pestiferous religion, I will (God willing) prove the
chiefest points of Papistrie that you stand upon, both by Scripture, ancient
Doctors, and by natural reason, to be false, most wicked, and abominable.

And because one part of the Popes religion which is worshipping of Images*
is mentioned before among the cursses of God, and therefore abominable unto
the Lord, and directly against the second commandment, therefore I will
first begin with it, not doubting, but that many of you do not so much
regard and esteem the worshipping or having of Images, though some of you are
deeply and superstitiously given thereto.

And first let us hear what God said to Moses therein, and in his law: Exodus
20.
Thou shall not (says God) make to thy self any graven Image, of any
likeness that is in Heaven above, nor in the Earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. This is
the very commandment of God, that he gave to Moses, and enjoined the children
of Israel in any wise not to break: for if they did, he promised to send upon
them his plagues, and great cursses, before at large declared, which diverse
times he performed, when they after did break the same, and worshipped Images
and strange Gods (as I have manifestly proved before, by diverse examples.)

Now, because your Papistrie permits Images, and your papistical Churches
are al full of Images and Idols, and because you bow down unto them, kneel
unto them, go on pilgrimage unto them, and pray unto them, therefore your
religion is clean contrary to this law of God written in the first Table of
Moses, and therefore most wicked and abominable, which deserves and procures
Gods great plagues, cursses, and vengeance. And the youngest child that is, if
he have either read aught, or learned aught, knows that to esteem,
reverence, or worship Images, is evil and wicked, and against the commandment
of God, so that your religion of Papistrie, in this point must needs be
evil, wicked, and abominable, as is aforesaid, and the Pope and his Prelates
do not only suffer and permit them in Churches, but also maintain them,
defend them, and make laws, that they shall be adored and worshipped, as
utter enemies to God, striving with all their power, to set up Images, which
God directly does forbid.

Cooper Epit. Chro. fo. 268.
And that this may more plainly appear, Pope Gregory the second, did not only
withstand the Emperors Deputy by force of Arms (which he never learned of
Christ, nor yet of his Apostles) in taking down and suppressing Images out of
Churches, but also wrote into all parts, that neither for fear nor entreatie
they should obey the Emperors commandment, in taking away of Images and
pictures of Saints out of Churches, for avoiding of Idolatry, but would have
Images erected, set up, and worshipped, contrary to the holy word of God.

Jewel pa. 551. Consi. Nicen. 2. Action. 2. 2. Action. 4.
Also the Pope and his Bishops in Nicene Counsel agreed with one consent
(contrary to the counsel of God) that Images in Churches are not only to be
allowed, but also devoutly and reverently to be honored, and that with the same
honor that is due to God him self.

O Cerberus whelps, Satan's brood, and destroyers of men's souls: are they
Christ's Uicars? can not they err, that make such laws and decrees in their
Deuilishe counsels, that a piece of crooked rotten wood, or a stone, wrought
and framed by earthly wretches, is to be devoutly honored, even with that
honor that is due to God himself? how can you that take God for your Father,
and Christ for your Savior, abide either the Pope or his detestable religion
any longer?

Also one of them says, I receive and worship the reverend Images: and this
will I teach while I live. An other says, I do perfectly adore the holy
Images, and I accursse all them that hold the contrary: yea but I believe
your cursses come to late. What if God have curssed you before that worship
Images, how will you do then? I think his curse will stand for a curse
before yours: if you can either out curse God, or undo his cursses and make
your own curses to stand, or to be of force, then I will say you have good
luck.

Mark what a godly decree was allowed in the Greeks Counsel touching the
worshipping of Images, Citantur in lib. Caroli magni.
which is as expressly against the law of God, as is possible to be. And thus
it is, He that fears God, adoreth, or worshippeth an Image, as he would adore
the son of God: he that adoreth (or worshippeth) an Image, and says, this
is Christ, offends not: he offends that adoreth (or worshippeth) not an
Image: he that adoreth not an Image, is an Heretic: we must adore or
worship an Image with the same reverence, wherewith we adore or worship the
holy Trinity.

What varlets are these, what vile wretches are these, that make such contrary
decrees to Gods law? would you have thought it, unless you had read it? nay
will you believe it for that you do hear it? God says, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not bow down to Images nor worship them: The Pope says, he that
fears God, worshippeth an Image, as he would worship the son of God.
The children of Israel worshypped a golden Calfe, and said, This is the God
that brought us out of the land of Egypt: wherewith God was highly displeased,
and plagued them sore for it. The Pope says, whosoever worshippeth an Image,
and says, this is Christ, offends not. And also God curses all them that
do worship Images. Deuteronomy. 28. Hester. 3.
The Pope calls them Heretics that do not worship Images. Mardocheus said, I
feared least I should turn the glory of my God to a man: but the Pope does
make a law, that we should turn the honor and worship of God to a block or
a stone. Mardocheus said, that he feared to worship any man save God, but the
Popes law is, that we must worship a dead Image with the same reverence
wherewith we worship the holy Trinity. Reuela. 22.
The Angel of God would not suffer Saint John to worship him: but ye Pope will
have us fall down and worship dead stocks and stones. But if it be not
lawful to worship an Angel, then surely it must needs be unlawful to
worship blocks and stones.

Thus you that have eyes, may see, that as falsehood is contrary to the truth,
so the Popes law is clean contrary to Gods law: therefore, as Gods law is
most holy and godly, so the Popes law must needs be most wicked and
devilish.

Do you think, that these holy Fathers that were gathered together in this
Council, and set out this detestable decree, had the holy Ghost? Well, though
they had not the spirit of God, yet they were inspired with the spirit of
the Devil: but we must not believe for all this, but that the Popes have the
holy ghost and spirit of God to direct their doings in all their counsels,
whereby they cannot (...), as it appears by the decree of this Greek
Counsel, and of the other Nicene Counsel. And therefore at the beginning of all
their holy Counselles, they have first of all a Mass of the holy Ghost: after
which being once said or sung, they can not err or go wrong.

And that you may the better perceive how ready the holy Ghost is to come
among these holy harlots, (Prelates I should say) at these their holy
Counselles: Mark well this that follows: Nicolaus de Clauengijs.
On a time in one of their late Counselles in Rome as they were singing and
roaring out of Veni creator Spiritus, that is, Come holy Ghost, etc. by and by
(at their beck and calling) a poor old Owl, amazed with the noise,
(thinking (belike) she was ye holy ghost they called so earnestly for) leapte
out of the hole where she sat, and came down in the mids of them, and sat
amongst them.

Thus you may perceive, there is a great difference between the spirit of God,
and the Popes holy Ghost. For God the holy Ghost descended and appeered to
Christ in the likeness of a fair white Dove, Math. 3.
but the Popes holy Ghost did descend and appear to the Pope, to his holy
Cardinals, and Counsel, in the shape of a foul evil favored Owl, Whereby you
may learn, how holy their laws and decrees are, by their holy Ghost that came
down among them to inspire and instruct them, for, such holy Ghost, such holy
laws: No doubt God had their counsels in derision, and discovered their
hypocrisy, and their diuelishe doings, that the world might understand and
perceive, in what spirit they did assemble and gather together,

Mark also what holy men your Popes Doctors are, Jewel in defen. Apo. page
676. Hosius in co^fessione Petri comen. ca. 29.
and how learnedly and truly they write on their God ye Popes behalf. Hosius
says: God will never have thee consider, whether the Pope be a Judas, a
Peter, or a Paul, it is sufficient only, that he sits in Peter's Chair,
that he is an Apostle, that he is Christ's Ambassador, that he is the Angel of
the Lord of hosts, from whose mouth thou art commanded to require the Law.
This thing only Christ would have thee to consider (but you tell us not in what
place of the Gospel we shall find it) be he Judas, forasmuch as he is an
Apostle, let it not move thee though he be a thief. Is not here good stuff
(trow you) there is very hard choice of Ambassadors, when Christ is
constrained to choose or have a thief for his Ambassador.

If a true man should go to a thief, to enquire the law, or ask Counsel,
do you not think that he will give him good Counsel, or tell him the law
rightly? it is more like, that he would take his pursse from him, or cut his
throat.

These holy Fathers are very hard driven, when their Doctors aforehand are
constrained to excuse their Popes if they chance to be Thieves, they thinking
belike that Thieves shall sit in that chair: but it is no great matter, for
though they be Thieves when they come to sit in the Chair, yet they are
true men, and must needs be most holy and Godly as soon as they be set in it,
such as marvelous virtue has the Popes chair. For if the Pope has little or
no goodness at all of his own, (as some of them had but very little as before
it appears) yet for all that he can want neither goodness nor holiness, for
Saint Peter has made the Pope heir of his goodness. Glosa super dest. 40 in
verbo cumbered.
This gloss upon the Popes distinction was well remembered, for if Saint Peter
had not made the Popes heirs of his goodness, and left it in his Chair
behind him, some Popes then perhaps might have wanted both godliness,
goodness, and honesty: And so the cheiefest holiness that the Pope has is
out of his Chair: Jewel in defen. Apo. page 734.
for Cardinal Cusanus says, Veritas cathedrae adhaeret, The truth cleaves
fast to the Popes Chair, etc. (yea, for if it had not been very fast nailed
unto it, it had bin quite gone ere this) Christ has fastened or nailed his
truth to the Popes Chair, and not to his person, for he says, the Scribes and
Pharisees are placed in Moses Chair. If this be true that the Truth is so
fastened to the Chair, I fear then that some have stolen that true Chair
away, and have set a chair of falsehood in the place of it, for surely all
the Popes have had such luck that have of a long time sitten in that Chair at
Rome, that they have told nothing but lies: would not that Chair that was so
full of knowledge and truth, make any desirous to steal it, and carry it away?
for if the Pope were never so false, by and by as soon as he got himself into
that Chair he could not err: For then he could say nothing but truth. But
as soon as the Pope was gone out of that holy chair, he left all the truth
behind him in the Chair, and carried none away with him. If the Pope were
never so unlearned, and could not construe his own name, by and by as soon as
he did once sit in that chair, he was the greatest Doctor in both laws that
was in the world, all knowledge was then crept into the Popes bosom, or
breast: oh, if either the students of Gods law or man's law had such a chair
of Virtue as this Popes Chair is, to sit in, then they should not need to
take such pains in studying night and day as they do. Therefore this
Chair being so full of virtue, as is before said, surely one or other has
stolen it from the Pope, and set another chair in the place of it: like it in
fashion, but not in virtue and truth was there ever any religion so rediculous,
that would teach us to think that the whole knowledge and truth of the same
were nailed or fastened to a Chair, and that their Pope when he sittes in that
Chair can not err? God send us a more certain truth than to depend upon
the truth of a Chair. But if you be desirous to hear what Virtue and truth
there is in the Popes Chair, and how wise and learned it makes the Popes to be
after they once si^ in it, I will not stick to show you, and that by an
excellent example.

There was a great contention between them of Ratispone in Germany, and the
Abbay of Saint Denise in France, Johan. Caluinus de reliquijs and Jewel in
defen. Apol. Pa. 765
about the body of Saint Denise, which was so deep a doubt to discuss, that
none but the Pope was able to try ye truth thereof. And so to Rome they went,
and the Pope sat sadly in judgment about it, and examined their allegations
and matter thoroughly, and grew to a conclusion, and in the end gave thereof his
deep and diffinitiue sentence, and said that both they of Ratispone, and they
of Saint Denise, had the whole body of Saint Denise, and that whosoever would
say the contrary should be an Heretic. If the truth had not been fast
nailed to the Pops Chair, the Pope could never have given such a true, wise,
and learned Judgment of this weyghtie matter. Now surely it was a Popely
resolution, yea and such a one, as must needs make the veriest fools in the
World believe, that Will Summers would not have given so fond and ridiculous a
judgment. This famous, Divine, and true judgment of the Pope, is sufficient
(if there were nothing else) to make us believe that the Pope can not lie. And
as the Pope is very wise and learned by the virtue of his Chair, to resolve
doubtful matters, so he has wise and learned Doctors, to give him weighty
and doubtful matters to resolve. Whereof I will show you some for a taste, to
see how you will like them.

Augustine the Italian Monk (that of some has bin taken for the Apostle of
England) demanded of Pope Gregory, Gregor. lib. 12 Indict. 7. Jewel in
defens. Apolog. Page 765. Inter decret. Zachariae.
by way of great council, whether a womanne with Child might be Baptized or
not: and how long afterward it might be lawful for her to come to the
Church.

Bonifacius the Apostle of German demanded of Pope Zachary, whether Iayes,
Dawes, Storkes, Beuers, Otters, Hares, and wild Horses be men's meat or not:
what order were to be taken with man or Horse having the falling sickness: at
what time of the year it may be lawefull or wholesome for folks to eat
Bacon, and if a man list to eat it raw, how old it ought to be before he
eat it: what may be done if a Priest have a black in his eye: who may
hallow oil: with other deep and doubtefull questions. Inter decret. Alexan.
3. Par. 30. cap. 2.
Surely, unless the Pope had been deeply and profoundly learned by the great
virtue of his chair, he could never have resolved these mystical questions.
You may read the new Testamente over ere you shall find any that ever
demanded any such things of Christ.

Mark further I pray you what dolting doctrine the Pope is feign to have to
proppe up his Papistry wythall, and what worthy arguments are brought out
of the Scriptures, for proving that the vulgar or common people ought not to
read the Scriptures, Math. 7.
Give not holy things to dogs says Christ, Ergo says the Pope, it is not
laweful for the vulgar people to read the Scriptures.

Is not this an excellent and a true proof to hide or keep the Scriptures from
the people? By as good an argument I may say thus: open not your secrets to
your foe, therefore tell not your mind to your friend: or thus: Give no drink
to them that are drunken, Ergo let sober men have no drink. The lay people are
much beholden to the Popes pen men, for they liken them to dogs. But here
for their purpose they can call the Scriptures holy, but when they list, they
will call it the black Gospel, and a nose of wax.

Therefore consider and mark well (though even now to serve their turn, the
Scripture of them is called holy) in what estimation and reverence the Popes
Prelates have the holy Scripture and word of God, and how they extol their
Romish Church. Ludouicus a Canon of the Church of Laterane in Rome, says
thus, The Church (meaning the Church of Rome) is the lively breast of Christ.
Jewel in def. Apolog. 552.
But the Scriptures is as it is now dead Ink. The Bishop of Poyters said,
the Scripture is a dead and a dumb thing, as are all other politic laws.
Albertus Pighius says, if thou say these matters must be put over to the
judgment of the Scriptures, thou show thy self to be void of common
reason: for the Scriptures are dumb Judges and can not speak. Eckius calls
the Scriptures, The black Gospel: and the Inken Divinity. Pighius again
says, The Church (that is the Church of Rome) has power to give Canonical
authority unto certain writings which otherwise they have not, neither of
themselves nor of their Authors: and thus may the Pope by his aucthority allow
any book of the Scriptures, and so he may make Scriptures. Again he says,
as one both truly and merrily said, the Scripture is like a nose of wax, that
easily suffers it self to be drawn backwarde and forward: and to be molded
and fashioned this way and that way, and howsoever they list.

Thus they teach the people to reverence and esteem the holy Scripture Gods
word, they call it dead Ink, a liuelesse letter, a dumb Judge that can not
speak, a black Gospel, Inken Divinity, a nose of wax, and a thing utterly
void of authority of it self. Notwithstanding that Christ the son of God
says, Search the Scriptures, etc. and they are they that testify of me,
John. ^
and his Prelates give good credit to Gods word, which is the chief worker
of our salvation.

When objection was made, that King David, being not a Bishop, but only a
Temporal Prince, had written the Psalms, that is to say, the very key of the
scriptures, Hosius made answer, Wrote David Psalms, and why should he not
write them? Jewel in defens. Apol. pag^* 22. Hosius lib. 2. contra Bre^tiu^.
Horace says, we write Ballades every body, learned and unlearned, tagge and
ragge, so irreverently he skorneth and scoffeth at the holy scriptures the
most pure word of God and compares the heavenly ditties of the holy Ghost to a
vile heathen wanton ballade.

The same Hosius (as one that has a mouth to speak blasphemy) and to say
without all shame what he list, (says) Whatsoever the Church teaches (mening
ye Pope and the Church of Rome,) That same is the express word of God, Hosius
de expresso verbo dei Page 97.
and whatsoever is taught against the meaning and consent of the Church, is
the express word of the Devil. So that if this be true that he says, then
the Romish religion which the Papists teach, is Gods word: and the Gospel
(which we teach) is the word of the Devil. What a blasphemous wretch is this,
to call gods word the word of the Devil? Hosius and other that say so and take
it so, at the dreadful and terrible day of judgment, (when neither proud
Pope, presumptuous Prelates, blasphemous Bishops, nor peevish Priests nor
Papists shall bear any such sway as they do now and have done, shall then know
whether that which we now Preach and teach, is the word of the Devil or not. I
beseech God that al such may repent before, Siluester Prierias contra Lutherum
for then to repent it will be too late. Siluester Prierias (says) Whosoever
leneth not to the doctrine of the Church and of the Bishop of Rome, as unto the
infallible rule of God, of which doctrine the holy Scripture takes force and
authority, he is an Heretic.

Let Prierias and a thousand of the Popes Doctors besides say so, for as long
as Christ says not so, we care not, if Prierias say true, then Christ and
his Apostles were Heretics and many other, for in Christ's time there was no
Pope of Rome, for as long as Christ himself was alive he needed no vicar. And
was ye scripturs then without authority and of no force, because the church of
Rome was unplanted, and because there was no Pope? it was happy there came a
Pope after, or else the Scriptures had bin of no force nor had any authority:
it was marvel that Christ bad them then Search the Scriptures: John. 5.
Did Christ send his Apostles abroad to preach a Gospel that had no
authority, and that was of no force? it appears that it had some force, for
Christ said, that, They that believed the Gospel (which they Preach) and
were baptized, should be saved: Math. 16.
and they that believed not, should be damned. Oh what a devilish and
preposterous doctrine is this Papistrie, yt teaches, that the holy Scripture
and word of God, takes his force and authority of the Church of Rome:
whereas their doctrine and all other must take their force and authority
from it: For Christ says: Math. 5.
Every plant that my heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted up. And
because Papistrie is contrary to Gods word, and so not planted by God,
therefore it shall be pluckte up by the roots. Therefore, though the Church
of Rome, and the Pope should both perish (as many Churches have done, and as
the Romish Church must needs perish) yet God has and will still give
authority and strength to his word.

This your Papisticall doctrine is such a false and rydiculous religion, that
in every point, it overthrows it self.

Mark again an other of the Popes penmen, Ioannes Maria Verractus
how blasphemously he writes for the exalting of the authority of the
Romish Church, Johannes Maria Verractus says: We do humbly confess, that
the aucthoritiie of the Church (meaning the Church of Rome) is above the
authority of the Gospel, (if it be true that he writes) though he be not
ashamed to write a most abominable lie, yet I am sorry to write true of him,
which is, that I am most certain, that the spirit of the Devil had
greater power in him when he wrote it, than the spirit of God. Saint Paul is
of a contrary opinion to this Ioannes Maria Verractus, for he says: That the
gospel of Christ is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.
to all that believe: and, (both for his credit, and for his authority and
auncientie) is to be believed as well as this Papisticall writer. Now, if the
Church of Rome have greater power, than to be the power of God to salvation:
then I know not what power it should be, unless it be the power of the
Devil to Damnation. And if that be his authority above the gospel that he
does mean, let him keep that authority to himself, and much good do it
him: but there is no wise man will yield or submit him self to that power I
think. This fellow belike takes his own word for a warrant, for he brings
neither Scripture, nor ancient Doctor to confirm his sayings. Well, seeing
he brings no other authority to affirm his saying but himself: I will be
an other that will maintain his assertion, that the authority of the Roman
Church, and of the Bishop of Rome, is above the authority of the Gospel.
And now you shall know wherein it is greater, which he would not utter, for
belike he was something ashamed of the matter: forsooth it is greater, for to
set the Pope above Emperoures and Kings: to make him Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings, to make him tread on the Emperors neck, to make him claim to have
al power in heaven and in earth: to make all the whole earth to be his Uicarage
or Dioces: to set Kings and Princes together by the ears: to make true
subjects rise and rebel against their Prince and King: to make him take upon
him to be called, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: to
make him a tyraun^e, and to burn the Scriptures, to murder, burn, and kill the
servant of God that profess the Gospel: to make him command the Angels
to come out of Heaven at his pleasure, (if they will do so much for him) and
to carrye men's souls to Paradise, (how wickedly soever they dye:) to make him
an earthly God: to make him be called our Lord God the Pope: to make him do in
a manner whatsoever God can do: and to make him and Christ to have one
Consistory or seat of Judgment. In these before declared the Church of
Rome has greater authority than Gods word, for Gods word has no such
force nor authority.

This is your godly Church of Rome. In all these things and many more such,
she has aucthority above Gods word, but in godliness, in truth, and in all
things that appertain to our salvation, the Scriptures and the word of God
has force and authority above your Church of Rome.

But perhaps you will not believe me though I have sufficiently proved it by
the Scriptures, unless I show you some authorities out of ancient Doctors. If
you look that the Doctors ought to confirm the Scriptures, then you are wide,
for the Scriptures must confirm and allow the Doctors. But to satisfy you
withal, I will allege the Doctors, who you shall see will agree with me, that
the Scriptures must allow the Church, and that the right Church is known by
the Scriptures: and whosoever refuses to be tried by the Scriptures, is not
of the right Church, nor of the church of God.

The Church of God is known only by Gods word, Iren. lib. 3.
as the ancient learned Father Irenaeus affyrmeth, who says thus: Columna and
firmamentu^ Ecclesiae est Euangelium and spiritus vitae: The pillar and
buttresse of the Church is the Gospel, and the spirit of life: Saint
Augustine says: Aug. de unit. eccle. cap. 3.
Nolo humanis documentis, etc. I will not (says he) that the holy Church be
showed by men's documentes, but by the word of God. Chrysostom says:
Chrysostom in opere imperfecto Hom. 49.
Nullo modo cognoscitur quae sit vera ecclesia Christ, nisi tantummodo per
scripturas. By no way it is to be known, which is the true Church of Christ,
but only by the Scriptures.

Thus you may see plainly by these ancient, holy and learned writers (whatsoever
the Pope and his late Parasites write and brag of the Church of Rome) that
the true Church Christ only is to be known and tried by the holy Scriptures.

Perhaps you will say, that many places of the Scriptures are so dark and so
doubtful, that they will never be understood, unless they be opened and
expounded by some learned Doctor or Writer. I will not deny but that it is good
and necessary to have the Scriptures opened and declared by godly, virtuous,
and learned men, (yet not of necessity to be bound thereto) and so to believe
their writings so far as they shall agree with the Scriptures, but that must
not be by the Pope and his Doctors, for they (as you have heard before) so
interpret the Scriptures, that they lose their meaning and sense, both of God,
Christ, the Prophets, and the Apostles, and so are made the Popes doctrine,
only to serve his wicked and ambitious authority and desire.

And also you shall here perceive, that the holy and ancient Fathers and
Doctors, are of this opinion, that the Scriptures are able to expound
themselves, and need none other interpretor, and that there is no case in
religion so doubtful or dark, Jewel in defe^. Apol. Pa. 78.
but yt it may well be either proved or reproved by collection and conference of
the Scripturs. Saint Hierome says: Moris est scripturarum obscuris manifesta
nectere, Hieronim. in Esai. cap. 19.
It is the order of the Scriptures, after hard things to join other things
that be plain. Saint Augustine also says, Solet circumstantia scripturarum
illuminare sententiam: The circumstance of the scriptures is wont to give
light, August. in lib. 83. quaest. q. ^9. Tertullian aduersus pra^eam.
and to open the meaning. Tertullian gives the like rule: Oportet secundum
plura intelligi pauciora. The fewer places must be expounded by the more. Thus
these learned Fathers and Doctors judgment is, that the Scriptures expound
their own meaning, and one place opens an other.

But now mark what one of the Popes Chaplains writes concerning the
exposition of the Scriptures, Hosius de depresso verbo dei.
and whether he agree with the Devil, or with these said holy Doctors or not?
Hosius, one of the pillars of the Popes Church, says, If a man have the
exposition of the Church of Rome, touching any place of the Scriptures,
although he neither know nor understand, whether, and how it agrees with the
words of the Scriptures, yet he has the very word of God.

You may perceive by this fellows writing of what Church he is, and that he is
of an other Church than Saint Hierom, Saint Augustine, Tertullian, or
Chrisostom were, for he says, If the Church of Rome expound the Scriptures,
though it be contrary to the Scriptures, or do not agree with the words of the
Scriptures, yet it is the very word of God: Thus have the Popes Doctors deluded
the people, that the Scriptures were no Scriptures, unless it agreede with the
expositions, and so they made the very word^ of God (which is our light to
Salvation) to be very darkness, and our leader to damnation.

Mark also what that Caterpiller Cardinal Cusanus writes for the authority
of their Romish Church above the Scriptures. I tell thee (says he) that
there is nothing taken for Christ's commandment, unless it be so allowed of
the Church (meaning the Church of Rome) when the Church has changed her
judgment, Gods judgment is likewise changed: Oh abominable, and detestable
imps of Satan, though the whorish Church of Rome may change in her
judgments, yet God in his holy word is infallible and unchangeable in his
judgments: What hel-houndes are these that would make us believe, that, as
the Popes judgments do change, so Gods judgments do change, and that
nothing is taken for Gods commandment, unless the Pope and the Romish Church
allow it, but contrary say I, that the commandments of the Pope and of their
Church, are nothing unless Christ does allow them. And mark well, for as this
Cusanus has written, even so the Pope has changed the law of God, clean
contrary to his own, or rather the Devils commandment.

For, whereas God himself said: Exodus 20.
Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Now that is not Gods commandment,
unless it be allowed by the Church of Rome, and because the judgment of the
church of Rome is changed, therefore Gods judgment therein is changed. So that
this law must now be taken thus, Extra Johan. 22. cum inter. Exodus 20.
thou shall honor Pope for a God on earth, and thou shall call him Lord God
the Pope.

And whereas God says: Thou shall not make to thy self any graue^ Image of any
likeness that is in heaven, etc. Now the Church of Rome has changed her
judgment therein, and therefore Gods judgment is changed, wherefore that
commandment must be turned thus: In council. Grae cor. and Citant. in lib. Caroli
magni.
Thou shall worship Images as thou would the son of God, he that
worshippeth an Image, and says it is Christ, offends not: nay he offends
that worshippeth not an Image, he that worshippeth not an Image is an heretic,
thou shalt worship an Image with ye same reverence, wherewith thou do worship
ye holy Trinity. Exodus 20.
And whereas God said: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc. Now the church of Rome has changed her Judgment, and so that God
has changed his judgment therein also. Therefore now you must say thus,
Constit. Othonis. Jewel in defens. apol. 422 Exodus 20.
if thou have married a wife, thou shall swear and take thine oath to forsake
her and to put her away from thee, but thou shall not swear to forsake whoores
or harlots, or to refuse whoredom. And whereas God says thou shall keep holy
the Sabbath day, etc. now that is none of Gods commandment for the Church of
Rome has changed her judgment, and therefore Gods judgment is likewise
changed, wherefore that law must now be turned thus: Thou shall not keep holy
the Sabbath day, but whereas Gods word should then be read and preached, thou
shall in steed thereof commit idolatry, worship Images and pray unto them, and
kneel to Masses, and honor a piece of bread, and take it for the body of
Christ.

Exodus 20.
God also says: Honor thy father and mother, yea but now for that the Church of
Rome has changed her judgment, God has also in this commandment changed
his judgment, therefore that law must now be thus: Thou shall disobey thy
father and mother, King, Prince, and Country, and obey the Pope and the Church
of Rome, yea, and thou shall accuse thy father and mother, if they profess the
Gospel, to the holy inquisitors of the church of Rome, that they may be burned
for Heretics, and if thou be an Emperors son, or a Kings son, thou shall rise
against thy father, Acts and Monumentes page* 198.
and put him down, and place thy self in his room, as Henry the Emperor was
served by his son, if he love and embrace the Gospel, and do any thing against
the Popes will and pleasure.

And whereas God says: Thou shall do no murder, Exodus 20.
now the judgment of the Church of Rome is changed, therefore God has
likewise changed his judgment, so that this commandment must now be turned
thus quite contrary, Thou shall murder, kill, and burn thy brother, mother,
This needs no author.
father, sister, or else any other whatsoever he be, if he profess the Gospel,
and follow Christ's law.

And whereas God says: Thou shall not commit adultry, Exodus 20*
now the judgment of the Pope and the Church of Rome is changed, and
therefore Gods judgment is changed: so that this law by the judgment of the
Church of Rome must now be thus: Thou shall not marry, The Popes law forbids
Briests marriage.
but thou may have a Concubine or a Harlot to commit aduoutrie or
fornication withal, and thou shall have a license for money of the Pope to do
so, and so he shall allow thee to commit aduoutrie, or to play the
whoremonger or Harlot, but take heed thou marry not according to the law of
God, for then thou shalt loose all thy living, and thou shalt be taken for an
heretic, and the Pope will not dispense with thee therefore. And whereas God
says: Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20.
now ye judgment of ye Popes church is changed, and so Gods judgment is
changed, therefore this law must now be after this sort, thou shall steal and
rob God of his glory, thou shall give the glory that is due to God, unto his
Saints, This is to^ manifest.
nay unto stocks and stones, yea, and if thou chance to steal any man's
good, care not, for the Pope shall pardon thee therefore, for the Pope by his
power is able to dispense with all the laws both of ye old Testament and of
the new Testament.

And whereas God said: Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy
neighbor, Exodus 20.
now, forasmuch as the judgment of the Romish Church is changed, the
judgment of God is changed, therefore this law must be turned an other way,
and thus it must be taken, thou shall bear false witness against God and his
word, Bonifacius Extra de Mayor. and obedi. Priam. Sa^ct. gloss. in eodem
and say there is no salvation without the Church of Rome, and that the death
of Christ is not a sufficient sacrifice for our sins, and if thou chance to
bear false witness against one that professes the gospel, thou shall be heard,
and the Pope shall give thee his blessing for it, and thou shalt have no harm
therefore: And if thou chance to bear false witness against any, for a little
money thou shall have ye Popes pardon for it, therefore bear false witness and
spare not, for ye pope and the holy church of Rome do give thee leave.

Exodus 20.
And whereas God said: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shalt
not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is his: Now, this is not Gods commandment,
because the Church of Rome does not allow it, and Gods judgment is therein
changed, because the Church of Rome has now changed her judgment, therefore
you must turn this law vpside down, and take it thus, thou may be bold to
covet any thing that is thy neighbors: for if thou steal any thing from him
or take it by vyolence, or take thy neighbors wife, or his maid and lie with
them, or lie with thine own sister, and marry her, the Pope will dispense with
thee and pardon thee for money, as Pope Martin did dispense with one that
married his own sister. Jewel in defens. apol. 385
Thus this vile and viperous generation have by their authority, (which they
say is above the Scriptures, allowing the scriptures whatsoever they list, and
taking from the same what they think good, have turned clean contrary the
commandments of God into the commandments of the Pope, which you may
plainelye perceive by their doings and dispensations before mentioned, to be
the very doctrine of the Devil.

And further this Carnal Cardinal says, Scripturae ad tempus adaptantur etc.
Card. Cusanus.
Scriptures are applied to the states of diverse times, and so are taken in
diverse senses, so that at one time they are expounded according to the current
order of the Church, but the order being changed, the sense of the Scripture
is likewise changed Howsoever they would have the Scriptures to be changed in
their meaning, the wicked Pope, and his presumptuous Prelates are changed from
al goodness and truth both in their sayings and livings, for according to the
time, they make the Scriptures and the Gospel of Christ agree with their
doings, but they will not frame their livings, to make the^ agree with ye
scriptures.

And because the Popes conditions, and the judgment of the Church of Rome is
changed, therefore the meaning and sense of the Scriptures must be changed as
is before said. For whereas Christ said, Blessed are the merciful for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven, Math. 5.
now the meaning and sense thereof ought to be changed quite contrary and say
thus, blessed are the unmerciful, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven: or else
thus, unhappy are the merciful, for theirs is the kingdom of Hell. And
whereas Christ said, Math. 5.
Blessed are the peace makers for they shall be called the children of God:
Now according to the time, the sense of the Scripture is changed, because the
judgment of the Church of Rome is changed, and therefore not to be expounded
as it was in Christ's time: So that now it ought to be turned thus, Blessed are
the peace breakers, and they that set men together by the ears, (as the Pope
does) and blessed are the rebels that fight against their Prince and Country
in the Popes quarrel, for they shall be called the children of god, and the Pope
will give them the kingdom of heaven.

And whereas Christ says, Math. 5.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father in heaven: Now the meaning thereof is changed, according
to the time, therefore now it is thus, let not your light shine before men, but
work the deeds of darkness, whereby you may please the Devil your Father.

And whereas Christ says, Whosoever puts away his wife, except it be for
fornication, Math. 19.
and marryeth with another commits aduoutry: now for as much as the
judgment of ye Church of Rome is changed, therefore according to ye time, ye
meaning of this saying must be changed, therefore understand it now thus, what
Priest soever keeps his wife and puts her not away from him though she be
never so honest, shall be counted for an Heretic, and shall be excommunicated,
and lose al his spiritual living. But if he shall keep co^cubines, and Harlots,
he shall be a Catholic man, of a good religion, and keep al his livings still.
Thus may ye precious Pope and the holy Church of Rome, turn and toss the
words and meaning of Christ how they list, but though they allow and do these
things, yet therefore we must not think they are good or to be liked, Did. 82.
presbiter in glossa
but to be abhorred and detested. And I believe yt many will not allow their
wicked laws and writings therein.

But now if ye Scriptures may have sundry senses at sundry times, and may have
one mening at one time, and another mening at another time, if this be so, and
yt the Pope may change the senses of Christ's Gospel for his pleasure, the^ why
may not Christ change the meaning of his own Gospel for his own pleasure:
therefore look by what places of ye scripturs, Peter and his successors were
made Popes of Rome, Christ may change the senses and meaning of the^ clean
contrary and thereby vnpope them again. For whereas Christ said, Super han^
Petra^ (id est, Anacletus Epist. 1.
super ecclesia^ Romana^) edificabo ecclesia^ mea^: which is, Upon this rock
that is to say upon the Church of Rome) I will build my Church, now Christ I
think has altered ye meaning and sense of ye saying, because ye order of the
Church of Rome is changed, and therefore now to be understood thus, upon this
rock being ye Church of Rome, ye church of ye devil shall be builded. And whereas
Christ said to Peter (the first Pope as they say) Whatsoever thou binds in
Earth shall be bound in heaven: Math. 16.
now ye sense of ye scripture is changed, and the meaning thereof is now thus,
whatsoeur you binds in earth, it shall be bound in Hell, and look whose sins ye
forgive they shall not be forgiven, and who^ soever you bless in earth shall be
cursed in Hell, and who^ soever you curse on earth, shall be blessed in heaven. And
whereas ye Pope says yt the meaning of Christ was, Math. 16.
yt the Popes (being Peter's successors) should have the keys, which he gave to
Peter, to open the gates of heaven, and to let us in to it, now I believe ye
same words of Christ have another mening, according to ye time and cha^ging of
ye Popes manners (which are now quite contrary to S. Peter's conditions) and yt
the keys now which the Pope has shall shut men out of heaven, and open the
gates of Hell, and let the Pope and his Papistical Prelates into it, and thus the
Pope by his cha^ging the sense of ye scriptures, and to serve for times, has
made a very fair market, for thereby he is nether Pope nor Christ's Uickar, and
so he may bind in hell if he will, but he can bind nothing in heaven, and also
thereby he has lost the keys of ye kingdom of Heaven, and has in stead thereof
gotten ye keys of ye dungeo^ of Hell. For if ye Pope has any spiritual keys at
al, as he says, he has by ye place of Scripture, then the meaning thereof is
surely changed according to the time as Cusanus says, and so the Popes keys
are not the keys of the kingdom of heaven, but of the doleful dungeon of Hell.

But though Hosius and this Cusanus with other such like does extol the Church
of Rome, and says the authority theris above the scriptures, and that the
meaning of ye scriptures are uncertain, and changes as the judgment of the
church of Rome changes, and yt nothing is taken for Christ's commandment
unless the Church of Rome does allow it: There is no wise man will believe them,
unless they bring better authorities therefore the^ their own bare words, and
in ye mean space let us give credit to S. Aug. which was as godly a man as
virtuous a man, as well learned a man, and one yt knew what authority ye church
of Rome ought to have as well as they, Augustinus de peccator. Merit. and Remi.
lib. 1. ca. 22.
who says thus. Cedamus and co^se^tiamus etc Let us yield (says he) and
consent to the holy Scriptures, which can neither deceive nor be deceived. He
names not here the Church of Rome nor says that it has aucthority above
the Scriptures, nor yet says that the Scripturs have sometimes one meaning and
sometimes another, and that the sense does alter or change: but he bids both
the Church of Rome and al other Churches whatsoever, to yield and consent to
the scripture, which as he says can neither deceive nor be deceived.

Truly if your Church of Rome had had any such authority above the
scriptures, as ye Popes, proctors would make us believe, then Irenaeus, S.
Jerome, S. Augustine, Tertullian, Chrisost. and other learned writers would
have written something of it, nay if they had done so, ye Popes doctors would
have brought the^ forth for the better credit of their cause. But because they
write directly against the^ (as is before mentioned) therefore they let the^
alone. Now if the scriptures according to Saint Au. can neither deceive nor be
deceived, then the Church of Rome, which is inferior to the scripturs and ought
to give place to ye Gospel (being clean contrary to the scripturs) may deceive
us, and therefore may err and ly, as she ca^ do none other, as before is very
manifest, but though these ye Popes prelates would make us believe yt there were
no certainty in the scriptures, and yt the Gospel is uncertain, and the
meaning thereof chaunges according to ye times, which is a most devilish
doctrine, yet I will approve that there is neither certainetye, truth, nor
godliness, in the Popes laws, nor in the Church of Rome.

Platina in Stephano.
Platina says) that the Popes yt follow, do evermore either break, or wholye
abrogate, the decrees of the Popes that were before: now seeing there is such
uncertainty in the Popes laws and decrees, are not we worthy to believe and
credit the same? Look what laws God did send unto us by Jesus Christ his
son, which is the Gospel, he never disanulled them nor did deliver us any
other since nor never will, his doings and judgments are so certain true and
infallible, and therefore Gods law and his holy gospel is so right, true,
perfect, and infallible, that al other doctrines ought to be judged and tried
by it.

Therefore if you be the children of God, you will credit no doctrine, (be it
never so ancient, and seem it never so glorious nor so holy) no further than
it does agree with the Scriptures and the word of God. Therefore believe not
the Church of Rome, whose Doctors and doctrine are so devilish, as before is
well proved, and as hereafter shall be more manifested.

Therefore mark well a little more of this doctrine of your church of Rome,
Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 253. De cons. Distin. 4. Si non.
which if you be of God you will scantly like. The Popes Doctors say and avouch
it for truth, that if the Priest say thus (when he does Baptize a child) Ego
te Baptiso in nomine patris and filij, and spiritus sancti and diaboli, that
is, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, and of the Devil, yet the form of Baptism is very good, and the child
is rightly christened.

I remember that Christ bad his Apostles Baptize in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Math. 28.
but that he bad them Baptize any in the name of the Devil I never heard. If
they be rightly christened that are christened in the name of the Devil,
(according to the Popes law) then I hope they are not falsely christened that
are christened in the name of God without naming the Devil, according to Gods
law.

If we should allow such Baptizing to be good, and that they were rightlye
Baptized, that were Baptized in the name of the Devil, you that call us now
Satan's brood, would then call us (as you might well) the children of the
Devil.

Must not this Church of Rome be a holy Church, that has such goldy
doctrine, and divine Doctors: if they be cursed that take any thing from the
word of God, then they are not blessed that add the Devil to the Baptizing of
the children of God. Every one that have an affection to the Popes Religion,
would scantly believe that there is such handsome doctrine belonging to his
religion.

This is not much unlike other of the Romish Doctors doctrine: Jewel in defen.
Apolog. page 674. Hosius contra brentum lib. 2.
for in the Defense of the Apology (which the learned Bishop of Sarisburie,
wrote against the confutation of Doctor Harding) are these words, Petrus
Asotus and Hosius stick not to affirm that the same Counsel wherein our
Savior Jesus was condemned to die, had both the spirit of Prophecy and the
holy Ghost, and the spirit of truth: And that it was no false saying: when the
Bishop said, we have a law and by our law he ought to die: and that they so
saying did light upon the very truth of judgment, and that the same was a just
decree, whereby they pronounced that Christ was worthy to die. Thus the Popes
Prelates take part with Annus and Caiphas against Christ. If that were a good
and true judgment that most shamefully and wrongfully condemned the son of
God to death: then where shall we find any false and wicked judgment? by this
means the Popes sentences and judgments in burning the members of Christ for
professing of ye Gospel, ca^ not be false, wicked, or evil. I fear, they yt
say they had the holy ghost and the spirit of truth, yt judged Christ to
death, and that the same was a just decree, whereby they pronounced yt Christ
was worthy to die, (I fear I say) yt they are none of them that Christ dyed
for: and as they yt judged Christ most wrongfully did it not by the spirit of
God: Even so Asotus and Hosius and all other that say yt their judgment was
true, and that their decree was just, whereby they pronounced that Christ was
worthy to die, spoke and uttered the same by the spirit of ye devil, for if
they gave true judgment against Christ, then Christ was an offender and
deserved to die.

The Lord bless every man from believing the doctrine of such that either say
or believe that Christ the Son of God (that never offended nor sinned,) was
worthily or rightly condemned to die.

If our Bishops, Preachers and Doctors should preach, teach or write such
blasphemous doctrine, you might then justly call us Heretics, as we may well call
them, and al other yt take their parts, blasphemers and the disciples of
Antichrist.

But Caiphas said it is good that one man die for the people least all the
people perish, Ergo, Jewel in defen. Apo. page 677.
says M. Harding Caiphas had the spirit of God. To whom that learned and
worthy M. Jewel late Bishop of Sarisburie replies with these words: But that
ye may the better (M. Harding) epsy your oversight, like as ye say, Caiphas
prophesied blindly himself not understanding what he said, Ergo, he had the
holy Ghost, S, Paul says no man can say the Lord Jesus, but in the Spirit of
God, hereof by your Logic you may reason thus, the Devil said unto Christ, I
know that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Ergo, the Devil had
the Spirit of God, etc.

If Caiphas had the spirit of God, then he had ye holy ghost that wrote this
note upon the Popes decree, that the Jews had committed mortal sin, Distin.
13. Item. in Margin.
if they had not nailed Christ to the Cross.

Now open your eyes and behold whether this be good and sound doctrine or not,
yt these Papisticall Doctors do teach. They that worship God aright and follow
Christ's Gospel, will and do detest such devilish doctrine. Therefore fly from
this Romish Church, that takes the Pope to be her head, and that refuses to
be tried by the Scriptures, and speedily become members of that Church that
takes Christ to be her head, and is content to be judged by the Scriptures.
For they that are of Christ will hear his voice, which is the Gospel, which
true Church (whereof Christ is the head) can not be known, but by the
Scriptures.

Chrysostom says, now can no man know the Church, Jewel in defens. Apolog.
Page 513.
but by the scriptures, S. Augustine says, Whether they have the Church or no,
let them show by the Canonical Books of the holy scriptures: we must know
the Church, even likewise as we know Christ, which is the head of the Church,
in the holy Canonical Scriptures. Again he says, the holy Scriptures shows
the Church, without any doubtfulnesse. Again, the question or doubt is, where
the Church should be, what then shall we do? whether shall we seek the
Church in our own words, or in the words of her head, which is our Lord
Jesus Christ? In my judgment we ought rather to seek the Church in his
words for that he is the truth and best knows his own body. And again he
says, Let us not hear these words, this say I, This say thou, but these
words let us hear, Thus says the Lord: there let us seek the Church:
there let us discuss our cause. And Saint Ambrose says, the Church shines
(or is known) not by her own light, but by the light of Christ, which is the
word of God.

These learned holy and ancient fathers words, are sufficient to prove unto
us that ye Church of Christ is known, and is chiefly to be discerned by the
word of God.

But what if these ancient and learned Doctors had not written thus? should
we then have taken that for the Church of God, which the Popes doctrine does
allow? then we should have a trim and holy Church, as by the premysses does
appear.

And now because nothing can describe which is the true Church better than
Christ himself, which is the head thereof: therefore let us search the
scriptures for the same, and there we shall be best certified. John. 5.
And seeing Christ bids us search the scriptures, which bears witness of
him: therefore let us search them, thereby to know Christ and his Church: for
it is the chief lantern, that will guide and lead us to the truth, (though
the Pope and his Prelates would feign make us believe the contrary.)

And as it is here proved by the holy, ancient, and learned Fathers and
Doctors, that the true Church is chiefly to be found out and to be tried
by the Scriptures and word of God: now you shall hear what a good report
diverse have given the Church of Rome, and to them that governed the same,
whereof some were of the Church, of Rome, who I think would not lie on their
own Church and especially a Pope, which some of you think can not err.

Pope Adrian the fourth was wont to say, we succeed not Peter in teaching, but
Romulus in killing our brethren. Jewel in defen. Apolog. Page. 734.
Erasmus says, the Popes now are the vickares of Julius Caesar, of Alexander
the great, of Croesus, and of Xerxes, not of Christ nor of Peter. It is written
in a Sermon bearing the name of S Ambrose, They that should have been the
Apostles vickars, are now become Judas fellows. Robertus Gallus that lived well
near three hundredth years past, imagines Christ thus to say of the Pope:
Robert. Gallus cap. 5.
who set this Idol in my room, and made him ruler of my flock? whether he
that commendes the Pope thus were a Papist or not, I know not, but surely he
was no Lutherane, Zwinglian, Caluinist nor Hugenot. It was marvel that the
Pope made him not a Saint for his sayings. Ennodius says, Ennodius Co^. Tom. 1.
That the Successors of Peter together with the privileges of their See, have
also gotten free liberty to do evil, for the Pope may not be judged by any
creature under Heaven.

If he will not, yet I can tell him one thing, he is like to be judged by one
that is in Heaven, which is Christ, whether he will or no.

S. Barnard describes the Popes, Priests and Bishops, (that are of the Church
of Rome) saying, Bernard. de consid. ad Eugenius libr. 3.
in their apparel they are Soldiers, in there gains they are Priests and
Bishops, but in effect and deed they are neither of both. For neither do they
fight in the field as do the Soldiers, nor do they preach as Priests and
Bishops. Of whether order therefore be they? whereas they would be of both
orders, they forsake both and confound both. S. Paul says, every man shall
rise again in his own order, but in what order shall they rise? whether, for
as much as they have sinned without order, shall they perish without order? I
fear me they shall be ordered none other where, but whereas is no order, but
disorder and horror everlasting. If we should say thus as S. Barnard said,
they would say we rayled. The said Barnard also says, Jewel in defe^. Apol.
pa. 910.
that the Bishops in his time which were of the Church of Rome, were not
Doctors but deceyuers, not Feeders but Defrauders, not Prelates but Pilates,
and he says further that the heads of the Church of Rome, are Ministers of
Antichrist, Deceyuers, Defrauders, Raueners, Traitors, the darkness of the
World, Woolues, Pylates, and Devils, wherein it seems he does not much
praise the governors of the Romish Church: this is but a sorry Church that
has such godly governors and guydes.

Mark also how the same Saint Barnard, (to whom Pope Eugenius was much
beholden, Barnard. in apol. ad Gulielm. abbat.
and being an Abbot) condemns all the Popes doctrine and Religion for that it
agrees not with the Scriptures. Does not the rule (says he) agree with the
Gospel or with the Apostle? otherwise that rule is no rule at all, for it is
crooked, it is not straight.

Here Saint Barnarde that was one of that Romish Church (yet an excellent
and a Learned man) does plainly condemn all those Laws, Religions, Churches
and Rules, that do not agree with the Gospel, and says it is no true nor
good Church, and that such Religions and Rules are crooked, and no Religion
nor Rule at all.

Now because the Popes Rules and Religion be contrary to the Gospel,
therefore they are crooked, and so naughty rules.

And the same Saint Barnarde in an other place, discribes and sets forth
what a godly and holy Church the Church of Rome is, Barnard. in co^uers.
Pauli.
who says thus. From the Sole of thy foot to the crown of thy head, there is
not one whole place, A man were better to be out of such a Church than in it.

Mark also how the Bishop of Bitonto extolled that same Church of Rome, at
the Counsel of Trident, saying: With what monsters of filthiness (says he)
with what villainy, Consil. Trid. Episcopus Bitontonimis.
with what Pestilence be not they corrupted and defiled in the Church (of
Rome) as well the Priest as the people? begin even with the Sanctuary of God:
if there be any shame, if there be any regard of honesty, if there be any
hope, or way to live well.

Petrarcha calls Rome a School of error, and a Temple of Heresy. Brigitta
whose Prophesies and sayings are of the Popes Scholars and Disciples much
reverenced, says in her Revelations: Christ shall take his blessing from the
Clergy of Rome, and shall give the same to a people that shall do his will.
Then by her sayings and the other before recited, the Pope and his Prelates
do not Gods will, and so if they do not Gods will, then they must needs do
the Devils will, so that by these (and by many other) the truth is a stranger
in the Church of Rome, and dwelles not there.

And whereas some say that the truth can not depart from the Church of
Rome, it had need to be there first, before it depart from thence: therefore
the truth can not depart from the Church of Rome, because it is not there.
But that holy Church for all their bragges love the truth so well, that if
they had it there, they would drive it away from thence. And now because the
Church of Rome has not the truth, but is a Church of all wickedness and
error, as I have sufficiently proved both with Arguments, Scriptures,
Doctors, yea and by the Popes themselves and other of the same Church:
therefore I beseech you come away from that whoorishe Church the seat of
Antichrist, and fly to the true Church, which embraces and obeys the
Gospel, and that hears the voice of Christ: least you be partakers of her
wickedness, whose destruction is not far off. And trust not to them neither
believe them, that say the truth is only in the Church of Rome, and that the
truth shall never depart from thence.

If truth and falsehood may dwell together or be both at once in one place, then
I will not say but that your Church of Rome may have the truth, but thy are
such enemies, that it is very seldom or never seen, and though the Church of
Rome had the truth, (as it is manifestly proved it has not) yet it had need
to have a very strong commission to tie the truth so hard to it, that it
should never depart thence.

Jerusalem was once a holy City, and the Temple of God was placed in the
same, wherein he appeared and showed his Majesty and revealed his will, in
which Temple, King Solomon that builded it thought the Lord would dwell there
for ever, and that there should be his house and his Church: yet now God has
left both that City of Jerusalem and the Temple, and suffered them to be
destroyed and overthrown: now if God has departed from and left Jerusalem
and the holy Temple which he himself appointed to be builded to be his house
for himself, and wherein he appeared and revealed his will and pleasure: then
there can be no great warrantie made, but that he and the truth may depart
from, and forsake the City and Church of Rome, which he never called his
City, neither appointed any Temple or Church there to be builded for him to
dwell in, neither ever appeared there and revealed his will to his Prophets
and servants as he did in the Temple of Jerusalem, which City of Rome was
first builded with murder, continued with murder, and maintained with
murder: where in is the Church of covetousness, the palace of pride, the
Castle of cruelty, the boothes of brothelrie, the Innes of Idolatry, the
mansion of mischief, the houses of Harlotrie, and the dungeon of all
Diuelishnesse and iniquity. Therefore it is very hard to warrant that the
truth shall never depart from this your Church of Rome, unless you mean
that the truth can not depart from thence because it is not there, or never
will be there.

By this undoubted assertion it should seem that you have bound Christ in
some great bond or statute Merchant, that he being the truth shall not depart
from the Pope, but it were more meet that the Pope were bound not to depart
from Christ.

Therefore seeing the truth has departed, from Jerusalem and the Temple there
which was the City and Temple of God, where he was content to appear and
reveal his will to his people. Then the truth may well depart from Rome, (if
it were there) which God never chosed for his City, neither ever appeared
there in any Temple, nor appointed any house there to be builded for him as he
did in Jerusalem.

Yet we may boldly affirm that the truth was once in Rome and the Gospel of
Christ was there embrased, and then there was the Church of God? but now of a
long time, it has not had the truth (as before it appears) but is the enemy
to the truth and forsakes and drives from them the truth that is the Gospel.
Therefore Rome is not now the Church of God, but the Synagoge of Satan.

Yet Doctor Harding did write that the Church that now is (meaning the
Church of Rome) and the Church that was in the old time is one Church: In
his confut. of the Apology of the Church.
as the man in his old age is the same he was in his youth. I grant herein
that Master Harding says true, but though he be the same man, yet the same
man may be an honest man in his youth, and a false harlot in his age. Even so
your Church of Rome, when she was young, she was godly, honest, and was a true
spouse to Christ her husband: but now your Church of Rome in her old age,
is become wicked, dishonest, and false to Christ her husband, and is a very
unshamefast whore, and an aduoutresse, and goes a whooring, worshippes Images,
and committes Idolatry.

And as the learned Master Jewel late Bishop of Salisburie says thus upon
the same, Jewel in defe^. Apo. page 632.
Even so is the Moon being full: and the same Moon Eclipsed is one Moon.
Even so a man well advised, and the same man stark mad, is one man: Even so
the house of God and a cave of thieves is one house.

And the same Master Harding was so far in love with the Church of Rome, that
he thought it to be so holy and true, that all other Churches ought to receive
their truth and light from it, and would not have it dayed or Judged by the
Scriptures or by any other thing, but that all other Churches ought rather be
daied and judged by the church of Rome, and thought she was too old and ancient
to be controlled in these days, either of God, Christ, or of the Scriptures.
And therefore he says thus as follows: Our doctrine (meaning the doctrine of
the Pope and of the Church of Rome) has had too high a teacher, Jewel in
defe^. Apo. page 639.
to be tried by me^ now, it has been approved too long to be put in daying in
these days at the latter end of the world. Thus much says he of the Church
of Rome, thinking she is too true, honest, and ancient, to come to trial or
to be put to daying.

But I say, he that refuses trial of his matter, doubts belike that it is
not very good: he that stands so much upon his honesty, and will refuse to be
tried by his neighbors, may be thought to be scant an honest man, and so the
Church of Rome refusing to be tried by the Scriptures and by the word of God,
(which is as honest, as true, and as ancient as she is, I am sure), doubts
the truth of her cause, and suspects her own honesty.

The Jews doctrine was once the doctrine of God, and the auncientest and
truest of al other, and they the people of God, and it was long before ye
Gospel which is ye doctrine of Christ, yea and before the Popes holy religion,
or the Romish doctrine: yet for all that, the Jews now are not the people,
servants, nor the true Church of God. Who might now say thus (as well as the
Popes proctors and a great deal better) Our law has been approved too long to
be put in daying in these days at the latter end of the world.

I trust you would not think ye saying were sufficient to overthrow your
Church of Rome although it might well enough. It is not the auncientnesse, but
the truth of the doctrine that ought to be allowed or accepted. Genesis.
Caine the first wicked murderer that murdered his brother Abel, was elder
than Abel. Yet murder for all the auncientnesse and long continuance thereof
may be put to daying well enough: and that by Gods law, which Abel professed,
though he were the younger brother.

The Heathen may say (by as good reason) our worshipping of Idolles being long
before the religion of the Christians, has been approved and used too long by
our ancestors to be put in daying in these days in the latter end of the
world.

The Devil was before the world began, and fell from Heaven for his pride, a
great while before God did set forth his law either by Moses or else by
Christ: Yet I trow, that pride is not therefore to be allowed to be good. The
Devil might likewise say, my law of pride began so long ago, yea before the
world was created or made, and has been allowed, approved, and used by many
great Emperoures, Kings, yea and Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, and many other,
too long, to be put in daying in these days at the latter end of the world.
But whereas the murder of Caine, the Idolatry of the Heathen, and the pride
of the Devil began long before Christ, yet the Pope and his Religion began
long and many a day after Christ, as plainly appears. Therefore seeing the
murder of Caine, the Idolatry of the Heathen, and the pride of the Devil,
that are so ancient and so long before Christ, may be put to daying: then the
Popes authority and his new Romish religion that began so long after Christ,
(wherein murder, Idolatry, and pride bears such a sway) may as well be put to
daying, and be brought to account. Therefore regard not the church of Rome for
her ancie^tnes, (who though you believed she was so old and so ancient, yet in
comparison of ye gospel she is very yo^g) but stick to the word of God and
the Gospel, which is both ancient and true, whereupon the right and true
Church is builded, and be not angry with us for forsaking that false late
vpstart Church of Rome, and in following Christ and his Gospel which makes us
the true Church, neither say that we boast our selves to much in saying so,
(which is no proud boasting but a godly rejoicing). For if it be a proud
part to follow Christ in religion and living, (who is the best pattern to
follow of all that ever dwelled on the earth): what is the Pope then that
claymeth Christ's authority to him self, and to be as Christ? For one saluted
the Pope in this manner as follows. Touching prymacie thou art Abel: Bernard.
de confid. lib. 2.
Touching government, thou art Noe: touching the Patriarkeship, thou art
Abraham: touching order thou art Melchisedech: touching dignity, thou art
Aaron: touching Authority, thou art Moses: touching Judgment, thou art
Samuel: touching power, thou art Peter: touching annoynting, thou art Christ.
All this I trow is sufficient for a Pope, and I may say further, touching thy
taking of all this upon thee, thou art Antichrist.

That Church that has such a head and chief Captain as claymes and takes
all these Titles, (and yet for all that is a very limme of the Devil) must
needs be a true and holy Church, such a Church is that Church of Rome, that
you have so much esteemed, therefore if you mean to be of the Church of
Christ, then fly away with speed from this Church of Antichrist. For how
can that be the Church of Christ that will not suffer the Gospel, which is
the Statutes and Laws of Christ to be red and taught in it?

As all earthly Emperors and Kings have their statutes and laws for the
obeying of them and the maintenance of the country and Commonwealth: so has
Christ the son of God his statutes and laws for them that be his people the
Christians, thereby to obey their Captain Christ, and to do these things that
may conserve them all together here in a holy congregation, and that may
lead them the way to the kingdom, where their head King and Captain in
Christ is.

But as they that will not suffer the laws of their Kings or Emperors to be
read and published to their people, (but will hyde them, destroy them, and
burn them, because they should not obey their Emperors and kings, and that
they should not do their things that should be for the prosperity, concord,
and continuance of their Country and common wealth) are no true subjects of
those Kings or Emperors (but rather rebels and traitors:) Even so the Pope and
the Church of Rome, are not the true children nor Church of Christ (but
rebels and Traitors to him) that hydes, destroys, and burns the Scripture,
Gospel, and Gods word, because we should not know our duty to our
Christ, and that we should not keep his commandments.

Perhaps some of you will say, if the Popes be so wicked, their doctrine so
detestable, and the Church of Rome so contrary to Christ (as is here
alleged) then why does the Emperor and diverse Kings, and so many Rulers in
Christendom follow him, and do not epsy his devilish doings? Mary I will tell
you why they do not: forsooth because they look not in the word of God, which
is the only Candle that would make them to see, and so without it they are
blind: therefore the Pope does suppress it, burns it, and hydes it, and
falsely expoundes it, and makes them believe it is Heresy to be in their
vulgar and known tongue, and all because he would not have them to see, that
he may lead them by the noses which way he list: for the Pope is assured,
that if the Kings and Rulers that are the defenders of his religion, did once
know the Scriptures, and had them in their vulgar tongue, as our gracious
Queen of England* the King of Denmark, the King of Scots, and other Dukes and
Rulers of Germany, and of diverse other Countries have: then they would spy
his iugling, and forsake him as her Grace and the other Kings and Rulers have
done.

Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 759.
The Lion or wild Bull (says M. Jewel) be they neueruer so cruel or great
of courage, yet if you may once closely cover their eyes, ye may easily lead
them whether you list without resisting: Even so does the Pope hoodwinke and
blindfolde the Princes of the world, and hold them in ignorance, (for want
of looking in Gods word) which done, he makes them to hold his Styrrop, to
lead his horse, to kneel down and to kiss his shoe, and to attend and
wait upon him at his pleasure, but if they either knew him or them selves
they would not do it: which they will never know well, before they know Gods
word better than they do.

And thus the blind Popes, lead the blind Kings, Princes and Rulers, whereby
they are all like to fall in the ditche, and the Pope learnes the blind Kings
and Princes meekness and humility: and the Devil teaches him to be
presumptuous and proud, for humility it can not well be called, unless the
Pope has one humility, and Christ an other.

For Christ says learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Math. 11.
Now if Christ (which is the chief teacher of humility and meekness,) had
thought it had been a point of humility, to have trodden in the Emperors
neck: that an Emperor with his wife and child should have come in the cold
frost, and to stand three days without at his gate for his absolution and
pardon: that an Emperor should hold his Styrrop, whiles he got up on his
horse: ye Kings should hold his horse, lead his horse by the bridle, and go
on foot whiles he did ride: to set the Emperors Crown on his head with his
foot, and to strik it off again with his foot: to suffer a Duke to lie in
chains under his Table whiles he was at dinner: and that Kings and Emperors
should kneel to him and kiss his feet: surely he would have done it. But
seeing these holy Fathers and Popes (who you do so reverence, and whose laws
you so love,) did not learn these Luciferlike doings of Christ nor of his
Apostles: then surely they must needs learn them of the Devil, who will
reward them one day (if they have not repented) for learning his lessons so
well, and for putting that in practice, that he taught them. If the Pope did
not mean to keep the people in blindness and error, what reason should
then lead him to keep the Scriptures from them, and not to have the same in
their vulgar tongue?

You see that children and scholars are suffered to have rules in their own
tongue that they understand, to make them Gramarians: they that learn
Arithmetike are permitted to have the Rules of that science, in the tongue they
understand to make them Arithmeticians: they that study Geometry are
permitted to have the same in such a tongue as they understand, that they may
become perfect Geometricians: they that desire to learn Physic are suffered
to study the same, in the tongue they understand, whereby they may be perfect
Physicians: and so of all other Sciences. And shall not we then that profess
Christianity, be suffered to have the law of Christ, to look on the law of
Christ, and study the law of Christ in that tongue that we understand? whereby
we may become perfect Christians? Nay we have more need that mean to be
Christians, to have ye law of Christ in our mother tongue that we understand:
than they that study any other Sciences. For the sciences that they study,
can but make them Doctors to maintain them here to live a while: but our law
of Christ (if we study it and practice it well) will make us Saints, and the
sons of God, whereby we shall live in Heaven for ever. And therefore the law
of Christ which is the Gospel, has most need of all other laws and sciences
to be in the vulgar tongue, yt every one may read, study, and understand it,
unless you will say yt it is not meet for every one to be Christians, or that
it is not meet for every one to be saved.

Therefore how injuriously and tyrannously does the Pope use the people in
taking Gods word from them that should guide them to heaven, and without which
they must needs wander in darkness and fall into Hell.

If many go out of their way, which they have gone in a fair bright day: then
it is impossible for one to go right in a dark night, where they know not
the way, or never went before. Wherefore the child of God will be willing that
his brother should have a torche or a candle to guide him in the dark. Then
may not he be called the child of the devil, that does put out the candle or
torche purposely, that his neighbor has in his hand, for ye lighting of him
home in the night, and leads him a wrong way in the dark, whereby he falls
into a ditch and is drowned? yes truly, and none will judge the contrary.

Then must the Pope needs be a most cruel and devilish Tyrant, that pluckes
the light of Gods word from us, that should guide us to heaven, and so leads
us in the dark out of our way into the deep pit of Hell, where we shall be
drowned both body and soul. For he does not only burn Gods word, but also
burns them that have it in their hands, to light them withal, and to guide
them in this dark world, to the kingdom of Heaven.

Perhaps some of you will say, that we do belie ye Pope, for he suffers us
to have ye scriptures in Latin. Yea marry, but that is even as though one
should take the burning candle out of the launtorne, and suffer the launtorne
still in our hands: and do you think, that then we should see to keep our
way as well as we did before? No I trow. Even so though we should have the
Bible in Latin, and understand never a word of Latin, what should we then
be the better for the Bible?

Perhaps you will say, that your Bishops, Doctors, and Priests would teach us
the right meaning of it, and would lead us the right way: forsooth that they
would as they have done already, and as he that plucketh out the bright
lincke out of ones hand, and leads him in the dark into a ditche, and so
makes him to be drowned.

If one meant that I should go right, he would not put out the Candel and lead
me in the dark: No more the Pope means that we should walk in the right
way to Heaven, that blows out the Candel of Gods word, and leads us in the
dark which way he list.

Nay he that is my friend and would have me go right, will not only suffer me
to have a link to light me in my way in the dark, but also he himself will
direct me in my way: Even so, if the Pope and his Prelates were of GOD, they
would not only suffer the people to have the word of God in their vulgar or
known tongue that they understand, to guide them in the way: but also they
themselves would preach Gods word unto them, and so direct them the right way
to heaven.

Therefore as thieves hate the light, and desire to be in the dark, because
they would not be spyed: so the Pope (because he is a spiritual thief) hates
the light of Gods word, and would not have the people to have it, but keeps
it from them, and suppresseth it: least they by that light, should spy his
theeuerie and perfectly perceive that he is a spiritual thief. For he knows
that Gods word is the chiefest light of all other, whereby to espy a
spiritual thief, being well assured, that if they had the light of Gods
word, that then he could neither rob them of their goods and treasure (as
he daily does) neither would they honor, esteem, or credit him: but take
him for a Thief, a murderer, the enemy of God, a destroyer of souls, and
the very Antichrist (as he is in deed.) And therefore by no means he can
abide, that the people should have Gods word openly in their vulgar or known
tongue: for it would show them, what he is, what he has bin, and to what
slavery, bondage, and thraldom, he brings them.

For as the word of God in our English tongue, has uttered and revealed him what
he is, and thereby out of estimation with our Prince and us here in England:
Even so he knows well enough, if the word of God were in all other realms in
their vulgar tongue, they would then esteem him no more than we do. And so the
Pope (because he hides the Gospel and takes it from the people which should
chiefly guide them) hates the light, and so is a spiritual thief, and Christ's
enemy.

Therefore it seems, that Christ did not chose his enemy to be his Uickar:
(but the Pope knew that it was a good way to bring him in credit.) For if
kings, rulers, and Lords of the earth (which may be deceived) do chose as nie
as they can, their most dearest and trustiest friends, to be their
presedents, and deputies: then I am sure that Christ the son of God, and the
King of all Kings (that can not be deceived) if he had meant to have had a
general vickar on the earth, would have made one of his dearest and trustiest
friends his vickar, and not his mortal enemy. And therefore the Pope may say
what he will, but al wise men do see, that Christ neither takes him for his
vickar, nor yet for his Curate. Can he or his chaplains be the children of
God, that prefers ignorance before knowledge? I think not, some of them have
affirmed that ignorance is the mother of devotion. O Lord how contrary are
these me^, both to God and to his son Christ? nay ignorance of Gods word is
rather, the mother of mischief, the father of falsehoode, the sister of sin,
the son of sedition, the daughter of disobediency, the coosin of conspiracy,
and the Captain of cruelty.

Full well the Devil knew that ignorance was the next way to bring the Pope to
promotion and the people to destruction for their ignorance made them think,
that none but the Pope or his Prelates did know the truth. And their blindness
did make them believe that none did see perfectly but he and his precious
Prelates: So that for want of knowledge of Gods word (which of purpose they
kept from them) they believed that al they spoke was true, and that it was the
very right way that they did lead them. So that the peoples ignorance was the
occasion of the Popes credit, his credit the cause of his gain, his gain
the cause of his power, his power the cause of his pride, and his pride the
cause he made Emperors and Kings his servants, or rather slaves, and thus
the ignorance of Gods word, brought the Pope to promotion, the Princes to
subjection, and the people to destruction.

And if you mark well, you may perceive that the Popes suppressing and the
keeping of Gods word from the people, is a manifest argument that he is
neither Christ's vickar nor his deputy, nor that he loves Christ. For Christ
said to Peter, love thou me? to whom Peter said, yea Lord, thou know
that I love thee, John. 21*
then Christ said to him again, Feed my sheep, etc. So that Peter's love to
Christ, appeared by feeding of Christ's sheep, which was not by feeding their
bodies with meat and drink, but by feeding their souls, through preching to
them the Gospel. Now if they love Christ that feed his sheep, then they must
needs hate Christ that starve his sheep, never preching to them at all: And
such a one is the Pope, for he never preaches, therefore he never feeds
Christ's sheep. Nay besides that, he does not only trouble, molest, hurt,
burn, and kill such as do or would feed Christ's sheep, but also hides,
keeps back, and burns the Bybles and Testaments, least the people should
look on them and feed themselves.

So that here it is manifest that the Pope loves not Christ because he feeds
not Christ's sheep: And he that loves not Christ must needs hate Christ,
and therefore the Pope being Christ's enemy can not be the vickar of Christ.

And here also is a great contrariety between Peter and the Pope though he
claim to be Peter's successor) for Peter loved Christ for that he fed Christ's
sheep, but ye Pope hates Christ because he sterueth his sheep, yea and also
kills his sheep. So that the Pope does not succeed Peter in any thing, unless
it be in denying of Christ.

Here it plainly appears, that the Pope may well be the Uicar of the Devil,
for Christ's Uickar sure he can not be. I am most certain that it was
Christ's will that his word should not be kept from any, though it be the Popes
will it should be rightly known of any. For would Christ have us keep that we
never heard of, and would he have us search we know not what? no, Christ was
never so unreasonable. For Christ says unto us all, If you love me keep my
commandments, (that is whatsoever he has willed by his word. John. 14.
) But how can we know what is his commandments yt we should keep? if none
declare the^ unto us? neither read the^ our selves, nor yet have the^ red unto
us? Therefore if our loving of Christ depend on ye keeping of his commandments,
the^ how ca^ we love him, seeing we can not know his commandments? So that
ye Popes keeping or hurding of Gods word from the people, is the cause they can
not keep Gods commandments: And their not keeping of Gods commandments,
is the cause they do not love him: and their not loving of him is the cause
that he hates them, and his hating of them, will be the cause of their
dampnation. And thus the Pope is the first worker of the ignorant peoples
damnation.

Christ says also, Search the Scriptures for they are they that witness of
me, John. 5.
but how can they search the Scripturs that have not the Scriptures to search,
neither know how to come by them? now if the Scriptures witness what is
Christ's will and pleasure, and if their searching and looking therein will show
them how to perform his will and please him, and the pleasing of him would be
the cause of their salvation. Then the Popes hiding and keeping the Scripturs
from them, is the cause they cannot hear, read, or search the Scripturs: and
not hearing, reading, or searching of the Scriptures, is the cause they cannot
know the will of Christ, and the not knowing the will of Christ, is the cause
they can not please him: and their not pleasing of him, is the cause they
please the Devil: and the pleasing of ye Devil is ye cause of their damnation.
And thus once again, ye Pope is the chief cause of the ignorant peoples
damnation.

Christ says also: Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it:
Luke. 11.
so that they that hear the word of God and keep it not, are unhappy. Now,
if all they that hear the word of God are not happy, then all they that hear
not the word of God must needs be unhappy, (for there are none happy but
they that keep or follow the word of God,) but how can they keep the word of
God, that neither hear it, nor read it? Now, if the hearing of Gods word is
the cause that they keep it, and their keeping or following of it, is the
cause they are happy or blessed: then the Popes restrayning of Gods word from
the people, is the cause they do not hear it: and their not hearing it, is
the cause they cannot keep or follow it: and their not keeping or following
of it, is the cause they are unhappy: and their unhappiness is the cause of
their damnation. And thus that holy Father that names himself the Uicar of
Christ, (whom you so much esteem, favor, and honor) the third time is
proved to be the chief cause of the ignorant peoples damnation, by keeping
them from the word of God, which is their only guide to Salvation.

Christ bad al his Apostles go throughout the world, Math. 28.
and preach the Gospel, and to teach al Nations to observe all things that he
commanded them, which is a manifest token, that he that would have it
preached to all, would not have it kept away or hyd from all.

What Emperor, King, or other Prince that makes good orders and laws for their
subjects to keep, with penalties of death for the breaking thereof, would
lock up the same in their Chests, and neither suffer them to be proclaimed,
nor their subjects to look on them nor know them, and yet would put them to
death that should break the same? Truly there was never any Emperor or Ruler
that were so vnreasoble. For it were meet that their subjects should learn,
read, hear, and understand the law^s that they are bound to keep. For how
can they keep these laws they know not? Then it stands as much with reason,
that we should learn, know, search, study, and hear the word and law of God,
and not to have it hid or kept from us, the keeping, and not keeping whereof
stands upon our everlasting salvation or damnation. Therefore it is a most
diuelishe and tyrannous part of ye pope to take ye word of God from us, which
Christ has left behind him, only to lead us to heaven: and to lead us in
ye dark with his Idolatry and superstition, to bring us to Hell. Saint Paul
says, There is no damnation to the^ that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
but how can they be or abide in Christ, that neither see, hear, or read the
law of God, (that should teach them to be or remain in Christ?) Whatsoever S.
Paul says, Pope Bonifacius tells us an other manner of tale, Extra. de
mayor and obe. vnam Sanct. gloss. in ^^d.
who says (if we may believe him,) That, There is no Salvation* without the
Church of Rome. And also the gloss of the same says, Quicquid saluatur est
sub summo Pontifice: Whatsoever creature is saved, is under the highest Bishop,
that is, the Pope) Here is neither mention made of Christ nor of his Gospel.
Christ and Saint Paul may both be deceived, but the Pope cannot err, for
Christ prayed for Peter that his faith should not fail, therefore the Pope
cannot err. But why not thus rather, Peter denied Christ his Master,
therefore the Pope denies or forsakes Christ? I think this is the more likely
and truer argument, for, if Coniurers, Idolators, Murderers, Heretics,
Blasphemers, Fornicators, Apostatas, Perjured persons, and that give themselves
body and soul to the devil (as Pope Siluester the second did) and that deny
and forsake Christ, Johan. Stella Venetus.
then the Popes have erred and have denied and forsaken Christ, for they have
bin such as before is manifestly proved. Therefore, if the Pope hold any thing
of Peter, it is his denying of Christ. But as they deny Christ with Peter, so
I beseech God that the Pope and his Prelates may repent with Peter, and not to
forsake him with Judas. And though Christ prayed for Peter, yet he prayed not
that the Popes should be Coniurers, Idolators, Murderers, and such like, as
before is declared.

Christ says moreover, My Sheep hear my voice, (which is the Gospel:) Even
so the devil may say: John 10.
My Goats hear my voice (which is Papistrie.) Thus it is manifest, that they
that hear not the gospel (which his Christ's voice) are none of Christ's
sheep. Then the tyrannous Pope, and his murdering ministers, that hear not
Christ's voice, that stop their ears at his voice, that suppress and burn
the Gospel (his voice) that torment* murder, and kill his sheep that hear
his voice, are none of Christ's sheep. And if they be none of Christ's sheep,
then they must needs be the Devils Goats. For there are none, but must needs
be the one of these two: that is, either the sheep of Christ, or the goats of
the Devil. And truly there is no better mark whereby to know Christ's
sheep, than by hearing of Christ's voice, (which is the holy Gospel.) And
there is no plainer mark whereby to know the Devils Goats, than by refusing to
hear the Gospel, (which is the voice of Christ.) Therefore, if you entende to
be Christ's sheep, then hear the Gospel Christ's own voice. But if you had
rather be the Devils Goats, then refuse (as you do) to hear the Gospel, and
care not for Gods Gods word, but love and obey the Pope, and follow
Papistrie, which is the voice of the Devil.

Here may you plainly perceive, that the Popes doctrine is, to refuse the
Scriptures in the mother tongue, and so not to hear the voice of Christ:
therefore they that are of the Popes doctrine, are none of Christ's sheep,
because they hear not Christ's voice: so that you by the refusing Gods word,
which is Christss voice, you make your selves to be none of Christ's Sheep.
Therefore fly from Papistrie, and hearken to the Gospel (the voice of
Christ) that you may be Christ's Sheep, and so to be placed on the right
hand of Christ at the last day, in the Kingdom of Heaven. For assure your
selves, if you will not hear the Gospel, which is Christ's voice you can be
none of Christ's sheep, yet to hear Christ's voice is nothing, unless you
understand his voice. For, though the Jews heard Christ's voice when he
preched to them in the Hebrewe tongue which they understood, yet if one should
come unto us, and preach the Gospel in the Hebrewe tongue, we should be never
the better, for though we heard his voice, yet we should not understand his
word, which is the right hearing of Christ's voice.

When the Nobles and chief of Thessalonia received the word of God which
Paul preached, Acts. 17.
they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things that he preached were
so or no: but these Scriptures were not then in the Latin tongue, but in their
mother or vulgar tongue that they understood when they did read them: or else
what should their searching of the Scriptures have profited the^? If one did
lack fire, though he had a flint stone lying by him and did not know there were
fire in it, or if he knew it, and could not tell which way to get ye fire out of
it, what were he ye better, Even so though the unlearned in the Latin tongue
had the Bible in Latin lying by them, what were they the better? Therefore I
muse what learning or reason should lead you, that it is sufficient for us to
have the Scriptures in the Latin tongue that we understand not, that in the
Primitive Church and a great while after were in the common tongues. Saint
Augustine was not of your mind, Jewel in def. Apolog. 637.
who said: The holy Scriptures passing from one tongue, and being publyshed
abroad far and wide by sundry tongues, of Interpreters, have come to the
knowledge of Nations and people to their salvation, then belike Saint Augustine
meant that the hyding of the Scriptures from the people in an unknown tongue, is
to their damnation (as no doubt it is, as before I have manifestly proved.) And
again he says: We have the benefit of God that would have the Scriptures
to be in many tongs Saint Chrisostom says: Page ^adem.
The Syrians, the Aegiptians, the Indians, the Persians, the Aethiopians, and
other Nations innumerable, translating into their own tongs the doctrine that
they had received of S. John, being a barbarous people, endeavored themselves
to learn Wisdom. Then, if all these Nations learned wisdom by translating
the doctrine of Christ into their vulgar tongues, then they must needs
learn folly, fancies and fables, that have not the Scriptures in their
vulgar or mother tongue. Saint Hierome says, The holy Scriptures are read to
all Nations, that al may understand it. Hereby it appears, that the
Scriptures were read in more tongs than in the Latin tongue, unless all the
whole world were Latinists, which I think is a very hard thing to prove.
Theodoretus says further, That the Hebrews Books of the Scriptures are
translated, not only in the Greek or Latin tongue, but also into the tongues
of Aegipt, Persia, India, Armenia, Scythia, and Sarmatia, and to be short, into
all the tongs that until this day are used in the world: Now, if it were lawful
by these ancient learned men, in the ancient time to have the Scriptures in all tongs of the world, why may it not be lawful then for us in these days to
have the Scriptures in our vulgar or English tongue. Therefore you may see
what godly and charitable men the Pope and his Prelates are, that burn the
Scriptures and the gospel which Christ did leave unto us for our salvation.

But some of you have answered in the Popes cause herein, and said, that you
burn not the Scriptures, but the errors and faults that are by false
translation in the same. I cannot tell whether you burn the faults or no, but
you have burned them so, that you left none of the truth behind unburned: for
you burned all the whole Bible. Certainly they were very evil and unlearnedly
translated, if there were never a whit of them truly translated. He is a very
sorry husband, and I think will never thrive, that to destroy the Thistles,
does weed up the Corn and al.

The Popes laws and decrees are full of manifest and wonderful errors,
devilish doctrine, and wicked blasphemies, is sufficiently proved. Yet none of
those books are burnd, no^ one fault amended, nay they are kept and preserved
full sa^^y.

That vile and wicked Sodomite Johannes a Gasa Archbishop of Beneuentum, Acts
and Monumentes page 1477
being deane of Pope Iulyes Chamber, and his chief Legate to the Venetians, did
not only play the filthy Sodomite himself, and boasted openly of the same, but
also most impudently wrote a Book in commendation thereof in Italian meetre,
saying, that he himself never used any other, which Book was printed at Venice
by one Troianus Nauus: Yet that most vile, and detestable Book that was all
full of wickedness, was permitted to go abroad, and not burnd, therefore, if
the Pope and his Prelates were of God, as they are not, they would burn those
diuelishe and detestable Books that provoke and persuade men to most wicked
errors, and to commit such shameful sins that highly offend God, and not the
holy Scriptures, and the Gospel of Christ, that teaches us al goodness and
godliness whereby we should maruellously please God.

If al Books should be burned that have faults in them, you that are of that
Romish religion should have but a few books to look on. If there were any
such faults in the translation (if you were godly or meant well) you would
rather mend the fault, than burn the whole Book: If a Candle should burn
dimly, it were more meet to top the Candle than to put out the Candle: He
might be thought to be a very evil Cook, that for one little raw morssell in
a Capon, would cast the whole Capon away to the Dogs: That woman might be
counted no very good huswife, that finding a flea on her husbands s^irte, to
kill the flea, would burn the whole shyrt: He might be thought to be scant an
honest man, that seeing a spider creep on his neighbors wall, to kill the spider,
would set the whole house on fire and burn it: Even so the Pope and his
Prelates do use us but homely, yt for some fault (as they say) in the
Scriptures, to destroy ye faults, will burn the whole Bible, which is the chief
house and Castle for our souls to dwell in.

Therefore excuse not the Pope nor his Prelates in burning the Scripturs, for
he that burns ye whole Bible, cares not for mending the faults of the Bible.
The having of the Scriptures in our vulgar tongue, is ye fault that he finds,
or is grieved withal: whatsoever he make show of: and therefore he burns the
whole Bible, because he is offended with the translating of the whole Bible.

Mark how blindly and fondly likewise ye Pope leads you, in that he does make
you believe, that you ought to pray only in the Latin tongue, whereby he pluckes
from you one of ye chiefest Jewels that Christ left you (if that be a Jewel
that will help you to whatsoever you lack.) Christ said not to his Apostles,
Whatsoever you ask my heavenly father in my name, he will give it you, so that
you make your prayers to him in the Latin tongue which you understand not
Neither his Disciples did ever say so to any other. Math. 6.
But Christ said to his Disciples, when ye pray, pray thus: Our father which
art in Heaven, etc. which I am sure he spoke not to them in the Latin tongue,
but in the Hebrewe tongue, which was their vulgar and mother tongue: and
therefore, because neither Christ nor his Apostles have taught us in the
Scriptures, that we must needs make our prayers to God in the Latin tongue, I
will not believe it, though an Angel should come down from Heaven and tell
me, much less the Pope and his Prelates.

You must needs grant this, that Christ bids us ask and we shall have:
then it is meet, if we would have, to know what we ask: but if we know
not what we say, how can we know what we ask? and if we know not what we
ask, how can we know what we shall have? then they that pray in the Latin
tongue, (and know not what they say) do not know what they ask, and they
that know not what they ask, they can not know what they shall have, and they
that know not what they shall have, can not be sure to have that they lack:
And thus, you that pray in Latin after the Popes teaching which you
understand not, are not sure to have that you lack: but they that pray
according unto Christ's teaching in their vulgar tongue, or which they
understand (if they ask in faith) they shall be sure to have that they lack.

But now, if every one that prays in a known tongue, and knows what they
ask, do not ask in faith, and therefore obtain not their desire, nor have
that they lack: then all they that pray in the Latin tongue, and know not what
they say or ask, can not pray in faith, and therefore must needs go
without that they lack. And so your prayers in the Latin tongue which you
understand not, must needs be a most frivolous, and vain prayer: whereby you
both anger God, and deceive your selves, therefore if you would have God to
grant your prayer, then you must know what you say to God, and wherefore you
make your prayer.

If one should come to a Noble man about a suit, and make a babbling to him
with his tongue, neither knowing himself what he says, neither ye noble man
understands what he would have, do you think he were like to speed of his
suit at the Noble man's hands? Nay, would not the Noble man think he were mad,
and therefore bid him go out of his sight? yes certainly: even so, when you
come thus babbling to God, not knowing what you say or ask, do you think to
obtain any thing at Gods hand? No, I warrant you, but he will be angry with you
for misusing his Majesty in such an indecent manner, and because you pray not
in that order to him as Christ appointed you.

But happily you will say, the comparisons are not like, for though the Noble man
does not know our mind, yet God knows our meaning. I know well, ye God both
knows our minds, and our hearts. But what if you know not certainly your own
meaning, would you have God to grant your uncertain meaning. As I said before,
God does not grant to every one yt they ask, though they know what they ask,
and do you think then he will grant you, that knows not what you ask? Elias
prayed unto God for a widows son that was dead, 3. Kings. 17.
whose prayer God heard for God restored him his life, but Elias did not only
know what he asked, but also he prayed with a fervent faith. Judith when she
prayed to God for the delivering of the Bethulians, she prayed not in Latin,
Judith. 9.
but in her own tongue that she understood, and spoke with her mouth yt she meant
in her heart, whereby she obtained her petition at Gods hands: and so must all
true Christians know what they say and require of God, that would obtain yt
they ask of God. Truly if Christ would have had us pray in any one tongue, and
bound us to one language: he would then have rather commanded us to pray in the
Hebrew tongue (yt was his natural speech and mother tongue) than in the Latin
tongue: but he regardes not the tongue, but the prayer that is made with the tongue,
and not the babbling of the tongue, but the fervent prayer that is pronounced with
the tongue.

Yet master Harding says, Jewel in defen. Apolog. Page. 567.
Some fruit there is always had, even by secret and unknown prayer, whom
master Jewel aunsweareth thus: But what fruit, or how much, or how ye know
it, or can assure it, ye tell us not? Yet Saint Augustine says, what profit is
there in speech, be it never so perfect, if the understanding of the hearer
can not attain unto it? for there is no cause why we should speak at al, if
they understand not what we speak, for whose sake we speak that they may
understand. And again he says, my mind is without fruit (this the Apostle
Saint Paul says) when the thing that is spoken is not perceived. And again,
Page 568.
set apart the understanding of thy mind, and no man has fruit or profit of
that thing he perceives not. And again, what needs us to sing, if we
understand not what we sing, or to sing with our voice and not with our heart:
for understanding is the sound or voice of the heart. Yet master Harding
tells us sadly that the devout people is edified by the latin prayer, though
he understand not one word that is spoken. But S* Au. says, by that thing that
he understands not, no man is edified. Master Harding says, there is
always some fruit even by secret and unknown prayer. But S. Au. says, there
is no fruit in speech be it never so perfect, if the understanding of the
heart can not attain it, so properly S. Au. and M. Harding agrees together,
thus much says M. Jewel, but because S. Au. is both antienter and of better
credit, we were best to stick to his judgment therein and let M. Hardings
go. But if one may be edified by the latin prayer, though he understand
never a word that he speaks then the creed or belief may profit one yt can
say ye words, though he understand them not, and so by this means the
Popingey of Cardinal Ascanius, Caelius Rhodigin. antiq. lib. 3. cap. 23.
that was taught to say and could say all the Articles of the Creed from the
beginning to the end, had some profit or was edified by her uttering or
speaking of the same. But I think few are so foolish as to believe it. No more
are they that prays in ye latin to^g that understand not what they say. S.
Au. says, It is possible that a man pronounce the whole words of the Creed
and yet not to have the right faith. August. de Baptismo contr. donat. lib. 3.
cap. 14.
Now if they that ca^ pronounce their whole Creed and know what they say,
and yet may not have the right faith: then how can they have the right faith,
that say the Creed in a strange tongue, and knows never a word what they say?
thus you may see, what a precious kind of praying, your latin prayers are,
that the Pope does allow you. But yet you shall see further how he has and
does delude you in your prayers, and how far he has wrested your praying, from
the prayers and manner of praying that Christ has taught you.

Christ willed his Apostles not only to pray in their own vulgar tongue, but
also he taught them a prayer, and to whom they should pray. Which was that they
should only pray unto God our Heavenly father, but the Pope not contented
with the doctrine of Christ, but thinks he can teach and set out a better
form of prayer than he has taught you that you must pray in none other
tongue but in the latin tongue though you understand never a word thereof,
besides, he does teach you to pray unto Saints, and to Marie the virgin and
mother of Christ; yea and to dead Images of stocks and stones that can
neither see you, hear you, nor grant you, that you require.

It may be that some of you will say that as you like not praying to Images, so
you mislike not to pray unto our Lady or unto Saints, that they may pray
unto God for you, for if one would speak with a King or with a great man, it
is no harm to speak to his Chamberlain or to one that is next unto him, that
he may show ye king of us, which vain reason Saint Ambrose answers very well,
Ambros. ad Romans cap. 1.
saying: we are brought unto the Princes of Kings by Lords and officers,
because the king is a man, and knows not to whom he may commit his Realm.
But to obtain Gods favor, from whom nothing is secret, as knowing what
every man is meet to have, we need no spokes man but a devout mind,
wheresoever such a one speaks unto God, God will answer him. Thus has that
learned Doctor answered this foolish and vain objection, whereby it plainly
appears that there were some of your opinion in his days, and that he was of
the same opinion that we are in these days.

But if Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, and a thousand more of learned men
should write, that we ought to pray unto the Uirgin Marie and to the Saints,
yet we ought not to believe them, for as much as Christ has taught us
contrary, who biddes us to make our prayers only to GOD our Heavenly
Father. But as long as the Doctoures and Fathers do agree with the Gospel we
will allow them, but if they do not we will reject them.

But whatsoever Christ says, ye Pope says otherwise, and now mark well herein
the holy doctrine of the Church of Rome which allows and wills you to pray unto
ye blessed Uirgine thus: Let him know thee to be his mother, command thy
son, use thy motherlye authority over him. Is not this a trim kind of
prayer? you shall not find this in all the Lords prayer that Christ taught to
his Disciples: if you say yt this is but a spiritual dallying, as M. Harding
said to master Jewel: then I will answer you as M. Jewel answered M. Harding,
this must needs be a blessed kind of Divinity, Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 365.
that can turn praying to dallying. This kind of prayer was used universally
(says M. Jewel) throughout all the Church of Rome, that men, women and
children, learned and unlearned, were taught, and forced thus to pray, Thou
art the Queen of heaven: Thou art the Lady of Angels, command thy son,
show thy self to be the mother.

Cardinal Bembus sometimes the Popes secretary calls the Virgin Mary Lady
and goddess. Ambrosius Catharinus in the late Chapter at Trydent, calls her
gods fellow, by these words, fidelissima eius Socia, that is, Gods most
faithful fellow* Nicholaus Cusanus a Cardinal of Rome says. This thing turns
to the praise of God, and the Virgin Marie the mother of Christ, that she was
never at any time under the Princehoode of the author of death. That Virgin
neded no deliverer that should redeem her from the sentence pronounced against
Adam and his posterity. Mary was neued raced out of the book of death, for
she was never written in it. Here we are taught that Marie the Virgin is our
Lady and goddess, that she is Gods fellow, and that she had no need to be
saved by the death of Christ, nay your church of Rome teaches to pray unto her
thus, Save thou al the^ that glorify thee, and this also is in Lipomanus,
behold how mighty is the mother of God, and how no man may be saved but by
her. What is blasphemy if this be not blasphemy, yet this is the religion of
your holy church of Rome: would you have thought yt either they had written
thus or durst be so bold to write thus? there was none that ever came of the
seed of Adam but they have need to be saved by the death of Christ.

These Books that contain these things, you ought to burn, and not the holy
Scriptures wherein you can spy no such faults. Your Church of Rome calls the
Uirgin Marie which is the mother of Christ, the Queen of Heaven, but it
mistakes her as it does many other things, for she is not the Queen of Heaven,
but her Son Christ is the King heaven. Therefore the Church of Rome does most
wickedly to worship her as they do. Whereupon Epiphanius says: Let no man
eat of this error, touching S. Marie, Jewel in defens. Apolog. Page 365.
for though the tree be fair, yet is not the fruit to be eaten, although
Marie be beautiful, holy and honorable, yet is she not to be adored: But these
women worshipping S. Marie renew again the sacrifice of wine, mingled in the
honor of the goddess Fortuna, and prepare a table for the Devil and not for
God, as it is written in the Scriptures. They are fed with meat and
wickedness. And again, Their women boult flower, and their children gather
sticks to make fine cakes in the honor of the Queen of Heaven. Therefore let
such women be rebuked by the Prophet Hieremie, and let them no more trouble the
world, and let them not say we worship the Queen of Heaven. Thus much writes
that ancient Father Epiphanius against the fond and unchristianly exalting
and honoring of the Uirgin Marie for the Queen of Heaven.

Mark also what a blasphemous prayer ye holy Church of Rome does teach you to
pray, whereby it appears that they that belong to that Church, need not the
blood of Christ to save them, for the blood of Thomas Becket which was once a
traitor to his King here in England, is sufficient, for they say thus in their
Mattins, O Christ make us to ascend unto heaven whether Thomas is ascended,
even by the blood of Thomas that he shed for thy sake. Is not this Church of
Rome think you the true Church of God, that blots out the blessed blood of
Christ, (without which there is no salvation:) and puts in the blood of a
sinful wretch to climb to heaven by, but I think they mistake ye words,
perhaps the meaning of them is thus, make us to descend into hell whether
Thomas is descended, even by the blood of Thomas yt he shed for the Popes sake:
for surely if Thomas Becket did pray to asce^d by the blood of any (but of
Christ) as these of the Church of Rome do by his, I believe that this your
holy Saint Thomas (a Saint of the Popes making) is rather in hell than in
heaven.

Can the children of God, or they that are Christians, be content to abide in
this blasphemous Church of Rome, that uses such a kind of praying, as
desires to climb to heaven by the blood of a vile wretched sinner, and
refuses the blood of that immaculate lamb Jesus Christ the son of God?

Surely if I were as deeply drowned in that detestable Papistrie (as any of
you are or ever was, hearing but half this that I have written,) I should not
only with all speed detest that abominable Religion of the Pope, but also
fly unto Christ and take hold on his holy Gospel, as I do not doubt but
assuredly trust that many of you will.

And as this Romish Church has with her most wicked prayer, blotted out the
pure and perfect order of praying which Christ did teach in the Scriptures,
even so, she has with their vain, fond, and superstitious fastings quite
banished the true fasting required by the Gospel. For Christ in the Gospel
says, Math. 6.
When ye fast, be not sad as the hypocrites are, etc, but when thou fastest
appear not unto men, to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret, and thy
Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. Here Christ does appoint
us, that we must not let it be known when we fast: but the Popes fast is so
published and the days so commonly and openly commanded and appointed, that
every one may know when they fast. So that Christ has not appointed his
fasting so privily, but ye Church of Rome proclaims her fastes as openly.
Christ has appointed no days nor times for his fasting, the Church of Rome
has appointed days and times for her fasting. The meaning of Christ's fasting
is to abstain from whatsoever either meats or drinks, yt makes us prone to
sin: The Popes fast is to forbear flesh only, but permits men to eat all
kind of fish though it be never so dainty and deliciously dressed, and all
kind of Iunkets and banketing dyshes, with delycate wynes, as much as we
will cramme and pour in: Christ's fast is to keep our bodies low to be in
subjection to the spirit: but that is not performed in the Popes fast but by
their dainty dyshes and drinks the Spirit is brought in subjection to the
body. Christ's fast is a willing and an uncompelled abstinence: the Popes
fast is a constrained abstinence, and is done of many against their wills,
Christ's fasting is to make us virtuous and holy before God: the Popes fast is
hypocritical, and to make us seem holy before men. This is difference enough
to show you that the Christian fasting of Christ and the common fasting of the
Pope, are far unlike, and do not agree, so that the one shall have his
reward hereafter of God, and the other has his reward already of men.
Therefore believe not that your accustomed fast of the Church of Rome came
either from Christ or his Apostles, for neither Christ in his Gospel, nor the
Apostles in their Epistles do once command it or affirm it, and therefore
we can not allow it. S. Augustine one of the excellentest Doctors, (whose
judgment I trust you will not refuse) writes upon what days we ought not to
fast, Augu. epist. 86.
and upon what days we ought to fast, I find it not appointed or lymitted
by any commandment either of our Lord or of the Apostles. But what if Saint
Augustine had wylled us to fast on such days as the Pope does appoint, and
a thousand other learned men more, yet we are not bound either to believe or
follow him or them, unless we find their sayings agree with Gods word, for
Gods word must lead them, but they may not lead Gods word. Therefore because
your Popish fast, is not commanded nor allowed by the holy Scriptures, but
clean contrary to the same, as before is proved, therefore it is
superstitious, wicked, and highly displease^h God, and so of us Christians
ought not to be used nor commended, but utterly to be eschued and contemned,
unless it be used for worldly policy.

God commaundes us to refrain swearing euerydaye, but for fasting he appointes
us no day: but the Pope commaundes us to fast certain days, but byds us not
forbear swearing any day* yet many of you regard the Popes law so much,
and Gods commandment so little, that you think it a heinous matter to break
the fasting days that the Pope has commanded: but make it no matter of
conscience to swear every day, which God has forbidden: therefore keep the
fasting days commanded by our Queen for good order and pollicye, and not for
the Popes pleasure, for his holiness or hypocrisy. Thus you may see how
far wide you wander, and all because you will not give your selves to the
hearing and reading of the Scriptures.

Consider further of your holy Romish Religion, which attributes to oil health
of body and soul, and remission of sins: which no oil (but the blood of
Christ) can do. And therefore a most blasphemous doctrine. Thus the oil is
blessed, Fiat domino hoc oleum, etc. O Lord let this oil by thy blessing, De
consecr. olei.
be made a spiritual ointment to purify both soul and body. And also this is
to be said over the sick: Per hanc Sanctam vnctionem, etc. By this holy
annoynting, thou may have remission of thy sins. Is not this a precious
oil trow you whereby we may have remission of our sins? you may see what
virtue is in the Popish Priests words, that can make such a precious oil,
truly if God had remembered this oil, he might have spared Christ his dear
son from dying. O what a horrible and blasphemous doctrine is this that is
taught by your Romish Church, S. Thomas de Aquino which may be S. Thomas of
Watring in English says, Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 190.
Some say, and that not without good reason that a man may obtain remission
of his venial sins, (which are not deadly sins) only by entering into a
Church that is consecrate.

If one had such a Church, it would never lightly be empty, and it is
purposely noted in the gloss upon the Decretalles that venial sins may be
removed either by a Pater noster, or by holy water, that it may be so by a
Pater noster, which is the Lords prayer, (so that it be faithfully said), I
will not deny, but that the popish Pater noster spoken in Latin of them that
understand not what they say, or else that holy water will do it, I will in no
wise grant. Thus the church of Rome has found out an other manner and way of
forgiveness of sins then either Christ or his Apostles ever taught, what a
damnable doctrine is this to teach remission of sins by such toys and
trifles, which can be had by no means but by the passion and death of Christ?

May not you think that the church of Rome is of a pure doctrine and of a
perfect religion, Acts and Monuments.
that allows and ordaines that Belles must be baptized and christened, and
allows Godfathers therefore, and gives them a name, and puts a coat on their
backs to keep them from cold as children have when they are Christened?
truly I have read and perused the whole Bible and the new Testament thoroughly,
and yet I could never read in any part thereof, of the christening of belles.
Marry I remember that Christ a little before his Ascension, said to his
Disciples, Math. 28.
all power is given to me in Heaven and in earth, go ye therefore and teach all
nations baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost,
etc. but then he made no mention of the baptising of Belles, for if he had, the
Apostles would have baptized Belles as well as the Popes Suffraganes, and then
we should either have heard of it in the Acts of the Apostles, or else the
Evangelists would have written of it.

Be indifferent Judges your selves, was there ever such a ridiculous religion
(as this your Romish religion is), that permit and appointe Belles to be
baptized? belike their baptising makes them give a loud, a perfect and a true
sound: if it be so, then the Bells are better baptized, than many of the Popes
preachers and Doctors be: for many of them in the pulpet give no sound at all,
or else give a false sound both in their preaching and writing.

Many of you mislike the putting down of Abbayes, and wish they were up
again, for you think the Monks and Friars were the holiest men in the world,
yea and that perfect holiness can not be well without them, and that God by
the^ was chiefly served. If the Monks were so in your time it is marvel, for
they were not such in S. Augustines time and therefore you shall hear how they
served God then. Whereof S. Augustine writes thus: These Monks serve not God
(says he) they serve their bellies. Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 557.
And again he says, Hypocrisy or vaunting of holiness is the more
dangerous, for that it deceives us under the name of Gods service. Again he
says, it deceives us by the deceitful countenance or Image of holiness. And
again touching the Monks he says, we can not tell whether they became Monks
for purpose to serve God, or else being weary of their poor and painful life,
were rather desirous to be fed and clothed doing nothing. Therefore he says
they carry their hypocrisy about to sale. S. Bernard says, (which knew
something of their holiness for he was an Abbot) the servants of Christ serve
Antichrist. S. Hierom says of the^, they are loath to be abiects, and in
servile state, for idleness they will not labor: and to beg they are ashamed,
for being valiant and lusty people, no man would give the^ any thing. Thus ye
Monks serving of God of the ancient writers and Doctors is called plain
Idleness.

If the Monks were idle in S. Augustines time, I fear they were not very well
occupied in our time. One of the Popes proctors of late to make us believe that
Monkerie was instituted by Christ, (if we may credit his own tale) says that
the Apostles were Monks and Christ was the Abbot. Copu^ fol. 284
If they were so, (but in all the Scriptures they are not named so) they were
not like our Abbots and Monks that are now, and that we had of late, for they
were an Abbot and Monks without an Abbey, and had never an Abbey to dwell in:
in those days belike there were good Abbots and good Monks without Abbeys, but
now there be Abbeys without good Abbots and good Monks.

In the book called Opus Tripertitum it is thus written, Well near the whole
world cries out against and is offended for so great a multitude of begging
Monks and Friars that are entered into the world. Pope Damasus speaking of the
order of the^ that were called Chorepiscopi, says thus, Jewel in defe^. Apo.
page 559.
From whence this third order is come, we cannot tell, and the thing that
wa^teth reason, must needs be taken up by the roots. Thus by the Popes own
saying both Monks, Friars, Cha^nons, Nonnes, yea and al ye Popes cardinals and
their popish priests, their Masses, Dirges, Pardons, and all the holy religion
of the Pope, because we know not how it first came in (for by Gods word it was
not planted) and because their doctrine of al other is the most foolish, false,
and both against reason and truth, therefore it must needs be plucked up by ye
roots. This is the Popes own decree, therefore it must needs stand for a law.
And, they are Heretics yt once speak against it, (if they be Heretics yt
speaks against ye Popes doings or sayings). If all the laws and decrees yt the
Popes have made, had been as true and reasonable as this saying of Pope
Damasus, then the Popes law and religion had not been so repugnant and
contrary to Gods law as it is. Mark further what a Devilish doctrine your
Church of Rome does allow, and her doctors do teach, for M. Harding says,
Jewel in defens. Apolog. Page 371.
Everlasting life is a reward for our deseruings, if everlasting life were not
a due reward, it were uncertain, for due debte is certain: mercy or favor is
uncertain. Thus (says M. Jewel,) they have drowned the grace of God and the
salvation we have only in Jesus Christ, and have turned the most comfortable
doctrine of the Gospel, into a dungeon of desperatio^. Thus the Popes doctrine
says we may deserve Heaven, but Christ which best of all knew what we are
hable to deserve, says, when ye have done all, (that you can) say that ye
be unprofitable servant, and therefore have deserved nothing, and thus we
can not deserve the kingdom of Heaven. If we deserve any thing it is the
kingdom of Hell. If we look to deserve any thing, then we make our selves
laborers and hirelings, and so we make our selves not the children of God, for
the natural and loving child obeyes his Father for love and not for reward,
and therefore being laborers, we must have no more than we deserve, which is
nothing, if unprofitable servant deserve nothing.

Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 374
And Master Harding says, that good works have their reward. They have so
says M. Jewel. S. John says, their works follow them And Christ says,
whosoever shall give a cup of water to drink for my names sake, Marc. 9.
because you belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his
reward. S. Paul says, Your works shall not be in vain in the Lord. But
because, they are rewards, it is rather of mercy than of duty. For a duty
is wages, but a reward is a gift. For if I send my servant to a noble man
with a present, and he gives my servant a reward, it is rather of his goodness
than of my servant duty, for he could ask nothing of him, therefore the
reward is of his courtesy, Job. 9.
and gentleness. Job says, If a man will dispute with God, he is not hable to
answer him one for a thousand. And though Job is called the most pacient
and a very godly man, yet he says, I stood in doubt and was afraid of all
my works. And again he says, although I were perfect yet my Soul shall not
know it, if I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me.
Esaias says, Esai. 64. Hieron. in Esai. cap. 64.
all our righteousness is like a foul stained clowte. S. Hierome says, If we
behold our own merits we must be driven to desperatio^. The Apostle says, I
judge that the afflictions of this time, are not worthy of that glory that
shall be revealed unto us. Therefore it is the most surest way to take hold on
Christ's merits, and let our own go, for God will justify us for Christ's
sake and merits, not for our own sakes or good works. Apoc. 22.
Blessed are they that have washed there Robes in the blood of the Lamb, (not
in there own works) I will give (says God) the thurstie to drink of the
well of life for nothing, Apocal. 21.
(not for his own works or deserts). Origin says most truly, forasmuch as
all men are shut up and closed under sin, now the salvation of man stands
not in man's merits, but in Gods mercy. And many such like have the learned
fathers written, only to beat us down from our own works: and to lay hold on
Gods mercies and the merits of Christ.

S. Bernard writes excellently hereof: Barnard. in Psalm. qui habitat.
my merit (says he) is the mercy of God: so long as God is not poor of
mercy, so long can not I be poor of merit, if his mercies be great, then am
I great in merits. This is the whole merit of man, if he put his whole
affiance in the Lord.

This same is the Protestants Religion, to trust with S. Barnarde, in the
merits of Christ and mercies of God: But they of that wicked Romish religion
do trust to their own works, for belyke they are so holy they need not
Christ's merits. For they can deserve the kingdom of Heaven by their own
works, which is a most detestable and Devilish doctrine.

For mark this well, all the deeds and good works that you can do are but
worldly works, and if you look to be rewarded for doing of them, yet a
heavenly reward is to good for an earthly work, and a heavenly wages is to
much for an earthly service. It is enough if God give you a worldly reward for
your worldly works: Nay, is your worldly works and service that you say you
do unto God, worthy of the earthly gifts and rewards that God daily gives
you? no I warrant you, if a man might ask you, that says you may deserve
Heaven by your own merits, what service do you or can you do that God stands
need off? he is a heavenly King and therefore has heavenly servants, to wait
upon him to do his will, and to serve him, who obey him in all things and
offend him in nothing, but you are earthly creatures, both unworthy and
unable to serve such a king, that obeyes him in nothing, and offendes him in
all things. Therefore if you be his servants you are but simple servants and
serve him but slenderly, and (as Christ calls you) unprofitable servants. Yet
for all that mark the great goodness of God, though we neither obey him nor
are able to serve him, yet he uses us rather like Sons then servants. Has
he not created us to his own likeness, (that is our souls to the Image of
God, and our bodies to the likeness of Christ) and does not he give us meat
daily to feed us: clothes to cover us, and all things on the earth to
maintain and help us? now weigh with your selves what service do we to God,
or are hable to do unto him, that can deserve al these earthly benefits that he
does daily bestow upon us? No, the greatest service that we can do to God, is
far unworthy of the least benefit that God has done to us, therefore we can
not justly say that we serve God in any point, but rather that God does serve
our turn in every point. For if we do him any service, it is only to serve our
own turn, for when we pray unto God, (wherein we say we serve God), do we then
serve pleasure or help him in any thing? no, it is to help our selves, to
pleasure our selves, and to profit our selves. For by our prayer to God we
crave of him, those things, that we have need of and do not proffer him any
thing that he stands in need of. Therefore though we say we serve God when we
pray, we might more truly say that we serve our selves when we pray. And thus
whereas you claim heaven as a due reward for your serving of God: it seems you
claim Heaven for serving your selves, wherein I must needs say, that you are
without all reason or honesty.

For if I should come to my Prince and pray her humbly upon my knees that she
would give me a farm to dwell in, and then she of her goodness should grant
me my request: might not I be thought to be most impudent shameless and without
all reason, if I should then claim for kneeling to her for the farm which she
gave me, the inheritance of all her kingdom? yes and well worthy, yea and
therefore to be quite thrust out of her kingdom. Even so they that claymes the
kingdom of Heaven for their praying and kneelyng to God, (for their own
profit and commodity) are not only most impudent shameless and
unreasonable, but also are well worthy to be thrust out of the kingdom of
Heaven. Now if our worldly serving of God (if we do serve him) can not deserve
the worldly benefits that he does daily bestow upon us: then our worldly
serving of him can by no means deserve the kingdom of Heaven, the joys
whereof are without comparison, and everlasting.

If a King by chance let his glove fall out of a window should he that takes
it up think that he has deserved therefore, that the King should make him
heir of his crown and kingdom? every one might think that he were to
sawsie, presumptuous, and to dear a servant that would claim such a great
gift, for such a small service, a worse reward might serve well enough, many
would be content to do a great deal more for a great deal less. Now if
this worldly reward is a great deal to much for such a service whereof the
King stood need, then the everlasting kingdom of Heaven is a wonderful
deal to much for our worldly works whereof God stands no need, (nay which
perhaps he mislikes).

Therefore revoke this Devilish doctrine of the Romish Church, which
teaches you that you may deserve the kingdom of Heaven by your own works
and merits, for (as it is sufficiently proved before) our own merits
deserves the kingdom of Hell, and Christ's merits only deserves for us the
kingdom of Heaven. And brag not of your vain and sinful works, for the
better you esteem them, the worse does God like them: and do what you can for
your life, yet think your selves unprofitable servants. For the more you
think you deserve at Gods hand: the less I am sure you shall have at his
hand.

The proud Pharisey and the humble and repentant Publicane may be a sufficient
example to you, Luke. 18.
for the proud presumptuous Pharisey thought he had deserved much of God for
his works: but the humble Publican thought he deserved Gods wrath for his
sins. Now which of these two got more at Gods hands, and was the better
esteemed of God? forsooth the Pharisey that boasted and bragged of his good
works, displeased God and went away unjustified: And the humble Publicane that
disabled his own works and trusted not to them, pleased God, and went away
pardoned. So that in any wise refuse your own merits and trust to the mercy
of God and the merits of Christ: for if your works be no better than the
works of the holy Popes of Rome before mentioned (that teaches you to have
such confidence in your works) they are more like to bring you to Hell than to
Heaven.

Now mark further what a pretty toye the Pope has devised, (which is his
paineful purgatory) to pick our purses withal, marueling that you can believe
that there is any such place. The Scriptures in diverse and sundry places make
mention both of heaven and hell, but not one word at all of Purgatory, and
therefore I am out of doubt there is no such place, for if there were, either
Moses, the Prophets, Christ, or his Apostles would have spoken something of it,
therefore believe not that the Pope and his Doctors do say true in this
thing, that have lied to you in so many other things. For it is only invented
to fear us withal, whereby to empty fools purses to fill the Popes coffers.

But if there were such a place, then it shows that the Pope is a covetous and
merciless Tirant, that will do nothing for pity but all for pence, for the
rich for money shall soon be rid out, but the poor that want money or
friends must tarry there still, One says, The Souls being in Purgatory,
Johan. Angelus.
are under the Popes jurisdiction, and the Pope might if he would avoid all
Purgatory.

Truly in this it seems that the Pope is not half so merciful as Christ
was, that will suffer the poor souls to lie broyling and roasting in the fire
of Purgatory, and might with one word of his mouth or a bull of lead, rydde
them out of their pains and prison. But belike the Popes think it needs not,
because they know there is no such place: the Pope would scarce do so much
for us if he could, as Christ did, that came out of Heaven to Earth and
suffered death, to rid us out of hell, that will not release the souls out
of Purgatory with speaking one word, and needs not once go out of his chair.

Well though the Popes do tell us that there is such a painful Purgatory,
yet they are not agreed among them selves of the manner of the place, nor of
the pains. For Sir Thomas Moore said that there is no water in Purgatory,
Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 357.
no not one drop, which he would prove by the words of the Prophet Zachary,
which are these, thou have delivered thy prisoners out of the dongeon wherein
there is no water, but Doctor Fysher the Bishop of Rochester says there is
good store of water, and that he proves by the Prophet David. We have passed
through fire and water, and thou have brought us forth into a place of
refreshing.

Albertus and the Bishop of Rochester say, that the executioners and ministers
of Purgatory are holy Angels. But sir Thomas Moore says, out of doubt they be
no Angels but very Devils. But may not one come after these two learned men,
and prove that there is neither fire nor water in the Popes Purgatory?
forasmuch as the Scriptures do not certify us of any such Purgatory,
therefore I am sure there is no such Purgatory: and if there be no Purgatory,
then I am sure there is neither fire nor water in Purgatory: and as there is
neither fire nor water there, so neither Angels nor Devils are executioners or
ministers there.

It is a very strange matter that these wise learned and grave men should be
so blind, as to apply hell from which Christ has delivered us, (whereof the
Prophet Zachary meant,) to the Popes Purgatory, whereof neither he nor any
other of the Prophets did ever hear. But God when and where it pleases him
does blind the eyes of the mighty and wise of this world, that they may not
understand the verity, and again does open the eyes of the simple that they
may see the truth I beseech God to open your eyes to see the truth, whereby you
may shun all falshhood and lies.

Mark further what a marvelous mischief the Devil has brought into the
Church of Rome, which is the disanulling of the marriage of Priests, (although
many of you think it is a necessary and a godly law,) but how godly so ever
it is, Saint Paul calls the forbydding of marriage the doctrine of Diuelles,
for thus he says, The Spirit speaks evidently, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the latter times, some shall depart from the faith, and shall give
heed to Spirits of error, and devilish doctrine of them which speak falsely
through hypocrisy, and have their consciences marked with an hot yrone
forbydding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with giving thanks, of them which believe and know the
truth.

Does not Saint Paul point out the Popes doyngs here as plainly as though
he had uttered him by name? for in what Religion in the world, but his, is
marriage and eating of meats forbidden? And as this text does touch the
Popes wicked and superstitious fasting, which before is disproued, even so it
does touch his forbydding of marriage, which is an abominable and detestable
doctrine as hereafter shall be proved. For whereas the Popes law is that
Bishops, and Priests may not marrye: Gods law does permit and allow
them to marrye, for Saint Paul says that a Bishop must be faultlesse, 1.
Tim. 3.
and the husband of one wife, likewise (says he) must the Deacons be
honest not double tounged, etc. Even so must their wives be honest, not evil
speakers, but sober and faithful in all things, let the Deacons be the
husbands of one wife, and such as rule their Children well, and their own
housholdes, etc.

Thus Saint Paul does allow that the Bishops and the other Ministers of the
Church should be married and have wives: but the Popes doctrine is that
neither Bishop nor Priest (which are Ministers of his Church) shall be
married, and therefore the Popes doctrine herein is the doctrine of the Devils,
as S. Paul terms it.

It is evident that Aaron and the Priests of the old law before Christ were
married, then why should not our Bishops, Priests, and Ministers of the new
law, that are after Christ be married, especially not forbidden but allowed
by the Scriptures?) And that you may perceive that Christ allowed and lyked
well of the Preachers and ministers of his Church, though they were married,
he choosed married men to be his Apostles.

For Ignatius that was Scholar to Saint John the Evangelist, says, Jewel in
defen. Apolog. page 206.
That Peter and other the Apostles of Christ were married men. And Saint
Ambrose says, that all the Apostles had wives only John and Paul excepted,
yet Origin says by report of other his ancestors, that Saint Paul and his
wife were called to the faith both at one time, of which wife (as he says) he
writes thus in his Epistle to the Phillipians, I beseech thee faithful
yokefellowe, help these women that have labored with me in the Gospel. And
moreover Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius and Ignatius, Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
that saw Christ after his Resurrection, and was in company with the Apostles
say in plain words that he had a wife.

But perhaps some of you will say, (as you have said,) what though some of the
Apostles were married, yet they used not the company of their wives after they
were Apostles, but did forsake them? when you have proved that, we will
credit you the better: but until then we will not believe you. But as it is
sufficiently proved they were married, so can you never prove, yt after they
were Apostles they did utterly forsake their wives, and after never used their
company.

You think belike, because S. Peter has not told you that he kept his wife
still and used her company: that therefore he did forsake his wife. This is no
sufficient proof, that he used not her company: for every one that keep
company with their wives, do not use to tell abroad that they lie with their
wives, and so S. Peter might keep his wife, and use her company sometimes,
though he never told it abroad or wrote of it in his Epistles.

I think that Saint Peter (whom you take to be one of Christ's chief
Apostles,) did not break Christ's his masters decree, so soon after Christ
had made him his Disciple. For Christ says, Mark. 10.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and stick to his wife,
and so they are now not twain but one flesh. Therefore what God has coupled
let no man separate. And thus seeing Peter was a man, by Christ's doctrine, he
ought not to separate himself from his wife.

Math. 5.
And again Christ says, Whosoever puts away his wife, (except it be for
fornication,) causes her to play the harlot. So that by this it must needs
fall out, that either Peter did expressly against his masters doctrine, (and
so was a false servant to Christ, in forsaking his wife,) or else his wife
playde the harlot for that he put her away, or else he kept his wife still and
did not forsake her. But because I am sure you will not say that Peter was a
false servant to his master, in breaking of his doctrine, and for that you ca^
not prove that she was an harlot: then it must needs be, that he did not
forsake her, but kept her still as his wife, and so likewise all the rest of
the Apostles that were named did not forsake their wives: if they followed the
doctrine of their master Christ.

But suppose that none of the Apostles had been married, should that be
sufficient to bind al Bishops, Ministers and Priests from marriage? Then I may
as well say, because none of the Apostles were Cooks, therefore no Bishops,
Priests, or ministers ought to play the Cooks, or in time of necessity
dress their own dinners.

Christ's Apostles did not ride in their iourneis that ever I heard, (for their
master Christ did ride but once in all his life) shall the Bishops, Priests,
and ministers therefore never ride? The Pope and his Prelates would not like
that.

Christ's Apostles never kept any Grammar schools, shall Priests and ministers
therefore never teach children grammar or the latin tongue? that were not meet,
Therefore Bishops Priests and ministers are not bound to refuse that which
Christ forbad them to do. And thus though the Apostles had not been married as
the most of them were, yet that were not a sufficient cause to make all
Bishops, Pristes, and Ministers live unmarried.

Mark how Saint Chrysostom extols marriage. Excuse not thy self (says he)
by thy marriage, Chrysostom. contr. Iudeos tom. 3 Pa. 363 Jewel in defe^. Apol.
pa. 227.
thy Lord was at the marrying feast, and honored marriage with his presence,
and yet do thou blame marriage? And say thou that marriage is a hinderaunce
to godliness? I tell the marriage is no hinderance to godliness. Will thou
know that it hinders not to have wife and children? had not Moses wife and
children? Behold Peter a pillar of the Church: he had a wife, therefore find
no fault with marriage. And also the said Chrysostom writing upon Esaias says,
who speaks these words, Esaye the beholder of the celestial Seraphins, who
notwithstanding that he had company with his wife, yet he quenched not the
grace of God, and moreover Esaias had a son and a wife that thou may
understand that marriage is not evil, but that fornication is evil. Saint
Augustine says, most holy Samuel begat children, Augu. quest. noui and Lu^er
lectam. 127.
and yet nothing abated the merits of righteousness. Zacharias the Priest a
just man, in his old age begat a child (John Baptist.) Wherefore then is that
thing accused that is proved to do no manner of harm.

Thus you may see that marriage is much commended of these learned and godly
Doctors, of the prophets and Priests, and of the Apostles, Tertullian was a
married Priest, Spiridion the Bishop of Cyprus was married and had children, S.
Hilarie the Bishop of Poyters had a wife and lived with her. Jewel in defe^.
Apol. pa. 227.
Gregory S. Basiles brother the Bishop of Nysa, and Gregory Nazianzum father
to Gregory Nazianzene, and Prosper the Bishop of Rhegium, were married, with
many other. Now if Moses and his brother Aaron and the other priests of the
old law, and also the holy prophets of God, and the Apostels of Christ, and
many holy Fathers, Bishops, and priests since of the new law, have been
married, and have esteemed and allowed it, and also proved that it is lawful,
and not hurtful for them in their godly living: Then why is it not lawful for
our Bishops, priests and ministers, now to marry as well as they. And why
should it hinder the godly living of us more than the godly living of them.

But Pope Hyldebrand whose holy and virtuous doi^gs is before something set
forth, did first of all establish, as is before said, the law for disanulling
Priests marryages, thereby to make them his chaste Chaplains, about five
hundereth years ago, which the other Popes have allowed and defended ever
since, more to get monye, than to make them live chastely, and more to seem
godly, than indede to live virtuously, which devilish law does show whose
disciple he was that devised it, whose Children they were that procured it,
whose Chaplains they were that established it, and whose Prelates they were
that did practice it.

Therefore ye Pope by the means of ye Devil (for Pope Hyldebrand was a coniurer
of Devils that first established it) has put down the marryage of Bishops and
Priests, that they may get money to license them to keep Harlots, knowing they
are not able to live chaste.

Mark how God and the Pope do agree, God forbids whordom and alows marriage:
but the Pope forbids marriage and allows whordome, clean contrary to God. God
appoynteth marriage as a remedy against whordom, the Pope takes away that
remedy because he would have whordome. God says thou shall not steal, but he
allows work and labor. But if the Princes should make a law that none of
their subjects should labor or work: (which is the chief remedy against
theft) as the Pope has made a law that no Priests shall marry, (which is the
best remedy against whoredom) then the most of their subjects would become
thieves: as the most of the Popes Priests become whorekeepers. For put down
labor and set up theft. Even so drive away marriage and bring in whoredom.

There are a great sort in England at this present yt live honestly with their
wives: but if they were al unmarried, and might not marry, do you think that
they al then would live chaste? no I warraunt you. Even so though a great sort
of Bishops, Preachers, and ministers live godly and honestly now having wives:
yet al Bishops, Preachers, and ministers would not live godly and chastely
without wives. Nay there are some of them fornicators having wives: then think
you they would live chaste if they had no wives? I think not. If one woman be
not ynow, then no woman would be too few: if they can not be content with one,
they would scantly be content with none: yet you will skantly believe
whatsoever is proved or said.

But if the Queens majesty (to please you and displease God) should cause
all Priests and Ministers under her to put away their wives, and command
them to live chaste, do you think they would live chastlye? yea yt they
would, as poor men commanded not to labor, would live truly, and not
steal.

You may as well learn the chastity of unmarried Priests, by the Popes
Priests of Italy, Rome, France, Spain, and of them that were late in Qu.
Mary's time, which lived and live under their holy and chaste Popes laws, as
to have our Bishops and Ministers and Preachers to put away their wives,
for if they live and lived chastelye without wives, then ours would live
chastely without wives. But for as much as we see and know that they lived and
do live most abhominably and wickedly, (counting it no sin) and have license
of the Pope, freely to use the same. Therefore (as Gods word does allow) our
Bishops Priests and ministers have their lawful wives, to avoid wickedness
and whoredom.

But some of you have a deep and great worldly reason that the marriyng of
our preachers and ministers will fill all the realm full of beggars: surely if
that were true, it would have been spyed once in two and twenty years, if
you see so much, you see more than many that are as wise and as well sighted
as you. I marvel why you have not spyed as well, that if poor laboring men,
blind men, and lame men yea and beggars be married, that they will likewise fill
ye Realm with beggars? but if you allow poor me^ to marry yt have no living at
al, but only by threshing, hedging, ditching, and such like, (where diverse of
them are not worth forty shillings in all the world.) Yea and beggars that
lives only of alms, then I think ye Queens majesty may as well allow, the B.
Deanes, Archdeacons, Doctors, Parsons, Uickars and Curats to marry: whereof
diverse have Lords livings, many of them great livings, yea and the worst of
them yearly livings, who are more able to bring up their children in learning
hereafter to get their livings, and more likelye to leave their wives and
children more goods and substance, than these poor men that in their life
have little or nothing, and at their deaths leaves their wives and children as
good as nothing. Therefore that the marrying of Preachers and ministers will fill
this Realm full of beggars, is but a bare beggerlye excuse.

But if one should ask you how many of their children you have seen go a
begging, I think you would either hold your peace, or else say that you have
seen but a few.

And though many of the Papistical Priests, have bin, and are great
fornicators, yet they would seem to be holy husbands (and so they had
need,) for they make us believe they have a holy wife, for they say that our
Lady (as they call her) is their wife.

They may well take her for their wife, but surely she does not take such
fornicators for her husbands. Truly I muse that she, when she was living here
on earth, had but one husband, which was both godly and chaste: and now being
dead and in Heaven, to have such a rabble of husbands that are so vicious and
wicked: therefore it is not like, that she that would have but one honest
husband when she was a live, will have so many naughtye husbands when she is
dead.

If the marriage of Priests be so evil, as many of you would make it, then
the Priests children can not be good, and so, if any Popes were Priests sons,
then these Popes must needs be evil. Then al these Popes that follow were
naught, for they were Priests sons. For Pope Siluerius, Pope Deus dedit,
Pope Adrianus 2. Pope John 15. Jewel in defen. Apolog. distinct. 17 Page. 207.
Pope Felix 3. Pope Hosius: Pope Agapetus: Pope Gelasius: Pope Bonifacius: Pope
John 10. Pope Theodorus, and many other are found, That being Priests sons,
ruled the Sea of Rome. Now, if Priests may be fathers to Popes, then Priests
may be fathers to pore men: And if Priests may beget them that rule
Emperoures and Kings, then Priests may begette them that Emperoures and Kings
may rule.

And for that it appears by the writings of the learned Doctors and fathers
that Priests marriage was honorable and lawful in the Primitive Church and
long after, I will likewise let you understand, that the ancient Popes and
Bishops have both allowed it, Jewel in defens. apol. 233
and confirmed by their Cannons. For Pope Leo says, Let him be consecrated a
Bishop, of whom it may well appear, that either he is, or has bin the
husband of one wife. Yet Pope Hyldebrand that came after him, comaundes, that
Bishops and Priests shall have no wives. Here is one Pope against an other,
one of them must needs be wrong. Therefore, whether shall we trust to Pope
Leo that agrees with Saint Paul, which says, Let a Bishop be the husband
of one wife: or to Pope Hildebrand, that (according to the Devils doctrine)
has commanded, that a Bishop must have no wife, (but that for money he
may have as many whores as he will, yea, and without money, if he can play
privily.) And it is written in the Cannons, commonly called the Apostles
Cannons, Let not either Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon, Canon. 5.
put away his wife, under color of Religion, or if he so do, let him be put
from the communion (of the faithful) and if he so continue, let him be
utterly deposed from his office: But now the Pope has an other Canon (though
it be neither so ancient nor so good) that whatsoever Bishop or Priest will not
put away his wife, or has a wife, shall be put out of his office. Thus you may
see, that S. Paul and the Pope, and the Apostles Canons, and the popes Canons,
and the former Popes, and the latter Popes agree as well together, as God and
the Devil, light and darkness, and truth and falshoode.

Jewel in defens. apol. 561.
Saint Paul (says Master Jewel) did write to the married people in Rome
saying: You are not in the flesh but in the spirit, they were married, and
lived in the laws of marriage: Yet Saint Paul says, They were not in the
flesh but in the spirit: Saint Aug. says, The bodies of married people,
keeping faith both to themselves and to the Lord, are clean and holy:
Chrisost. says, It is the honest chastity and temperance that is between man
and wife: S. Paul calls Holiness. And again, Marriage is void of fault
and is no hindraunce to Virtue. If S. Paul and these holy Doctors and writers
were alive now, they would say there were more holiness in men's marriage, than
in Priests chastity. Chriso. says, Jewel in defen. Apolog. Page 564.
Abundance of riches does hardly bring a man into the kingdom of heaven, yet
often times many rich men have entered into it, so also does Marriage. As
Marriage hinders, so does Riches: and no more the one tha^ the other. Christ
calls riches Thorns and Brambles, I do not remember that ever of marriage
he said the like: yet the Pope restrayneth his Priests only from marriage,
and allows them benefices, Prebends, Abbeys, Bishopprickes upon
Bishopprickes, with money and treasure, as much as they list, and thinks it
no hinderance to perfect life. Christ forbade the Apostles money in their
purses, but not Marriage: but the Pope forbids his Prelates marriage but not
money. Thus, whatsoever we can say or do, the Pope will needs be contrary to
Christ.

And now, for ye Priests marriage is aucthorized by God, allowed by Christ,
used of the Apostles, commended of the Doctors, and confirmed by the Popes,
then why should you so much discommend it or speak against it. Perhaps you
will say, that Priests have made a vow to live unmarried: if they did live
chastely by being unmarried, I would say they did well, but if they commit
fornication by their being unmarried, I must say they do evil. But I pray
you, who required this vow at their hand? where did ever God command them, or
Christ procure them, or the Apostles persuade them? Now seeing they make this
their vow without Gods w^rrant, therefore their vow is both vain and wicked
(and so ought not to be kept. Judge. 11.
) Iephtha the Judge of the Israelites made a vow, that if he got the victory,
he would kill and sacrifice the first thing that met him after he came home,
whereby he killed his own daughter, who did meet him first of all other.
Herod vowed unadvisedly, that he would give his daughter whatsoever he asked:
Math. 14*
whereby S. John Baptist lost his head. And the Jews made a vow to kill Saint
Paul. It is noted by Gratian in the Decrees, that Hubaldus made a vow, Jewel
in defe^. Apolog. 213.
That he would never help his own mother or brethren, were their need
never so great, but as they that make evil vows, ought not to keep them,
so they that make godly vows advisedly, ought not to break them: but if the
vow seem never so godly, and the maker thereof, is not fully able to perform
it, let him then rather break it to goodness, than to keep it in euilnesse.
All Priests that made this vow to live unmarried, did make it for a show to
live chaste. But how chastely did they live? or how were many of them able to
live chaste? forsoothe they lived as chastely, as their Popes that caused them
to make it, the Popes pond found full of childrens sculles shows how chastely
they and their Chaplains lived. Acts and Monuments. Page 393.
Therefore, for one to make a vow that knows he is not able to keep it, is
mere folly, or else to commit sin by the keeping it, is abominable and
wicked.

What a fond thing is it, that a lame man (that is not able to go a mile a
day) should make a vow to go to Jerusalem in a month, and to come home in an
other? even so what a madness is it for Priests and ministers of the Church,
to make a vow to live unmarried al their lives, that can not be without a
woman a month? therefore it is a wicked thing for Priests to vow Chastity,
and can not live chastely. A vow of Chastity without keeping of Chastity,
pleases God as well, as the Pope does in naming himself Christ's Uicar, being
notwithstanding, the Devils Deputy. Saint Hierome says, Quid prodest
pudicitia corporis animo constuprato: Hieron. in Hierem. lib. 2 cap. 7.
What profits the chastity of the body, if the mind be unchaste: Now, if
they be unchaste before God (as they are indeed) that have unchaste minds,
though they touch not a woman: then how chaste are the Popish Priests that
vow to live chaste, and yet are common fornicators? (for they make their vow
of custom, not for chastity.) And as they make the vow commonly, so they
break the vow commonly. But truly it stands with reason, that if a Priest may
break his vow in taking a whore, then he may break his vow in taking a wife.

Cyprian de singul. clerico.
Saint Cypryan says, Peius est quam mechari, continentiam ducere criminosam: To
live vnchastely under the color of chaste life, (as the spiritual Chaplains
of the Popes do) is worse than aduoutrie.

And though you would think that the forbidding of Priests marriages was
established to make the Priests live more godly and religiously, and the
Priests vows to be made only to make them live chastely, you shall see now by
this that follows, whether they were appointed, and daily performed for that
purpose, or not.

After that most pestilent Pope Hyldebrande had by cruelty and tyranny
quite abolished the marriage of Priests, Auentin* wrote, Auentin. in Heldebrando
That the^ many godly learned men forsook the ministry, and also that false
Prophets, false Apostles, and false Priests sprang up, which under a
counterfaite religion deceived the people. The most part of them under the
honest name of Chastity, commit whoredom, aduoutry, incest, and that
commonly, and without punishment.

The Popes chaste living may show us their Chaplains chastity, for, such
Master, such man, Aeneas Siluius de Cons. Basil. lib. 2.
such Sovereign, such subjects, and such schoolemaister, such Scholar. One
Robert Holcote does set out the Priests in his time in their colors for their
chastity, saying: The Priests of our time by their lechery are like the
sprites called Incubi, the Priests of Priapus or Belphegor, and the Angels of
the pit of Hell. The Priests wicked livings for want of wives made Pope Pius say
thus: Perhaps it were not worst that many Priests were married, for many
might be saved in married Priesthood, which now in bare Priesthood are
condemned. If the Popes themselves speak against the single life of Priests,
and spy the mischief that comes of it, and think it good for Priests to
have wives, then you that favor the Popes me think ought not to maintain
their single life, or think it necessary, that our Spirituality should put
away their wives. Thus you may perceive their lack of wives, and their holy
vow made them rather live vitiously than virtuously. Jewel in def. Apology.
413


If I should write all the sayings of godly and learned men, that have thus
written against their vowed chastity and unchaste lives: I should rather make a
great bible than a little book. S. Aug. says, although you have no wives, yet
is it not lawful for you to have co^cubines, whom ye may after put from you.
So yt by S. Aug. it appeers yt a wife and a concubine is not al one: though M.
Harding (a defender of Priests concubines) says that a concubine is taken for
a wife, and she is a true wife before God, Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 413.
though one keep her and lie with her before they be married. But I may answer
M. Hard. thus. Suppose that a Concubine is taken for a wife (as it is not)
where a man keeps a woman yt after he intendes to marry: yet the popish
Priests can not call their co^cubines wives in this sense. For what Prelate or
Priest of the Romish Church keeps a concubine to the intent to marry her
afterward? therefore if a co^cubine might signify a wife to him yt keeps her
and marries her afterward: yet a Concubine must needs be a harlot to Priests,
that never marry her, nor mean to marry her. But the text shows plainly
that a wife and a Concubine are two several things: as appears by S.
Augustines words before recited. And as the text shows whereof M. Harding
writes, which is, he that has not a wife, but in steed of a wife has a
Concubine, let him not be put from the Communion (this law gives no liberty
at all to sin.) Therefore M. Harding (as M. Jewel says) is fowlie deceived,
or means fowlie to deceive other, that says a wife and a concubine is all
one, for hereby it appears they are two several things. If a Concubine be a
lawful wife, then a lawful wife is as well a Concubine, and if a Concubine and
a wife be both one, why does the Pope allow a Priest to keep a Concubine,
Distinct. 34. Christiano.
and so straightly forbid him to have a wife? Also in the Popes decrees, it is
lawful for a Christian man to have only one woman, either his wife, or in
steed of a wife his Concubine, (but first by the way this is a godly law) here
a co^cubine is not a wife (says M. Jewel) but a woman in steed of a wife.
Distinct. 34. Is qui.
And the Rubrike upon the 34. distinction, Is qui. is thus: It is lawful for
him that has no wife, in stead of her to have a Concubine (here is good
stuff) And what is a Concubine but a harlot? For S. Aug. says, Some man will
say, that the woman that I keep is not my Harlot, she is my Concubine: whereto
S. Aug. answered thus: Well, well, whether thou will or wilt not, she that
sleeps with thee besides thy wife, is thy harlot. Thus Master Harding would
prove, that a Concubine is a good honest woman, because belike they are Priests
Lemans, but the Scriptures and S. Aug. account them plain harlots.

May you not now perceive, that the Popes law is a pure and holy law, that
allows Priests to have harlots, and forbids them to have wives? nay punishes
them and burns them for Heretics that have wives.

I may say, that you are not so wise, as I would have you, if you forsake the
Gospel of Christ, and follow still that Romish Church that allows laws to
maintain whordom.

As it does partly appear before, that these Popes restrain Priests from
Marriage not to live in Chastity, but in whoredom and aduoutrie, so shall you
understand the same more plainly by this that follows, therefore mark it
well, For fornication no man ought to be deposed, Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 418*
unless he continue in the same: whereupon they have made this favorable
gloss for their chaste Priests, Now adays no man may be deposed for
fornication. Is not this a good gloss for the cherishing of Chastity? yes I
trow. Panormitane says, The laws of men ought to be altered according to
the change of times: (for, though before time when the Church of Rome followed
Christ, Priests are deposed for fornication, yet now because the times were
changed, the judgment of the Church of Rome is changed,) therefore now-adayes
Panormitane tells us an other tale, and says, That for simple fornication no
Priest is deposed from his benefice.

Likewise it is noted upon the Decrees thus, Jewel in defen. Apo. page 418.
It is commonly said, that for simple fornication no Priest ought to be
deprived, for that few Priests are found without that fault: yea, but why did
you take away marriage from the^, yt would have made them be without that fault,
and therefore by that saying, the words that I spoke before are verified, which
were, Drive away Marriage, and bring in Whordome.

But they that committed fornication or aduoutrie Master Harding says, In
eade^ page
Saint Siluester made a bridle for them, which was: They should suffer ten
years penance, which to our new Clergy (says he) would seem very
strait, Yea, but as they use the matter, it is now slack enough, for it is
so qualified with such a gloss, that the offender may release all that ten
years penance for the giving of a penny. Therefore the Popes chaste Priests
(having this liberty, and so easily to be released) will make hard shifte but
they will give that penny. Further, ye Popes law is, that no man now a days,
ought to be deprived for fornication, and that because our bodies are frayler
than they were wont to be. Distinct. 82. Presbitor in glossa.
So the Priests bodies both in the old law and in the new law, long before
your time, would have bin frail as well as yours, if they could not have bin
suffered to have wives. Therefore why do you not take the remedy that God has
appointed: that is, to marry, whereby your bodies would not be so frail as
they are.

Otho in his Constitution Legantine says: Let Priests put away their
Concubines within a months respite, Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 419.
and afterward to hold neither them nor any other in any wise which the
gloss very favorably expounds for the spiritual ease of the Priests, (they
may not afterward hold neither the same Concubines nor any other) which
words you must thus understand, That by the space of a whole month together
he may not hold them: And thus by this kind of glosing, yt Priests are safe
enough from being punished by this law: for the Devil were on them, if they
should lie with their harlots a whole month together. And thus, though some
of their laws be strait, the gloses of their laws have made them easy
enough. Many such licencious laws are made in favoring of the Priests
fornication.

Now I pray you judge rightly and without partiality whether Gospellers or the
Papists give more carnal liberty or occasion to sin. A man may look al Gods
law through, ere he find one such favorable clause for fornicators, as the
Pope has made many for his fornicatyng Priests.

Master Harding says, If the Bishop wink and dissemble, and bear with the
wickedness of the Priest in this behalf, that then he himself ought to be
punished by suspe^tion from his office. Whom Master Jewel aunsweareth as
follows. This master Harding is Canon of your own making, for other
authority ye allege none. But how may it seem likely that ye punish so
cruelly your Bishops for favorable dealing herein, seeing your high and all
only Bishop and the Bishop of all Bishops, is so well content upon agreement for
money, to license both Bishops and Priests, to keep Concubines. If ye
mistrust the truth hereof, beside your common practice as you know, Extra de
Iudicijs ca. 4.5. de adulter.
your own Pope Gregory himself will soon tell you, touching aduoutrye and
other small faults: (Here the Pope makes aduoutrye but a slender or small
sin) The Bishop after penance done may dispe^ce with a Priest. Likewise again
it is noted in your gloss, with Priests having sundry Concubines, the Bishop
may dispense that they may nevertheless do their office. Thus fornicating
Priests are good enough to say the Popes Mass and service, for such holy
service such holy Priests. And in the said former gloss (says Master Jewel)
you shall find another special note, well worthy to be written in the Popes
Gallerie in letters of gold. And this is it that follows: Mark well that he
that keeps sundry Concubines is not thereby made Irregular. (Which is, that
he has not broken his order of Priesthood, but is as good as holy and
virtuous a Priest, as though he kept no Concubines, or played not the
fornicator.) Is not this a trim gloss that can gloss that fornicating Priests
are right and perfect Priests. I will not say but that they are right and fit
Priests for the Pope and the Devil, but they are not meet and perfect
Priests for God and Christ. If Priests that keep never so many Harlots be
right and perfect Priests, then it were a hard world that the Pope should
lack Priests.

But now see how their own gloses disclose their knauerie. Jewel defens. Apol.
Pa. 420
Thus it is: Mark well (says the gloss) here is a marvelous strange
reckning. The Bishop dispenceth with him that offends (having sundry
Concubines) but with him that offends not, having married two wives, (yea or
but one wife) he dispenceth not. (Therefore he shall be Christ's Uickar no
longer, but the Uickar of the Devil.) And further he says, Here lechery has
more liberty tha^ chastity.

If they had made no falser nor worser gloses than this, their gloses then
would have been more true and godly than they are.

Again in the decrees it is thus written, Whatsoever woman have such company
with Priests, let them be removed by the Bishop and sold, and made slaves.
Unto this law being in it self over rigorous, the gloss adds this favorable
construction: let them be sold and made slaves. This is true if the Priests
marry with them as with their wives. Otherwise I grant not that for simple
fornication they may be sold.

By this goodly glosing marriage is double fornication. And here they punish
the married and sell them for slaves, and suffer the fornicators to be in quiet
and rest: what a heavenly interpretation of the Popes decrees is this? you
shall not find such a glorious gloss in the whole Bible.

Co^stit. Othonis, de Cer. concub. remo. licet ad profu.
Otho in his Legantines says thus, The Priest that openly keeps Concubines,
let him be deposed. Hereupon the gloss says thus: He that openly keeps
Concubines, let him be deposed: understand thou by this word openly, if he be
not afraid though he appear unto the people, it is otherwise if he keep his
Concubine secretly, whether it be^ in an other man's house, or in his own: for
so he comes not within the danger of the law, for a house betokens not an
open matter. Thus therefore (says the gloss) expound thou this constitution:
if he keep his Concubine openly, that is to say, if he keep her commonly
and in the sight of many. Therefore if such a Concubine be seen twice or
thrice openly, it is not sufficient, and so ends the gloss.

This Church of Rome must needs be a very catholic Church, that has such
Catholic constructions and gloses of her laws. By this kind of glosing if a
Priest lie not with his Concubine or Harlot, in an open Fair or Market, or in
the open street that every one may look on them or see them, they are safe
enough, this law cannot once touch or hurt them: you call the Gospellers,
Lutheranes, Swinglyans, Hugonets, and Caluinistes, and I can not tell what, and
take them for most rankest Heretics in the world and that they gave liberty
to sin, but yet neither Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, nor any other that are
Gospellers, made ever any such construction or exposition of any part of the
Scriptures, nor in any of their preachings or writings give such liberty to
sin in any point, (but persuade from sin) as the Popes doctors by ye
construing and glosing of the Popes laws and decrees, have given liberty for
fornication and whoredom: as here it does too manyfestly appear.

I am sure there are many of you simple and ignorant persons that favor
Papistrye, yt would not have thought that the Pope and his Prelates had any
such gloses, and that the Pope were such an open maintayner of sin and
whoredom, and such a sufferer of such horrible vices and blasphemies against
God, as herein is most truly and plainly described.

And further in this point M Jewel says to M. Harding, Whereas you say if a
Bishop show favor herein, he himself shall be suspended, your own Doctor,
Abbot Panormitane would have you the contrary. Who says, the Bishop is not
bound to deprive a Priest that keeps a Co^cubine. To make short, says M.
Jewel, ye also have of great providence devised a special praemunire, to
embolden your Priests in fornication, and to warraunt them free from all
danger of any your laws made in that behalf. For thus you say, If a lay man
by the instigation of the Devil accuse a Priest of an incontinent life,
straight way he is thrust back, and put to silence. The lay sort may not be
heard in the accusation of a Bishop, Did. 84. Maximianus glossa.
And again, a lay man may not accuse a Priest of fornication. This is that
extremity and universal rigor (Master Harding) that ye show your Priests
in these causes, no lay manne may accuse them, no Bishop may deprive them,
and no law may touch them.

Hildricus the Bishop of Augusta in Germany writing unto Pope Nicholas
against the restrainte of Priests marriage, Jewel defens. Apol. Pa. 421
uses the like manner of speech as we have used, Thus he says, unto this
commandment (I will not say unto this Counsel) they set so foolish and so
shameful a suggestion, that they say, it is an honester thing for a priest, to
be entangled with many Concubynes in secret and privily, then openly and in
sight, and in knowledge of all the world, be joined in marriage with one wife:
which thing verilye they would not utter, if they were either of him or in him
that says, woe be unto you ye Pharisees that do al things to please men.

Jewel in defen. Apo. page 422.
In like sort the counsel of Worms wrote sometime against Pope Hyldebrand, for
that he had devised great rigor and tirannie to sunder Priests from their
wives, saying, He places strumpets before honest wives: and fornication,
incest, and aduoutry before Chaste marriage. What need we many words in so
clear a case, the whole practice of your Church (M. Harding) professes the
same. If a Priest marry a wife, ye suspende him, ye excommunicate him, ye
deprive him, ye disquiet him, and trouble the whole Church. But if he keep a
Concubine, one, two, or three, ye are then contented and ready not only to
dissemble it: but also with favor to excuse it. Thus much Master Jewel against
Master Harding.

I heard it credibly told, that a certain married Priest came in Queen
Mary's time, to Doctor Bonner then Bishop of London, bringing a letter with
him from a gentleman that was well acquainted with the Bishop, which letter was,
to desire the said Bishop Bonner to be good to the Priest, for the admitting
of him into a certain benefice that he required: which letter ye Bishop
lovingly rece^ued, and willingly red, which done the By. showed a loving
countenance upon ye Priest, bidding him to come again to him another time, and
then he would answer him what he would do: As soon as the said Priest was
gone, there was one yt was in company of the B. that knew the Priest, who
said unto the Bishop, my Lord if you let him have the benefice you know not
what you do: why said the Bishop? forsoothe my Lord (said he) because he is a
married Priest: is he so said ye Bishop? now before God let me alone, ye knave
will come to me again. And then after within three or four days, the same
Priest came again to Bonner the Bishop of London, Ah sir said ye B. you are
even he yt I look for, you are a married knave you, no my Lord said the Priest,
yt is untrue whosoever told it to your Lordship, no said the B. it is credibly
told me yt you are a married Priest, truly said the Priest, I had a woman I
must needs confess, but I never took her for my wife but for my Harlot, no
said the B. I pray God it be no worse, I pray God it be no worse, and so went
casting his arms abroad saying still, I pray God it be no worse, as though to
have a wife was worse than to keep a whore. Whether this honest chaste Priest
sped of that he came to the Bishop for, I know not, but the Bishop was
better pleased with him for saying that he took her for his whore, than if he
had said that she was his wife.

Thus you may well perceive, that though the Popes show a face of chastity,
by restrayning of Priests from marriage, yet both he and his Prelates prefer
and mainetaine abominable whoredom, as by the sequel it shall more
manifestly appear.

Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 422.
Upon the Legantine constructions of Otho, ye may find these words noted in
the gloss, Whether may a Priest be forced to forswear his Co^cubine or not? it
seems (says the gloss) that he may not, the resolution hereof is this, If a
Priest have married a wife, in this case he is forced to forsake her by an
oath. Thus these holy Fathers forbid not fornication nor aduoutrye, nor they
may not take an oath to put their Harlots away, but they must swear to put
away their wives and to forsake them. If Saint Paul had the holy ghost, then
this Popes law is the doctrine of Devils.

Co^stit. Othonis de co^cubin. clericoru^. remo^.
Further the gloss says (but mark it well for it is good doctrine) It seems
that the Church (of Rome) ought to dissemble the falt of whoredom (or else it
is not worthy to be Satan's Synagoge) for the Popes Marshal in deed receives
tribute or pention of whores.

Is not this holy father worthy to believed, esteemed, and honored of you as a
GOD, or Christ's own vickar, that mayntaines Stews and brothell houses, and
takes yearelye rent for whoredom? you shall not find in all the Scripturs,
that God did either appointe it, (but plainly forbad it) or that either Christ
or Saint Peter (who they say was the first Pope) did ever permit or allow it,
or got money on that fashion.

Yet Master Harding would feign excuse the Pope for the keeping of his
Stews, Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 422.
and therefore he says thus as follows. Wherefore is the Bishop of Rome
more to be blamed for maynetenaunce of his Stews, than the French King or
the King of Spain? well said Master Harding, it is spoken like a Divine
Doctor, you have with no small consideration allowed the Popes Stews. For
though the French King and King of Spain, can learn no chastity of ye Pope:
yet the Pope may learn Whoredom of the French King and of the king Spain.
But me thinks the French King and the King of Spain, might say thus rather,
why may not we maintain whoredom and open Stews as well as our holy Father
the Pope? for if it were not good and lawful (he being Christ's vickar) would
neither use it nor suffer it. This had been more meet for a learned Doctor to
have said (though not for a Catholic Doctor.)

God said unto the Jews, There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel:
Jewel in defen. Apo. page 425.
nor any whore-keeper of the sons of Israel. Yea but the Pope and his
glosers may gloss this saying well enough, for they may say that the Pope nor
his Prelates nor Priests, that are within his Uickaredge or Dioces, are no
Jews, nor are the sons or daughters of Jacob: Therefore they are none of the
sons or daughters of Israel: and so they may keep whores and play the
Harlots well enough, and because Gods law does not touch them, therefore the
Popes law does allow them.

Mark here what a straight law was made against women for lying with Priests.
Constitu. prouin. Edmundi ca^t. Archiep.
In a provincial Council holden at Oxford it is written thus. Let Priests
Cuncubine^ be warned by the Archdeacon, etc. if they will not amend, then let
them be forbidden to kiss the Pax, and to take holy bread in the Church,
was not this a grievous and sore punishment to make Harlots refuse their
whoredom with Priests? did their Harlots care so much for kissing of the Pax,
that they would forsake the kissing of Priests? no I warrant you, and therefore
this hard and straight law was made.

As good a law to avoid dru^knesse were this, whosoever will not forbear
drinking of wine, (whereby they become drunk) let them in no wise be suffered to
drink water, this is as good a law to suppress drunkenness, as their law at
Oxford was to avoid whoredom.

Saint Paul says, It is better to marry than to burn, but the Pope is of a
clean contrary spyrite and judgment. 1. Cor. 7.
For his laws and his deeds shows, that it is better to burn in
concupiscence than to marry. But if Saint Paul's words be turned clean
backward, they will be the Popes own law. And though the Popes law is quite
contrary to gods law, yet I dare undertake to make the Popes law and Gods law
agree both in one and that very quicklye, yet many would think that it is a
very hard thing to do, because they seem so contrary one to another. And
mark for thus I will make them agree. If in every sentence of Gods law you do
put in this word, not, (if it be not there already) and likewise if you take the
same word (not) out of every sentence of the same where it is, assure your
self that then the whole law of God, will straight way be turned into the
very law of the Pope, as thus for example.

Exodus 20.
God said, Thou shall have none other Gods but me, put (not) away, and then it
is, thou shall have other Gods than me. Also God says, Thou shall not make to
thy self any graven Image, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship
them. But take (not) out of the same sentence, and then it will be thus, thou
shall make to thy self graue^ Images: thou shall bow down to them and worship
them. And again God says, Thou shall not kill, take (not) away from it, and
then it is thou shall kill. And again God says, Thou shall not commit
adultry, take away (not) and then it is thou shall commit adultry. And thus
these holy laws of God, by taking away (not) are now quickly turned into the
Diuellishe laws of the Pope. And whereas Christ says, Math. 5.
Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God, but
if you put this word (not) to it, then it is blessed are not the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. And whereas Christ
says, Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works,
Math. 5.
add this word (not) unto it, and then it will be thus, let not your light
shine before men, that they may not see your good works: and thus you may
quicklye and easily turn the law of God into the law of the Pope.

You may see by this preatie lesson that follows, whether ye Pope by his
restrayning of Priests from Marriage, does mean, that thereby they should
live chaste or not: and this it is mark it well: Si non cast, tamen caute, If
you deal not chastely, yet deal charily: The rule is both pretty and short,
though the Pope knows that his Chaplains can not hyde their vicious living
from God, yet he would have the^ hyde it from men. A man may look through the
whole Bible, and yet find not such a fine rule for whoredom: and because it
is not to be found in the Bible, but directly against the doctrine of the
Bible, therefore I may conclude, that it is, (though it came from the Pope)
the doctrine of the Devil.

But Master Harding did allow it well enough: Jewel in defen. Apolog.
for whatsoever it pleased the Pope to allow, he would not stick to
affirm: for the said Master Harding says, That thereby a man is not
animated (or boldened) at all to do evil, but (if he hap to do his unclean
lust, or will not be staid from it) is admonished to do it charily, though not
chastely: It does not animate him (says he) at al to do evil: and truly I
cannot see how it should bolden him to do good.

If we had no other law for thieves, but these words that follow, If men
live not truly, yet let them steal privily: do you think that then we should
have as few thieves as we have? I think not: And as this would increase the
thieves, so does that fine rule of the Popes breed fornicators, aduoutrers,
whoores and harlots. Though Master Harding say, that it does not animate or
encourage them to do evil: And though he account it as a good admonition:
1. Cor. 7.
yet Saint Paul (in my judgment) gives a better admonition, who says, To
avoid fornication let every man have his wife, better it is to marry than
to burn, that is in desire or concupiscence: thus, though not by the Popes
law, yet by Saint Paul's rule Priests ought to have wives to avoid
fornication, if they be men: mary if they be women, they are then without the
compass of S. Paul's admonition.

Mark what Petrus Rauennus one of the Popes Canonistes upon the Decretalles
says, In glossa Extra. de immunitate Eccle. Pet. Raven-
Notwithstanding handling and kissing in Lay persons be the occasions or
beginnings of incontinent or unchaste behavior, yet in Priests it is far
otherwise: Uery well said and Doctor-lyke, for Priests do not kiss or dally
with women as other men do, for the Priests kissing and dallying with women,
is the beginning of godly devotion. Therefore, when we see a Priest kiss or
dally with a woman, we must assure our selves, that by and by after they will
fall to prayer, such virtue have Priests in their kyssyng and dallying above
other men. And this was the cause that women have so willingly suffered
Priests to dally with them, and to kiss the^. Here is also a golden gloss for
maintaining of priests chastity. 11. quae. 3. absit in glossa.
And thus it is, If a Priest embrace a woman, a Lay man must judge of it thus,
that he does it to the intent to bless her: and well said, for such blessings
of the Priests have been so full of virtue, that many women thereby have had
such Tympanyes, that they could never be helped of their disease, before they
had Midwiues to be their Physicians. Are not these goodly gloses to make
Priests to live chaste.

Acts and Monuments. Page 835.
In diverse places under the Pope, the Bishops and Officialles, do not only
suffer Priests to have Concubines, so that they pay certain sums of money,
but also compel continent and chaste Priests (which live without Concubines)
to pay tribute for Concubines, affyrming, that the Bishop has need of
money, which being paid, it shall be lawful for them, either to live chaste, or
to keep Concubines at their pleasure: must not these holy Fathers be of a
sound and true religion, that maintain their Prelates and Priests to live
thus chastely? and that do not only allow whoredom and forbid marriage, but
also compel men to pay money for the keeping of whores that would live without
them.

Here you may plainly see, that the law for restraint of Priests marriage is
not that the Priests should live chastely, but thereby to get money, for
licencing them to sin. I will not deny but that these Popes and Prelates are
spiritual men, but they are not inspyred with the spirit of God, but they
are led by the spirit of the Devil: It were more reasonable me thinks, that
the Pope (if he would needs have money) to take money of Priests for having
of wives, than for keeping of whoores.

Cardinal Caietane says, Catherinus contra errore^ Caietani, err^. 103.
that The Pope may dispense with a Priest of the Weast Church to marry a wife:
(in my opinion) he may do so well enough: for he that may dispense with
Priests of the East Church to keep whoores, which God does forbid, he may
dispense with Priests of the Weast Church to marry wives which God does
allow. But I marvel what the Priests of the East Church have offended, that
they may not be dispensed withal, to marry as well as the Priests of the Weast
Church? belike the Pope thinks that God has appointed the Eastern Priests
to live in whoredom, and the Western Priests to live in marriage, sure^y this
your Romish religion is the fondest, the vnreasonablest, and most contrary to
it self of al other. Thus I trust you are satisfied for the marriage of Priests
and Ministers, which I have not only proved to be lawful by Gods law, by the
ancient Doctors, and by reason, but also have manifested what mischief and
wickedness this vowed chastity of Priests has wrought: besides the Popes
abominable laws and shameful suffering, nay rather maintaining and procuring
of whordome and most vicious living of his Prelates and Priests.

And now, as I reproved the forbidding of Priests marriage, and other of the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, manifesting the same to be most wicked and
ungodly, and against the word of God, even so I will prove, that your Mass is
most wicked and detestable, and that the Sacrament as you use it, is both
most abominable Idolatry, and not the body of Christ, as your Romish
religion does teach, and as you believe: though you think Gods word can not
confound it, no doctrine disprove it, no writers overthrow it, nor no reason
condemn it. And now to begin therein, whereas many of you are persuaded,
that this your Mass was used of Christ and his Apostles, and so came from
them: your opinion therein is most untrue and false, for, if Christ had
instituted it, and the Apostles had used it, then assure your selves, that
Christ would have made mention thereof in the Gospel, or Saint Luke would
have showed it in the Acts of the Apostles, or the Apostles would have
written of it in their Epistles, or else GOD would have revealed it in the
Revelations, whereby Saint John would have uttered it in the Apocalips: and
therefore forasmuch as there is no mention at al in any of those places,
either of the Mass, or of any part of it, as you have it, we must needs
think, and are most assured, that it is not to be received, allowed, used,
nor esteemed, but rather to be eschewed and contemned of all true Christians,
for, whatsoever is necessary for us, Christ and his Apostles have uttered in
the New Testament. And therefore this that I have already said, is sufficient
to overthrow, and quyte to confound your Mass. For where should we
Christians look for Christ our Capitaines law, but in Christ's Book? and
what other Book has Christ but only the New Testament? therefore his law
and will is there to be found and no where else, and so whatsoever is not to be
found in that book, is not the law of Christ, and because your Mass is not
to be found in the New Testament, therefore it is not Christ's law nor
commandment, and seeing it is not Christ's law nor commandment, what
should Christians do with it? this me think were sufficient for you utterly
to refuse and forsake the Mass, because it is not mentioned by Christ nor his
Apostles.

Perhaps some of you will say, though it be not in the Gospel, yet
therefore it is not to be rejected, for that Christ left many things out of
the Gospel that he would have us to follow, which you would seem to prove
by these words of Christ which he spoke to his Apostles, I have many things
to say unto you, but you are not able to bear them yet, John. 16.
etc. if this be the best foundation to build your Mass on, it will be quite
overthrown at the first I can tell you that: this is the text whereby the Pope
would prove his Purgatory and pardons with much of his other trashe. I muse
that any will be so fond as once to think, that a text will prove that thing
whereof it makes no mention: you are very hard driven for your Mass, when you
must be feign to try it, by a sentence that neither names it nor means it.
He is hard bestadde that is enforced to go to one for the trial of his
honesty that neither knows him nor ever saw him.

Because Christ said, I have many things to say unto you, but you are not
able yet to bear them: therefore you must kneel to the Mass, which is a
Sacrifice both for the quick and the dead. Is not this a good proof think
you? what if the Queens Majesty should say to one of her servants, sir, I
have many things to say unto thee, but because thou can not now remember
them al, I will tell thee my mind when I come again: Now when the Queen is
gone, if the same fellow should say, that her Grace (by these words) did
give him one of her greatest Parkes and Lordships that he would choose, and so
he therevppon pluckes down her Pales and houses, putting out her tenauntes
and buildes what he lists upon her ground, do you think therefore that this
was the Queens meaning? or do you think that she will be well content with
his doings? I think not. Now look what authority this man had by these her
words, to have one of her best Parkes and Lordshippes, and to pluck down
her houses and Park pales, and thereon to build what he list: even so by like
authority of the said words of Christ, the Pope has entered and taken
possession of Christ's Church, plucking down his ordinances, taking away the
Scriptures, (which is the wall and defense of his Church) and putting out the
Preachers of Gods word, building and setting up insteade thereof in the same,
this your monstrous Mass with all the Idolatry belonging to the same, (which
Christ never thought nor meant by these his words:) if every servant might
construe and take his Masters words in this order spoken in like sort, and
should by authority have it performed, the Masters within a while should
become servants, and the servants would be Lords and Masters, as the Popes be,
who make the scriptures to mean what they list. But Christ, to hedge you out
of this liberty, and that you should not build your Mass, nor other dreams
out of these aforesaid words written in the 16. chap. of S. John, he shows
more plainly in the 14. chap. of S. John's gospel, what things they are yt they
are not yet able to bear away or remember. And these are the words, But that
comforter the holy ghost (whom my father will send in my name) he shall
teach you all, John. 14.
and bring al to your remembrance whatsoever I have told you. Hereby it
plainly appeeres, yt neither the Pope nor any other, can imagine out of their
own brains, any thing by ye same words of Christ, but only such things as
Christ had told his disciples before: al which, through their fleshly
weakness^ they could not remember, until they had received the holy Ghost,
who did then put them in remembrance of al things that Christ had told and
taught them: therefore this is no sound ground for your Mass to stand on,
whereby it must needs sincke and come to nothing.

Surely, if this your Mass came from Christ, or were so ancient and so godly,
as some of you take it to be, then your own Doctors and great Champions of the
Church must needs have known, and not say there were many abuses in it.

Doctor Stephen Gardner that was Bishop of Winchester, Steph. (...) in the
(...) Sophistri* Jewel in de^fens. apol. ^^*
says, That the use of the ministration under one kind (that is, of the
Mass, as it is now used) began first not of Christ or his Apostles, or of any
ancient learned father, but only of the simple devotion of the people,
(which may be called error well enough) for those people that lack the
knowledge of Gods word, must needs be in error: and then their error did
breed their simple devotion, and their simple devotion did bring forth the
same Mass, and so by Doctoure Gardners judgment, your Mass (as it is now
used) is builded on plain error, and whatsoever is builded on error, must
needs be false and ungodly, and so your Mass by your own Doctors dayment is
false and ungodly.

Albertus Pighius, Albertus Pighius de missa priuata.
one of the Popes chiefest posts affyrmeth, That there are many abuses in the
Mass: If the Popes divine Doctors find fault with the Mass, then why
should you think that the Mass is so holy and full of Virtue?

And Master Harding (which was a mighty defender of the Popes doctrine)
cannot tell when your private Mass first began, or who said it first of all:
well though he can not tell when your Mass began, yet we can tell when our
Communion began, and who he was that was the first author and sayer of it,
which was Christ* the son of God, who said it the day before he suffered
his passion.

Wherefore, if you can prove that your Mass is ancienter than our Communion,
Acts and Monumentes Page 26.
and that it was first said by a better man than by Christ, we will then refuse
our Communion, and embrace your Mass: but until you do that, we will not do the
other: but because Master Harding cannot tell who said the first Mass, I will
now tell you who said it first in Latin, and where it was said. One John
Portuensis being the Popes Legate (almost 700. years after Christ) did say the
first Mass in Latin, before the Patriarch and Princes at Constantinople in
the Temple of Saint Sophie.

Here we have gotten at first eight hundred years, from your Mass, so that it
is not so old as our Communion by eight hundredth years: and I am sure, that
John Portuensis that first said your Mass, is scantly able to compare with
Christ that first said our Communion. Yet your Mass that you so much
reverence and esteem, was not then in his perfection, nor fully finished. For
it seems that then it was so imperfect, that it was a peecing seven hundredth
years after, Jewel in defens. apol. 243.
and then made up at the last as it is. So that hereby it does plainly
appear, that your holy Mass was not come to her full growth, two hundred
years since. But it is almost sixteen hundred years since our Communion
began, first instituted by Christ: and the Apostles and holy fathers used
this our Communion, according to the Scriptures: but your Mass was patchte
up by the Pope but of late, and used of his Prelates and Priests, and is not
to be found in any part of the Scriptures, and clean contrary to the same.

Therefore you may well call the Popes Mass; a new law: (and not our
Communion) unless you call it new, because it agrees with the new Testament.

Thus you may see, that your Mass was patchte up of late, and your own
Doctors say it came not from Christ, nor his Apostles, that there are many
abuses in it, and that they know not how nor when it first began, therefore it
is mere madness for you to esteem the Mass any longer.

And though this be sufficient, yet, as I have proved the Mass cannot be
good, so I will prove, that the priests be most wicked that say the Mass, (if
they be wicked that are guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Dialog* inter
veritatem and cons.
) S. Ambrose an ancient learned father and a Doctor of good credit, and
called one of the Doctors of the Church, says, Is indigne sumit qui aliter
sumit quam Christus instituit: He takes it vnworthilye (that is the
Sacrament) that takes it otherwise, than Christ ordained it. Now Christ
commanded it to be done in his remembrance: the Priest does it in remembrance
of dead me^: Christ took bread and left it bread: the Priest takes bread, and
coniureth it quite away. Christ took bread and gave thanks: the Priest
takes bread and breaths upon it: Christ took bread and brake it, ye Priest
takes bread and hangs it up: Christ took bread and d^lt it to his Discipels,
the Priest takes bread and eats it up every whit himself: Christ in a
Sacrament gave his own body to be eaten in faith, the Priest for lack of faith
receives accidents, (as whiteness, roundnesse, weight, thickenesse, and such
like, without the substance of bread as they say) Christ gave a Sacrament to
strengthen men's faith: the Priest gives a sacrifice to redeem men's s^ules:
and Christ gave it to be eaten, the Priest gives it to be worshipped: and to
conclude, Christ gave bread, the Priest says he gives the very body of
Christ. Here is difference enough between Christ and the Priest. Beside all
this, Christ spoke in such a tongue, that he and the Apostles knew what was
spoken: but the Priest speaks in latin, that few or none understand him
what he says: And sometimes the Priest himself scantly understands what he
says. And thus because ye Priest receives it otherwise than Christ did
appoint it, he takes it unworthily to his condemnation.

Therefore the Priests were best to leave saying of Mass to their own
condemnation, and say our communion to their salvation. And for all this,
Master Harding (though he knew not by whom nor when the Mass began) yet he
was not ashamed to say, That the Mass is the most highest and most honorable
service that is done to God in his Church. If it be so, Jewel defens. Apol.
Pa. 342
I maruayle that Christ was so forgetful of his dear Father, that he never
spoke of it, that we might thereby highlye and honorablye serve GOD. And if he
had told it to his Disciples in secret, that they did never utter it.
Therefore until it be more crediblye affyrmed than on Master Hardings bare
word, there is no wise man that will believe it.

And if the Mass were so high and honorable a thing, and that it were a
sufficient sacrifice both for the quick and the dead: and that thereby we
might be clean cleansed of our sins: I much muse that God did not tell his
dear son Christ of it, when he so earnestly prayed a little before his death,
saying (Oh my Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me) but god
said then never a word of ye Mass to his son in ye great agony, Math. 26.
yet then was the time for God to have spoken of it, if ever he would speak of
it: therefore it is most manifest, that the Mass has no such power to
release us of our sins, as the Pope and his Prelates would make us believe.
For if it would deliver us from our sins, then God at this special time, would
have heard the earnest prayer and request of Christ his dear and only son,
and would have kept him from that cruel death that after he suffered, and
would or might have answered his son thus, oh my loving son be merry and
glad, thou shall not dye for the sins of the people, for I have devised
another easier way to save the^, whereby thou shall not need to dye, and this
it is, the Pope and his Priests shall say and celebrate the Mass, which is
not only the most highest and honorable service that can be done to me, but
also it shall be a sufficient and perfect sacrifice for sins both of the quick
and dead, and thereby they shall be delivered from Hell, as well as though thou
had dyed for them, and it shall be a ladder for them to climb up to heaven.
If God had said thus to his son our savior Christ, when he prayed so
earnestlye to his Father for the saving of his life, I would have liked you
Masses a great deal better: but because Christ said to his Father, if it be
possible let this Cup of death pass fro^me, and yet God suffered him to die for all his request, therefore it is most manifest and true, yt it is impossible for
us to be saved by any thing but only by the passion and death of Christ. This
is so sufficient an argument to make you forsake most speedily ye most
detestable Mass, ye robs Christ of his merits, and to take hold on Christ and
to embrace his gospel, as none ca^ be more sufficient and probable.

But for that many of you do think and believe that the bread in the Mass
after the Priest has consecrated it, is the very body of Christ, because
Christ said This is my body, Math. 26.
you shall now hear plainly by the ancient and learned Fathers and Doctors,
what Christ meant by these words. But first before I rehearse them, you shall
see what Christ meant by conferring of his own words: Christ took bread
and gave thanks and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples: saying, this is my
body which is given for you, this do in my remembrance: now this latter
sentence (do this in my remembrance) does show the meaning of the first
sentence. For if Christ had left his own body with us, then he would not
have said do this in my remembrance. For what need one be wylled to
remember that thing that he sees? Saint Paul likewise says, That which I
delivered unto you, I received of the Lord, for the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed, Corinth. 11.
took bread and gave thanks, and brake it and said, Take ye and eat ye,
this is my body, which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. After
the same manner he took the cup when supper was done, saying: this cup is the
new Testament in my blood: yet the cup wherein was the wine, was not the new
testament, though the very words are so, this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me, for as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this
cup, (not meaning that they should drink the Cup though he say so, but the
Wine in the Cup) ye shall show the Lords death till he come. Here Saint
Luke and Saint Paul differ from Saint Matthew and from Saint Mark, for
here they say: This Cup is the new Testamente in my blood, but Mark and
Matthew says: This is my blood of the new Testament, etc. whereby it appears
that therein S. Luke and S. Paul do open the meaning in this place of ye
other two Evangelists. So yt thereby Christ me^t not that the Wine was the
blood, but that the Wine does signify his blood, and is a new covenant or
witness of his blood, that was shed for many: and so he meant of the bread.

And Saint Paul says further, Ye shall show the Lords death until he come.
So that by his words it plainelye appears, that in eating of the Lords supper,
we chiefly ought to remember Christ in his absence, and show and remember his
death, and to be thankeful to him therefore until he come again at the last
day, for these words (until he come) do signify plainly, that he is absent in
his body, and will come at length.

And now you shall hear whether the auntiente Doctors and writers were of
the same judgment or not. Tertullian expounds these words of Christ,
Tertull. co^tra Marcian. li. 4
hoc est corpus meum: hoc est, figura corporis mei, which is: This is my body,
that is to say, this is the figure of my body, likewise Saint Augustine says,
Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, hoc est corpus meum, Aug in Psa. 3
cum daret signum corporis sui. Our Lord says he) doubted not to say, this is
my body, when he gave a sign of his body. And he says, Christ received Judas
unto his banquet, whereat he gave to his Disciples the figure of his body and
blood, here, by these ancient and learned writers it appears that the bread
that Christ brake and gave to his Disciples, was not his body, but a figure
and sign of his body.

Saint Cyprian says, The cup is offered in the remembrance of Christ,
Cyprian lib. 2 Epist. 3.
by the wine the Lords blood is showed, (or signified) therefore Wine is
used, that by Wine we may understand the Lords blood, etc. Saint Augustine
says, Aug. de fide ad Petr. ca. 19
in this sacrifice is a thanksgiving, and a remembrance of the flesh of
Christ, that he has offered for us, and of the blood that he shed for
us: And if you refuse all these learned authors aforesaid, yet you will not
refuse (I hope) ye Popes own gloss yt expounds it thus, vocatur corpus
Christi: id est significat corpus Christi: It is called the body of Christ,
that is to say, it signifies the body of Christ. De consecra. did. 2. hoc
est quod in glossa. A great sort more of learned Authors write of the Sacrament
to this effect, but these are sufficient to prove that the Sacramental bread
and wine are fygures and signs of the body and blood of Christ, and not the
very body and blood of Christ.

If it be a Sacrament as you call it, then it can not be the body of Christ:
for Saint Augustine says, Sacramentum est visibile signum inuisibilis gratiae,
A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace. Now if it be a sign of
an invisible grace then it is not the invisible grace it self. So that the
Sacrament being bread and wine, are signs of the body and blood of Christ:
which is an invisible grace (for Christ is the greatest favor and grace that
ever God bestowed upon us or sent us.)

Further this is the true diffinition of a Sacrament, Sacramentum est signum
rei sacrioris se. A Sacrament is a Sign of a holyer thing than it is it self.
And for that nothing is more holy than the body of Christ, and it being a
Sacrament is a sign of a holyer thing than it is it self: therefore it can
not be the body of Christ. And mark these arguments that follow: Nothing is
done in the remembrance of it self, Acts and Monuments. page 1328.

But the sacrament is used in the remembrance of Christ,
Therefore the Sacrament is not Christ.
Again Christ never devoured himself,
But Christ did eat the sacrament with his Apostles,
Ergo, the Sacrament is not Christ himself.
And again one thing can not be both visible and invisible,
But the Sacrament is visible, and the body of Christ is invisible, therefore
they are not one.


Which Saint Augustine opens well by these words. Acts and Monumentes Page
1329.
Aliud est Sacramentum, aliud res Sacramenti, etc. The Sacrament is one thing,
the thing of the Sacrament is an other thing, the Sacrament is that goes into
the body, the thing of the Sacrament is the body of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Saint Augustine says also, Evil men have the Sacrament, but they have not
the thing of the Sacrament, which is the body of Christ, that the Sacrament
does signify. By these sayings it appears plainly that the Sacrament is one
thing and the body of Christ is an other thing. S. Ambrose says of the bread
and wine, Jewel in defens. Apolog. Page 299.
Sunt quae erant, etc, They remain the same that they were, and are changed
into an other thing. That is they are made the Sacrament of ye body and blood
of Christ, which before they were not. S. Ambrose says, let the word be added
to the eleme^t or outward creature, and it is made a Sacrament, that is to say
another thing. Sacraments are signs or tokens of things, being by substance
one thing, and signifying an other thing. So says Chrisostom of the water of
Baptim, when this creature of water has received the holy ghost, it is made a
Sacrament. And now it is not water to drink* but water to sanctify, not
common water but water to refreshe. Thus the Element or outward creature, both
remains and is changed. S. Augustine says, it is so called after a sort,
that is, not in truth of matter: but by a mystery signifying, that the sense
may be this, it is called the body of Christ, that is to say, it signifies
the body of Christ.

Hereby it appears by the judgments of these learned w^yters, that the bread
and wine are changed, by the word, into a Sacrament, (being bread and wine
still in substance,) and so are changed into an other thing then they were
before, for before they were but only bread and wine, and now they are a
Sacramental bread and wine signifying the body and blood of Christ. So that
the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, is a figure and sign of the body and
blood of Christ, and not the very body and blood of Christ.

These holy and learned men that wrote of this worthy and excellent changing of
the Sacraments, never knew of the Popes changing or transubstantiation or
turning of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ: but if any
were so wicked to write it, so deuilish to declare it, or so pestilent to
persuade it, of all them and all such Saint Augustine does write thus:
August. de^ doctr. christiana. li. 3. ca. 5 Jewel in defe^. Apo. pa. 275.
This is a miserable bondage (says he) of the Soul, to take the Signs in
stead of the things that be sygnified. But whether there were then any such
or no, he has fully touched you, that takes the Sacrament that signifyes the
body of Christ for the body of Christ. And therefore by his sayings, you are
in a miserable bondage of your souls, that takes the sacrament for the body of
Christ, whereas it does but signify the body of Christ.

Therefore for the love of God release your souls and your bodies also out of
that miserable bondage, and take it for a memory and remembrance of the body
of Christ, as the Scriptures do will you, and the Doctors do persuade you,
and believe not the Popes turning or changing or transubstantiation of the
bread into the body of Christ, for it is not true, nay it can not be true.
For it is not four hundredth years since it was first allowed or authorized by
Pope Innocent the third, Acts and Monuments. page 1124.
and his Prelates which must needs come from the Devil as the rest of the
Popes holy Religion did: as well for that neither Christ did teach it, nor the
Apostles did once mention it, nor the ancient Doctors did affirm it or
believe it, as also for that is repugnant to scriptures, to the doctrine of the
Apostles, and to the writings of the holy and learned Doctors.

And though you have bin persuaded, that it is most sure and infallible
doctrine, the chiefest posts and pillars of the same, are not only in great
doubt thereof, but are at their wits end and know not well what to say
therein: for Peter Lombard ye chief general of this camp, of this
transubstantiation says thus as follows, Some me^ judge thus, Senten. 4.
distin. 11. fi autem, etc.
some say thus, some have written thus, some grant this, some other have
thought thus: Jewel in defe^. Apo. pa. 290.291.
that the very substance of the bread and wine remains still. Here is but a
mad agreement of the learned to prove the same. If so many learned men say by
the confession of the chief champion of this matter, that there remaynes still
bread and wine in the Sacrament: then it were a very madness for all you, to
believe that it is the very body and blood of Christ, and neither bread nor
wine.

But mark what Peter Lombard says him self hereof, that takes upon him to
judge these doubts, how he is resolved, or how he agrees in judgment with
himself? his answer is this, Si autem queritur, etc. If a question were
moved (says he) what manner of conversion or change this is, whether it be in
form or in substance, or of some other sort, I am not able to discuss it.
Here may you see (says M. Jewel* the blind leads the blind, he that
sets his foot before the rest and would be taken for a guide, knows not
where to set his own foot.

Gabriel Biell says, how the body of Christ is there, whether it be by
changing of something into it, or Christ's body begin to be there with the
bread, (both the substance and the accidents of the bread remaining still
without changing) it is not found in the Cannon of the Bible, etc. Thus do
the learned Doctors of the Pope teach you they can not tell what. But this I
will say if it be not to be found in the Bible, it shall never be found in
my belief.

Mark further how the Popes learned Doctors agree in this the Popes
transubstantiation, or changing of the bread into the body of Christ? Some of
you hold (says M. Jewel against M. Harding in his defense of the Apology)
that Christ's body passes down into the stomach, Jewel in defens. Apolog.
Page 291.
some say that it only enters into the mouth and goes no further, some other
say, as soon as the forms of the bread be grated with the teeth, straight way
the body of Christ is caught up into heaven. Another of you says that a mouse
can not eat it, (yea but if she might catch it, she would ask no better
dinner) Peter Lombarde, the grand master of your School is piteously
confounded in the case, and can not imagine poor man, what thing it should be
that the mouse eats: for after he himself had moved the question, what is it
then that the mouse receives, or what eats it? he answers, now God
knows, as for my pa^te I can not tell. Such is your doctors Master Harding
(says M. Jewel), such is your doctrine, Thus far has M. Jewel written.

You may see what a sound doctrine this is of your transubstantiated bread
into the body of Christ, and how certain it is, whereon the Popes doctors so
diversely descant. Therefore seeing the learned Papists are not fully resolved
among themselves, of this their Christ's body, that they say is made of
bread, what fools are ye then that do so stiffly maintain the same, and that
will so faithfully believe that they so firmly doubt, and to take that for
the body of Christ that a Mouse will eat and devour? But because some of
these learned do say that a Mouse will eat it, I am of their opinion if she
may come by it, and then if she eat bread, then it is not the body of Christ,
and if it be the body of Christ, then it is but a simple Christ that will
suffer a Mouse to eat him, therefore turn it which way you will, you bring
your selves into the breares.

Consider I beseech you the absurd and vile sayings and opinions of them of
the Popes side touching the same, De consecr. did. 2. qui been.
whose words be these. If it be said that a Mouse receives the body of
Christ, it is no great inconvenience. And Alexander of Hales a great School
doctor, in unseemly and gross manner does say, Alexander Halen. par. 4.
quae. 45.
If a Dog or Sow (says he) should happen to swallowe down the whole host
(being consecrate) I see no reason, but the body of our Lord may pass
withal into the belly of the Dog or of the Sow. Is not the doctrine of this
holy Romish Church worthy to be embrased and followed: that has such
heavenly doctrine in it? what execrable wretches are these, that would make
Christ's body, (which is most holy and glorious and is in Heaven on the right
hand of God the father,) to be devoured of Dogs and Swine. If such leave not
to allure and lead the ignorant from the truth, and forsake not their
abominable papisticall Religion and doctrine betymes, I fear thy shall have
their portion with Dogs, Swine, Owls, and Gotes, in the endless and
unquenchable fire of Hell: from whence neither the Pope nor their Christ of
bread shall ever be hable to deliver them.

Mark how Devilish and detestable Master Harding writes in the defense of
this doctrine of Transubstantiation? at the Supper of our Lord (says he)
ministered in the Catholic Church, In his confut. of the Apol.
by Priests rightly consecrate, there is the true and holy body of our Lord
and Savior given and received: be the receivers believing or not believing.

If this be true that M. Harding says, then it skilles not, whether we believe
in Christ, or no: so that we may once get it into our mouths and eat it. But
S. Augustine and other ancient writers are of a contrary opinion to M.
Harding. For he says* Quid paras dentem and ventre^, creed and manducasti.
August. in Joan. tract. 25
Why prepares thou thy tooth and thy belly, believe and thou have eaten. Thus
by S. Augustines rule, belief is chiefly required to the receiving of the
Sacrament, though M. Harding makes no account whether we believe or not. S.
Cyprian calls the Sacrament, Cibum mentis non ventris, the food of the mind
or Soul not of the belly. Tertullian says, Christ must be devoured by
hearing, chewed by understanding, and disgested by faith. Saint Augustine
says, To believe in Christ, that is the eating of the bread of life. And he
says also, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you. Christ seems by these words says
Saint Augustine, to command us to do an horrible wickedness, for it is an
horrible matter to eat man's flesh, or to drink man's blood. Therefore this is
a figure commanding us to be partakers of Christ's passion: and comfortably
to lay up in our mind: that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

Therefore the eating of the Sacrament or Christ's body with our mouths (as
Master Harding does dream) is not to eat Christ's flesh and drink his
blood, for this holy Sacrament of Christ supper is the food of the soul not
of the body, and as the body has a mouth whereby it does feed Corporally,
so has the Soul a mouth whereby it does feed Spiritually, which mouth of
the Soul is faith, and as our bodies are fed and norished by eating of
meat, so are our Souls fed and nourished by believing in Jesus Christ.

For if there be none other eating of Christ's body whereby we shall have
eternal life, but only by the fantastical and fleshly eating with our mouth
and teeth: then how can the holy Fathers in the old time before Christ, be
saved: as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, David, Samuel, and other of the
holy Prophets, that never did eat the Sacrament with their mouths and never
knew it? There have been a great sort of godly Martirs, young christian
children, besides the thief that died with Christ on his right side, whom
Christ promised that he should be with him in Paradise, Luke. 23.
that have not with their mouths eaten this Sacrament: yet I trust few will
therefore say that they are al damned. But if this eating of the Sacrament
with the mouth as M. Harding says, and many of you believe, be the true and
perfect eating of ye body or flesh of Christ: then there is none other shift,
but they all must needs be damned. As it appears by Christ's own words, for
he says, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood,
Johan. 6.
ye have no life in you. Hereof we must needs conclude, (if your Romish
religion and doctrine be true, that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, all the
Patriarchs and Prophets and other holy men, and al ye godly Martirs, al young
children, yea and the theef^ that Christ promised to be with him in Paradise,
yt never did eat or receive the Sacrament with there mouths, have no life but
are utterly damned for ever. Which no true Christian will believe. Therefore if
you will needs believe the Popes Transubstantiation, and that the Sacramental
bread is turned into the body of Christ, and that if you eat it with your
mouth and champe it with your teeth that then you eat the very body and flesh
of Christ: then you must also believe that al these holy men, martires, young
children, and the thief that never did eat it with their mouths, are damned.
Which Devilish and most untrue doctrine I hope you will believe no longer, but
if you do, yet we will rather believe they are saved, and that your Devilish
doctrine of Transubstantiation is altogether false. Thus you may see into what
a great mischief and inconvenience you are driven by believing that the
Sacramental bread is the very body of Christ. And now mark well, how you are
brought into an other marvelous mischief and inconvenience by this your
Romish doctrine. Christ says, Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, Johan. 6.
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Now if your
eating of the Sacrament with your mouth and teeth, and your drinking of the
wine, is the right eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ: then
Judas is saved, for he did eat and drink it, and Jews, Turks and the
Heathen worshippers of Idols shall be saved, if they once catch hold of your
body of Christ and eat it, yea and the little Mouse shall be saved if she catch
it and eat it, (for I dare say for her that she neither believes in Christ,
nor would believe that it were the body of Christ, but a piece of bread or a
cake, for if she did think it were the body of a man she would not come so
nie it.)

Thus if it be the very body of Christ, and be truly received whether one
believe in Christ or not, then the greatest Infidels, Idolaters, Tirants, and
the most wicked persons on the earth, yea and the Mouse, the Dog, or any
other beast, (if they may once get this your Christ's body into their mouths
and mawes,) are sure to be saved, and Christ will raise them up at the last
day, for Christ says (as it is before) whosoever eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And so
by this your true and reasonable doctrine, Christ will raise up Mise and Dogs
that have and shall eat your Sacrament, at the last day, and also by this
means the thief is damned that Christ said should be saved, and Judas is
saved that Christ said was damned.

When you have red this, may you not be ashamed, that ever you gave such
credit to this vile and Devilish doctrine of the Romish Church. Yes verily, if
you have any wit or reason, but especially any spark of the grace of God.

See hereafter I pray you, how Christ's doctrine and your Romish religion
agrees in this point, forsooth even as it does in all the rest. Christ said,
I am the living bread that came down from Heaven, but clean came: Johan. 6.
and quite contrary, you say that your earthly dead bread, is Christ that
went to Heaven, for I am sure, that the bread that you make your Christ's body
of, was never in Heaven), therefore your bread never came from heaven, and so
your bread can not be the body of Christ), for that he says, I am the
living bread that came down from heaven. And so your dead bread can not be the
body of Christ. And now because it can not be the living body of Christ: it
must needs be a dead Substance or piece of bread. Therefore be no longer
allured by the Romish Religion, that teaches you thus falsely and
unreasonably, that the Sacramental bread by their consecrating of it is the
body of Christ, but believe as the Gospel does tell you, the Apostles do
show you, as Saint Steven does learn you, and as your Creed does teach you,
that the body of Christ is now in Heaven, on the right hand of God the
father, from whence he will come to judge the quick and the dead.

And if these be not sufficient to persuade you that he in his body is in
Heaven and no where else, you shall hear the opinions of ancient, godly and
learned men, therein. S. Augustine says, August. in Johan. tract. 8
Ibat per id quod homo erat: manebat per id quod Deus erat, etc. Christ
departed by that he was man* but abode by that he was God: he departed by that
that was in one place: he abode by that that is in all places. Fulgentius
writes as follows concerning Christ's absence and presence. Fulgen. ad Regem
Trasym. lib. 2.
Secundum humanitatem suam localiter erat in terra, etc. Christ according to
his manhood he was placed in earth: but according to his godhead he filled both
heaven and earth. The manhood of Christ is contained in place: the godhead of
Christ is infinite and in all places. The flesh of Christ is doubtless local
or in place: the godhead of Christ is for ever in every place. There remained
still in Christ the infinite godhead: there was received of him a local
manhood: how ascended he into Heaven, saving he is very man contained in place?
how is he present with the faithful, saving he is infinite and true God? And
last of all he says, Vnus idemque Christus secundum humanam substantiam, etc.
Christ being one according to the Substance of his manhead, was absent from
Heaven when he was in earth: and he forsook earth when he was in heaven. Now
if we may believe Christ, if we may credit our Creed, if S. Steven said
truly, if S. Paul be true of his word. If Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine,
Chrysostom, and this Fulgentius, with many other godly fathers and learned
writers have not fabled herein: then surely the very body of Christ, that died
on the Cross, is at this present time in heaven on the right hand of God the
Father, and neither here on earth nor any where else, though the Pope and his
Parasites tell us that he is here.

But mark further and you shall see how learnedly and clarkly M. Hard. goes
about to prove this turning of a cake into Christ. Who says, that Christ made
his Apostles (says M. Jewel) misteriall Spirits, Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 259.
saying* Do this (wherein is contained make this) in my remembrance, saying a
little before, that Christ was a Priest, and consecrated as a Priest, as S.
Hier. does witness, that as Melchisedech in foreshewing the figure of Christ
had done, Panem and vinum offerens, ipse quoque veritatem sui corporis and
sanguinis representaret. Christ himself also should make present the truth of
his body and blood. To whom that famous and learned man M. Jewel late Bishop
of Sarisburie, answered as follows, Is representare Latin to make present
M. Harding? what Grammarian ever taught you so to say: or what making find you
in this word? as you tender your credit, tell us who ever spoke such Latin:
or out of such Latin made such English? if you can show us no better Author,
we must needs think it is your own, etc. but that representare should
signify, either to make Christ's body, or to make it present, no man I trow
ever durst to say so but Master Harding. In these words do this, you say is
contained make this: does Christ bid you to make this in deed Master Harding,
and what this I pray you would you make? ye will say Christ's body, but
Christ's body as we believe is made already and needs no new making at your
hands. But you will say you will make Christ in remembrance of Christ. All
this is mere folly, for every way ye tell us you make Christ. Presume not
Master Harding to make him that made you, it is enough for Stella clericorum,
to say, qui creauit me, etc. he that made me has given me power to make him, a
Priest is his makers maker. (by this means the Priest was before he was, and
God was not God when he was: oh abominable doctrine) But God has made Hell
fire to the destruction of all them that yield their mouths to speak such
blasphemy. Thus Master Jewel answered and confounded Master Harding, that
so foolishly and falsely did expound and wrest the words of Christ for the
making of Christ of a piece of bread.

Mark further how learnedly and truly Master Harding commendes and extolles
the Mass upon whose words Master Jewel writes as follows. Jewel. in
defe^. Apol. pa. 276.
M. Harding (says he) makes as though in their Mass, the Lords banquet is so
purely, finely, truly, and so delicately dressed, and that it is such a feast
for the people, as the like is not in any thing else, saying, let this banquet
be dight as it ought to be, let the best dishe be made ready, etc. Good
Christian reader (says Master Jewel) the best, the wholesomest, the most
pleasant, and most comfortable dish at this table, is the death of Christ, that
lamb of God that has taken away the sins of the world. Thus Christ himself
the master of this feast, has willed us to dress this dinner, Do this says
he in the remembrance of me. Likewise Saint Paul says, as often as ye shall
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show forth and publish
the Lords death until he come. This banquet therefore is not the outward or
bare Sacrament. And as it is alleged out of S. Ambrose, this banquet is not the
bread (of the Sacrament) that passes into the belly, but the bread of
everlasting life, which relieueth the Substance of the Soul, etc. Likewise
Saint Augustine says, he that is blind in his heart within, sees not
Christ that is our bread. And is he blessed? no man will so say, unless he
be one as blind as he. And so Master Jewel goes on and says. But what
manner of feast is it that M. Harding prepares for the people? how is it
seasoned? how is it dressed? first by discourteous and uncivil dealing, he
withdraws the one half, that is the cup of the new Testament, and reserueth
it severally to him self. And yet he would make the people believe, they have
the whole. And this does he when he has the greatest company to sup with him,
and when his feast is best furnished, otherwise he suffers his guestes to
stand aloof, and he consumes all his provision himself alone. Neither has
he any thing to set before them, saving only a cold surcharge of dead shows
and dumb Ceremonies. The poor people hears nothing: understands nothing:
eats nothing: drinks nothing: tastes nothing: they publish not the Lords
death: they know not the Lords supper. Suidas.
To such a ba^ket Pasetes the Iugler used sometimes to call his friends, there
was great variety and plenty of all manner of meats and drinks the table
full: but when any of the guestes would have touched any thing, it vanished
suddenly away and was turned to nothing: and so when their eyes were full, they
put up their knives and rose an hungered. Even thus M. Harding feeds and
feasteth the people of God with shows and Ceremonies, and suffers them in the
mean while to sterue for hunger, Even as the Prophet says, Esai. 29.
it shall be like a dream of a hungry man, behold he eats and makes
merry, but when he is awakte his soul is empty. Thus excellently and most
truly has that famous learned Bishop M. Jewel compared your great and
worthy feast in the Mass which M. Harding so highly commendes, and
maintains, to the feast of Pasetes the Iugler.

Your Romish religion is so fond, childishe, and false, that it bewrays it
self, and her champions that seem to defend her, do wound her and quite
overthrow her, and the more they approve her, the more they disprove her, for
though M. Harding does praise his Mass to be such a marvelous and godly
feast, yet it appears that the master of the feast is but a very churl, for
(as M. Jewel says) he has none to his feast or dinner but himself: but
Christ's Supper (though M. Harding commendes it not) was more like a feast than
your Mass, for he did not eat his Supper by himself, but he bad all his
Apostles to it (yea Judas his enemy that betraide him, and all) and they did
eat and drink with him, and he divided both the bread and wine among them:
but the Priest at the Mass, though he break the bread, yet he eats and
drinks al himself. Therefore if the Mass be a feast, it is not only a
churles feast, but also it is quite contrary to Christ's feast, as before is
well proved. Therefore in all things the Papistical religion and doings be
quite contrary to the doings of Christ.

And for that in many places before, it appears that your Romish religion
does overthrow it self, even so I will now by your Doctors own doctrine,
overthrow your Christ of bread. It is concluded in a Book called Antididagma,
lately set forth by the Chapter of Colain, that the bare words of Christ's
institution without the words of the Canon of the Mass, are not sufficient to
make consecration. If this be true, then Christ did not consecrate the bread
and wine, because the Cannon of the Mass was not then, nor of a good while
after. And you say that before the consecration the bread is not the body of
Christ, so that for want of consecration, Christ did not make the bread his
body, and because your Priests making of Christ's body dependes wholly of
Christ's making the bread his body, for that they claim to do as he did, and
by the words that he spoke, therefore they do not make the bread Christ's
body, because Christ made not the bread his body: and thus by your own
doctrine, your changing of the bread into the body of Christ, is clean
overthrown, and therefore it must needs be bread still, and so they teach
you falsely, and you believe falsely that the Sacrament after it is consecrate,
is the body and blood of Christ.

Jewel in defen. Apolog. page 314.
Mark further of the goodly doctrine of your Romish doctors in this point,
Clemens that they will call the Apostles fellow says, Let no Mise dung be
found among the fragments or pieces of the Lords portion (meaning the
Sacrament) if Clemens said so, then he did not it to be the body of Christ. For
the glorious body of Christ is not nor will be where such filth is. The Gloss
also says, that the body of Christ may be vomitted up again. O horrible
words, not meet to be named or once thought, though ye priests Christ's body of
their own making may be vomitted up, yet we are sure that the body of Christ
which is in heaven, will suffer no such absurdity.

And as this their doctrine is absurd and wicked concerning their
transubstantiation of the bread into ye body of Christ, so is the doings and
superstitious ceremonies of the Priest in saying of the Mass (and celebrating
as they call it) of their said body of Christ as fond and ridiculous, as may
appear by their duckings, turnings, crossing, lycking, and feyned sleeping,
with many other such toys, with the childish and ridiculous garments and
attire that he then wears, dressed more like a player than a Priest.

But Doctor Durand sets out the Priest then as though he were in his complete
harneys. Who says as follows. His Amys is his head piece, Jewel in defens.
Apolo. page 399.
his Albe is his coat of male, his Girdle is his bow, his Subcingle is his
quiver, his stoale is his Speere, his manyple is his Club, his Chyseble is his
target, and in the end he says, these be the pieces wherewith the Bishop or
Priest must be harneyssed, that will fight against Spiritual wickedness.
Must not this be both a holy and strong harneys, the Devil dare not come
near him that has all this on his back. If the Devil will be afraid, it
must needs make him fly away for fear.

I remember that Saint Paul tells us of a harneys for us to wear to resist
our spiritual enemy and the fyrie Darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.
but among all his harneys he names not one iotte of the Priests harneys that
he wears at Mass. Whose words are these. For this cause (says he) take
unto you the armor of GOD, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day,
and stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore, your loins gyrte about
with verity, having on the breast plate of righteousness, and shodde with
shoes prepared unto the Gospel of peace, above all take to you the shield of
faith, wherewyth ye may quench all the fyrie Darts of the wicked. And take
the Helmette of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
GOD. And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication, and that in
the Spirit, etc. Lo here is not one word of Doctor Durands harneys, therefore
(if it be so good a harneys as he makes it to be) I much muse that S. Paul
did leave it out and spoke not of it: belike either S Paul knew not of it, or
he had forgot it, or else did mislike it: but because we are assured that the
armor that S. Paul speaks of, is an old ancient harneys, and is an armor
of proof, and this Doctor Durands harneys is but some cou^terfeit and new made
harneys, therefore ye Popes Priests were best to throw away Doctor Durands
harneys, and to take S. Paul's sure armor of prooffe.

Mark I beseech you to what streites the Popes Doctors are driven, for the
proving of this their transubstantiation, and changing of the bread into the
body of Christ, and yet it will not be, nay they are vanquished with their
own arguments. For they say that the body of Christ in the sacrament, Jewel
in defen. Apolog. page 92.
has neither form, nor proportion, nor limitation of place, nor distinction
of parts, and is neith^r high nor low, long nor short, thick nor thyn, and
yet for all this saying, many of you believe firmly that it is the very body
of Christ, truly if it be so, it is the strangest body that ever I hard of, if
they make Christ body such a body, but for manners sake, he were as good have
never a body. This your Christ's body is such a body by their saying, that
none can see it, feel it, hear it, nor perceive it: and so within a while
they will make (I hope) that not none will believe it, and when none believes
it, then farewell the Mass the flower of your follio. I have heard diverse of
you say, yt they would desire no better judge than S. Augustine, well I am
content, S. Augustine shall be judge, but when you have heard him speak, I
fear you will not like his judgment. But if S. Augustine or any other should
say that the body of Christ may be without shape, proportion, quality,
quantity, or be without place, I would say then that neither he nor they were
worthy to be counted to be learned, or at the least well learned. Now let us
hear what S. Augustine says in this case. August. ad Dardanum epist. 57.
These are his words, Spatia locorum toll corporibus, and nusquam erunt, and
quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt, etc. Take away (says he) from bodies limitation
of place, and the bodies will be no where, and because they be no where, they
will be nothing. Take away from bodies the qualities of bodies, there will be
no place for them to be in, And therefore the same bodies must needs be no
bodies at al. And now because that which you call the body of Christ, has
neither quantity, quality, nor place, neither proportion of a body: Therefore
by Saint Augustines judgment, it is no body. And if it be no body, then it
must be bread, or else it must needs be nothing, but I trust you will not
say, that it is nothing, yt the Priest does consecrate, or that it is nothing
that he does hold over his head. Therefore you were best to take and use it,
as Christ by his Gospel has appointed, and as he himself did use it: and so
you shall have it, (though not Christ's very body) yet a worthy something,
that is, a holy Sacrament, a precious pledge, a singular seal, a sovereign
sign, and a most comfortable remembrance of our redemption and salvation by
the passion and death of our Savior Jesus Christ the son of God.

Mark I beseech you how wide they wander that walk in a wrong way. Was there
ever any think you, did so grossly, so fondly, so unlearnedly, and so
untruly apply the sacred Scriptures as Master Harding one of the Captains
of your crew has done, for the proving of this your Transubstantiation, or
changing of the bread into the body of Christ? I think but a few: For he
says, Confutati. Apolog.
That the son of man came not to destroy but to save: That is, He took
bread and wine and turned them into his body and blood, aduauncing these
(creatures of bread and wine) to a much excellenter condition (than they were
before) but so as they should lose none of their former virtues, (but that
they should have still their color, thickness, weight, taste, and all other
their accidents.) And these their accidents forsooth were the things that
Master Harding says that Christ came to save. Oh that ever a man that has
learning and knowledge, discretion, wit or understanding, and that professes
himself to be a Christian, should either in earnest or in bourde write or
affirm any such thing, for Christ came to save (man's soul) that was lost.
Math. 18.
But now let us weigh to what more excellent condition or state ye bread and
wine is brought more than they were before? (unless he meant they were changed
into a sacrament, which is not the mark he here shootes at,) they have the
same color, taste, weight, bigness, smell, fashion, nature and virtue of bread
and wine as they had before. And this he says Christ came to save, (for fear
belike they should al else have flowne or gone away.) But would al these have
remained still if ye substance of bread and wine had bin gone? can a man take a
pot, and leave the weight, ye color, the bigness, ye thickness, the length,
ye breadth, and the fashion behind? this passes all Aristotle's learning: no,
no, if you take away the fire, you take away also ye brightness and heat of
the fire. For if the brightness, color, and heat of the fire remain, the^
the fire remaynes also. Call you this changing of the^ bread and wine into a
more excellent condition? or as you mean into a more excellent matter of
substance? this your changing of the bread and wine into the body of Christ,
and as you say into a much more excellent condition, is like as though one
should say to a poor lame lean cryple, sytting in the cold with nothing
but a shirte on his back, sir, by that time I have said certain words over
thee, thou shall be a goodly, strong, fair, and well liking King, and when he
has spoken the words, yet the color, length, breadth, weight, proportion,
fashion, lamenesse, leanesse, and the shirt, and all to see to of the lame
cryple is there as was before, do you think the man is gone and left all
these things behind him? you may make fools believe so if you will, but I
think if one ask all these accidents, whether the lame cryple were gone or
no, they would answer him and say that the same criple is there as he was
before. Yea and would be angrye with him that made him such a King. He might
well say to him that made him such a King, but for the name of a King, he were
as good be a poor lame lean cryple as he was before, and might also say that
he could make such a King himself. Even so the least child that is, may
quickly make such a body of bread as you make. Therefore think not but that
the substance of bread and wine remaynes still, though as Saint Augustine
says, they are changed into an other thing, which is into a holy Sacrament,
which is a sign of Christ's death, and a pledge left us of Christ, that he
will come again at the last day: and yet the very substance of bread and
wine remains still.

A garland of Iuie before it be hanged out of a tavern, is nothing else but a
garlande of Iuie, but when it is once hanged on a pole out of the Taruerne,
then it is changed into an other thing than it was before, for it is a sign
that there is wine to sell. Notwithstanding it is still a garland of Iuie. But
if one would be so fond as to say, that the same garlande of Iuie that
hanges out of the Tavern, is the very wine it self that is in the Tavern,
there is none would believe him that is wise. Even so I must count you most
fond and foolish, that take the Sacramental bread and wine to be the very
body and blood of Christ, which are signs and tokens of the body and blood
of Christ. But some of you have said (so feign you would have a Christ of a
Cake) what? did not Christ at a marryage turn and change Water into Wine, and
why might not he then turn the Sacrament into his body? forsooth and well
said, you have brought such an argument for the prouyng of your Christ of
bread, as I will desire none other for the overthrowing of your Christ of
bread. Christ you say turned Water into Wine, Ergo, Christ turned the Sacrament
into his body. If you could prove the one as well as we can prove the other,
we should agree better herein than we do: but mark how your own weapon
yt should wound your enemy does kill your self. Christ by a wondeful miracle
at a marriage in Cana of Galile, turned water into wine, (but the Pope and
every one of his Chapleynes tagge and ragge by your sayings do a greater
miracle than Christ did, for they turn a piece of bread into the body of
Christ. Now you shall see whether Christ's miracle and the Popes miracle are
like or not: nay in all wise men's eyes it shall appear that Christ's turning
of the water into wine was a great miracle, but the Popes turning of bread into
ye body of Christ is no miracle: for the water that Christ turned into wine,
was very pure and good wine in color, taste, and smell, and had all the
qual^ties of perfect and excellent wine: but the bread after the Priests (as
they say) have turned it into the body of Christ, is very bread still in
color, in smell, and in taste, and is never a whit changed, and has all the
qualities of bread as it had before. So that if Christ had turned the water no
better into wine than the Priests do turn their bread into the body of
Christ, the Jews would have drunk none of Christ's wine, they would have
bid him drink it himself, and might have said but for the name of wine, one
were as good to drink fair water. But if the Priests did turn the bread
into the very body of a man, with head, face, body, arms, legs and feet
(as all men have, and that we might see it and feel it, as the Jews did the
wine that Christ made of water, then many would a great deal the better
believe them. For seeing many do now believe them, a great sort more would
then believe them. Which if they should do, yet for all that no godly or wise
man would believe that it were the very body of Christ, but yt it were some
other fantastical body wrought by the power of the Devil. For though by
miracle one creature may be changed into an other contrary creature, as Christ
turned water into wine (which were two contrary creatures,) yet a creature by
any means can not be turned into Christ our Creator, both God and man. But
whereas Christ turned water into wine, that is one creature into an other
contrary creature, the Priests would make us believe that they turn a
creature which is bread, into Christ which is no creature but God and Man, and
the son of God creator and maker of al things. So that Christ's body cannot
be made of bread nor of any other thing, for Christ is the Son of God, and
was not made, but was begotten by God his Father, and was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and borne on the virgin Marie. Therefore let it neither sink in your
minds, that a piece of bread or a cake can be turned into the body of
Christ, nor that the body and blood of Christ is to be eaten and drunk with
our mouths, and so to be conveyed into our bodies, as other meats and drinks
are, but they are only food of the Soul, and must be eaten and drunk of the
same by faith, as before is declared.

If the Canibals are to be abhorred, because they devour and eat man's flesh,
their enemies whom they take in the wars: are not you then much more to be
detested, that are not ashamed to eat and devour with your mouths and teeth
the very body of Christ your great and high friend, the only Savior of all
the world?

Bells Priests were much more to be commended than the Popes priests, The
story of Bell.
and were not such Caniball rauenours as they be, for they did honor their God
Bell, and did but eat his meat from him: but the papisticall Priests after
they have honored the body of their Christ, they eat him clean up and
devour him. Are not these fellows worthy to have a Christ, that after they
have honored him a little do then eat and devour him? that he shall never be
seen again?

If a King Cyrus did put the 70. Priests of God Bell woorthily to death for
eating their Gods meat from him: surely then our Queen might more lawfully
put the papisticall Priests to death that eat and devour up their Christ
himself.

But the Priests have none other song but this, Christ said, This is my body,
therefore it is the body of Christ* Math. 26.
and Christ bad them eat it, and therefore according to Christ's commandment
they eat the body of Christ: well the meaning of those words and what is
the true eating of Christ's body, is sufficiently expressed before, but to
drive you clean from this gross and absurd error, mark well these
reasonable arguments following. As Christ did say this is my body, John. 14.
so he said, I am the way, etc. yet we must not think therefore, that he is
a very way that leads us from Town to Town: or that we must tread or go
upon him when we walk or go to any place: as the proud Persian Prince
Sopores used to tread on a Kings back when he got up upon his Horse. But as
this worthy Sacrament does signify Christ's body, which by his death has
redeemed us: Even so Christ is our Spiritual way, by whom we must go to
Heaven. And as our common ways leads us in our earthly travel, to the place
we determine to go: so Christ does only lead and direct us in our Spiritual
journey to Heaven.

Christ also says, he is the light of the world. If we should take these
words literally and as they are spoken, John. 8.
then we might say that Christ is the Sun that shines daily upon us, for
the Sun is the chiefest light that we in this world do see by, and
without it we could not so perfectly direct our iourneis in this world as we
do. But Christ does not mean that he is the Sun or any such light: But as
the Sun does give us light to direct our iourneis on the earth: so Christ
being the Sun of God, does shine and gives us our whole light in our
Spiritual journey to Heaven. And thus Christ is the light of the world, that
in this world does light us to Heaven. Christ also said, I am the door, but
we must not think (though he said so) that he is a very door, John. 10.
but in some respect is like unto a door, for as the right and ready way
into a house, is to go in at the door: so Christ is the very true door of
Heaven, by whom every one must enter that shall go into Heaven. And as Christ
calls them Thieves that enter into the house any other way, but by the
door, even so they are Spiritual thieves and enemies to God, that go about
to enter any other way into Heaven than by Christ the true door of Heaven.
And this is the true meaning of Christ that said he is the door.

Christ also said, have I not chosen twelve of you, and one of you is a Devil?
John. 6.
(meaning Judas that after betrayed him) and if we may credit old wives
fables, the Devil has horns and cloven feet, yet we must not think,
(though Christ called him so) that Judas was turned or Transubstantiated into a
Devil, and had horns and cloven feet: But as the Devil is a murderer and a
betrayer of innocent blood, so Judas did resemble the Devil in betraying his
innocent master Christ: and in procuring his death.

Thus you may see that the words of Christ are not always to be understood
literally as Christ spoke them, no more ought those words spoken by him of
the Sacrament. But if all this that is said herein, will neither satisfy nor
persuade you, I would feign know of you, whether the bread is turned into
Christ's body, that was vncrucified or that was crucified, if you say it was
his body that sat among his Disciples at his last Supper before he was
crucified, then how could he die on the cross after, seeing his Apostles had
eaten his body before? If you say, it was his body after it was crucified,
that could not be, for when he brake the bread to his Disciples, he was not
then crucified, therefore he could not give them his crucified body to eat,
for then it was not crucified, for as one can not give to any baked bread
before it be baked, so Christ could not give his crucified body to his
Disciples before it was crucified. And thus every way you are driven to a
mischief.

There was a learned man (he was a master of Art at the least) chanced to be
at supper where I was with diverse other, who said then that he would prove by
Scriptures and by learning, that the bread after it is consecrated by a priest,
is the very body of Christ, the same that was borne on the virgin Marie: whom
then I asked if he would stand to his word, and he said he would: then I said
to him again, that I would either make him deny his word, yield unto me, or
else hold his peace, for want of answer: who answered me again (as it seemed)
both proudely and disdainfully, saying that I was to young a Scholar to do
that. Then I said again, if I do it not, then let all them at this table bear
witness of it. And thus I began with him. I pray you sir how long is it since
Christ was borne on the virgin Marie, and began in his humanity? forsooth said
he above fifteen hundredth year since: you will deny this said I, no that I
will not said he, for I can not if I would: then I answered him again, I fear
either you will deny it, or else hold your peace, which is as good as a grant,
for qui tacet consentire videtur, you are not ignorant I am sure said I, yt to
morrow there will be many Masses said and song (though not in England,) yet in
Rome, Italy, Spain, France and other places: that is surely so, said he: at
the same Masses to morrow, said I again, you are sure that ye Priests will
have little cakes, and until the Priests have consecrated them they are bread,
yea said he that is very true, but as soon as he has consecrated them (said I)
then it is the very body of Christ, that I must needs grant said he: then
said I to all them that did sit at the table, masters I pray you bear
record, this Gentleman said in the hearing of you all, that to morrow the
little cakes before the priests consecrate them, be bread, and immediately after
they have consecrated the same, they are then the very body of Christ. So that
hereby he plainly affirms, that to morrow the body of Christ will be made of a
piece of bread, or that a little cake will become the body of Christ, whereby
the body or humanity of Christ will begin to morrow: notwithstanding he
said as you did hear but even now, that it is above fifteen hundredth years
since the humanity or the body of Christ first began. Which when I had
spoken, all they at the table did not only hold their peace, but also the said
learned Gentleman had never a word to say. Wherein he did wisely, rather to
say nothing, than nothing to the purpose. And thus by this true argument he was
confuted, that by false arguments thought to confute the truth.

And if this argument will not suffice you with diverse before that are
infallible, but that you will needs persist in your most gross opinion, and
believe that the Sacramental bread is changed into the very body of
Christ, then I would feign know why the Priests are allowed and do use to
burn their body of Christ, when it does putrify, is mustie or wax mowlie?
Monumentes of the church. page 1330.
(for they will keep him no longer than he is man's meat) which shows that in
continuance of time it will putrify and be mowlie or mustie: but what wise man
or what Christian can once think that ye body of Jesus Christ, the Son of
the Eternal God, the Savior of all mankind and the King of all Kings, that
shall reign in everlasting glory, can putrify corrupt, or wax mowlie or
mustie?

But I will go further with you, what is that is burned or that was burned when
Pope Hildebrand did cast the bread his body of Christ into the fire, or
whereof are the ashes that commes of that you burn, or that Pope Hildebrand
burned, either they must be the ashes of the body of Christ, or the ashes of
bread. If they be ashes of the body of Christ, then why do they burn the
body of Christ? and what wicked wretches are they that burn the body of
Christ? no marvel though they burn the poor servant of Christ, when they
stick not to burn the body of Christ himself. But if it be lawful for them
now in this world to burn Christ's body which they make themselves: then it
is as lawful for God hereafter in the world to come to burn their bodies and
Souls that he made himself (far inferior to Christ's body,) which I
fear he will, unless they repent betymes this their marvelous abusing of
the worthy Sacrament (which Christ left us for a memory of his death and
Passion,) and for thus deludyng the people of God. And if they are the ashes of
bread that is burned, then why do they make us believe that it is the body of
Christ? but there are some of you so unshamefast, yt to maintain your
errors, have said that neither the body of Christ nor the bread is burned,
but the Accidents, that is the whiteness or color, the roundnesse, the
breadth, the thickness, the taste and the smell is burned, and thereof the
said ashes came: that is very strange that a matter or Substance, (which is
the ashes) should come of Accidents. This is more than ever I knew, I have
heard that Accidents come of a matter or Substance, but not Substance to come
of Accidents. If the Accidents were burned as some of you say, then I would
know whether the Accidents of Christ's body or of bread was burned. If you
say they were ye Accidents of Christ's body that was burned, and his body is
whole and sound and unburned, then you have dressed Christ well in deed, you
have made Christ to have a proper body, yea such a body as few have heard
of, for then the body of Christ is neither short, long, thick nor thin,
gross nor lean, round nor square: and you have made him also without weight,
color, taste, and smell, what a kind of body have you made Christ to have,
for want of his Accidents which are burned? there is not such a body to be
found in all the whole world, as you have made Christ, if you have burned al
these his Accidents from him. If you say you burned the Accidents of bread, as
the roundnesse, thickness, thinness, weight, taste, smell and color, and
left the bread remaining unburned, the^ you burned no part of the body of
Christ, and so your Sacrament was not the body of Christ. But I would very
feign see that bread that you dressed in that order: it would be a strange cake
if one might see it, that has neither color, taste, smell, thickness,
length, breadth, nor weight, such a piece of bread or cake was never yet seen
nor never will be. You may see what mischieues, inco^ueniences, and
impossibilities you bring your selves into, with maintaining your most false
and gross opinion of Transubstantiation. So that whether you burn the body
of Christ or the bread, or those Accidents either of the body of Christ or of
bread, you are confounded, and your Christ of bread clean lost and vanished,
and your Christ of bread proved nothing but bread, and so you do honor,
worship, knock and kneel to a cake or piece of bread, which must needs be
most wicked and detestable idolatry.

And further, if you say you burn but the Accidents, so might Josias also
say, when he burned the Priests of Baal on the Altars whereon they committed
Idolatry, that he did not burn the Priests nor hurt their bodies, 4. Kings.
23.
for he burned but their Accidents, as their color, their length, breadth,
weight, thickness, thinness, savor and such like. So if the Queens
Majesty should burn these Missall Priests, that make Christ and eat
Christ, and if he once be past man's meat, burn Christ, (who has as great
authority so to do as Josias had) she might likewise say their flesh nor
bodies were not burned nor hurt, but their Accidents, as their length,
breadth, thickness, thinness, weight, and color, and such like: but if they
were thus handled (though they would make us believe that nothing of the
Sacrament is burned but the Accidents,) they would then both believe and
feel, that their bones, flesh, skin, sinews, and all their whole bodies
were burded as well as their Accidents.

Mark this also, if the bread be changed into the body of Christ by the
Priests consecrating it, Carrion. Martinus Polonus.
then why was the Emperor Henry the sixth, poisoned by eating the body of
Christ? and why was Pope Victor poisoned in his Chalice by drynkyng the blood
of Christ? is the body of Christ now so far contrary to it self to that
it was before, and is now become a destroyer and killer of men, which
before was a helper and healer of men? a marvelous matter, when Christ was
here on earth and his body not glorified, John. 11.
he raised Lazarus from death to life that had been four days dead: and now
that he is in Heaven and glorified, his body has poisoned and killed men that
had lived above thirty years, and so brought them from life to death.
Therefore how soever you have used Christ among you, he is wonderfully changed.
A man would think it had been more likely, that Christ's body (being so full
of virtue and power as it is) that it should have turned the poison mixed with
it, to the good nature and virtue of it self, and to have preserved men's
bodies: and not the poison to turn Christ's body into poison and so to poison
or kill men.

Perhaps you will say, that it was not Christ's body that the poison was mixed
withal, truly if you say so I believe you, I allow his wit the better that he
tarried not: it was time for him to be gone, for if he had tarried he had bin
poisoned. But I pray you what was it then that the poison was mixed withal? you
will not now for shame say that it was the accidents of Christ's body, least
you make Christ to have such a strange body, or rather no body at all, as is
before mentioned. Belike then it was the bread that was there before, for the
one it must needs be, for (what soever the Popes Doctors say,) al learned and
wise men affirm, that there can be no Accidents without a Substance, and young
children that are but in the beginning of their Grammar can tell you, that an
Adjective must needs have a Substantive: truly if the bread being the body of
Christ and exalted to so high a degree, did vnchriste himself, and was content
to become bread again, and to be poisoned to save the body of Christ from
poisoning: then it was the louingst bread, the friendliest bread, and a bread
of the greatest consideration that I ever heard of: well in so doing I must
needs say, that the bread showed Christ a very friendly part: for if the
bread had not come again, then Christ himself had bin poisoned, and then he
had dyed twice, and then the professors of the Gospel had bin utterly undone,
for the Pope being ^opercioner with Christ (having both one consistory or
seat of Judgment) would have claimed all by suruiuor, and so he would have
sit alone, and thereby he might have sent the Devils and the wicked to heaven,
and the Angels and the godly to hell.

But if one should ask you how many bodies Christ had, I am sure you will
say he had but one, if you say truly: then if the bread were changed as you
say, yet could it be but a piece of the body of Christ, or else Christ has
had at one time twenty thousand bodies at the least, for I am sure there have
bin so many Masses at the least said in one day.

Though this be sufficient that I have already spoken to any Christian, godly,
wise or reasonable man, that the bread is not, neither by any means can be
changed into the body of Christ, yet I will go further with you: Suppose yt
Christ at his last Supper by these words (this is my body) did turn the
bread into his very body, (which before is proved he did not, both by the
scriptures, ancient Doctors and natural reason) yet therefore the Priests
are never a whyt the near for the turning or changing of the bread into the
body of Christ. For if he had done it, yet he gave them no warrant nor
commission to do it. For where can you find that Christ said, as often as any
Priest shall pronounce and say these words over a white little cake, (this is
my body) and shall bless and consecrate it, that straight way the little cake
shall be turned and transubstantiated into my very body, and the substance of
the bread from thence forth shall be clean gone, and my very body, flesh,
blood and bone, that was borne on the virgin Marie my mother, shall remain
there in the stead of bread. If you could show us these words or such like
spoken by Christ, then it would seem that they had Christ's commission so to
do, but they have from Christ no such commission or warrant so to do, (if
Christ had done it as he did it not.) Therefore all the racking, glosing, and
expoundyng of the some words of Christ, serve your turn never a whyt: all
that Christ said therein to his Apostles was, do this in my remembrance. So
that neither Pope nor Priest can have any more authority therein than the
Apostles had themselves. Therefore the Priests do not only most wickedly to
make you believe that the Sacramental bread is the body of Christ, which is
but a sign or remembrance of Christ and his death, but also both they and you
commit most horrible and abominable Idolatry, in kneeling to it and
worshipping of it.

If a great Lord that loves me well, being my master, should deliver me his
painted picture (which were something more like him than a cake is like Christ)
and say to me, when you look on this my picture, in my absence, remember me:
and then if I should when he were gone, show the same picture abroad, and say
to every one that sees it, that the same picture is my Lord and master
himself that left it with me, and so make courtesy to it, and reverence and
honor it for the said Lord, all that should see me do so, would not only
think I were stark mad, but also my said Lord and master that loved me so
much, would not be very well content with me for taking and honoring that dumb,
dead, and senseless picture for himself, that he did leave with me for a
sign to remember him withal in his absence: besides that, I think he would
dismiss me (as I were well worthy) out of his service. Even so all wise men may
think yt you are more than mad, yt take a piece of bread for the body of your
dear and loving master and Savior Christ, and kneel to it and honor it for
Christ: which he has left you for a sign to remember him withal in his
abse^ce, and a pledge of his coming again. And doubtless he will be very
angry with you yt so do, and thrust you out of his service, that give that
honor to a piece of bread, that is due unto himself, (unless you repent and
take it for a remembrance of him as he did leave it for you.) Thus you may
plainly see that ye words yt Christ spoke (this is my body) will not serve
their turn any way to make the sacramental bread the body of Christ: nay the
Popes Doctors by tossing ye same every way for their transubstantiation, have
brought themselves into such a maze or labyrinth, that they can not tell how to
get themselves out.

I could have helped the Pope to a better place of Scripture than this for the
making of Christ's body: whereby Christ should not only by express words
have allowed it for his body at all times, but it should have been like the
body of Christ, in substance, quality, and all other accidents. And that is
this: Christ took a child and said, Math. 18.
who so shall receive such a little child in my name receives me. These are
Christ's very words, and would have served the Popes turn a thousand times
better than ye words yt Christ spoke of the sacrament at his last supper. But
perhaps it may be thought, that by this word, whosoever, every one may do it
as well as the Pope and his Priests, therefore it is not for his purpose. Yea but
I could help yt matter well enough, for as much as the Pope has power to
expound the scriptures as he list, and that they shall have none other sense
than he will allow the^, then ye Pope might have said, yt whereas Christ said,
whosoever receives such a child in my name receives me, that is to say,
whosoever of ye Popes, or of ye Popes Bishops, Abbots, or priests, receives
such a child in my name, receives me. And thus ye Pope and his Priests when
so ever they would have made the body of Christ might have taken a child and
said: In the name of Christ, I receive thee, and then straight way, by Christ's
own words, the same child had been Christ: And so they might have allured
and taught the people to have kneeled to the same child, and worshipped it, and
so to have taken it for Christ (although it were not.) And thus doing they
should not only have had a good commission from Christ by special words so
to do, but also the child whom they made the people believe was Christ, should
have had the proportion, shape, form, body, bones, flesh, skin, head,
arms, legs, and all other members as Christ had. And therefore the Pope and
his Priests be very far ouerseene, that without any authority make the
body of Christ of a dead piece of bread so far unlike unto Christ, and
might have made it with Christ's commission and warrant, of a living child,
that in all points (to the eye) is like unto Christ. This had bin a finer,
likelier, and more credible way, to have made Christ of a living body, than of
dead bread. For if the people are so fond to believe that a cake of bread is
the very body of Christ, then they would (I think) quickly believe, that a
quick boy or child, were even Christ himself.

But though the Priest might make many believe that that same child were
Christ, yet perhaps the father of that child would not believe it, but would
say unto the Priest, sir you make the people believe a false lie, for this
child is not Christ, he is my son, I begot him, and I am his father: Even so
might the Wafer maker say to the Priest, sir you are much deceived, and deceive
the people also, this is not the body of Christ, it is a cake, and thereof I am
very sure, for I my self made it. And though this had been a more fitter text
for the Pope to have chosen, for the making of Christ's body: yet if they had
said the same words a thousand times over a boy, yet for all that he should
have been a boy still as he was before, (so the cake of bread is a cake of
bread still, though the Priest prattle never so much over it.) For as I said
before, Christ's words ought not always to be taken literally, but sometimes
spiritually: and so these words of Christ ought also to be understood
spirituallye, and not as Christ spoke them. For though Christ said, Math. 18.
Whosoever shall receive such a little child in my name receives me, he meant
thereby, yt whosoever receives such a one in his name, and does any thing for
him for Christ's sake, he shall have as great a reward therefore as though he
had received Christ, or done ye same to Christ himself. And he that receives
the spiritual member of Christ, he must needs receive and entertayne the
spiritual head of that member which is Christ: but to receive Christ his own
person or very body, none can do, neither can we have the body of Christ
present by any means before the last day, though you most fondly and falsely
believe, that his body is present here, and that the sacramental bread is
turned into his body, which is sufficientlye proved before to be a most
absurd, gross, and wicked error.

Therefore whosoever says there is no bread in the sacrament, but that it is
the body of Christ, believe him not, Dialog verit and consuet. In the Acts and
Monum. Page 1331.
for you have heard plainly, that gods word, the Doctors, the ancient
writers, our own reason, our own eyes, our nose, our tongue, our fingers, and
the silly mouse, do al agree in one, and say that there is bread, and if you
refuse so many sure and sound witnesses so well agreeing in their tale, and
that will lie for no man's pleasure, then call the Sacrament it self to record,
and it will tell you the truth, who will say unto you if you ask it, I am
grated with the teeth, I am conveyed into the belly, I perish, I can endure no
space, I canckar, I breed worms, I am kept in a box for fear of bats, if you
leave me out all night I shall be devoured before morning, for if the mouse get
me I am gone, I am bread, I am not the body of Christ, believe the^ not. This
and the rest that I have written is sufficient to persuade you from your
gross, senseless, unreasonable, and most wicked abominable error of your
turning or changing the sacramental bread into the body of Christ, unless
you are fully determined and purposely bent, to offend God, and to deny and
refuse Christ and his merits, and wilfullye and obstinatelye to withstand and
resist the truth.

It may be that some of you hold this most fond and fantastical opinion,
rather by the persuading of your father, mother, or some other of your special
friends at these death, than for any truth you know in it, or for any learning
you have to defend it, at whose earnest request perhaps you have made either
a vow, or sworn unto the^ that you would believe it as long as you live, and
that nothing should allure you from it. If any of you have done so, as I
think some of you have done so, yet you ought rather consider the thing
wherefore you swear or make your vow, than the party to whom you swear or
make your vow, and the truth and goodness of the matter, not the affection
you bear to the person. Because your father, mother, or some other of your
dearest friends, believed all their lives, and their Fathers before them, that
the bread after the consecration is the very body of Christ, yet that makes
not that therefore it is the body of Christ, the heathen, and their Fathers,
grandfathers and great great grandfathers before them do, and have most
wicked worshipped Idolles, yea and perhaps some of them at their deaths have
made their children or other whom they loved, to vow or swear unto them,
that they should never forsake or refuse to worship their Gods or Idols, and
that they should by no means become Christians: yet this is not a sufficient
argument, to prove that therefore their Idols were Gods and ought to be
worshipped? or say that therefore they should keep their oath or vow, to
take their Idols for Gods and worship them, and not to become Christians.

If one that has been a thief all his life should at his death say thus to
his son, come hither my child and mark well my words, I have been a thief
all my life, I have found it a very good trade, and I have lived plentifullye
and pleasauntlye withal, therefore my son I charge thee on my blessing, that
thou use the same trade all thy life: shall this thieves child, think that
theft is a good and honest trade, because his Father used it all his life? and
play the thief and steal as long as he lives, for fear of loosing his
fathers blessing? that were not meet: no more ought you to believe that a Cake
of bread is the very body of Christ, and to kneel to it and worship it for
Christ, though your Father or mother believed so, and worshipped it, and
though they at their death charged you of their blessing, so to do: it is
better for you to lose your Father and mothers blessings, to have the
blessings of God, than to loose the blessings of God to have the blessings of
your Father and mother: never fear to break your vow or promise made to your
earthly Father, if the keeping of them will displease your heavenly Father:
regard not man's doctrine unless it agree with Gods doctrine: care not for
man's commandment unless it agree with Gods commandment: and wey not what
man does charge you, as long as GOD does not charge you.

Therefore how far wide are you? how bewitched are you? how daungerously
walk you? and as Saint Augustine says, In what a miserable bondage of the
Soul are you? that take the thing that does signify, for the thing signified:
that take the Sacrament, for the thing that is signified by the Sacrament:
and that take a dead earthy piece of bread, for the heavenly and living body
of Christ? And also what horrible Idolatry do you commit, how derogate ye
the merits of Christ, and how greatly do you offend the Majesty of God? that
kneel too, honor, and reverence a Cake of bread, in the stead of Christ the
very son of God?

Did not ye children of Israel highly displease God, Israel.
which (immediately after he had so wonderfully delivered the^ out of Egypt
from their enemies) did make a golden Calfe: and dau^st about it* saying, Exodus
20.
These be the Gods that brought thee out of the land of Egypt? yes truly, and
Gods wrath being kindled against them, he worthylye therefore plagued them.
And whosoever thinks that they therefore, did not justly deserve the plagues
and curses yt god sent upon them, are more senseless than swine, and more
brutish tha^ beasts, And I think that none of you to whom I write this
persuasion, but will say that they deserved the same, (yea if they had bin
greater and more:) for that they did forgette God so quickly, that miraculously
delivered them so lately, committing such wicked Idolatry to a dead image of
a dumb and senseless beast, that could do them no good, in stead of
honoring the living God that had done so much for them: and because they did
attribute their deliverance out of thraldom which they suffered in Egypt, to
the Image of a Calfe, which none but their living and loving God did or could
do. And further I think you would not be content with them, that should say
you like well of their worshipping of that golden calfe: And as you think not
well of their doings therein: So we can not like well of your doings herein, for
as those wicked and rebellious Jews most falselye and abhominably did
attribute the wonderful deliverance out of Egypt to a molten image of metal,
and did worship the same which had neither life nor soul: So you most
wickedly and Idolatrouslye do worship and honor a piece of bread that has
neither life nor soul, and do say, this is the very body of Christ, the
son of God, that was borne on the Uirgine Marie, which has brought us out of
the spiritual bondage under ye wicked Pharao the Devil, and that has saved us
by his death from endless damnation.

Do not you here make a cake or a piece of bread that has neither life nor
soul, to be Christ the son of God? yt has delivered you out of Hell, as
these fond foolish Jews did make a dumb and dead golden Calfe to be the living
God, that brought them out of the land of Egypt? Yes verily, and thereby you
make that the cake has done more for you, than the golden calfe did for them,
for their bodies only were delivered out of a short thraldom in Egypt: but
both your bodies and souls are delivered out of the endless torments in
Hell. So that hereby you approve, that the Cake (which you say is the very
body of Christ, and Christ is our only redeemer out of hell) has done more for
you than the Jews could attribute that the golden Calfe had done for them.
And as they honored the golden Calfe for their God, so you honor the cake of
bread for your Christ.

O how witless and senseless are you? can any of us that are living souls,
and made to the Image of God, be equal with Christ the son of God? no
truly: and then can a piece of bread be Christ, that is a dead and senseless
creature, and that God has made for us to eat? no it is impossible.

Therefore, as the Jews were worthily plagued for going from the word of the
Lord, in committing such wicked Idolatry to a golden Calfe: even so assure
your selves, for your contemning and refusing the Gospel, and for committing
this most detestable Idolatry to a Cake of bread (making it your Christ)
that you shall receive the grievous plagues before rehearsed (or greater) in
this world, and after your deaths, everlasting torments in hell fire: such, as
no tongue can express, or heart can think, unless you repent unfeignedly, fly
from your Romish doctrine most speedily, and embrace Christ's Gospel right
thankfully, (which is the pure doctrine of Christ and law of God, though many
of you most blasphemously call it Heresy.) Therefore right earnestly I desire
you, and most humbly beseech you to cease from worshipping a Cake on earth,
and fall to the honoring of Christ in heaven.

Thus you may see, if you will see, that your Popish Mass, and your
Transubstantiation or turning or changing of the bread into the body of
Christ, by Gods word is confounded, by the Doctors confuted, and by natural
reason clean overwhelmed (which you counted ye most truest and holiest part
of the Romish religion) besides that it is a most devilish, detestable* and
damnable doctrine, which robbes God of his glory, Christ of his merits, and
you of your salvation.

Hitherto you may perceive that the Popes and their doctrine do not much
differ, for, as the Popes were most wicked and devilish, so their religion is
most erroneous and pernicious: So that how can you think well of your selves,
and how can you take your selves to be meet members of England; that for to
have this abominable, Idolatrous and monstrous Mass again planted here, you
seek or wish the supplanting of our prince, the overthrow of our Nobility,
the sorrow of our Communaltie, the confusion of our Country, and the ruin of
the whole realm of England: wherefore with all speed, of English enemies
become English friends, to be defended by the power of England, and to be
nourished in England.

And seeing that I have proved unto you, that your Mass is a gugaw, not a
Jewel, a poison, not a preservative, a confusion, not a consolation, and a
guyder to Hell, not a leader to Heaven. Now you shall hear what proper things
the Popes pardons are to please you withal, as your young children are pleased
with Babies, but I would to God his pardons did hurt you no more, than the
Babies do the children: for the Babies do still them when they cry, and make
them merry and hurt them not, but the Popes pardons please you here for a
while, to displease you ever after. I may compare the Popes pardons to a
counterfaite Privilege, as if a false subtle fellow (to get money withal)
should write a large Privilege from the Prince, counterfayting the Kings
seal, wherein he shows, that the King has given him license (and whom he
shall allow) to steal without danger of any law, and to have no harm
therefore though they be taken with the manner: where upon many give him
money to be privileged thereby to steal, and think it to be no counterfaite,
but a true privilege from the King, whereby they steal boldelye, but are
hanged therefore suddenly: and though they allege for themselves at the
gallows, and show their authority to steal from him that had the
counterfaite Privilege, and say, that he had money of them for it: yet all that will not serve, but they are hanged for their stealing: Even so the Pope
makes you believe, that he, by his power and authority from God, may pardon
whom he list, for whatsoever offense they commit, but whatsoever he say, he
has no such Privilege from God, therefore his is but a counterfaite Commission,
which he like a false harlot has invented, only to get money, whose words
you so credit, that you believe, that God himself sold his Commission:
whereupon you think, that Commission from God is so cock sure, that you give
him money for his pardons, whereby you think you are not only pardoned of all
your sins, and as clean as when you were new borne: but also, that you may
freely commit what sins you will, assuring your selves, for money therefore at
any time to be pardoned at the Popes hands, (yet we must not say, but that
your religion does restrain men from sin, and our religion of the Gospel
does give liberty to sin, but how true it is, herein you may see, (if you be
not blind:) but when you are dead, (if before you have not a better pardon of
God without money, than you have of the Pope for money) you are like to be
hanged in hell, with the Popes pardons about your neck. And then the Pope
brings you into a worse case, than they that were hanged for stealing by a
counterfaite Privilege.

But mark the mischievous craft of the Pope, all the wares that he sells
you, as his Mass, Trentalles, Dirges, and pardons and al other his trumperie,
are such, that by just trial in this life, you cannot comptroll them, or say
they have not pleasured you, except you look in Gods word, which he
keeps safe enough from you: for the trial of his wares, whether they do you
good or not, is after your death: whereby he is sure you can not come back
again, to chyde or check him for selling to you such deceitful wares.

He promises and sells you great and wonderful things that are to be tried
after your death, but he does not promise and sell you things of smaller force
and weight, that may be tried during your life.

I warrant you he will not sell you any Pardons or Privileges, that steal as
often as you will, you shall never be hanged or put to death therefore: that
eat as much as you will, you shall never surffet or be sick of it: drink as
much as you will, you shall never be drunk: and spend what you list, you shall
have never the less money in your pu^^e: and yet these are easier things for
him to promise and perform, than to give us the kingdom of heaven yt deserve
the kingdom of hell, tha^ to save us from our spiritual hanging in Hell, though
we never so much rob God of his glory: and though we offend never so much,
yet still to be pardoned and clean cleansed from sin. Wherefore, you may well
suspecte, nay firmly believe, that his pardons and other wares that he so
boldly sels you, are naught, because they are such as you can not reprove
before you be dead: and for that he never offers to sell you any thing that you
may try whiles you are alive. For he knows full well, that if he should sell
you a privilege, that though you eat never so much, or what meat soever you
eat, you should neither be sick or surfeit thereby: yet when you were sick
or did surfeit, by eating of it, (whereof you should be sure) then you would say
that his privileges were naught, not only contemning and despising them: but
also all other that knew it, would never after buy any of those his
privileges. And also the Pope is right certain, if he should sell one a
plackard, that whatsoever he did steal, he should never be hurt, hanged, nor
put to death for the same: yet when he should be troubled, hanged, or executed
for stealing, (which he should be sure of at one time or other) then the same
thief would not only cry out of the Pope for deceyuing of him, and for
selling to him such a false plackard, and perhaps would say that he had never
played the thief but for the Popes warrant to save him harmless, as many I
fear would not sin so much but for the Popes pardons: but also every one that
should hear how the Pope had served him, would despise the Pope, and buy
no more of his plackardes. But as these that should buy such Privileges of
the Pope to rob and steal at their pleasure, without any fear of
punishment, were worthy to be compted for thieves, so you that buy the Popes
pardons, to release you of your sins, whereby you may be bold to offend God
at your pleasure, can not be compted very true to God.

But now, for that perhaps you will give but small regard to my reasons,
arguments, or persuasions, for the reproving of the Popes pardons (though some
of you may happly yield as bad reasons, arguments, or persuasions for the
proouing of the Popes pardons) I will first show you by Christ's own words
(who is worthy to be believed) that we ought to crave pardon for our sins
only of God: For in our prayer (which Christ taught us) we do say: Our
father which art in heaven, etc. Forgive us our trespasses, etc. Here you may
see, Math. 6*
that we are taught by Christ to ask pardon for our sins of God, and not
of the Pope. And forasmuch as we commit our sins against God, and not
against the Pope: therefore we ought to crave Gods pardon, and not the Popes
pardon: if we offend the Pope, the Popes pardons may do us pleasure, but if
we sin against God, the Popes pardons can do us no good (though they may do
us much harm, by trusting to them that can do us no good.)

All the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, holy and virtuous kings, that God both loved
and blessed, Christ's Apostles, and al holy Martirs and other godly men did
never ask pardon for their sins and offenses but only of God. And shall we
think, that because they had not the Popes pardon, yt therefore they were not
pardned? or shall we believe that you are better pardned of the Pope than they
were of God? think you what you will, for I can never think it, neither will
believe it.

If you can show me but one of the holy Patriarks, Prophets, or the Apostles,
or godly martyrs, or other ancient and holy fathers, that either bought any
of these Popes pardons, or desired any of the Popes pardons, as we can show
you, that every one of them did only require and crave Gods pardon: I will
yield unto you, and grant, that the Popes pardons are good, necessary, and
requisite: But because I am sure you cannot, therefore to allow the Popes
pardons we ought not. And because none of all these holy men of God (whom
God dearly loved) nor yet Christ the son of God: whom God above all other
esteemed, did never teach, write, nor once make mention of the Popes pardons,
therefore I am sure, that they are neither good nor necessary: For, if the
Popes pardons had been so full of virtue (as some of you fondely believe)
we should have heard something of them in one place or other of the
Scriptures. Now, for that they are not warranted by Gods word, nor to be found
in any part of the Bible, therefore if you are true Christians, if you love
Christ, if you would have Christ to take you to be of his sheep and flock,
then believe not the Popes pardons, trust not to the Popes pardons, neither
allow the Popes pardons, because they are not allowed nor expressed in the
Gospel and law of Christ: For, if an Angel should come from Heaven, or if
one should come unto us in the likeness of Christ, teaching any other doctrine
than Christ has already taught us: we ought not to believe them. Then we
may well enough discredit the Pope, that is a wicked earthlye man clean
contrary to God, and also contemn and refuse his paltrie pardons, that are
contrary to Gods word.

And though some of you through ignorance, and Papisticall persuasions think
that the Scriptures do allow the Popes pardons, you shall here what Siluester
Prierias, (that was Master of the Popes Palace) writes therein, who says,
Pardons are not known unto us by the authority of Gods word, Siluester
prierias cont. Lutherum.
but by the authority of the Church of Rome and of the Pope, which is
greater than the authority of the Scriptures: Here you see, that the Popes
own servant confesses, that pardons are not aucthorized or warranted by Gods
word, but they are aucthorized by the Church of Rome and by the Pope, whose
authority he says is greater than the word of God. Mark this well, to prove
the Popes abominable pardons, the vile wretch and the Devils Doctor does not
stick to commit most horrible blasphemy, making the Pope above God, and
the Church of Rome above the law of God. Saint John says: In the beginning
was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, etc. John. 1.
So that hereby it appears, that God and his word is all one. Then this
Siluester Prierias affyrmeth, That the authority of the Pope is greater than
the authority of God: For, if the authority of the Pope be greater than the
authority of Gods word, (and God his word be all one) then it must needs
be so, and so by this means this vile blasphemer, makes the Pope, and the
Church of Rome to be greater than God and his word. I hope that you that are
the deepest drowned in Papistrie, will detest and abhor the Popes pardons,
that must be allowed or aucthorized by one that is greater than God and his
word. O fly from this purple whore of Babylon, the Antichrist, that thus
extolleth her self above God and his word, least you be partakers of Gods
terrible vengeance, that God has prepared for her.

Fisher once Bishop of Rochester says: Jewel in defe^. Apol. pa. 600.
That he knows not from whence pardons first began, which hangs only
upon Purgatory: then what shall we need pardons?

Mark also how the Popes pardons do bewray themselves what they are, for some
of the Popes pardons are for a twenty thousand years, and if you set all the
years of the Popes pardons together, they come to such a number, as they that
bought them and paid for them, yea, and all other yt should have profit by
them, shall have little need of them: For the whole world will not last by
conjecture, nor by conference of the Scriptures and other learned Writers,
seven thousand years, then he that has pardon for twenty thousand years, is
sure of enough: for though the Pope may make you believe, that his pardons
will pleasure you before the day of Judgment, yet I hope that none of you
believe, that they will do you any good after the day of Judgment:
wherefore they that have pardons from the Pope for twenty thousand years, or
now for two thousand years, and paid their money to him for so long, if
they should go to Hell by and by, the Pope does them great wrong, to suffer
them to go thither before their pardons be out: and if they should go to
Heaven, then the Pope has done evil likewise, to take money of them for me
years than he was able to perform: therefore it seems, that the Popes
pardons were naught, because he gave men more years than there needed: For if
his pardons had bin good, he would rather have given them fewer years than
they ought to have.

He that sels water in stead of wine, (though he be a niggarde) will never
stick to give more than measure.

It apperes, that Friar Ticel, the Popes pardner, thought that the Popes
pardons were of great force, and that the Pope that did grant them, had
either greater authority than God had, or else at the least equal
authority with him: for he made his Proclamations to the people openly in
the Churches as follows: Johan. Steida^. lib. 13.
Although a man had lain with our Lady the mother of Christ, and had
begotten her with child, yet were he able by the Popes power to pardon the
fault: This is deep Divinity, they that would not give money for these
pardons; were not worthy to lie with a fair woman* he yt can pardon one yt should
get Christ's mother with child, he is able to pardon Priests for keeping of
harlots. I think if one had got a child on Christ's mother, if he were here on
earth or alive, I think the Pope (though he were a bastard) would make him
Legitimate, and I think they would make him more than the brother of Christ,
for I believe he would say it were Christ himself: for he that makes a Cake to
be Christ, would surely make our Ladies second son to be Christ.

What folly and fondness is this your Romish religion, to pardon such indecent
and impossible things, but as many of the things are ridiculous, foolish, and
unmeet to be named, that the Pope promises to pardon: So all his pardons that
should pardon them* are vain toys and bables to please fools withal, and of
Christians are to be derided, rejected and to be abhorred.

And now for that your Popish pardons were not manifested by Moses, not
proclaimed by the Prophets, not authorized by Christ, not allowed by the
Apostles, not mentioned of the Martyrs, not declared by the Doctors, but
quite contrary to Christ and his Gospel, and is a maynetayner of mischief, a
procurer to wickedness, and a liberty sin, therefore they are to be
detested and abhorred: wherefore fly from them and trust no more to them, and
seek only for Gods pardon which he will give you freely, and shall cost you no
money, only for ye love of his dear son Jesus Christ.

If the Popes pardons were so precious, his blessings so godly, and his relikes
so full of virtue, as some of you have made witless woodcocks believe. Acts
and Monuments. Acts and Mo. Page 1990. Page eadem.
Then why did M. Smith hang himself in his Chamber, who commonly did wear an
Agnus dei about his neck, having besides a Crucifixe which he brought with
him from Louaine? why did the Parson of Grondal in Kent dye suddenly in the
Pulpit, having there present the Popes pardon? And why did the Suffragane and
B. of Dover, break his neck going down a pair of stairs, immediately after
he had received the Cardinals blessing? why did the Bishop of Winchester
Steven Gardener being pardoned by the Pope, Acts and Mo. Page 1992.
a little before his death-say That he had denied with Peter, but repented not
with Peter? and died so horribly, stinckingly, and desperately, as he did? with
diverse other that ioyfullye received the Popes religion into England, and had
the Popes pardon?

Surely if every one were of my mind and opinion, seeing so evil ^ck
follows them that have the Popes pardons, relickes and blessing, the Popes
Bul^ should be kept in store to bread the Popes calves: his blessings he should
keep, until we were young Children again and came to ask him blessing: and
his Agnus dei and Crucifixes, and his other whimwhams, should be kept in store
until harvest, than to be hanged about the haruestdams necks, to make them
gay withal: and so though they did not much good, yet they should do no great
harm.

If a Surgeon should promise that he could and would help al kind of sores,
wounds, aches, ulcers, impostumes, and al other pains and griefs, that are so
cured by surgerie, and yet for all his great brags and promises, curses never a
one, (but leaves them as he found them or rather worse?) few within a while
after, would set that Surgeon on work: or give him any money for his salues
playsters or oyntements. If a Physician with a great show of learning, should
take upon him to help the diseases that were to be cured by Physic, and
thereby should receive much money of many, and for all that neither help nor
ease any, suffering the^ to dye under his hand: few within a while would come
to him for Phisike, neither would any I think buy any of his medicines, nor
would receive any of them, though they might have the^ for nothing* And can
we be so wise and cyrcumspect, to refuse the Chirurgions salues and the
Physicians medicines that helps not or hurtes our bodies? And yet so foolish
to buy the Popes paltry pardons that destroys both our bodies and souls?
seeing it is thus, I must needs say that the Pope has the best luck in
uttering of his wares of all that ever I knew or hard: for though his pardons
are stark staring naught and do much harm, yet many are so witless and
foolish and so far in love with the Pope and his pardons, that rather then
they should not have them, they would go to Rome with great pain, travel,
and cost, and pay dearelye for them when they come there (though they hang
themselves, drown themselves, break their necks and dye suddenly when they
come hom. But to have Gods pardon in their own house (which brings eternal
life) without any travel labor, pain or cost, and without paying any thing
at al, they make none account. Thus you of this wicked Romish religion had
rather with pain pay dearelye for your damnation, than with ease at home and
freely to have your salvation: therefore if you are wise, or well in your wits
let al wise men judge.

If Christ had used the Jews in this sort, as the Pope does use you, that is,
to promise much and perform nothing, so many would not have followed him as
did, but contrary to the Pope he promised little and performed much. The
Centurions servant that lay grievously payned of the palsy, was healed by
Christ, at the same hour, Math. 8.
when the Centurion did require him, and yet Christ did not say yt he would
heal him: Math. 8.
but said Go thy way as thou beleeuest, so be it unto thee. When Christ had
touched Peter's wives mothers hand that was sick of a fever, straight way ye
fever left her, and she arose. When they that were possessed with Devils came to
Christ for help, with his words immediately he cast out the Diuelles in
deed, out of them, he made the lame to go, the blind to see, the death to
hear, and the dumb to speak When one that was sick of the palsy, was
brought on his bed to be healed of Christ: Math. 9.
Christ did not only heal him, but also gave him his pardon: saying son be
of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee: and also said unto him, arise,
take up thy bed and go home to thy house, Yet after that Christ had given him
his pardon, I never heard or red that he either hanged himself, drowned
himself, or brake his neck, died suddenly or desperately, as many of them have
done that have had the Popes pardon. Christ laid his hands upon young children
and blessed them (which was as good and a little better than the Popes or
Cardinals blessings) but none of the same Children did break their necks yt
ever I herd, Mark. 10.
as the B. of Dover did after he received the Cardinals blessing. Therefore none
but fools or mad men will refuse Gods pardons and blessings which will make us
dye the servant of God, for the Popes pardons and blessings that will make us
die the children of the Devil. Thus I have not only proved that the Popes whom
you so reverence and esteem, are not only wicked, mischievous, the impes of
Satan, and even the very Antichrist himself, but also that his religion and
doctrine and the Church of Rome is most false abominable, and detestable, and
clean contrary to ye Church of Christ and his doctrine the holy Gospel.
Therefore I beseech you refuse the Pope and his doctrine (which has made
you English Enemies) and embrace Christ and his Gospel which will make you
English friends. And further you shall perceive, that the Church of Rome has
one especial mark, that shows perfectlye that she is the Synagog of Satan and
not the Church of Christ, which is her persecuting, murdering, and killing
of such as will not obey her law, for ye increasing, maintayning, and setting of
her up. Chrysostom writes thus, Chysost. in Math. Homil. 16.
Nunquid Ouis lupum persequitur aliquando? Non sed lupus ouem, etc. What does
the sheep persecute the Wolf at any time? no, but the Wolf does persecute the
sheep: for so Cain persecuted Abel, not Abel Cain: so Ismael persecuted Isaac,
not Isaac Ism: so the Jews persecuted Christ, not Christ the Jews: so the
Heretics persecute the Christians, not the Christians the Heretics: Therefore
ye shall know them by their fruits. Thus far Chrysostom, And now because
the Papists persecute ye Protestants, therefore Chrisostom calls the Papists
wolves, and the Protestants sheep: and the Papists Heretics, and the
Protestants Christians. Here may you see that they that are of the Church of
Rome, yt persecute, are the Devils wolves, and the Gospellers that are
persecuted are Christ's sheep. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
Tertullian shows who are the true Christians, and who are not. The proper
office (says he) of the true Christians, is to pray for all me^, to love their
enemies, never requiting evil for evil, when as all other do love but only
their friends, and scantly them. Now if they are not to be counted Christians,
that love but only their friends: then what is the Pope and his holy
Prelates that hate, trouble, torment, murder, burn, and kille the friends of
Christ? hereby it must appear that you that are of ye Popes persecuting
religion, are no true Christians, and so you have not the true religion of
Christ. For none but the true Christians have the true religion And as the Pope
is the very Antichrist, so they that are of his religion are Antichristians,
therefore continue no longer in the Popes doctrine, for so long as you embrace
his doctrine, so long must you needs be Antichristians, and no true and
perfect Christians. Therefore deceive not your selves, but persuade your selves,
that if you murder, kill, and persecute, you are not of Christ's fold, nor any
of his sheep. For Christ was persecuted, and his Apostles were persecuted. Now
if Christ yt was persecuted, was and is the son of God, and Christ's Apostles
yt were persecuted his sheep, then they yt persecuted Christ and his Apostles,
and you that persecute now* must needs be the children and the Gotes of the
Devil* It is not ye property of sheep to bite or devour, but of dogs, wolves
and such like. Therefore whosoever does bite douour or kill, certainly* (though
he look never so like a sheep) he is no sheep, he may well have the coat
of a sheep, but he has the heart of a Wolf. And so as Christ says, they
come to you in sheep clothing: Math. 7.
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Therefore you (especially that are
bloody and persecuting Papists) because you are rauenours, therefore you are
Wolves and not of Christ's flock: And the professors of the Gospel are
Christ's sheep, because they are killed and devoured.

Though you of the Popes religion kill us, yet we do neither kill you, wish
your death but amendment, saying with Saint Hierom, Jewel in defen. Apolog.
page 552.
Would God we may rather kill the children of Heretics, and of all them that
be deceived, with spiritual arrows, that is to say, with the testimonies of
the Scriptures. And with S. Augustine, would God thou would kill them O
Lord, with the two edged sword, (that is with thy holy word) that they may
live unto thee. And again, God so revenge our cause against you, that he may
kill your error in you that ye may rejoice together with us of the truth.
Thus we wish you to be killed, and not to murder you in your errors, and
so from one fire to send you to an other fire, (the fire of Hell) as you seem
to do to us, we deal not thus with you, but suffer you to live and pray for
you that you may turn, but you burn us, whereby (if we were in error) we
should not turn, and some of you have said that we ought not to be prayed
for.

If you be so blind that you can not see your cruelty, and our mercy, then I
beseech God to open your eyes to see it. But some of you make but a jesting
and scoffing at them yt died and were burned and murdered in Queen Mary's
time, saying that they died stubbornly, wilfully and in most damnable heresy.
Though they died in your heresy, yet they died in Gods veri^ie, and though you
have pleasure to talk of their torments, yet they had no great pleasure in
feeling their torments. But who I pray you did put them to death in their
error and false heresy? (as you call it) even they yt are of your holy Romish
Church, who (without repentance shall answer ye shedding of their guiltless
blood: yea and some have not sticked to say that they that were burned were
damned: which was but a hard judgment, first to judge their bodies to be
burned here on earth: and after their souls to be burned in Hell, they will
not stand to this judgment, they will rather appeal. But if they died in
error, and are damned (as some of your religion said) then who was the cause
of their damnation? forsooth even they that condemned them and burned them, for
though they had been so wilful to burn in an evil opinion, yet they should
not have been so merciless, to have burned them in that opinion,

If you should see a mad man running into a pit to drown himself, would you run
after him, and thrust him into the pyt? The children of God would rather pluck
him back and save him from drowning. Even so if they had been such heretics
as you would make them, and their opinions so damnable as you report them, why
did your holy and religious brethren of the Church of Rome, so cruelly burn
them whereby they were damned? have you no greater zeal to your brethren, but
so rashly and uncharitably to send them to hell? Everlasting damnation is an
horrible and doleful thing: for they that are there once, shall be in torments
unspeakable in hell fire for ever and ever world without end. And can you or
any such, look to have any mercy at Gods hand, that thruste your brethren
(being as you say in a damnable opinion or heresy) first into the fire here,
and burn them, and from thence send them into an other fire, (the fire of
hell) where they shall burn for ever? truly you may look and hope for
mercy, but if you refrain not from this your heathenish cruelty, and repent
the same unfeignedly, you are more like to go without it than have it. You that
are such burners of your brethren herein do condemn your selves for most
cruel and mercylesse tyrants: for you burn them here, and after say they be
damned.

The Franciscane Friars of Paris in France may seem to be more charitable
than the Popish persecutors before mentioned, Ex pantal. lib. 7. Acts and
Monuments. page 884.
for they whiles one was in a good opinion (as they said) hanged him up*
quickly because he should be saved and go to Heaven: but these said cruel
Papists have burned their brethren because they should go to hell. Mark it well
for it is worth ye hearing* There was a rich merchant man in Paris, who said
in (...) to the Friars of S. Fraunces, you wear a rope about your bodies
because S. Fraunces once should have been hanged, and the Pope redeemed (...),
upon this condition, that all his life after he should wear a rope. Upon
this saying the Franciscane Friars of Paris caused him to be apprehended and to
be laid in prison: and also judgment past upon him that he should be hanged.
But he to save his life, was content to recant, and so did: the Friars hearing
of his recantation, commended him saying, if he continued so, he should be
saved: and so the Friars calling upon the officers, caused them to make have to
the gallows to hang him up, whiles he was yet in a good way (said they) least
he fall again. And so this Merchant notwithstanding his recantation, was
hanged. Thus though some of you do burn men to send them to hell: yet these
charitable Friars did hang this Merchant to send him to heaven. But as your
burning of us (contrary to your saying) does bring us (through Christ) to
salvation: so I pray God that the Friars hanging of the Merchant (contrary to
their saying) did not bring him to damnation. If the Popes Friars do hang men
for jesting against them: then it is no marvel though the Popes Champions do
burn men for speaking against them in earnest. The hanging of this Merchant
may well be justice according to ye Popes law: but it is scant justice by Gods
law, nor by the law of any godly Prince. These holy Friars might learn this
of the Devil: for I am sure they never learned it of God. You shall see by
Christ's words, whether you that do this murder and persecute your brethren
are of God or the Devil. Christ says Whatsoever you would that men should do
to you, Math. 7.
do even the same to them. Now weigh with your selves, would you be content,
that if you were heathen men or Jews, that other should burn you, and send
you thereby after to hell: I think not, Math. 5.
Christ says, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, but
the Papisticall persecutors are unmerciful tyrants, as their burning of their
brethren and their saying after they be damned, do evidently declare: therefore
you that are the Popes persecutors are unhappy and shall not obtain mercy,
unless as I said you repent in time.

But we are most sure that they are not gone to Hell, as some of your sect have
both boasted and bragged, for they are under the Altar where the rest of the
Saints and Martirs be, that have dipped their garments in ye blood of the Lamb.

But if they had bin in error or Heresy, thus you would have served them. And
though they died willingly they died not in Heresy, and yet they died not so
willingly (as the mad man I spoke of parabolically) but that they would have
lived, if they might with a safe conscience without denying Christ. For you
drove them to a mischief, either to be burned here in your fire, and to save
their endless life in Heaven: or else to save their life here, and to burn
for ever in Hell, who remembered Christ's words which are these, Whosoever
shall deny me before men, Math. 10.
him also will I deny before my father in Heaven. Thus you may see what cruel
Tirantes the Pope and his partakers are, that without all pity and mercy do
burn and kill us here, to burn us and kill us everlastingly in Hell. And yet
the Popes for all this call themselves the Servants of Gods Servants: but if
the Pope be such an underling, then he used ye Emperor his master but homely,
when he made him lie down and trod in his neck: and also if the Pope be the
Servant of Gods servants, then he is a very evil servant, that has killed so
many of his masters.

And now you shall have an other infallible rule that our Religion is the true
Religion, and that the true professors and followers thereof are of the
kingdom of God. The Popes kingdom is increased and mainteyned with cruelty,
murder and persecuting, but Christ's kingdom increases by humility, by being
murdered, and persecuted: for though the true Christians are daily killed and
murdered, yet their number is daily increased, for kill they never so many,
yet let them tell them, and they shall find them mo in number. And so does no
other religion in the world but it, therefore there is no better mark whereby to
know the true religion and the church of Christ, than by persecution, and by
increasing thereby. And hereto Tertullian agrees, who says, Crudelitas vestra
nostra gloria est. Tertull. ad Scapulam.
Your cruelty is our glory, and your earnest cruelty is an entisement and a
provocation to this sect, as often as ye reckon us, ye find us mo and mo, the
seed is Christian blood. Thus it appear that the Gospel of Christ grow and
spring by being troubled and persecuted, and so as I said does no other
religion. But the Popes doctrine would decrease, if they should not trouble and
persecute.

When the Emperor Adrian had yielded to grant one church within the city of
Rome, Aelius La^pridius.
certain of his privy Counsel advised him in any wise not to do so, for that
they said if the Christians might have but one church within the City, the
whole people would al become Christians, and thereby their idols churches
should be forsaken. Eue^ so if ye Princes that hold on the Pope and his
religion would cease from their killing, murdering, burning and torme^ting of
the professors of the gospel, and suffer them quietly to teach and preach the
gospel that would, and to have the Bible and the co^mmunion in the Churches,
surely the Bible would drive away al ye images, the Communion would quite
overthrow their Masses, ye truth of Gods word would utterly confound and
abolish the Pope and al his false doctrine. Which the Pope knows well enough,
and therefore he keeps the Kings and Rulers not only in error and blindness,
but also persuadeth the^ to be persecutors of the^ that profess the Gospel.
And as Christ is merciful, so the Pope is cruel, (not to the wicked but to
the godly,) for the Pope kill them that profess the Gospel, whom God would
have preserved and not killed: but harlots, fornicators, aduouterers,
Sodomites, and incestuous persons, which God appoints to be executed and
stoned to death, he preserves makes much of and maintain. John. 8.
Christ saved a woman from being stoned to death, ye had deserved to die by the
law: but the Pope clean contrary, burns, kilteh, and murder them that
ought to live, both by Gods law and man's law? If Peter were Pope of Rome as
some of you believe, then mark how his doings did differ from the Popes
practices: for Peter did give sentence of death against Ananias and Saphira his
wife the children of the Devil, and so were suddenly stricken to death by the
power of God for lying: but the Pope and his Prelates pronounce sentence of
death against the children of God and burn them for speaking of truth. And
thus the persecuting Pope will needs be contrary to Christ do and say what
we can.

Therefore if Christ be good as he is, then the Pope is evil as he is, for
that they be so contrary, for Christ was meek and merciful, the Pope is
proud and a tyrant, John. 6.
Christ was poor, ye Pope is rich, Christ was in subjection to Emperors and
Kings, ye Pope makes the Emperors and Kings his subjects and servants, the
Jews did offer to make Christ a King but he refused it, the Pope makes
himself a King of Kings and no man does offer it, Christ was the Author of
peace, the Pope is the author of wars, Christ forbad sin, the Pope does
license to sin, Christ preached the Gospel, the Pope suppresseth ye gospel, and
Christ was persecuted and killed, and the Pope does persecute and kill.
Therefore as Christ is the son of God: so is ye Pope the child of the Devil,
unless he turn and frame himself to the fashion of Christ otherwise the^ he
does. This I hope is sufficient for you to know of whose church they are ye do
murder and persecute, eue^ of the church of the Devil for he was a murderer
from the beginning, for as I said, John. 8.
murdering and persecuting are badges of the Devils church, but let ye Pope be
assured, yt God is not only angry with him for this his cruel murdering and
persecuting, but also will pluck down his pride at length, for if God were
angry with king Saul and put him from his kingdom because he killed not Gods
enemy king Agag according to his commandment: 1. Kings. 15.
then you need not doubt but ye God is angry with the Pope and will put him
out of his Popedom that kills his friends, contrary to his commandment.

And though the Pope call them Heretics and burn them because they will not
woorship images and idols, and obey his Devilish law, yet they are the
children of God: and though he burn their bodies, he can not hurt their
Souls. But if they be Heretics that put away idolatry which God does
command them, then what is the Pope and his Prelates that do set up Images
and commit idolatry, which God does forbid? but though the Pope call them
Heretics, that he persecutes for professing of the Gospel, and says they be
damned: yet Christ is of a contrary opinion: for he says, Blessed are they
that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Math. 5.
for theires is the kingdom of Heeauen. Now if the kingdom of Heaven be
theirs that are persecuted for righteousness, then they that the Pope
persecutes for testifying the Gospel, (which is truth and righteousness) are
sure to have the kingdom of Heaven, (though the Pope tell us they are damned.)
And if the kingdom of Heaven be theirs that the Pope persecutes, then surely
the kingdom of Hell is the Popes that thus does persecute them. So that by
Christ's own words, the Pope (though he say he can save whom he will, and
can give the kingdom of Heaven to whom he li^te,) is so nie driven, that he
himself is like to dwell in the kingdom of Hell. And no marvel, for he has
been so lyberall in gyuing to so many the kingdom of Heaven, that thereby he
has quite dispossessed him self of Heaven, and therefore he is very like to
dwell in Hell. Wherefore if you would avoid Hell, have no desire to burn your
brethren, nor to persecute the professors of the Gospel, for thereby you
provoke Gods wrath, and also increase his kingdom, and get the Devils favor,
and decay the Popes kingdom. There is no striving against God, it can be no
good bulwark that is builded with blood.

Suffer the house of God by the preaching of the Gospel, to be builded, for
what soever you pluck down in ye night he will build it and more to again in
the day, and God will overthrow in the day whatsoever you build in the night.
For when the wicked Emperor Julian in dispite of Christ had given the Jews
leave to build and repair their Temple (the Princes power assisting them and
no power seemed able to withstand their purpose. Jewel in defen. Apolog. page
790.
) Then God himself from heaven above encountered with them, Earthquakes brake
out and ouerthrewe there buildings, lightnings fell down and burnt both the
tools in their hands and the coats on their backs. And then was the Gospel
of Christ more bewtiful and more glorious than ever it had been before. Thus
the Jews might have perceived that God was both angry and despised them and
their Jewish sacrifices, though once he esteemed them above all other, and the
Temple that he before commanded to be builded, and wherein he appeared to the
Jews, now he from heaven ouerthrewe and the builders thereof. Whereby they also
might well understand that he had an other people and Religion that he esteemed
better and would fight for.

And therefore seeing God ouerthrewe the building and the builders of the
Temple of Jerusalem, which he commanded to be builded, and that he once so
well liked: then he must needs overthrow, (as he has begone partly well
already) all the dens and buildings of the temple or church of Rome which he
utterly hates, and that he never commanded to be builded. For as Christ says,
every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. Math.
15.
Therefore fly from this your Romish Church and her doctrine, which God does
daily overthrow (and let the Pope and his partakers do what they can, at
length he will pluck up by the roots:) and walk in the law of God, least God
power his plagues and cursses upon you. Deuter. 28.
For if they are accursed by Gods law that turns out of it, either to the
right hand or to the left hand, then think not that you are blessed that
wilfully walk clean out of it, and never come in it. And let this suffice
you, that Woolues devour, and Sheep are devoured. So that the deuouryng
Woolues are of the Sinagoge of Satan: and the devoured Sheep are of the
Church of God.

But some of you have said, that God in the old law showed for the better
crediting of the same many wonderful miracles, and that there have been many
strange miracles for the confirmation of the Popes religion. Then belike you
look for miracles, for a religion you think without miracles is nothing worth,
and therefore one of your religion, said where be your signs? where be your
miracles? but as Christ called the Jews an evil and aduouterous generation
because they required a sign from heaven (that they might the better credit
him and his doctrine) so I can not count you a godly generation, Math. 12.
that will not believe the gospel of Christ without miracles, (yea and such
miracles as you your selves should like.) And will you not believe our doctrine
without miracles? nay will you believe it with great and strange miracles? I
would you would. Well because ye would so feign have miracles, you shall have
miracles, and that other manner of miracles, than ever your Romish church could
show for the confirming of her doctrine: therefore mark them well for they are
wonderful and marvelous miracles. Our little Bible has driven al your great
idols out of all the churches of England. Our holy Communion has put to flight
all your Masses which you thought nothing could overthrow. They that were
blind, the Gospel has made them now to see clearly the crafty iuggling of
the Pope: they that before were dumb, now speak so plainly, and vehemently
preach the Gospel of Christ. These are wonderful miracles I think.

But if some of you should say that these are no miracles, or else no great
miracles to be counted of: yet I dare boldly say they are marvelous great
miracles, yea and pass your miracles a great deal. For mark this well, if
you had never known that fire would increase in burning, and should have
suddenly seen a whole City burned and consumed with one little spark of
fire, and that such a huge and mighty fire should come of one little spark,
would you not have thought that the same had bin a wonderful miracle? I think
you would: then why should not you think, that the spiritual burning and
enflaming (with such a little spark of the gospel at the first) of such a
number of peoples hearts, consuming and wasting the idolatry, false religion,
and Papisticall superstition of Kingdoms, Dukedomes, Provinces, and such a
great number of countries, Cities and Towns, and the mighty increasing of
this spiritual fire (the gospel) and that within so short a time, is a
marvelous miracle? (although the Pope and his power did what they could to
quench the same.)

Surely it is such a miracle in all wise men's eyes, considering the Pope and
his power (do what they could) were not able to quench, as there can not be a
greater. And there is nothing that may more better persuade you, that this our
Religion is the very true Religion and word of God, than that God so mightily
defends it and so miraculously increases it. This and the other miracles
before mentioned are sufficient miracles I hope, for the confirming of any
Christian heart to believe the Gospel, yet you shall hear more miracles
hereafter.

And now for that you have called for our miracles, I trust I may likewise call
for your miracles. What kind of miracles were they whereby your Romish religion
was confirmed? forsooth they were such as might make the witty to become
fools, but ours are such as will make fools to become wisemen. And now mark
your miracles, of your Romish Church, your Roodes and Images can speak, if
they have a false knave stand behind them: your Idols can roll their eyes,
wagge there chappes, and cast their arms abroad, if there be one behind
them to pluck there Engines: and they will sweat in Winter and cold weather
if they be well oiled with Penetratiue oils, yea and your images can light
their own la^ps, which is as great a miracle as a jack of the clock to strike
on ye bell: your holy water can chase away Mise: and your Priests giving women
good counsel and blessing them (for the Pope will not have it called kissing
and dallying) miraculouslie make them to be with child, your Popes pardons can
make men die desperately and suddenly, your Cardinals blessings can make
Bishops break their necks, and your Agnus deis can make men hang
themselves: are not these your Romish miracles wonderful? are they not
worthy to go for miracles? yes I trow, our miracles of the Gospel are no
such, they are not like unto them: but this you were best to believe, that our
miracles before mentioned are of God, and these your miracles now mentioned
are of the Devil.

Thus I trust I have sufficiently proved, by Gods word, by ancient Fathers,
and learned Doctors, by natural Reason, by Arguments, by Similitudes, by
Examples, by the Popes themselves, by their own writers, and by persecuting
and murtheryng: that the Pope and many of his predecessors Popes, was and is
wicked, Devilish, the Devils deputies (not Christ's vickars) and the very
Antichrist, and that his Religion is most false, erroneous, and detestable, and
clean contrary to the word of God, and that the Church of Rome is the
Sinagoge of Satan, and that all you that love, honor, and reverence the
Pope, and favor, follow, esteem, and embrace, his Papisticall abominable
doctrine, are English enemies, and that such enemies, as you exceed all other
English enemies.

For as I have before probably declared, you are enemies to God, to his
Gospel, to our Savior, to our Sovereign, to our Superiors, to her loving
Subjects, to your selves, yea and to your own Souls. And can you think to
reap any commodity by being enemy to all these? if you think so, the Devil
does bewitch you, it is he that does blind you, and he only will destroy you.
Therefore if you be wise, be no longer English enemies, to please the Devil,
but become English friends, to please God.

And if all this will not suffice to make you abhor the Pope and detest this
devilish doctrine, then I beseech you, (for I will leave no way to win you) let
these sewe examples chosen out of many, of the pacient suffering, joyfully
dying, and myraculous ending of the professors of the Gospel, and of this our
religion, persuade and allure you.

And though this first and rare example was long since, yet the blessed Martyr
was persecuted and tormented for the professing of Christ and his Gospel, as
our late persecuted brethren were: and as they were all of one Religion, so the
same one God did strengthen them and myraculously wrought in them. Therefore I
beseech you mark them diligently, and consider them advisedly.

A worthy man whose name was Romanus, Acts and Monumentes Page 90. A notable
example of Romanus a Martyr.
through who^ many were persuaded, that they should not do sacrifice to Idols
nor worship them, was brought before the Emperor, being bound as a sheep to
the slaughter, to whom the Emperor said with wrathful countenance, art thou
the author of this sedition? art thou the cause why so many shall loose their
lives? by the gods I swear thou shall smart for it. And first in thy flesh
thou shall suffer the pains, etc. To whom Romanus answered: thy sentence O
Emperor I joyfully embrace, I refuse not to be sacrificed for my brethren, and
that by as cruel means as thou may invent: because it lay not in Idolaters
and worshippers of Devils to enter into the holy house of God, and to pollute
the place of true prayer.

Then Asclepiades inflamed with this stout answer, commanded him to be
trussed up, and his bowels drawn out. But that was not performed, but he was
scourged with whippes, with knaps of lead at the ends. And in his scourging
he sung Psalms and required them not to spare him. And he spoke vehemently by
the spirit of God, but it was not regarded. And the Tormentors by the
Captains commandment, stroke out his teeth, that he might pronounce his
words the worse: and all his face was pitifully defaced. The^ this meek
Martyr said, I thank thee O Captain, yt thou have opened to me many mouths,
whereby I may preach my Lord and savior Christ: look how many wounds I have,
so many mouths I have lauding and praising God. The Captain astonyed with his
constancy, threatened him with fire: saying blasphemously, thy crucified Christ
is but a yesterday God, the gods of the Gentyles are of most antiquity.

Then Romanus made a great Oration of the eternity of Christ, etc. And then he
said give me a child O Captain but seven years of age, etc, and thou shall
hear what he will say. And then a pretty boy was called out of the multitude
and set before him. Tell me my boy quoth the Martyr, whether thou think it
reason, that we worship one Christ, and in Christ one father: or else that we
worship infinite gods? unto whom the babe answered, That certainly whatsoever
it be ye men affirm to be God, must needs be one, which with one, is one and
the same: And in as much as this one is Christ, of necessity Christ must be
the true God: for, that there be many gods, we children can not believe. The
Captain hereat clean amazed, said, thou young villen and traitor, where and of
who^ loarnedst thou this lesson: of my mother quoth the child, with whose
milk I sucked in this lesson, that I must believe in Christ.

The mother of the child was called, and she gladly appeared. The Captain
commanded the child to be scourged, every one wept that saw this pitiless
deed: but the joyful mother stood by with dry cheeks, yea she rebuked her
sweet babe, because it craved a draught of cold water. She charged him to
thurst after ye cup that the infants of Bethle^ once drank of, forgetting
their mothers milk and paps, etc. Whiles she gave this counsel, the butcherly
Tortor, plucked the skin from the childs head hear and al. The mother cried,
suffer my child, now thou shall pass to him, that will ordeine for thy naked
head, a crown of eternal glory. And the babe received the stripes and
torments with smiling countenance. The Captain perceiving ye child invincible,
and himself vanquished, commits ye seely soul the blessed babe to the
stinking prison, without any drink or any other cherishing, and commanded the
torments of Romanus to be renewed and increased. Thus was Romanus brought forth
again to new stripes and punishments: to be renewed and received upon his old
sores, in so much the bare bones appeared, the flesh al torn away, wherein no
pity was showed.

Then the tyrant said, is it painful for thee said he to tarry so long
alive? a flaming fire doubt thee not, shall be prepared for thee by and by:
wherein thou and that boy thy fellow of rebellion, shall be consumed into ashes.

Then Romanus and the child were led to the place of execution. And as they
laid hands on Romanus, he looked back, saying, I appeal from this thy
tyranny Judge unjust, to the righteous throne of Christ that upright judge.
Not because I fear thy cruel torments and merciless handling: but that thy
judgments may be known to be cruel and bloody.

Now when they were come to the place, ye tormentor required ye child of his
mother, (for she held it in her arms,) and she only kissing it delivered the
child to the tormentor, and said fare well my sweet child: and as the
executioner applied the sword to the childs neck, she did sing in this
manner. All laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord we yield to thee: To
whom the death of all thy Saints, we know most dear to be. The Innocents head
being cut off, the mother wrapped it up in her garment, and laid it to her
breast. On the other side a mighty fire was made, where into Romanus was cast:
who said, that he should not burn, Wherewith a great shoure arose, and quenched
the fire, Then the Captain commanded that his tongue should be cut out: and
it was plucked out by the hard roots. Nevertheless he spoke, saying, he that
speaks Christ shall never want a tongue. Think not that the voice that
utters Christ, has need of the tongue to be the minister. The Captain at
this half out of his wit, bare in hand, that the hangman deceived the sight
of the people, by some subtle and crafty conueyance. Not so quoth the
hangman, if ye suspect my deed, open his mouth, and search the root of his
tongue. The Captain at length being confounded with the fortitude and courage
of the Martyr, commanded him to be brought back into the prison, and there to
be strangled: And so he was: where his sorrowful life and pains being ended:
he now enjoys quiet rest in the Lord, and where no Tirants can hurt him.

This worthy Martyr in whom God thus myraculously did speak, when his tongue
was plucked out by the roots, and in whom God thus maruellously wrought, and
whom God did thus strengthen and made bold and stout in his cause, though his
name was Romanus, yet he was not of your Romish religion, but a professor of
the Gospel and of Christ's religion.

And as the spirit of God was plentiful in this holy Martyr and true
Christian, so has he been most abundant in our Martyrs of late, and will be
for ever in all them that profess the Gospel of Christ, and are true and
perfect Christians.

And now I will recite no more examples of the ancient Martyrs, but of such as
were persecuted and suffered for the professing of Christ's Gospel, of late
days, wherein you shall plainly see, that as they were persecuted and
tormented in Christ's quarrel and cause, as Romanus was, so God wrought in them,
as he did in Romanus, the holy Ghost taught them, as he taught Romanus, and
Christ did strengthem them most wonderfully and myraculously, as he strengthened
Romanus. Therefore mark the most cruel and merciless dealings of these
Tormentors the Papists, which they do to show themselves how like they are
to their father the Devil, John. 8.
who as Christ says, was a murderer from the beginning: and yet they will
needs be Christ's sheep, and his chief flock. But though they say they
are the Church and flock of Christ, this most horrible murder and slaughter
does show that they are the Church and flock of the Devil.

By that holy Father Pope Pius the fourth, Acts and Monumentes page 915.
the professors of gods word were persecuted in Cabria* whereof this that I will
now describe and show, as well for an example of the marvelous constancy and
patience of them that were persecuted, as of the cruelty of them that did
persecute, is to be well noted. There were fourscore and eight persons that
were Protestants, put all into a house together, and the executioner comes
in, and amongst them takes one, and blindfoldeth him with a mufler about his
eyes, and so led him forth to a larger place, where he commanded him to
kneeele down, which so doing, he did cut his throat, and leaving him half
dead, he held the bloudye knife between his teeth as Butchers use to do,
and carried the mufler all of goare blood in his hand, and came again to the
rest, and so he led them out one by one, into that other house, and cut their
throtes. And thus Butcherly he killed the^ al like Calves and sheep. Which was
a doleful and horrible spectacle to behold: who went so humbly and patientlye
to their deaths, as many will scantly believe. Yet as ye true professors and
persecuted for the Gospel have always used to do.

There was a blind woman was burned at Darby, Acts and Mo. Page 858.
for saying that the substance of the bread and Wine is not turned into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ, which woman did offer to the
Bishop that persuaded her to believe that the Sacrament was the very body of
Christ, that if he would before that company take it upon his conscience, that
that doctrine which he would have her believe concerning the Sacrament was
true, and that he would at the dreadful day of judgment aunsweare for her
therein, as Doctor Tailor (before in King Edwards time) in diverse of his
Sermons did offer (for that that he preached) she would then further
aunsweare them.

Whereunto the Bishop said he would. But Doctor Dracote his Chancellor
hearing that, said, my Lord you know not what you do: you may in no case
answer for an Heretic. Then the Bishop asked her if she would recant or no,
and said she should answer for her self. Then the poor blind woman
perceiving this, said, if you refuse to take it on your conscience, that it is
true you would have me believe, I will aunsweare no further: and desired them
to do their pleasure. And then they gave sentence against her, and so she was
burned. Were not these godly and holy Fathers, and of a good and true religion,
that did burn innocente people, because they did not believe, that they
themselves did not believe to be true? for if the doctrine was true that they
taught and they believed the same: why might not they then have said on their
conscience that it was true? and why might not they have answered for them
therein to God at the day of judgment? this notable example shows plainly
that the doctrine of these persecuting Papists is wicked and false, and that
they are not of the church of God, but of the fellowship of the Devil, that
burned these poor blind and simple women, and many other, because they
believed not that the Sacramental bread and Wine was the very body and blood
of Christ and their wicked religion of the Pope, which they themselves (being
learned Bishops and Doctoures) did not believe nor stand too.

But our Preachers of the Gospel will take on their conscience, and will stand
between God and their hearers, that the doctrine they teach is true. Therefore
this only example (if I had written nothing else unto you) is sufficient to
persuade you, that our doctrine is true, and your Romish religion is false:
unless you wink for the nonce because you will not see.

Here also is another notable example whereby you may understand how God
gives his spirit of truth to the professors of the Gospel, his servants
that dye for the Testimony of the same: wherein you shall hear how
maruellouslye and truly, a poor man that was burned for this our Religion,
prophesied of the shameful end of his persecuter a wicked Papisticall
Commissarie.

A certain poor man of Callais saying that he would never believe that a
Priest could make the Lords body at his pleasure: Acts and Monumentes page
1994.
was therefore accused and also condemned by one Haruy Commissarie there.
Which Haruy in time of his judgment inueighing against him with opprobrious
words said, that he was an heretic and should dye a vile death. The poor man
aunswering for himself said again, that he was no heretic, but was in the
faith of Christ. And whereas thou say, that I shall dye a vile death, thou
thy self shall dye a viler death and that shortly. And so it came to pass,
for within halle a year after, the said Haruy was hanged, drawn and quartred
for treason in the said town of Callais.

Now, if the holy Ghost be the teacher of truth, then the holy Ghost did teach
this persecuted member of Christ to prophecy truly, and if the spirit of
Satan be the teacher of lies, then the spirit of Satan did instruct Pope
Hildebrand that prophesied falsely (as is before mentioned) of the deposing of
the Emperor. Wherefore, if you would (by this notable example and by many
other) consider what truth the holy Ghost does utter by the persecuted
professors of the Gospel, though simple and unlearned: And again on the
other side, what lies and falshoode the spirit of the Devil does utter, by the
great learned Pope himself, his Catholic Cardinals, and his proud
presumptuous Prelates: you would (if you love truth as you say) forsake them
and all their falshoode and lies, and embrace the Gospel of Christ the
Touchstone of truth.

Mark also how maruellously the spirit of God did speak in another
persecuted professor of the Gospel. Acts and Monuments.
One Patricke Hamleton a godly and learned professor of ye Gospel in Scotland,
was condemned to be burned, who in the fire did cite and appeal the Black
Friar called Campbel that accused him, to appear before the high God (as
general Judge of al men) to answer to the innocence of his death, and
whether his accusation was just or not, between that and a certain day of the
next month, (which he the said Hamleton, then and there named.) And after,
it was very manifest, that the said Friar dyed immediately before the said
day came, (that the said Hamleton did cite him to appear) without remorse of
conscience that he had persecuted the innocent. By this example (so strange
and rare) diverse people did not only much muse thereat, but also firmly
believe the doctrine of the said Hamleton to be good and just.

Acts and Mo. page 1850.
Behold here a glass most clear, that whosoever lokes in the same can not
choose but both see and say that your Church of Rome is the Captain of
cruelty, and without all pity and mercy, and so by no means can be the
church of God. There were three women condemned in Garnesey, the mother and two
daughters, because they did not come to the Church whereof one of them was
named Peretine, great with child: they were tye^ to three stakes, the mother to
the middle stake, the eldest daughter on the right hand, and the younger
daughter on the left hand: they were first strangled, but the rope brake
before they were dead, and so the women fell in to the fire. Peretine who was
then great with child, did fall on her side, (...) happened a ruthful thing, not
only to ye oils of al yt stoo^ there, but also to al other true hearted
Christians yt hear or read ye same, or as ye belly of ye woman brust asunder
by vehemency of ye flame, ye infant being a fair man child, fell into ye
fire, and being taken out of ye fire by one William House, was laid upon the
grass. Then was the Child had to the Provost, and from him to ye Bayliffe, who
gave judgment, that it should be carried back again, and cast into the
fire. And so the Infant baptized in his own blood, to fill up the number of
Gods innocent Saints, was both borne, burned, and dyed a Martyr, leaving
behind to the world (which it never saw) a spectacle wherein every one may
see that has any eyes at all, the Herodian cruelty of this graceless
generation of Catholic tormentors never to be forgotten.

Yet for all this great and many other of the Papists, more than heathnish
cruelties, many (of you) are so blinded ano bewitched, that you can not
perceive the unmerciful time of your Queen Mary, nor can consider the
merciful time of our Queen Elyzabeth. If the Queens Majesty should use all
you that refrain from the Church, (because you will not hear Gods word) as
these three seely women were, because they went not to the Church to commit
Idolatry: you would then say she were a cruel and tyrannous Prince. But
suffering you, without any cruelty, yet you will not say that she is a
merciful Queen.

Behold here an other wonderful and rare example, how God did strengthen a
young maid, that professed the word of God our religion.

One Master Tyrrell and other did beset the house of one William Mount, and
willed to have the door opened: Acts and Monuments of the Church. page 1898.
which being done, the said Master Tyrrell with certain of his company,
went into the Chamber where the said father Mount and his wife did lie,
willing them to rise: for (said he) ye must go with us to Colchester
Castle. Mother Mount hearing that, being very sick, desired that her daughter
might first fetch her some drink: for she said she was very evil at
ease: Then he gave her leave and bad her go. So her daughter (called Rose
Allen) took a stone pot in the one hand, and a Candle in the other, and
went to draw drink for her mother. And as she came back again through
the house, Master Tyrrell met her and willed her to give her father and mother
good council, and to advertise them to be better Catholic people. To whom
the said Rose said: Sir, they have a better instruct^r than I am, for the
holy Ghost does teach them I hope, which I trust will not suffer them to
err. Then said Master Tyrrell, why? art thou still in that mind, thou
naughty huswife? Mary it is time to look upon such heretics indeed. Then
said Rose Allen: Sir, with that which you call Heresy, do I worship my
Lord God I tell you truth.

Then said Master Tyrrell, I perceive you will burn gossip with the rest for
company sake. Then said she, no sir, not for companyes sake, but for Christ's
sake, if so I be compelled. And I hope in his mercies, if he call me to it, he
will enhable me to bear it.

Then Master Tyrrell turnyng to his company said: sirs this gossip will
burn, do you not think it? Marry sir quoth one, prove her, and you shall see
what she will do by and by. Then that cruel Tyrrell taking the Candle from
her, held her wreaste, and the burning Candle under her hand, burning cross
wise over the back thereof, so long till the very sins crackte asunder. In
which time of his tyranny, he said often to her, why whore, wylt thou not
cry? thou young whore, will thou not cry? Unto which always she answered,
that she had no cause, she thanked God, but rather to rejoice: you have more
cause, to weep (said she) than I, if you consider the matter well. In the
end, when the sinews brake that all the house heard them, he then thrust her
from him violently, and said: Ah strong whore, thou shameless beast, thou
beastly whore, and with such like vile words, but she quietlye suffering his
rage for the time, at the last said: Sir, have you done what you will do?
and he said yea, and if you think it be not well, then mend it. Then Rose
Allen said, mend it, nay, the Lord mend you, and give you repentance if it
be his will. And now, if you think it good, begin at the feet and burn to
the head also, for he that set you a work, shall pay you your wages one day I
warrant you. And so she went and carried her mother drink, as she was
commanded. The said Rose Allen being asked of one, how she could suffer the
painful burning of her hand, she said, at the first it was some grief, but
afterward, the longer she burned, the less she felt, or well near none at all.

Thus you may well perceive, that the Gospel that she professed, was, and is
the true religion, and that she took Gods quarrel in hand, or else the Lord
would not have given her this wonderful patience, and have strengthened her and
mitigated her pains, in the burning of her hand, as he did.

Bishop Bonner, Acts and Monuments of the Church. page 1898.
(he might be called Bishop Burner well enough) caused a blind Harpers hand
to be burned with a hot burning coal, which blind man said, that if every
joint of him were burned, yet he trusted in the Lord not to fly.

Mark here again I beseech you, Acts and Monumentes of the church Page 1508.
a wonderful and strange example, not only of the great constancy and
patience of one Thomas Hawks that was burned for his professing the gospel of
Christ, but of the manifest proof thereby, that the cause he died in, was just
and true, and that God did myraculously assiste him, and mitigated his torments
in the flames of the fire.

This worthy member of Christ Thomas Hawks was burned for witnessing the word
of God, at a Town in Essex called Coxhall. A little before whose death,
certain of his friends privily desired, that in the mids of the flames he
would show them some token, if he could, whereby they might be more certain
whether the pain of such burning were so great, that a man might therein
keep his mind quiet and pacient: which thing he promised them to do. And so
secreatlye between them it was agreede, that if the pain might be suffered,
then he should lift up his hands above his head toward Heaven, before he
gave up the Ghost. And when he was brought to the stake to be burned, there
mildely and patiently he addressed himself to the fire, having a straighte
chain cast about his middle: after whose fervent prayers made unto God, the
fire was set unto him, in the which when he continued long, and when his
speech was taken away by violence of the flame, his skin also drawn
together, and his fingers consumed with the fire, so that al men had thought
certainly he had been dead, suddenly, and contrary to expectation, the
said blessed servant of God (being mindful of his promise before made)
reached up his hands burning on a light fire (which was marvelous to
behold) over his head to the living God, and with great rejoicing (as it
seemed) stroke or clapped them three times together. At the sight whereof,
there followed such an outcrye of the people, and especially of them which
understood the matter, that the like commonly has not been heard. And so
this blessed servant of God, strait way sincking down into the fire, gave up
his spirit. This myraculous burning of the said Thomas Hawks was in the year
of our Lord. 1555.

These wonderful examples of the Gospellers suffering so patiently, of their
dying so willingly, of the holy Ghost speaking in them so abundantly, of their
marvelous constancy, of Gods strengthening them so mightilye, and his working
in them so myraculouslye, that (if before I had not sufficiently proved the
Pope to be the child of Satan, and your Romish religion to be the Devils
Doctrine) is sufficient to win you to God, to allure you to Christ, and to
embrace the Gospel our heavenly and true religion, to obey your Prince, to love
your Country, and now with great desire to become english friends. But if
there be any of you so deluded by the devil, so incensed by Satan, and so
bewitched with papistrie, that neither any thing before written can move you,
nor these marvelous examples of Gods merciful and wonderful protecting,
boldening, teaching, strengthening, favoring, comforting, assisting, and
defending of his servants the professors of the Gospel cannot allure you:
then I beseech you (for I can go no further) let these fearful, faithless,
horrible, doleful, and desperate deaths of the persecuting and murdering
cruel Papists, with their mockers and scorners of Gods word, and reuolters and
shunners from the Gospel, that follow fear, and terrify you, any longer to
persiste in your erroneous and most pernicious Papisticall doctrine, least you
be made the instruments of his wrath (as they were.) Now therefore mark them
well, and as you like their deaths, so follow their lives.

And as I said before, that the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, and our
persecuted Protestants suffered all alike, were patient all alike, and were
loved, aided, and strengthened of God all alike, and therefore all of one
religion: So the tyrannous persecutors of the Martyrs long since, and the
Papisticall persecutors of the professors of the Gospel, since that time, have
died desperately, horribly, diuelishly, and dolefully, all alike: and have
had Gods wrath and vengeance all alike, and therefore were all of a wicked
and devilish religion. And for that you shall not think that the Papisticall
murderers and persecutors died more godly than they: you shall see the godly
ends and deaths of some of them both. And first I will show you some examples
of the tyrannous persecutors in the old time, of the professors of the Gospel.

Herod that murdered John Baptist, Acts and Monuments pa. 31
and condemned Christ, was condemned to perpetual banishement, where he dyed
miserably.

Pylate, under whom Christ was crucified, Acts and Monuments p. 30.
was apprehended and accused at Rome, deposed, then banished to the Town of
Lions, who at length did kill himself.

Antiochus a tormentor of the Christians, Acts and Monuments. p. 59
fell down from his judicial seat, crying out, whose bowels burned within
him, and so he dyed.

Decius, that cruel persecutor of the Christians, both he and his son,
Acts and Monuments p. 66 Acts and Monuments. p. 75
were slain of enemies in battle.

The Emperor Valerian, a cruel persecutor of the Christians, went not
without his reward therefore: for Sapores the King of the Persians took him
prisoner, and used him for his block when he got upon his horse.

Maxentius that great persecutor of the Christians, fell off on a bridge with
his horse and his harness, Acts and Monuments p. 86
which bridge he had made for Constantine the Christian Emperor: and so be
was drowned.

Mark the ends and death of these persecutors of the Christians: Acts and
Monuments. page 89.
Dioclesian poisoned himself: Maximinian was hanged: Seuerus was slain by
Maximinian: Lucinus was slain by Constantine. Thus these persecutors of the
professors of Christ's Gospel, never live quietly nor yet dye godly.

Galerius the Emperor of the East parts, a great persecutor of the Christians,
Cooper Epito. Chron. fol. 24
was therefore plagued of GOD with a wonderful sickness, and an incurable
disease: for he had a sore risen in the nether part of his belly, which
consumed his privy parts, from whence swarmed great plenty of worms:
which disease could not be helped with any surgerie or physic, (according
to the promise of God) wherefore he confessed, that it happened for his
cruelty toward the Christians, who slew himself, not able to abide the
stenche of his own sore. Such has been, is, and will be, the gain and
end of them that persecute Gods people.

Eusebius in Histor. eccle.
Behold here a wonderful example of God, showed upon three perjured persons,
for falsely accusing the aged and reverend father Narcissus the servant of
God, and a pure professor of Christ's Gospel, which Narcissus was of the age
of a hundredth three score and three years, and Bishop of Jerusalem. The one of
them that were his accusers, wished to be destroyed with fire, the other to be
consumed with a grievous sickness, the third to lose both his eyes, if he did
lie: whereby the godly* and guiltless man went and lived in a solitary and
desert place a great while. But God that is a just revenger of wickedness,
and a defender of his innocent servants, punished them al three according to
their own words. The first by casualtie of one little spark of fire was
burned with his goods and al his family. The second was taken with a great
sickness from the head to the feet, and devoured by the same. The third,
hearing and seeing the punishment of the other, confessed his fault: But
through great repentance, powered out such fears with weeping, that he lost
both his eyes. And thus as God justly punished them for their perjury against
the innocent servant of God: So God of late days has maruellously punished a
great sort of the Papists, that cruelly killed, murdered, and misused Gods
true and simple servant for professing the Gospel. And now, as I have
showed you how God has powered his vengeance on the tyrants and persecutors
of the holy Martyrs that were persecuted long since, before the wicked Popes:
so also I will express unto you, the miserable ends and deaths of some of the
Papisticall persecutors since the time of the wicked Popes, whose terrible and
fearful ends, I beseech GOD, may be a sufficient warning for you.

A cruel wretch called John de Roma a Monk, Acts and Monumentes of the Church
Page 916
having a commission to examine such as professed the gospel (whom they call
Heretics) used great cruelty toward them. He filled boots with boiling
grease, and so put them upon their legs, tying them backward to a fourm with
their legs hanging down over a small fire, and so he examined them. Thus he
tormented very many, and in the end, most cruellye put them to death, etc.
But the said holy Monk (as holiness goes with Papists) by the just
judgment of God, fell sick of a most horrible disease, strange and unknown
to any Physician, whose pains and torments, being most extreme, could not
be eased one minute of an hour with any ointment or any thing else, whose
ste^ch and savor was so great, that came from him, that none could abide it,
neither would any of his own friends come near him, wherefore he was
carried to an Hospital to be kept, but the stenche and infection so increased,
and was so great, that no man there durst come near him: no more he
himself was able to abide the horrible smell that issued from his body,
being full of ulcers and soars, and swarming with vermyne, and so rotten,
that the flesh fell away from the bones by piece meal. And whiles he was in
these torments, he cried out often in great rage: Oh who will deliver me, who
will kill and rid me out of these intolerable pains? which I know I suffer
for the euilles and oppressions that I have done to the pore men: he went
diverse times about to destroy himself: but he had not the power to do it.

In these horrible torments and fearful despair, this blasphemer and most
cruel vexer, tormentor, and murderer of the poor professors of Gods word,
most miserably ended his curssed life.

Here you may plainly understand, that this wicked Monk, (though he were
of the Popes religion) he was not of Gods religion: for that the Lord thus
plagued and torment^d him, showing his very curse before mentioned: even an
incurable disea^e, as he did to wicked Iehoram the son of good King
Iehoshaphat. And as the Monks torments and end was like to the end of
Iehoram* So he was like in cruelty, and also in Idolatry, forsaking the law
of God, for the wicked devises of men.

Acts and Monumentes of the Church Page 916
Also the Lord of Reue^^, chief President of the Parliament of A^a^, cruellye
used the professors of the Gospel, (and put them to death,) who after was
stricken with such an horrible sickness of fury and madness, that his wife
nor any durst come near him, and so he dying in his fury and rage, was
justly plagued of GOD for his unmercifulness and cruelty, showed and done to
the children of God.

The Commendator of Saint Anthony of Vienna, that gave sentence of
condemnation on the servant of GOD Wolfgangus, fell suddenly down and dyed.
Acts and Mo. of the Church Page 857.
And the Abbot of Clarilocus his fellow, stricken with sudden fear at the
crack of guns, fell down and dyed.

Thomas Arundale Archbishop of Canterbury, a persecutor of the Gospellers,
Acts and Mo. of the Church Page. 5^7.
yt gave sentence on the Lord Cobham for professing the word of God: was
plagued of God, that his tongue did swell that he could swallow no meat, and so
dyed. And although he gave sentence on the Lord Cobham, yet gods judgments
were such, that he died two or three years before him.

A (certain) Bishop of Hungary did run about stark mad, and so rauing dyed
miserably, that tied Hares, Geese, Acts and Mo. of the Church Page. 865.
and Hens about a Priest, and then put dogs to him, who chased him about
the City, snatching and catching at him what they could get, whereof he dyed.
And thus the Priest was martyred for saying that the eating of flesh is not
forbidden by the Scriptures: but this Bishop gained nothing by thus martyring
of him, unless Gods wrath be a gain.

A Priest reuolting from the Gospel was suddenly killed by two gentlemen that
ought him evil will (by the judgment of god) immediately after he went out
of prison, Acts and Mo. Page 889.
from one Philbert that after was strangled and burned for the word of God: To
which Priest Apostata the said Philbert said, oh unhappy and more than
miserable, is it possible for you to be so foolish as for saving of a few
days which you have to live by course of nature, so to start away and deny the
truth? know you therefore, that although you have by your folishnesse avoided
the Corporal fire, yet your life shall be never the longer, for you shall die
before. And God shall not give you grace, that it shall be for his cause, and
you shall be an example to al Apostles. And immediately the reuolting Priest
was slain as soon as he went out of prison, as is before said.

This notable and rare example is sufficient I think to prove, that the Gospel
our religion is most true, and that only in it ye Lord is pleased, for showing
his heavy wrath and vengeance on this Priest that did reuolte, shrink from,
and deny the same: and also in that the holy ghost did so miraculously speak
in this worthy Philbert, (continuing so firmly and stoutely in the same
Gospel) which s^ wonderfully and truly prophesied and foretold of the sudden
end and desperate death of the said wicked reuolting Priest. This is so
manifest and so apparaunte, that it will enforce you to embrace the Gospel, and
to fly from Papistry, if you be not determined and purposely bent to withstand
God and the truth.

Acts and Mo. Page. 1929.
Also one Berry the vicker of Aylsham and a Commissarie, was a cruel tyraunte,
he killed two with striking of them, and he was a cruel persecutor of the
professors of the Gospel, but GOD rewarded him therefore (or else the Devil
that set him on work) for as he was going homewarde from the Church, he
fell down sodaynelye to the ground with a heavy groan and never styrred
after, neither showed he any token of repentance. Likewise at that time one
Dunning Chancellor of Lincoln and a merciless Tirant against the professors
of the gospel, died in Lincolneshire of as sudden a warning as (this) Berry
dyed.

Acts and Mo. Page 1993.
One William Mawlden, that was of this our religion, and professed the Gospel
in the latter end of Queen Mary's reign, and dwelling at Grenwich with one
master Hugh Aparry, lacking a book to read on, looked about and found a
Primer in English, whereon he read (being in a Winters Evening.) Whiles he was
reading, there did sit one John Apowel that had bin a seruingman, about
thirtye years of age borne toward Wales, to whom the said Hugh Appary,
gave meat and drink til he could get him a service: and as the said William
Mawlden red on the book, the said John Apowel mocked him after every word
with contrary gaudes and flouting words irreverently, insomuche that the
said Mawlden could no longer abide him, for grief of heart, but turned unto
him and said, John, take heed what thou do, thou do not mock me but
thou mockest God, for in mocking of his word thou mockest him. And this is the
word of God, though I be simple that read it: therefore beware what thou
do: then Mawlden fell to reading again, and still the other proceeded in his
mocking. And when Mawlden had read certain English prayers, in the end he
read, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, etc. And as
Mawlden was recyting these words, the other with a starte, said Lord have
mercy upon me: with that Mawlden turned and said, what aylest thou John? he
said: I was afraid: whereof was thou afraid said Mawlden? nothing now said
the other, and so he would not tell him: after this when Mawlden and he went
to bed, Mawlden asked him whereof he was afraid: then he said, when you read
Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, me thought the hair of
my head stood upright, with a great fear that came upon me. Then said
Mawlden, John thou may see the evil spirit could not abide that Christ
should have mercy upon us: well John said Mawlde^, repent and amend thy
life: for God will not be mocked: if we mock and jest at his word he will
punish us, etc. But after that as he lay, almost a day and a night, his tongue
never ceased, but he cried out of the Devil of hell, saying, O Devil of Hell,
now the Devil of Hell, I would see the Devil of Hell, thou shall see the Devil
of Hell, there he was, and there he goes, etc. This I trow may be a worthy
warnyng for all mockers, scorners, and deryders of Gods most holy word.

Mark the end of Morgan Bishop of Saint David's, Acts and Mo. page 1990.
a Papisticall persecuter, that sat upon the condemnation of Bishop Farrare
being after burned for the Gospel: not long after, the said Morgan was
stricken with Gods hand after such a strange sort, that his meat would not
go down, but rise and pick up again, sometime at his mouth, sometime blown
out at his nose, most horrible to behold, and so he continued till his death.

What a stroke of Gods hand was brought upon Bishop Thorneton, Suffragane of
Dover, a cruel Papisticall persecutor of the Saints of God for professing his
word, who after he had exercised his cruel tirannie upon many godly men at
Canterbury, at length coming upon a Saturday from the Chapter house at
Canterbury to Borne, there upon a Sunday following, looking upon his men
playing at boules, fell suddenly into a palsy, and so was had to bed, and then
was willed to remember God: yea so I do said he, and my Lord Cardinal to.

Acts and Mo. Page 1990.
An other Suffragane of Dover, who not long after he was made Bishop or
Suffragane of Dover, brake his neck falling down a pair of stayers in the
Cardinals Chamber at Grenewich, as he had received the Cardinals blessing.
You may see here, that God does not always bless, where the Pope, his
Cardinals and his Bishops bless, as here it is manifest: But rather cursses,
unless sudden death and breakyng of necks be blessing.

Acts and Mo. Page. 1991.
Doctor Ieffrey a great Papisticall persecuter, being Chauncellor of
Sarisburie, stricken by the mighty hand of God, died suddenly, who was
determined the next day followyng (but that he was prevented by sudden death by
Gods providence) to have called before him four score and ten, or mo, to
examine them by inquisition upon religion.

Acts and Mo. Page. 1691.
Mark (here also) the end of a Papiste, that was a lover of the Mass and
diligent and hasty in setting of it up in Queen Mary's time, one Burton the
Baylife of Crowland in Lincolneshire: sone after King Edward was dead, he came
into the Church on a Sunday in the morning, at which time the Curate was
beginning the English service, (for there was no law as yet to the contrary)
when he came to the Curate in a great rage and said, (like a pure charitable
Catholic and full of devotion) sir will you not say Mass? buckle your self
to Mass you knave, or else (swearing by a great oath) I shall sheath my dagger
in your shoulder. The poor Curate for fear (not so constant in the Gospel as
Curates should be) settled himself to Mass. Not long after this, the Bailife
road from home, accompanied with one of his neighbors: and as they came
riding together upon the fenne bank homeward again, a Crow sitting in a
Willow tree, took her flighte over his head, and spoke to him in her language
as well as she could and called him by his name, (as Crows are wont to do)
and withal let fall upon his face: so that her excrementes ran from the
top of his nose, down to his bearde. The poisoned smell and savor whereof
so noyed his stomach, that he never ceased vomiting until he came home,
wherewith his heart was so sore, and his body so distempered, that through
extreme sickness he got him to bed, and so lying he was not able for the
stink in his stomach and painful vomiting, to receive any relief of meat
or drink: but cried out still sorrowfully, complaining of that stink, and
with no small oaths (for belike he made an account that the Pope would
dispense with him for them) cursing ye crow that had poisoned him. To make
short, he continued but a few days, but with extreme pain of vomiting and
crying he desperately died, without any token of repentance of his former life.

You shall hardly find a perfect Protestant, and a faithful follower of the
Gospel die in this sort, as this Masse-monger did. Truly if the Mass be so
available and of such force as you take it to be, and the Pope of such a power
as many of you thinks him to be (for it is written in his law as is
beforesayde, that he has all power in heaven and in earth, and that is enough
for a Pope) then either by the virtue of the Mass, (which this Burton so
maintained, and busily set up) or else by the Popes mighty power, me thinks
this his Champion of the Mass, should have been preserved from dying thus
strangely and desperately. But if the Pope and his holy Mass do suffer them,
that put such trust in him, and confidence in the Mass, to die suddenly
without repentance, to die desperately, and to call on the Devil, and to lie in
such extreme pains and torments, as a great sort of them do, and have done:
surely if I were as you, the Pope and his Mass should go to the Devil, ere
I would trust any more to him or to it.

Acts and Monuments. page 1622.
Also one Richard Denton having words of commendations sent to him from one
William Wolsey, that was after burned for professing the Gospel, which were,
that he marvelled that the said Denton tarried so long behind him, seeing he
was the first that delivered him the Book of the Scriptures into his hand, and
told him that it was the truth, desiring him to make have after as fast as he
could. Which Denton said, when the said message was done to him, I confess it
is true, but alas I can not burn. But after though he could not burn
willingly in Christ's cause: he was burned against his will not in so good a
cause: for after that his house being on fire, he went in to save his goods,
and thereby was burned and lost his life. And thus he was burned for earthly
goods, yt refused to burn for heavenly treasure.

Acts and Monumentes. page 1991.
Mark this end of a Papist and an enemy of the Gospel: One Clarke an open
enemy to the Gospel and all godly Preachers in King Edwardes days, hanged
himself in the Tower of London.

Acts and Momuments. 1992
The great and notable Papist, called Troling Smith, fell down suddenly in the
street and died.

Acts and Monumentes. page 1992.
Dale the Promoter of the professors of Gods word, was eaten into his body
with lyse, and so dyed as it was well known of many.

Cox an earnest Protestant in King Edwardes days, and in Queen Mary's time a
Papist and promoter (or accuser of the Gospellers) going well and in health to
his bed, Acts and Monumentes. page 1992.
(as it seemed) was dead before the morning.

Alexander the keeper of Newgate a cruel enemy to them that lay there for
Religion, died very miserably, Acts and Monumentes. page 1992.
being so swollen that he was more like a monster than a man, and was so rotten
within, that no man could abide the smell of him. This cruel man to hasten the
poor lambs to ye slaughter, would go to Bonner, Story, and other, crying
out, Rid my prison, rid my prison, I am too much pestred with these
Heretics. It seems that this cruel wretch was better content to have the
company of Thieves and murderers (great offenders against the law that were
in his prison) than Gods people that professed his word that were no offenders
against the law.

Behold the great and terrible judgment of God on the parson of Croundall in
Kent, Acts and Monumentes. page 1990.
who upon Shroue Sunday, having received the Popes pardon from Cardinal
Poole, came to his Parish Church, and exhorted the people to receive the
same, as he had done himself, saying, That he stood now so clear in
conscience as when he was first borne, and cared not now if he should dye the
same hour in that clearenesse of conscience. Where upon he being stricken
suddenly by the hand of God, and leaning a little on the one side,
immediately shronke down in the Pulpet, and so was found dead speaking not
one word more. Truly if they have no better luck with the Popes Pardons and
blessings than I see they have, they were better a great deal to have a fool
bless them with his Babble, than to have the Pope to Pardon them or bless them
with his hands: if I were desirous to die suddenly, or to break my neck
(from which the Lord bless me and every body) I would either get the Popes
Pardons, or else have either his or one of his Cardinals blessings, for other
good they do none that I can hear or see.

Acts and Monuments. page 1992.
One John Peter, son in law to the said Alexander the keeper of Newgate,
being an horrible blasphemer of God, and no less cruel to the said prisoners
that professed the word of God, rotted away and so most miserably dyed, who
commonly when he would affirm any thing, were it true or false, used to say,
If it be not true I pray God I rot ere I die.

Acts and Monumentes. page 1992.
Also one Robert Bawlding a Papisticall persecutor, was stricken with lightning
at the taking of William Seaman, whereupon he pyned away and dyed.

One Rockwood the chief procurer of the great trouble of certain Callys men
for religion, Acts and Monumentes.
who at the point of death staring and raging cried he was utterly damned, and
being wylled to ask God mercy (who was ready to forgive all that asked
mercy of him) he brayed and cried out, all to late, for I have sought
maliciously the deaths of a number of the honest men in the Town. And though
I so thought them in my heart, yet I did that lay in me to bring them to an
evil death. All to late, therefore all to late. The which same words, the
said Rockwood answered to one that said, I never saw men of such honesty so
sharply corrected, and taking it so patiently and joyfully. At which time the
said Rockwood, fetching a friske or two, scoffingly answered, all to late. But
whereas he said and meant, that it was all to late for these godly prisoners to
have pardon of their Prince in this world: now God justly turned these words
to himself, it was all to late for him to have pardon at Gods hand in the
world to come. For he said he was utterly damned: and when he was counseled
to ask God mercy, he said it was all to late.

Acts and Monumentes. page 1027.
Also one Pauier, town Clarke of the City of London (a notorious enemy to ye
word of God) could not abide to hear that the Bible should be in English, who
said (in the presence of one Edward Hall, a writer of the English stories, the
reporter hereof, swearing a great oath) that if he thought the kings highness
would set forth the Scriptures in English, and let it be read of the people by
authority, rather tha^ he would live so long, he would cut his own throat.
But he brake promise (says Hall) for he did not cut his throat with a knife,
but with an halter did hang himself.

One Doctor Foxforde Chancellor to the Bishop of London, a cruel persecutor,
Acts and Monuments. page 1027.
and a common Butcher of the professors of the Gospel, (who was the condemner
of all those which were put to death, troubled, and absured under Bishop
Stokesley through all the Diocese of London:) died suddenly sitting in his
chair, his belly being burst, and his gu^^es falling out before him. Thus you
may plainly see, that God does revenge the wrongs done to his children, that
patiently suffer all their torments, delivering them out of their enemies
hands by death or other ways: and paies them home at length for their hyre,
that so persecute and torment them. But these cruel Papists, that wreake
their malice themselves on the professors of the Gospel, that do them no harm,
there is none to take their parts, nor that can deliver them hereafter when
the Devil shall torment them in Hell fire.

Mark well and consider the end of that hautie proud Papisticall persecutor
of Gods servants in Queen Mary's time, Steven Gardener, then Lord Chauncellor
of England, Acts and Monuments, page 1992.
who after so long professing of the doctrine of papistrie, when there came a
Bishop to him on his death bed, and put him in remembrance of Peter's denying
his Master, he answearing again, said, That he had denied with Peter, but
never repented with Peter, and so both stinkingly and vnrepentantly died: he
knew then full well on his conscience, that he had denied Christ and his
Gospel, in following the Pope and his Religion. Therefore deny the Pope and
repent with Peter, least in denying of Christ you die unrepentant with Gardener.

Consider further the miserable end of one Twy ford a busy and diligent doer
by Bonners appointment in setting up of stakes for the burning of the servants
of God, Acts and Monuments, page 1595.
who when he saw the stakes consume away so fast, yea said he, will not these
stakes hold? I will have a stake I trow that shall hold, and so he provided a
big tree, and cutting off the tops, did set it in Smithfield, but thanks be to
God, ere ever the tree was all consumed, God turned the state of Religion: And
the same Twyforde fell into a horrible disease rotting above the ground alive,
before he died.

Acts and Monuments, page 1996.
Hofmaister the great Archpapist, and chief master pillar of the popish
Church, as he was in his journey going toward the Counsel of Ratispone, to
dispute against the defendors of Christ's Gospel, suddenly not far from
Vlmes, was prevented by the stroke of Gods hand, and there miserably died, with
horrible roaring and crying out. His death does show that the cause was not
very good that he went to maintain.

Fraunces Spiere fell into a marvelous desperation after he had recanted the
word of God, Acts and Monuments.
as may appear by his words and death, who could not be persuaded of Gods
mercy by any man, though many learned me^ with Scriptures mightly moved him to
repent, but it could not prevail, but still cried (when he heard any
testimony of the Scripture) that nothing could save him that had offended
against the holy Ghost, and in that manner pitifully died.

Acts and Monuments.
Mark also the end of a young Gentleman called Master Smith, that first was a
Protestant and an earnest professor of the Gospel, and after allured to
Papistrie, who went to Louaine (a fit nest for all Owls that hate the light)
where he was so noozeled, that he became a perfect Papist. And after returning
into England, he brought with him from thence, Pardons, a Crucifixe, an Agnus
dei, which Agnus dei, he commonly did wear about his neck, which when he
wore, he thought then he was false enough, and that neither deadly sin,
desperation, nor Devil had any power to hurt him. But he was deceived, as
all other are, that put their trust in such trashe, and refuse Christ and
his holy word. For he, (notwithstanding his Pardons, Crucifixe, Agnus dei, and
the Images before which he used to pray) hanged himself in his chamber.
Consider I beseech you that this is not the end of such as turn from Papistrie
to the Gospel, but it is the end or such like (as appear, before) as depart
from the Gospel to Papistrie, or shrink from, or deny the Gospel. Therefore
if Gods word nor any other persuasions can win you, let this and the other
dreadful examples fear you.

The burden of conscience and desperation of mind happens chiefly to such as
have first embraced Gods word and the Gospel of Christ, and do fall from the
same to any other Religion, or commit some grievous and notable sin,
learning by the same word of God, that it deserves the great wrath of God,
and so drives them to desperation. As may appear by Judas one of Christ's
Apostles, who after he had betrayed Christ for money, (against his own
conscience) despayred of Gods mercy and so hanged himself. And as may appear
by Fraunces Spiere and Master Smith before mentioned, who first professing the
Gospel, and after reuolting or shrinking from the same, died most
desperately, dangerously, and dreadfully. Besides many other, whereof diverse
at last have, notwithstanding, been comforted with the grace of God, and so
have died very patiently and godly. But I have not read nor heard, that they
that have turned from Papistrie or any other Religion, and received and
followed this our Religion of the Gospel, continuing in the same did ever fall
into despair or died desperately. Which is a most infallible argument that
this our Religion is true, and your Papisticall religion and all other are
false.

Mark well I pray you what end William Swallow, Acts and Monuments. page 1994.
and Richard Petto came to, that were troublers and persecutors of one George
Egles a true and constant professor of Gods word. The same William Swallow was
shortly after so plagued of God, that all the hair of his head and the nails
of his fingers and toes went off, his eyes were well near closed up that he
could scant see: the other Richard Petto, upon a certain anger or chaufe with
his servants was so suddenly taken with sickness, that falling upon his bed
like a beast, there he died and never spoke word.

Acts and Monuments. page 1991.
Behold further and mark well, for here is such a glass for you to look in,
that unless you wink purposely, or turn your faces backwarde because you
will not see, you must needs (whether you will or no) grant and yield that
our religion is most true, and that your Romish religion is most false, and
that our doctrine does work our salvation, and that your doctrine does bring
your damnation. Wherein you shall plainly perceive how God did show his
vengeance of one that rayled on one James Abbas that was a professor of the
Gospel, who was burned at Bury, whereby all you that are enemies and raylers
against the professors of this our Religion the word of God, may learn to
fear God, fly from Papistrie, and to embrace the Gospel.

As this James Abbas was led by the Shiriffe toward his execution, diverse
poor people stood in the way and asked their Alms, he then having no money
to give them, and desirous yet to distribute something among them, did pull of
all his apparel saving his shirte and gave the same unto them: to some one
thing, to some an other. In the giving whereof he exhorted them to be strong in
the Lord, and as faithful followers of Christ, to stand steadfast unto the
truth of the Gospel, which he (through Gods help) would then in their sight
seal and confirm with his blood.

While he was thus charitably occupied, and zealously instructing the people, a
servant of the Shiriffes going by and hearing him, cried out alowde unto them,
and blasphemouslie said, Believe him not good people, he is an Heretic and a
mad man out of his wit, believe him not, for it is Heresy that he says. And
as the other continued in his godly admonitions, so did this wicked fellow
still blow forth his blasphemous exclamations, until they came to the stake
where he should suffer, unto the which stake this constant Martire was tred,
and in the end cruelly burned. But immediately after the fire was put unto him,
the same fellow that did rail on him, (saying, that he was an Heretic and
mad) was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken with a
Frenzy (such was the great stroke of Gods justice on him for his blasphemous
railing) and was then mad in deed, (as he before had charged the Martyr
withal) who in this furious rage and madness, casting of his shoes withal
and the rest of his clothes, cried out unto the people and said, Thus did
James Abbas that true servant of God who is saved but I am damned. And thus
ran he round about the Town of Burye, still crying that James Abbas was a
good manne and saved, but he was damned. The Shiriffe then being amassed, caused
him to be taken and tied in a dark house, and by force compelled him again to
put on his clothes: thinking thereby within a while to bring him to some
quietness. But he (all that notwithstanding) as soon as they were gone,
continued his former raging, and casting of his clothes, and cried as he did
before, James Abbas is the servant of God and is saved, but I am damned. At
length he was tied in a carte and brought home to his Masters house, and
within half a year or there aboutes, he (being at the point of death) the
Priest of the Parish was sent for, who coming to him brought with him the
Crucifixe and their hous^inge Host of the Altar, which gear when the poor
wretch saw, he cried out of the Priest and defied all that baggage: saying,
that the Priest with such other as he was, were the cause of his damnation, and
that James Abbas was a good man and saved. And so shortly after he died.

This fearful, terrible, and most strange example me think were enough to
make you believe, that this same James Abbas that was burned did profess the
true law of God and the Gospel of Christ, and that he was the servant of
GOD. As this blasphemous rayler was enforced by Gods mighty power to grant
and confess, (though before he called him Heretic, and said he was mad.)
Now if this Gods marvelous miracle has proved that James Abbas that was
thus burned was the servant of GOD: then it is manifest that the Religion that
he died for is the true Religion, and if his Religion were true, then our
Religion set forth by the Queens Majesty (which is the same) must needs
be true. And so your Religion of Papistrie of force must needs be false,
which is quite contrary to our Religion: of which Papisticall religion this
Sheriffs man was, when he had the people not to believe James Abbas, saying
he was an Heretic and was mad, trusting there is none of you so mad as to
think he was of a good and true Religion when he said so. For surely he
himself knew he was both wide and wrong, else he would not have said that
James Abbas was the true servant of GOD and was saved but he was damned. And
as they that are saved die not in a false Religion or wickedly: so they that
are damned die not in a true religion or godly. And if your Papisticall
religion had been true and good, he would not even at his death have cried out
of the Priest that brought the Crucifixe and the hous^ing bread (which they
say is the very body of Christ) neither would have defied the same, nor yet
would have said then, that the Priest with such other as he was, was the
cause of his damnation.

But if any of you be so maliciously bente against the truth by the
procurement of the Devil (as the Devil may do much) to say that this same
fellow made himself mad for the nones, or that he was hired by some
Protestant to do and say so (which could not be.) Here now therefore I will
bring you an other most wonderful and rare example, that will stop you (I
hope) from either saying so, or thinkyng so.

And as this last myraculous example was of a man, so this next and last
myraculous example that I will show you is of a woman. Whereby you shall not
only see that she was of the right Religion, and died a Martyr and Saint of
God: but also that God did so dearly love her, for professing the Gospel and
dying in his quarrel, that maruellously and most miraculously he fought
against her persecutors, and revenged her death.

Therefore mark it well, for surely of all other, there is not a more notable
example of Gods great love and favor toward the professors of the Gospel
and that dye for the same, and of his great fury and wrath to the Papists
that persecute and murder them, than this that I will here set forth as a
glass. Wherein you that are so bewitched and drowned in Papistrie, may see
whether God is pleased with your Religion or doings, or not.

There was a certain godly woman condemned to be burned for the professing of
the Gospel in King Henry the seauenthes time, Acts and Monuments. Page 75^.
by one Doctor Whittington the Bishops Chancellor, which woman was burned
in a town called Cheepingsadberie, at whose Execution was not only the said
Doctor Whittington that condemned her, but also a very great number of
people. And when she was dead and burned, the people began to turn homeward.
It happened in the mean time, as these Catholic executors were busy in
slaying of this sillye Lamb at the Towns side, a certain Butcher within the
Town was as busy in slayinge of a Bull, which Bull he had fast bound in
ropes ready to knock him in the head. But the Butcher (belyke not so skylfull
in his art in killyng of beasts as the Papists be in murdering Christians)
as he was lifting the Axe to stryke the Bull, failed in his stroke and smitte
a little to low: or else how he did smite I know not, but this was certain,
that the Bull somethyng grieved with the stroke, but yet not stricken down,
put his strength to the ropes, and brake lowse from the Butcher into the
street, the very same time as the people were coming in very great prease
from the burning of the godly woman. Who seeing the Bull coming toward them,
and supposing him to be wild, (as was none other like) gave way for the Bull,
every man shifting for him self as well as he might. Thus the people gyuing
back, and making a lane for the Bull, he passed through all the throng of
them, touching neither man, woman, nor child, till he came whereas the
Chancellor was. Against whom the Bull as pricked with a sudden vehemency,
ran full but with his horns, and taking him upon the paunche: gored him
through and through, and so killed him immediately, carrying his guts and
trayling them with his horns all the street over, to the great wonder of all
them that saw it.

Although the carnal sense of man be blind in considering the works of the
Lord, imputing many times to blind chance: the things which properly
perteyneth to Gods only praise and providence: yet in this so strange and so
evident an Example, what man can be so dull or ignorant, which sees not
herein, a plain miracle of Gods mighty power and judgment, both in just
punishyng of this wretched Chancellor, and also in admonishing all other like
persecutours, by this example, to fear the Lord, and to abstain from the
like cruelty.

These wonderful and myraculous examples with a great number mo, (to the great
comfort and consolation of the persecuted Gospellers, and to the fearing and
terrifying of the cruel and unmerciful murdering Papists) the worthy godly
and learned M. Fox with his great travel, study, and labor, has set forth
at large in his Book of the Acts and Monumentes of the Church, commonly
called the Book of Martyrs.

I fear there are some of you (so far drowned in that abominable Romish
Religion and so far in love with the Pope, and with all things whatsoever he
or any of his cruel crew do, or command to do) that if a mad man had
chanced to have run on this wicked Whittington the Chancellor and had
killed him) hurting none of all that great throng and number of people but
only him) would have said, that the man had made himself mad for the
nonce: and that some of the heretical Gospellers had hired him to do it. But
I trow none of you will say that the Bull made himself mad for the nonce,
and that the Gospellers hired him to run only on the Chauncellor and kill
him: and to let all the rest of the people go away safe and unhurt.

Wherefore it can not be denied, nor by any way be avoided, but that it was the
Lords wrath and vengeance, that lighted on this cruel and persecuting Papist,
and murdering Chauncellor. And as the Devil procured this wicked Chauncellor
to be his slaughter man on the said godly woman the servant of God: So God
sent this Bull to be his slaughter man on the wicked Chancellor the servant
of the Devil. Therefore as I said before if the pacient, constant, joyful, and
myraculous ends and deaths of the professors of the Gospel, can not allure
nor persuade you from Papistrie to the Gospel, from the Pope to Christ, and
from the Devil to God: yet let the fearful, horrible, desperate and doleful
deaths of the Papisticall persecutors and murderers of the professors of the
Gospel enforce, fear, and terrify you to fly with all speed from the Popes
dangerous, detestable and Devilish doctrine.

What made Judas to say, Math. 27.
I have sinned betraying the Innocent blood, but that he was pricked in
conscience, and that he was enforced through Gods might, to utter ye truth, and
that he had falsely and wickedly betrayed Christ his Master.

What made Iulianus the Apostata (that once professed the Gospel, and turned
from it, to say, Vicisti Galilee, Cooper. Epit. Chron.
that is, O thou man of Galilee thou have overcome, (meaning Christ) but that
he yielded to Christ and that he granted that Christ's Gospel was the true
religion, and that he most wrongfully persecuted the servants of God.

What made yt cruel persecutor of the Gospellers, John de Roma to say in his
marvelous pains and torments as is before mentioned, (I know I suffer for
the evils and oppressions that I have done to the poor me^,) but yt he was
pricked with the sting of Gods judgment, that they that he had so tormented
were the servants of God, and that he was the minsster of Satan.

What made that rigorous Rockwood to cry out being at the point of death, and
to say, I am damned, all to late, all to late, for I have sought maliciously
the deaths of a number of the honest men in the Town, etc. but that God
enforced him to confess the truth when it was too late to have mercy, and
that he knew then in his conscience yt the Romish Religion was false and
wicked, and that the professors of the Gospel were the servants of God, that
he did persecute for the Pope.

What made Bishop Gardener to say at his death, I have denied with Peter, but
never repented with Peter? but that he knew in his conscience (being stung
with the wrath of God) that he wickedly and wrongfully resisted the truth, and
most unjustly persecuted the professors of the Gospel, the servants of God.

Why did the Sherifs servant (before mentioned) say that James Abbas (that
was burned for professing of the Gospel) was the servant of God and was
saved, and that he himself was damned? but that he was procured through the
power of God, to acknowledge and open the truth, that thereby every one that
then heard him or afterward should hear of it, might plainly perceive,
that the Gospel is the true Religion, wherein GOD is chiefly pleased, and
that they that are persecuted for professing of the same, are the servants of
God: and that the Papists that murder and persecute them, are the children of
the Devil.

Learn therefore to confess willingly your errors, and to recant and refuse
your diuelishe Papisticall doings and doctrine in time, whiles you may repent,
recant, and obtain mercy* by these woeful wretches that compelledly confessed
their errors, and recanted their devilish doings and doctrine out of time,
when they could not repent neither obtain any mercy at all.

If you could show us but one of your Papistical Religion that died so
willingly, cheerfully, constantly, Christianly, peaceably, godly, and
myraculously as these professors of the Gospel before described, and
thousands of such more have done: then you would rejoice and clap your hands,
noysing abroad thereby that your Religion were true, and most godly.

But because you can not show us one such, I have showed you diverse (and
could show you many more) of your cruel persecuting Papists, that most
desperately and dreadfully have killed and hanged themselves, and that through
the great and just judgment of God, have been stricken with the Lords mighty
hand, and so have dyed most horribly, dolefully, diuelishly, and desperately,
to the great terror and fear of all them that either saw it or heard thereof.

Therefore if there be any spark of Gods grace in you at all, then the godly,
pacient, and cheerful suffering, and myraculous and tormenting deaths of the
professors of the Gospel, will not only allure you with all speed to lay
hold on Gods word, and to embrace the Gospel our religion: but also the
dreadful, doleful, horrible, and most desperate deaths and ends of the
cruel persecuting and murdering Papists, will terrify and fear you any
longer to hold with the Pope, or to follow his detestable and damnable
doctrine.

Many of the Heathen have only been won to become Christians, by seeing the
constant and pacient suffering of the Martyrs: and will you that profess to be
Christians, be won to Papistrie by their cruelty and tyranny, and by their
dreadful, horrible and desperate deaths?

I beseech you therefore for the love of God, as you profess your selves to
be Christians, so hear daily and follow the law of Christ, by whom you are
called Christians.

But some of you have said, that we may have too many Sermons, and too much
talking of the Scriptures, if we may have too many Preachings of the word of
God which will guide us to Heaven: then you may have too many Masses which
will lead you to Hell. And if you think it is good to hear twenty Masses in
a day which work your damnation: then we think it is godly to hear one or
two Sermons in a day that will work our salvation. Therefore, if you will be
Christ's sheep, then must you hear Christ's voice: and his voice is no where
else to be heard but in his Gospel. There is no law can teach us Christ's
will better, then his own law that he spoke and gave us him self. As no law
can teach the Popes will and pleasure, better then the Popes law: so no law
can teach us better to please Christ and to perform his will, then his own
law the Gospel.

If we meant to be Papists, we would not follow the Gospel, but the Popes
law: then if you mean to be Christians, follow not the Popes law but the
Gospel.

But how can you follow the Gospel, when you refuse to read it, or how ^an
you hear Christ's voice, when by no means you will hear the Preachers of Gods
word, that utter Christ's voice: That is such a fault in you, that has kept
you in error, and will keep you still in blyndnesse.

Perhaps you will say that our Preachers do preach heresy, and therefore
you will not hear them. But how do you know they preach heresy before you
do hear them? it were meet you should hear them before you do blame them.
But suppose that you had the true doctrine, and that our Preachers should
preach false doctrine, then what need you refuse to hear them preach? or to
read their works or writings, for you should sooner confute their heresy
with your true doctrine, than they should allure you from your true doctrine
to their heresy. What need a true man fear to hear a liar speak of that
thing he knows? he shall sooner take the liar in a trip, than the liar can
make him believe his lie, why should a wise man doubt to hear a fool talk,
for the wise man should rather deride the fools folly, than thereby be allured
to be a fool. Therefore if your Religion be the launterne of light (as some
have not sticked to call it) and our religion the doctrine of darkness, then
the light of your doctrine, would soon bewray the darkness of our doctrine.
And so the more you should hear it, the more you would despise it, and the
more you should read it, the more able you would be to confute it.

As he that is in a fair, goodly, sweet, beautiful and bright house, need
not doubt to go into a dark, evil favored, and stinking dungeon, least he
should be allured to tarry there still, and to forsake the fair and trim
house: even so (if your doctrine be good and true, and the beauty and light of
all other religions) then you need not fear to hear our Preachers of
heresy, and read our books of false doctrine, least you should be seduced
thereby and forsake your own true doctrine, for as the vile dark and stinking
dungeon would rather enforce him that is in it to abhor it and quickly to go
from it, making him further in love with the trymme bright and sweet house: so
would our wicked and false doctrine (if it were so) make you further in love
with your own true and godly doctrine.

But for that disdainefully, obstinately, and wilfullye you refuse to hear our
Preachers, and to read our books, it shows that you doubt your own
doctrine, that you are determined to dwell still in your error, and that
purposely you will not come from darkness to light, nor from falsehood to
truth.

But because we are most sure that our Religion of the Gospel is right and
true, and your Papisticall religion is most erroneous and false: we willingly
read your books without any fear to be allured from our doctrine. Nay we
read them desirously, for that we are sure to confound you with your own
books and writings. And therefore Iulianus the Emperor and Apostata commanded
that the Christians should not be trained up in good letters, Cooper in Epit.
Chron. fol. 129.
saying, that he and the Philosophers were wounded with their own feathers: as
the Pope would have us not to be brought up in the knowledge of gods word,
least we should pearce him and his Prelates with their own pykes.

But seeing we have Gods word (which is the tryer of truth and confounder
of falshoode:) we desire none other arrows to wound you wythall, than the
same you shoot at us, for with your own darts we destroy your doctrine.

Your Popish Religion is so erroneous, so false, so foolish, so childishe, so
vain, so ridiculous, so tied together with rotten threedes, so far out of
square, so contrary to Christ's doctrine, so wide from the Apostles teaching,
so far from the ancient Doctors meaning, so repugnant to reason, and so
far disagreeing with it self, (as before it does appear) that utterly it
does bewray it self.

A liar had need to have a good memory, or else he will soon be taken in a
trippe: let a thief premeditate his matter before hand never so well, and
cast his cards never so cunningly, yet if a wise man have him in handling, his
own tale will trippe him and try him a thief: (yea, though before he were
thought to be a true man. For assure your selves that truth will abide all
tryalles,) Veritas non querit angulos, truth seeks no corners, and truth
(as is before said) fears nothing, but least she should be hid. And truth
does most triumph when she co^mes to trial.

And now for that your Romish doctrine refuses trial, that argues, that it
is not true. For if your Papisticall doctrine be so true, so perfect, and so
precious as you say it is, and our doctrine so false, so wicked, and so
heretical as you blase abroad, then why do you not confound it rather with
persuadyng than with punishing, by disputing than by destroying, by learning
than with murthethering, by preaching than by presecuting, and by writing than
with burning.

Though I have written this to win you, and for your instruction, yet I
fear some of you therefore will wyshe my destruction. And though some of you
do bark against it, (as I think you will) yet I am most sure that none of
you can disprove or confound it, for that the foundation whereon it is builded
is truth, which no storm can shake, nor tempest can overthrow.

Marry if you had our power joined to your cruelty, you would confute it and
the writer thereof quickelye (if burning and kylling may be called a
confuting.) But if you should so do, I must be content, the servant ought
not to grutche to follow his Master: but this I will tell you by the way,
the greatest friend I have in the world, could do me no such pleasure as
you should do me thereby: (if the sendyng of one to heaven be a pleasure)
for Christ says (whose words I believe) Blessed are they which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.
Math. 5.
Therefore if by your burning and kylling of me, you should send me to
Heaven: then surely in my judgment, you could do me no greater pleasure.

And contrary, all the enemies you have in the world, could do you no greater
displeasure, than you thereby should do to your selves, (if going to hell be a
displeasure) for if they be blessed that are thus persecuted and shall enjoy
the kingdom of Heaven, then their persecutors must needs be cursed and
unhappy, for theirs is the kingdom of hell. And so by sending me to Heaven,
you should send your selves to hell, (unless you repent): but it is a more
common thing to the persecutors of the Gospel, (as before you may see if you
will see) to die desperately than repentantly.

Wherefore let their dreadful and desperate deaths drive you from the Popes
persecuting Religion, hoping that these terrible and fearful examples of Gods
heavy wrath, powered on the persecuting and reuolting Papists (if they were
fewer) are ynowe to such of you as are ignorantly led in Papistrie, and that
will open your eyes to see: but I fear they are too few for such of you, as
are obstinately, wilfully, and purposely bent to continue in the same, and that
will wink for the nonce, because you will not see.

But mark this well I beseech you, which of you if you did see a man go
before you, and fall on a slipperie ground, where he may rise or be helped up
again, would not shun that place, and seek an other safer way? Now if
you will shun with one example a slipperie place for fear of a fall, where
you may rise or be helped up again: will you then run wylfully (having so
many examples and warnings) into the doleful and horrible pit of Hell,
where you can never get out again by any means? thousands have shunned hell
with a great deal less warning, and will you fall into hell for all this
great warning?

Though you feel not the torments of the said persecutors and dead desperate
Papists, yet if you do and die as they died, you shall feel as they feel.

But perhaps you think, because you taste no smarte, that they feel no
sorrow: Be not incredulous, and think not that your neighbors house is not
burned, because your house is safe and unburned. And be not like fools that
will not believe that fire has burned their neighbors house, before they
themselves have set fire on their own houses, and until they see them burned
and consumed before their faces.

It is not your harm to take heed by other: but it would be your harm for
other to take heed by you. Therefore yield willingly unto Christ and to his
Gospel in time, least you yield to Christ and his Gospel (as the said
desperate Papists did against their wills) out of time. And embrace Gods
mercy whiles it is offered in time: least it be denied you, when you would
have it out of time. And beware by the said desperate Papists that are dead:
but let not them beware by you that are alive. The said Papists of your
religion that died so horribly, dolefully, and desperately, would give all the
world (if they had it to give) to be but one hour in your place, that they
might repent: then how happy are you that are here, where you may turn to
the Gospel without giving anything, and where you have many hours to recant
and repent? Therefore take heed in any wise that you come not into their place
where you can not repent, or else cannot have mercy though you repent never
so much. Detest and abhor Papistrie with repentance, least you detest and
abhor it (as the other before mentioned have done) without repentance. And
refuse not Christ's Gospel in this life* least Christ refuse you after your
death.

And as we have one God our heavenly father, so let us obey him as his most
loving children: as we have one Christ that has redeemed us most dearly,
so let us embrace his Gospel that teaches us his will most truly: as we have
a Noble and merciful Queen that governs us most prudently, so let us obey
her and love her, as true subjects most faithfully: As we were all borne in
this famous Island of England, so let us love one another to the strengthening of
England* As we are or have been nourished in this Realm of England, so set us
all seek the com^oditie and quietness of England: And as you have followed
Papistrie (the Popes wicked doctrine) which has made you enemies to England,
so now (I most earnestly beseech you) profess and follow the holy Gospel
Christ's doctrine, which will make you true friends to England.

I think I have written to much to many of you, sufficient to some of you, and
to little to a great sort of you. But if any of you be so obstinate and so
wilful, that neither Gods word can win you, nor the learned and godly
writers can withdraw you, nor my reasons can persuade you, nor my arguments
will allure you, nor the examples I have brought can move you, nor the pacient,
godly, and miraculous suffering and dying of the professors of the Gospel can
procure you, nor yet the sudden dreadful, desperate and damnable deaths of
the persecuting Papists can fear you, from your detestable and Devilish
doctrine of the Pope (which is against the law of God, the law of our Queen,
the law of Nature, and the law of Reason): Then I can see none other but that
you are determined to withstand God and his Gospel as much as lies in you to
your utter confusion, (as they did which before I set forth for examples to
warn you withal.)

And though by writing I can do no more for you than I have done: yet I will
pray for you still as I have done. Which is, that God may give you eyes to
see, and hearts to understand the truth: whereby you and we may embrace and
follow the Gospel of Christ, here on earth together: that after this life we
may dwell in the kingdom of Heaven together, as ye children of God: to whom be
all honor, glory, and praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, ANNO DOMINI. 1581.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


