(...) TO THE RIGHT Honorable Lord, the Lord GORING, Baron of Hurster-point,
and Mr. of the Horse to the Queens Highness.
Right Honorable:

YOur Brothers Lieutenant Coronell Goring.
real worth showed to me in the Wars abroad, imboldned me to present this
newborn babe to your Protection, not doubting but to find the same Reality
of worth in your Self in the Court at home, as I found in Him in foreign
Leagers: The Subject is new and Merry, the fitter either for Court or Field. It
was conceived and perfected in ten daves space; and how desires tuition under
your Lordship. It is the Emblem of my affection, and so hopes to be loved and
liked the better and sooner; it is the first, but not perhaps to be the last.
I had thought to have presented it unto your Lordship, before this time in
Print, as I did in the Manuscript, had not either some maleuolent spirit, or
envious Planet crossed me in my designs. I wish that it may be esteemed nere
the worse, though from so mean a hand, and so unworthy a person as my self.
Lend it a favorable sm^le to comfort and cherish it, and it shall be the highth
of my desires; thus presenting my self, it, and what is, or shall be mine, to
your Honor. I humbly take my leave.

your Honors Obliged: D. Lupton.

To the Reader.
IF Courteous, I love thee; if otherwise, I fear not, deal by me, as thou
would have others do to thy self: if the matter prove as pleasant, as the
Subject is New, I doubt not thy approbation: it is one comfort, thou can not
say, I am the first Fool in Print, nor as I think, shall be the last.
Friends persuasions prevail much, had they not, I had not showed my self in
this kind: I am in Press, do not ouer-presse me with preiudicate Opinions. I
desire thy smile and benign aspect; yet fear not much thy frown. If thou
say, it is idle, know it came not into the World to work much; Like it and
Love it if thou Please, leave it is thou will; it is all I say, if thou Love
me, and my Child, I love thee, and

Thine as thou art mine. D. Lupton.

In Commendation of the Author.
TAke in good part what here I offer,
T is my maiden loving proffer;
I wonder at thy strange device,
That thus thou should Charactize:
And how alone that thou should find,
These two new Subjects to thy mind.
Brave Ouerbury, Earl, nay none
Found out this Plot but thou alone.
But most of all, I wonder yet,
How in ten dates thou finished it,
The Mirth, the Wit, the Style, the phrase,
All give thee a sufficient praise.
He that thy Book shall buy and read,
Shall find I Have spoken truth indeed.
Thine John Barker.

To his loving Friend, D. Lupton.
Fear not Momus, though he Carpe,
Nor Zoylus though he snarle or Bark;
Mirth is the Subject of thy Book,
City and Country here may look,
Wonder at thee, and praise thy pain,
That labored have Sans hope of gain?
Thy Wit and Learning I Commend,
To thee Applause, I freely lend:
The wise will like, I wish the rest
To spare their Censure, it is best:
They Will hurt themselves with their own tongue,
Their Snarling can do thee no wrong.
Per Samuel Perkings, Philomath.

The Table.
OF London. 1. The Tower. 2. St. Paul's Church. 3. The Bridge. 4. Of the
Thames. 5. Exchanges Old and New. 6. Cheapeside. 7. Innes of Court, and
Chancery. 8. Smithfield 9. Bridewell. 10. Ludgate and Counters. 11. Newgate.
12. Turnebull-streete. 13. Hounsditch and Longlane. 14. Charter House. 15.
Christs-hospitall. 16. Paris-Garden. 17. Artillery Garden. 18. Bedlam. 19.
Play Houses. 20. Fencing-Schooles. 21. Dancing-schooles. 22. Fisher-woemen. 23.
Scauengers and Goldefinders. 24. OF the Country. 1. Hospitality. 2.
Enclosures. 3. Tenants by Lease. 4. Tenants at will. 5. Country School masters
6. Country Vshers. 7. Country Chaplains. 8. Alehouses. 9. Apparators. 10.
Constables. 11. (...) or weekly News. 12.
London and the Country Carbonadoed and Quartred into several Characters.
SHE is grown so Great, I am almost affraide to meddle with Her; She Is
certainly ^ great World, there are so many little worlds in Her: She is the
great Bee-hiue of Christendom, I am sure of England: She swarms four times
in a year, with people of al Ages, Natures, Sexes, Callings: Decay of Trade,
the Pestiletice, and a long Vacation, are threescar-Crowes to her; She seems
to be a Glutton, for she desires always to be Full: She may pray for the
Establishing of Churches, for at the first view, they are Her chiefest Grace:
she seems contrary to al other things, for the older she is, the newer and
more beautiful. Her Citizens should love one another, for they are joined
together; only this seems to make them differ; they live one above another:
most commonly he that is accounted richest lives worst. I am sure I may call
her a gally-mophrey of al Sciences, Arts, and Trades: She may be said to be
always with child, for she ^owes greater every day then other; she is a
Mother well stored with daughters, ^t none equal to Her for ^reatnesse,
Beauty, wealth: she is somewhat politic, ^r she inlarges her bounds
^ceedingly, in giving way (...) make Cities of Common ^ardens; and it is thought
^r greatness does dimi^sh her Beauty. Certaine^ she is no Puritaine, for ^er
buildings are now Conformitant; nor she (...) no Separatist, for they ^re
united together: she ^ath a very great desire it is ^ought to be good, for she
is always mending: she may be called a great Book fair Printed, Cum
Priuilegio Regis: She is the Country-mans Laborinth, he can find many things in
it, but many times loses himself; he thinks Her to be bigger then Heaven,
for there are but 12. Caelestiall signs there, and he knows them all very
well, but here are thousands that he wonders at: well, she is a glory to her
Prince, a common gain to her Inhabitants, a wonder to Strangers, an Head to
the Kingdom, the nursery of Sciences, and ^ wish her to be as Good (...)
Great.

2. The Tower.
Four things make it to be remarkable. Man, Antiquity, Situation, Strength,
an head fitting so great a body, a Royal residence has graced it: it stands
principally, now for Defense, Offense, and punishment of Offenders. Anger it,
and you shall hear it thunder farther then you can see it. Time seems to be
a little angry with her, for she strive to ruin her beauty, ^ere it not
supported by (...) hand of Majesty. Gold and Silver the (...) of our Land
receive their a^ lowed forms from hence^ A Coronation day is brau^ ly
exemplified here. It i^ faithful, for what is put i^ here is surely safe: they
tha^ are within need not much fear, for they are sure t^ be kept well, I
cannot say^ they shall presently be^ forth coming. The me^ that keep it are
no slug^ gards, but are very ready for they Watch and War^ continually. I wish
it may be my prospectiue for pleasure, but not my abode by compulsion, I had
rather be an honest poor man without it, then otherwise never so Great, and
(...) in it: I think it to be (...) Changling, for she still ^epes the old
fashion, It ^ay be said to be the School of Moral Philosophy, for it
ciuilizes Lions and other Wild beasts: the Officers ought to be faithful
Stewards, for they are much trusted, they had ^eed be wise, for they do ^ot
only keep themselves but others too. Those that are in it are reserud, still,
and well stayed men: those that keep it, are well paid, for it keeps them:
Those that come to see it, rather ^dmire at every thing (...) ^eight any
object. It is the ^ublick Megazine for warlick^ provision, it does seem
terrible to those that do offend her Prince, for her own part she has taken
Allegiance, and withal Loyalty intends to keep it. This Land has affoorded
this place many brethren, strong fortified Castles; but through rebellion,
through times malice, and the frowns of Princes, they cannot be known almost
but by their ruins, this kept her obedience to her Rulers, and so escaped as
yet destruction. To conclude she is the glory and strength both of City and
Kingdom.

3. Of S. Paul's Church.
OH Domus Antiquae, a fit object for pity, for Charity; further Reported of
then known, it is a complete Body, for it has the ^hree dimensions of
Longi^ude, Latitude, and Profundity, and as an excellent O^er-plus famous for
height. It was a maine point of Wisdom to ground Her ^ppon Faith, for She is
the more likely to stand ^ure: the great Cross in the middle, certainly has
bin, and is yet ominous to this Churches Reparation. S. Paul called the Church,
the pillar of Truth, and surely had they not been sound, they had fallen
before thi^ time. The Head of this Church has been twice troubled with
aburning Fever, and so the City to keep it from a third danger, let it stand
without an head. I can but admire the Charity of former times, to Build such
famous temples, when as these Ages cannot find Repair to them, but then the
World was all Church, and now the Church is all World: then Charity went
before, and exceeded Preaching; now there is much Preaching, nay more the^
ever, yet less Charity; o^ Forefathers advanced the Church, and kept their
Land: These times loose their Lands, and yet decay the Churches: I honor
Antiquity so much the more, because it so much loved the Church. There is more
Reason to suspect the precise Puritaine deuoyd of Charity, then the simple
Ignorant fraught withgood Works. I think truly in this one point, the ends of
their Actions were for good, and what they aimed at was Gods glory, and their
own happiness. They builded Temples, but our degenerating Age can say* Come,
let us take them into our hands and possess them: Amongst many others, this
cannot be said to be the Rarest, though the greatest. Puritaines are blown
out of the Church with the loud voice of the Organs, their zealous Spirits
cannot endure the Music, nor the multitude of the Surplices; because they are
Relickes, (they say,) of Romes Superstition. Here is that famous place for Ser
mons, not by this Sect frequented, because of the Title, the Cross. The middle
I Will is much frequented at noone with a Company of Hungarians, not walking so
much for Recreation, a^ need; (and if any of these meet with a yonker, that
has his pockets well lined with silver, they will relate to him the meaning of
Tycho Brache, or the NorthStar: and never leave flattring him in his own words
and stick as close to him, as a Bur upon a Trauailers cloak; and never leave
him til he and they have saluted the green Dragon, or the Swanne behind the
Shambles, where I leave them.) Well, there is some hope of Restoring this
Church to its former glory; the great sums of money bequeathed, are some
probabilitles, and the charity of some good men already, in clothing and
Repayring the inside, is a great encouragement; and there is a speech that the
Houses that are about it, must be pulled down, for Paul's Church is old enough to
stand alone. Here are prayers often, but sinister suspicion doubts more formal
then zealous; they should not be worldly, because al Churchmen; there are none
dumb, for they can speak loud enough. I leave it and them, wishing all might
be amended.

4. The Bridge.
IT is almost Arts wonde^, for strength, length, beauty, wideness, height: It
may be said to be Polypus, because it is so well furnished with legs: Every
Mouth is four times filled in eight and forty hours, and then as a Child it
is still, but as soon as they be empty, like a Lion it roares, and is wondrous
Impatient: It is made of Iron, Wood, and Stone, and therefore it is a wondrous
hardy Fellow. It has changd the form, but as few do now a days, from worse
to better: certainly it is full of Patience, because it bears so much, and
continually: It Is no Prison, for any one goes through it: It is something
addicted to pride, for many a Great man goes under it; and yet it seems
something humble too, for the poorest Peasant tread upon it: It has more
Wonders then Arches, the houses here built are wondrous strong, yet they
neither stand on Land or Water: It is some praeiudice to the Water-mans gains;
many go over here, which otherwise should row or sail: It helps many a
Pennilesse Purse to pass the water without danger or charges: nothing afrights
it more, then Spring-tides or violent inundations: It is chargeable to keep,
for it must be continually Repaired: it is the only chief crosser of the
water, his Arches outface the water, and like Judges in the Parliament are
placed upon woole sackes: one that lives here need not buy strong Water, for
here is enough for nothing: it seems to hinder the Water-bearers profit, for
the Inhabitants easily supply their Wants by Buckets: He is a settled fellow,
and a maine vpholder of houses; he is meanly placed, for there are diverse
above him, and many under him, and his houses may well be called Nonesuch, for
there is none like them, and to conclude, he pertakes of two Elements, his
nether parts are all for Water, his upper for Land; in a word, it is without
Compare, being a dainty street, and a strong and most stately Bridge.

5. Thames.
THis is a long, broad, slippery Fellow; Rest he affects not, for he is
always in motion: he seems something like a Carrier, for he is still either
going or coming, and once in six or eight hours, salutes the Sea his Mother,
and then brings Tidings from her: He follows the disposition of the VVind, if
that be Rough, so is the Water; if that calm, so is this: and he loves it,
because when the VVinde is at highest, then the Water will best show her
strength and anger: it is altogether vnsteedy, for it commonly is sliding away.
Man's unconstant state, and Uncertain frail condition, is truly Resembled by
this, always either ebbing or flowing, being in a trice high and low: he will
not be a Martyr, for he will turn, but never burn: Resolution is absolutely
his Guide and Counselor, for he will run his course; he cannot be said to be
a Well or Spring without Water, for he is puteus in exhaustus. Merchandise he
likes and loves; and therefore sends forth Ships of Traffic to most parts of
the Earth: his Subjects and I^habitants line by oppresion like hard Landlords
at Land, the greater rule and many times devour the less: the City is
wondrousl^ beholden to it, for she is furnished with almost all necess^ries by
it: He is wondrously crossed, he is the maintainer of a great company of
Watermen; he is a great (...), for he works as much in the night as the day.
He is led by an unconstant Guide, the Moon: he is clean contrary to
Smithfield, because that is all for Flesh, but this for Fish; his inhabitants
are different from those upon Land, for they are most without legs:
Fishermen seem to off^r him much wrong, for they rob him of many of his
Subjects; he is seldom without company, but in the night, o^ ^ough weather: H^
meets the Sun but follows the Moon: ^e seems to complain a^ the Bridge,
because it has intruded into his bowels, and that makes him Roar at that
place: to speak truth of him, he is the priuiledg'd place, for Fish and
Ships* the glory and wealth of the City, the high way to the Sea, the br^nger
in of wealth and Strangers, and his business is all for water, yet he deals
much with the Land too: he is a little Sea, and a great River.

6. Exchanges Old and Neu^
THe one of these came from Antwerpe, the other from a Stable; the one was
Dutch, yet made Denison; the other was not lo at the beginning, but did
Exchange his name and nature. The Merchants are men generally of good habit,
their words are usually better then their Consciences; their Discourse
ordinarily begins in Water, but ends in Wine: the frequenting of the Walks
twice a day, and a careless laughter, argues that they are sound: if they visit
not once a day, it is suspected they are cracking, or broken: their Countenance
is ordinarily shaped by their success at Sea, either merry, sad, or desperate:
they are like ships at sea, top and top gallant this day, to morrow sincking:
the ^ea is a Tennis-court, their State^ are Bals, the Wind is the Racket, and
does strike many for lost under Line, and many in the hazard: They may seem to
be acquainted with Athens, for they all desire News: Some of them do keep
two brittle Vessels, their Ships and their Wives: the latter is less
ballast, and that makes them so light: the Merchants Respect the former most,
for if that sink or be ouer-throwne, they fall, but the fall of the latter, is
oftentimes the advancing of their heads: Conscience is sold here for naught;
because it is as old Sermons, a dead Commodity: they will dissemble with, and
cozen one another, though all the Kings that ever were ^nce the Conquest,
ouerlooked them. Here are usually more Coaches attendant, then at Churchdoores:
The Merchants should keep their Wives from visiting the upper Rooms too
often, least they tire their purses by attyring themselves. Rough Seas, Rocks,
and Pirates, treacherous Factors, and leaking ships affright them: they are
strange politicians, for they bring Turkey and Spain into London, and carry
London thither. Ladies surely love them, for they have that which is good for
them, Far fe^cht, and dear^ bought: they may proou^ stable men, but they must
first leave the Exchange. It is a great House full of goods; though it be
almost in the middle of the City, yet it Stands by the Sea. There Is many
Gentle-women come hither, that to help their faces and Complexions, breaks
their husbands backs, who play foul in the Country with their Land, to be
fair; and play false in the City: the place to conclude, is thought to be a
great Formal^st, and an hazardable Temporizer, and is like a beautiful Woman,
absolutely good, if not too common.

7. Cheapeside.
It Is thought the Way through this street is not good, because so broad, and so
many go in it; yet though it be broad, it is very straight, because without any
turnings: it is suspected here are not many sufficient able men, because they
would sell all: and but little honesty, for they show all, and some think, more
some time then their own: they are very affable, for they will speak to most
that pass by: they care not how few be^ in the streets, so their shop^ be
full: they that bring them money, seem to bvsed worst, for they are sure to
pay soundly: their Books of accounts are not like to their estates; for the
latter are best without, but the other with long crosses* there are a great
company of honest men in this place, if all be gold that glisters: their
parcell-gilt plate is thought to Resemble them selu^s, most of them have better
faces, then hearts; their moneys and coins are used as prisoners at Sea, kept
under hatches. One would think them to be good men, for they deal with the
purest and best metals, and every one strives to work best, and stout too, for
they get much by knocking, and especially by leaning on their Elbowes. Puritans
do hold it for a fine street, but something addicted to Popery, for adorning
the Cross too much. The inhabitants seem not ^o affect the Standard; the
Kings and Queens would be offended with, and punish them, knew they how these
batter their faces on their coins. Some of their Wives would be ill
priso^ers, for they cannot in^re to be shut up; and as bad Nuns, the life is
so solitary: there are many virtuous and honest Women, some truly so, others
are so for want of opportunity* they hold that a harsh place of Scripture, That
women must be no goers or gadders abroad in going to a lecture many use to
visit a Tauern: the young attendant must want his eyes, and change his tongue,
according as hi^ mistress shall direct, though many times they do mistake the
place, yet they will remember the time an hour and half, to avoid suspicion.
Some of the men are cunning Landerers of plat^ and get much by washing that
plate they handle, and it has come from some of them, like a man from the
Brokers that has casheer'd his cloak, a great deal the lighter. Well, if all
the men be Rich and true, and the women all fair and honest, then Cheapeside
shall stand by Charing-Crosse for a wonder, and I will make no more Characters.
But I proceed.

8. Innes of Court, and Chancery.
THese were builded for Profit, Grace, Pleasure, Justice: the buildings grace
City, the Men grace the Buildings, Justice and Learning grace the Men: These
places furnish our Land with Law: Here Nobility, Learning, Law, Gentrey, have
their Residence; here are Students and Professors; here are Students that will
not be Professors* here are Professors and Students: here are Professors yet
not Students; and here be some that are neither Students nor Professors: Many
hold, that for an excellent Custom, in the Temple, immunity, from danger of
Serieants or such like proling Vermin. Some live here for profit, others for
Grace, some for pleasure, some for all, yet most for profit and pleasure: They
that mean to live by Law, desire not so much the Theory as the Practicke part:
though many here follows the Law, yet all keep it not, but some transgress:
They are the Seminaries of Judge meant and Justice; he that is most expert in
the Law, is the most fitting for public employment, and the Magistracy; these
cause Caesar to have his due, and give the Subject his Right: that Land is
likely to flourish where Religion and Justice are honored and practiced: take
away Justice, and Religion will halt; remove Religion, and Justice will
degenerate into tyranny; let Moses and Aaron Rule, and our Israel will prosper:
these places Moralize, Ciuilize the younger, advance the Learned: their
Founders intended the stablishing of Peace, and confirming of Religion: many
things that begin with blows, and would end in blood, are by these Professors
mediated, and Christian agreement made* their number, Unity, great employment,
makes the^ admired, to conclude, the^ are Rich Megazines for Law, storehouses
for policy, Bulwarks of Equity, let them ever flourish, as long as they are
Deo, Regi, Patria; for God, their King and Country.

9. Smithfield.
YOu may have a fair prospect of this square Fellow, as you pass from the
streights of Pie Corner; this place is well stored with good harbors for
Passengers to put into for flesh and drink, and fish it is admirable; but fish
harbor appears now but two days in seven above water: here thrice in a week
one may see more beasts then men. Butchers that have money make this their
Haven, or Rendeuouz: Men that are downe-fled, and better fed then taught, may
see many like themselves, boght here for the slaughter: Butchers surely cannot
endure Cuckolds, because they kill so many horned beasts. Some I suppose, may
be said to buy themselves, such as traffic for Calves: though the place
besquare, yet here is much cheating in it: here Land-pirates use to sell that
which is none of their own: here comes many Horses, (like Frenchmen) rotten in
the joints, which by tricks are made to leap, though they can scarce go; he
that lights upon a Horse in this place, from an old Horsecourser, sound both
in wind and limb, may light of an honest Wife in the Stews: here is many an
old Ia^e, that trots hard for it, that uses his legs sore against his will, for
he had rather have a Stable then a Market, or a Race: I am persuaded that this
place was paued without the consent of the Horse-courses company: this place
affords those leather blacke-coates, which run so fast upon Wheels, they
shake many a young Heir out of his stock and means: the men that live here,
may be said to be well fed, for here is meat enough; this place (...) what Rich
Country England is* and how well it breeds Beasts, a man that considers their
number and greatness and how soon Consumed* may think there are a World of
mouths, or else that Englishmen are great eaters. Well, I will speak this of
Smithfield, it is the greatest, fairest, richest, squarest market place of this
great City or Kingdom.

10. Bridewell.
HEre comes many that have been at many a Dance, but never affected the
Bride-Well; here is a Palace strangly Metamorphosed into a prison: in the
outward Court were Carts not for the Husbandman, but for those that have used
the unlawful game of Venery; it seems to be contrary to nature, to make those
draw which were made to bear, a strange invention to have such a new
punishment, for such an old sin. Me thinks the house complains, Oh quam a
dispari Domino: It may be said of it, that it has been Eminent, Great, and
Maiesticall, so much may be said of it yet, that the Court is where it was:
It should maintain Virtue, for it punishes vice, they are severe Governors,
for they are most upon correction: when men have here done their work, they are
sure of their wages, a whip: they are temperate here, for they eat not over
much; for their drink, if all were to follow their course, it would make Male
cheap, for it is water. It may be said of this, as of the Palatinate, would it
was restored In statu qu^ prius: some say there are many idle persons in it;
strange! yet work so hard: It' is thought there is scarce a true fellow in it,
for they all lie hard: there is none can say he works for nothing, for they
are all s^e of payment. It Is the only Remembrancer of Aegypts The lash.
slavery, they have task^maisters to hold them to their work: their
whippemaister is like a Country Pedagouge, they many times whippe better, then
himself, and both take a pride in their office, they inflict that upon
others, which they deserve themselves: they that come out of it need not fear
Purgatory, for it is thought to be a place of more ease. This is a two fold
comfort unto them, that they may once come out, and then they can scarce light
of an harder master, or a worse service: they may be Papists, for they fast
often, have their bodies afflicted, are shut up from the World, seem wondrous
penitent, only they pray not so often. I leave the place, wishing they may
come out, amend, and never more come into it.

11. Ludgate and Counters.
I Will join all these together, because their natures are not much diferent,
some of the Officers make the places worse then they would be, if a man cannot
by moneys or good security pay his debts, yet he may l^e for them here* the
Prisoners are like Apprentices, desire heartily to be Freemen: Certainly, they
have been men of great credit, for they have been much trusted: they hate
three persons, an extreme Creditor, a cunning Lawyer, and a biting Serieant:
these three are all fishers of men, the Creditor ownes the Net, the Lawyer
places and spreads it, the Serieant ^als and draws it to a purse: the Serieant
seems to be most of trust, for he has the Whole business put into his
hands, and if he can, concludes it: the Lawyer next to him, for he is trusted
with the Bonds: the Creditor himself is of least note, for he will not be
seen in his own business: yet the Creditor is Lord of the Game, the Lawyer is
his Hunsman, the Serieant his blood Hound, the Yeoman his Beagle, and the
Debtor is the wild Hare; if he be taken, most commonly he is tamed in one of
these M^ses: a Serieant is worst when most employed, and a Lawyer when most
trusted, the Cre ditor when without pity, and the Debtor when prodigality and
ill courses have procured this Cage. The Attorney and Serieant may be termed
Hang-men, they procure and serve so many Executions: These places are fullest
when men break their bonds, and make forfeitures; they may be called Dens, the
Serieant Lions, and the Debtor the Prey. It is a^ ancient Gate, yet not
affected by Citizens, though a closet for safety. For the Counters, they teach
wanderings Nitingals the way unto their Nests, and learn them to sing the
Counter-Tenor: the Counters seem very courteous, for they will open almost at
any hour in the night, they would not have men lie in the streets: well, they
are places that are too full, the more pity that men either have not better
Estates, Consciences, or manners, to pay their Debts, and li^e uprightly and
orderly.

12. Newgate.
IT may well answer to the name, and thank the City for her care and charges:
It is now well faced and hea^ded, Charity helps much to a decayed Estate: but
that Saint Paul's is a Church, and so to bear no anger or grudge, it would envy
the prosperity of the Gates, and be angry with the Citizens for not thinking
upon her old age and poverty. Newgate is generally a place of safety, and few
comes hither, but by merit: the captives are men that once would not, now must
live within compass, they should be men of worth, for the Keeper will not,
dare not loose one of them. When they are forsaken every where, then this place
takes them in, for fear their heels should be as quick as their Hands have
been: He lays them in irons, that he may be the surer of them: they are, or
may be supposed to be sound men, for they seldom break out: as long as they
stay here, they cannot be said to be vnstayd fellows or Vagrants, for they
are sure of a place of stay: they are quicke-sighted, for they can see through
iron grates: some of them seem to be Eminent men, for they are highly
advanced; they are like Fish, have a long time nibled away the bait, but are
now caught: Certainly they are no Libertines, and are convicted of Free will:
they are uncharitable, for they seldom love their Keeper; they have the power
of life and death in their own hands, and put many to be pressed to death. Lice.
By seeking others goods they procured their own hurt. They lived without any
thought of Judgment, now it is the only thing they feate: They hold a
Triangle to be a dangerous Figure. Of all places they hold Holborne-hill an
unfortunate place to ride up. It seems they go that way unwillingly, for they
are drawn: They cannot miss their way to their Iourneys end, they are so
guarded and guided. Lice seem to be their most constant Companions, for
they will hang with them for company: It seems these men were not made for
Examples, for at their Confession they wish all men not to follow their
courses: and most are easily persuaded, for there is very few dare do as they
have done. Well, I pass from them, thus much you may be sure of, once a
Month you may hear, know, and see if you please; whether they live, or dye

13. Turnebull-streete.
IT is in an ill name, and therefore halfe-hang'd: here may be some
Probability of Honesty, little or no demonstration, especially a Priory. Here
are Lasses that seem to hate Enclosures, for they would lay all open, they may
seem good Subjects, for they love standing or lying for the Common: They hold
it was a good Age, when Women practiced Astronomy. They seem to be P^ritans,
for they love private Conuenticles: They are not altogether vnpractif'd in the
Law, for they know and love Feelings: The Aspect here is the Conjunction, and
they hold a noune Substantive, a Preposition, an Interiection and Conjunction
the best parts of speech. They have learned thus far in their Ac^idences, that
femin^ ludificantur viros. They seem to be no whit addicted to pride, for
they desire to be below: they love not Lent, because they delight more in
flesh: they seem to be well-wishers to Lawyers, and to the City, for they
love Terme-times, and pray against the decay of trading. Their chiefest desire
is to be well manned, they keep open houses: It is hazardable to trust them
because they are much addicted to Lying: They affect a Cannoneire well, because
he will force a breach, and enter the passage. They Jove not to wrestle, they
had rather take a fall, then give one. When this Street was builded, surely
Mars and Venus were in a Conjunction. Here are very few men, but they are well
armed: Nay the Women have received presse-money, and have performed the
Service: women though the colder vessels by Nature, yet these are the hotter
by Art: they may be thought to be great Scholars, for they partake of all the
liberal Sciences, for Grammar they know the Syntax^s, and the Figure called
Apollo P. For Logic^ they have skill in the Antepraedicaments and the
Fall^cies; for Music they a^ not affected with Unisons* but are skillful in
Chroches and quauers, and love Ela^ because the highest Note and makes them
squeake for Retoricke, they kno^ the Metonomia adiuncti, and Apostrophe; for
Arethmeticke, the love addition, and division; for Astronomy, they know the
motion of Venus, and are obseruers of Mars; for their skill in Geography, they
know the Tropickes and the Torrid Zone, and ^o being thus experienced in these
Sciences, they are much frequented and sought too. I wish all in this Street
to take heed of their Cellars, least they fire first, and to lay their Trading
down, or else it will lay them down.

14. Hounsditch and Long-lane.
THese two are twins, they have both set up one Profession; they will buy a
man's Suite out of his hands, but it shall be hanged or pressed for it. A man that
comes here as a stranger would think that there had been some great death of
men and women, here abouts he sees so many suites and no men for them. Here
are Suites enough for all the Lawyers in London to deal withal: the
Inhabitants are men of many outsides, their faults are not seen easily,
because they have so many cloakes for them: they should be well affected to the
Roman Church, for they keep, and lay up old Relics: They are beholden to
the Hangman, for he furnishes their Shops: And most of their Creditors wish
that they may furnish his three cornered shop, which often comes to p^sse; and
as many say, the oftener the better: Broke Currs they are in two respects, most
of them were broke before they set up, and Currs for biting so sore ever since
they set up: his shop is a Hell, he the Devil in it, and torments poor souls:
the Iayler and Broker are Birds of a feather, the one Imprisons the Body, the
other the Clothes, both make men pay dear for their lodging: The Broker seems
somewhat the kinder, for he lays the clothes in Lauender: he is much of a
Serving man's nature, lives much upon the Reuersion of cast clothes: the
Seruing-man has them the cheaper, but the other keeps them the better, they
many times do make a bargain: He loves those birds best, that oftnest cast
their Feathers: to conclude, he is no Tradsman, if the whole bunch of them be
weighed, you shall not scarce find a dram of honesty, for a pound of craft.

15. Charter House.
THis place is well described by three things, Magnificence, Munificence, and
Religious government: Magnificence is the ^erminus a quo, good Orders the
Terminus mediari, Munificence and Charity the Terminus ad quem: the first
shows the wealth of both Founder and Establisher: the second shows the ^eanes
to make the good thing done, durable: the third demonstrates his in^ent that
thus Established it: had it been great without good government, it had long ere
this time come to ruin: or had it bin great and yet deuoyd of Charity, it
would have bin laughed at and derided; but now Charity shows it is well
governed, and the good Government keeps it firm, and make^ it famous:
Soldiers and Scholars, I think, begin their love here, that they continue
hereafter firm and solid, by living together* callings both honorable, and
here bountifully maintained: It is a Relief for decayed Gentlemen, old
Soldiers, and ancient Seruingmen: it is to be pitied, that such Religious,
Charitable houses, increase not in number: this one place has sent many a
famous member to the Universities, and not a few to the Wars: I will not
censure as some do, that many places are here sold for moneys, nay the
reuersions also: I Will rather ex^ort the Governors to discharge a good
conscience, (and not to suffer their men, or any other whom they affect, to get
thirty or forty pounds for the promise of the next vacant place for a youth to
come in,) and to observe their first Institutions; and those that so suppose, I
wish them that they speak not that with their mouths, which they know not in
their hearts. The deed of this man that so ordered this House, is much spoken
of, and commended: but there is none Syon Col ledg ner^ CripleGat^.
(except only one) that as yet, has either striuen to equal or imitate that,
and I fear never will: there is many that will not do any such good Works,
and give out that they smell something of Popery, and therefore not to be
imitated: well, I durst warrant thus much, let the Ouer-seers live Religiously,
govern Ciuily, avoid Bribery, keep their Cannons directly, and this House
shall stand to vpbraid this Iron Age, and see many brought to beggary for
prodigality, when they shall be satisfied, and have enough: Well, this is my
opinion of it, that the Founder is happy, and so are all his Children that live
here; if they degenerate not, and ^rne from fearing God, obeying their Prince,
and from living in love amongst themselves.

16. Christs-hospitall.
THe former place and this are much of one nature, yet some difference there
is; Charter House is the younger for time, but exceedes for reuenews: It was
erected by one, this by many Citizens. Christshospitall is principally for
Childrens education, that are fatherless and motherlesse, the other for Men's
and Childrens too. The former is for any, as well as Citizens, the latter not,
that only, it is for Children; seems to be conformable to Christ's will,
Suffer little Children to come unto me: None that are in this place can be
said to be without portions, for they have Education: the Cities Charity is
the less, for she Relicues but her own. It Is a good means to empty their
streets of young beggars, and fatherless Children: She does no more then the
Laws of the Land seem to enjoin, to keep those that were borne within her:
it is a good policy to p^ them young to this place, because they may learn
Virtue before Vice: And ordinarily, if youth be well seasoned, it is the more
hopeful to be good in age. The City does deserve very great commendation for
this action, because it is rare to see so great a Company join together, for
the good of the poor, and last out. You may easily know the Children that
belong unto this place, by their Azure liueries, and their Sable head-peeces:
This House may be termed the Childrens Commonwealth, and to speak truth, it is
well governed by good Laws, I wish the City not to be proud for her Charity,
nor to be weary of well doing; and the Hospital to remember their Benefactors,
and the Children to live and learn well, for fear of Correction.

17. Paris-Garden.
THis may better be termed a foul Den then a fair Garden. It Is pity so
good a piece of ground is no better employed: Here are cruel Beasts in it,
and as badly used; here are foul beasts come to it, and as bad or worse keep
it, they are fitter for a Wilderness then a City: idle base persons (most
commonly) that want employment, or else will not be otherwise employed,
frequent this place; and that money which was got basely here, to maintain as
bad as themselves, or spent lewdly; here come few that either regard their
credit, or loss of time: the swaggering Roarer, the cunning Cheater, the
rotten Bawd, the swearing Drunkard, and the bloody Butcher have their Rendeuouz
here, and are of chief place and respect. There are as many civil religious
men here, as thei're Saints in Hell. Here these are made to fight by Art, which
would agree by Nature: They thrive most when the poor beasts fight oftenest:
their employment is all upon quarrels as unlawful, as unseemly, they cause
the Beasts first to fight, and then they put in first to part them: It Is pity
such beastly Fellows should be so well maintained, they torment poor
creatures, and make a gains and game of it. The Beasts come forth with as ill
a will, as Bears to the stake. A Beare-ward and an Attorney are not much
unlike, the Attorney seems the more cruel, for these bait but Beasts; but
these men, their Clients: The Beareward strives to recover the hurts of his
Beasts, but the Attorney regards not the damages of any, and they both follow
the Trade for profit. Well, I leave the place, and when I intend to spend an
hour, or two, to see an Ass and an Ape, to loss and charges, I may perhaps
come hither: But as long as I can have any employment elsewhere, I will not
come to see such a great Company so ill occupied, in so bad a place.

18. Artillery.
THis place is the Cities Camp, and Mars his School: Here are four brave
Flowers in this Garden, Manhood, Courage, Actiuity, Arms. The use and expert
skill of War may be seen here in peace: Decency, Nimblenesse, Skill,
Uniform order, and Experience, the five qualifications gracing Military
Discipline, are usually here to be viewed. In their exercising how many little
bodies may you see, that by their proportionable motion make a great body? and
that suddenly alterede into any Form: Here are brave Martial Blades, that at
three words, and three motions will give fire: here are more arms then heads
or feet: Yet when one moves, like Wheels in a Jack they all move. They are
men that must not encroach into one another ground, but as they are com
manders, so they must keep distance; and they seem not affect Confusions, for
they all strive to keep order: ^is no marvel why Soldiers desire so to
fight, for they are always in Divisions. You may know by their Marchinge where
ever either the best Gentleman, or the ancienest Soldier is placed, for he is
ever in the Right before, or Left behind: They are strange men; for in ten
yards space of ground they can all turn their faces about: there is thought to
be no steadiness in them, for like Fortunes wheel, they many times suddenly
alter and turn: they are generally men of good Order and Rank, they then are
at compleatest view, when their length and breadth agree, ten every way. They
are most disliked, when they are either out, or off their Files. They use to
put their worst Pieces in the midst. They seem to be suddenly angry, for
one word moves them all. Obedience and Silence they must practice, to do as
they are commanded, and to harken unto their charge. A good Soldier must be
like a true Maid, seen but not heard: He Is more for actions then words. The
City did well to provide Mars a Garden, as well as Venus an House. No question,
but when these meet, they will be at push of Pike, and often discharge. Before
I leave this honorable place, I may speak this of it: that is excellent the
oftener used, the best when it is fullest, and most Eminent Wisdom, Courage,
Experience, Policy, be the four Coronels; and the four Regiments consist of
Patience, Obedience, Valor, and Constancy; and their Colors Deo, Regi, Gregi,
Legi, for God, their King, Law, and Country, flourishing all in the field of
Honor and Victory.

19. Bedlam.
Here live many, that are called men, but seldom at home, for they are gone
out of themselves: Nature has bin a Steppemother to some, and misery and
crosses have caused this strange change in others: they seem to live here,
either to rectify Nature, or forget Miseries: they are put to Learn that
Lesson which many, nay all that will be happy, must learn to know, and be
acquainted with themselves: this House would be too little, if all that are
beside themselves should be put in here: it seems strange that any one should
recover here, the cryings, screechings, roarings, brawlings, shaking of
chains, swearings, frettings, chaffings, are so many, so hideous, so great,
that they are more able to drive a man that has his wits, rather out of them,
then to help one that never had them, or has lost them, to find them again.
A Drunkard is mad for the present, but a Mad man is drunk always. You
shall scarce find a place that has so many men and women so strangely
altered either from what they once were, or should have been: The men are al
like a Ship that either wants a Stern, or a Steresman, or Ballast; they are
all Heteroclites from Nature, either having too much Wildness, or being
defective in Judgment. Here Art strives to mend or cure Natures imperfections
and defects. Certainly, he that keeps the House may be said to live among
wild Creatures: It Is thought many are kept here, not so much in hope of
recovery, as to keep them from further and more desperate Inconveniences.
Their Faculties and Powers of their Souls and Bodies being by an ill cause
vitiated and depraved, or defective. The men may be said to be fair
Instruments of Music, but either they want strings, or else though being
strung are out of tune, or otherwise want an expert Artist to order them: Many
live here that know not where they are, or how they got in, never think of
getting out: there is many that are so well or ill in their wits, that they can
say they have bin out of them, and gain much by dissembling in this kind:
desperate (...) that dare make a mock of judgment: well, if the Devil was not
so strong to delude, and men so easily to be drawn, this house would stand
empty, and for my part, I am sorry it has any in it.

20. Play Houses.
TIme, Place, Subject, Actors, and Clothes, either make or mar a play: the
Prologue and Epilogue are like to an Host and Hostess, one bidding their
Guests welcome, the other bidding them farewell: the Actors are like Seruingmen,
that bring in the Scenes and Acts as their Meat, which are liked or disliked,
according to every man's judgment, the neatest dressed, and fairest delivered,
does please most. They are as crafty with an old play, as Bauds with old
faces; the one puts one a new fresh color, the other a new face and Name: they
practice a strange Order, for most commonly the wisest man is the Fool: They
are much beholden to Scholars that are out of means, for they sell them ware
the cheapest: they have no great reason to love Puritans, for they hold their
Calling unlawful. New Plays and new Clothes, many times help bad actions:
they pray the Company that is in, to hear them patiently, yet they would not
suffer them to come in without payment: they say as Scholars now use to say,
there are so many, that one Fox could find in his heart to eat his fellow: A
player often changes, now he acts a Monarch, tomorrow a Beggar: now a Soldier,
next a Tailor: their speech is loud, but never extempore, he seldom speaks his
own mind, or in his own name: when men are here, and when at Church, they are
of contrary minds, there they think the time too long, but here too short:
most commonly when the play is done, you shall have a ligge or dance of al
trads, they mean to put their legs to it, as well as their tongs: they make men
wonder when they have done, for they all clappe their hands. Sometimes they
fly into the Country; but it is a suspicion, that they are either poor, or
want clothes, or else Company, or a new Play: Or do as some wandering
Sermonists, make one Sermon travail and serve twenty Churches. All their care
is to be like Apes, to immitate and express other men's actions in their own
persons: they love not the company of Geese or Serpents, because of their
hissing: they are many times lowzy, it is strange, and yet shift so often: As an
Alehouse in the Country is beholden to a wild Schoolmaster, so an
whoore-house to some of these, for they both spend all they get. Well, I like
them well, if when they Act vice they will leave it, and when virtue, they will
follow. I speak no more of them, but when I please, I will come and see them.

21. Fencing-Schooles.
Here Is many a man comes hither, which had rather work then play, though very
few can hit these men, yet any one may know where to have them, upon his guard:
his Scholars seem to be strangely taught, for they do nothing but play; his
care seems to be good, for he learnes men to keep their bodies in safety.
Usually they that set up this Science have bin some Low Country Soldier, who
to keep himself honest from further inconveniences, as also to maintain
himself, thought up on this course, and practice it: the worst part of his
Science is, he learnes men to falsify: he is glad to see any Nouice that
reads his Orders with his hat on, for then he hopes for a forfeiture; there are
many blows given and taken, yet little or no blood spilt, the more he beats,
the better man he is held to be, he will make many dance about his School, as
a Bear about a stake. A little touch upon your elbow, is commonly his first
acquaintance and salutation: he has his Discourse ordinarily of single
Combats, and then will show you his Wounds, and cause you to hear his oaths
which are his familiar Retoricke: He is for the most part a potter and piper
and if he be well in age or not, you may know by the sanguine complexion of his
nose, and the number of pearls that are usually about it, accompanied with
Rubies and Saphires, show that he is some Ieweller. His School is an
introduction to blows, and he makes many man's head to ^ee the pillow of his
Cudgel: one must not trust to his looks, for he looks at one place, and
strikes at another: you must be sure to keep him off, for he is most
dangerous when nearest to you: he seldom strikes down right, but either
back^- wards or forwards: He that loves fighting in earnest, let him go to the
Wars; he that loves to fight in jest, let him come hither.

22. Dancing-schooles.
THey seem to be places Consecrated, for they that use to practice here, put
off their shoes, and dance single-sol'd; they are not exceeding men, for they
teach and delight in Measures: they seem to be men of spare diet, for they
live upon Capers: their trade is not chargeable to begin withal, for one
treble violl sets it up: they should be good players at Cards, for for they
teach men to Cut and shuffle well: their scholars arms are like pinioned
Prisoners, not to reach too or above their heads: their heels seem to hinder
their preferment, and that makes them to rise upon their roes: whatsoever
their actions be, they must carry their bodies upright: The Scholars are like
Courtiers, full of Cringes: And their Master seems to be a man of great
Respect, for they all salute him with hat in hand, and knees to the ground: the
number of five is the dancing A, B, C, both Master and Scholars seem to
love News, for they both consist much of Currantoes: their eyes must not see
what their feet do, they must when they Dance, be like men that have the
French disease, stiff in the Hammes; they are guided by the Music, and
therefore should be merry men. What they may seem to intend, is that they hope
to dance before Gentlewomen: But in the next Iigge you shall be sure to have
them turn like Globes all round. They like a Fiddle better then a Drum, and
hold Venus to be a more auspicious Planet then Mars. When they are in the
Schools they are Antickes, when they are out, I think you will judge as I
do, they love the Faeminine gender more then the Masculine: Generally, these
Schools learn men to begin merrily, leave off sighing, and therefore they are
players of Tragedies, not Comedies; I think he that seldom dances, lives
well; but he that never, lives best. When I intend to show my bodies strength,
and my minds weakness, I will be one of their Proficients: I had rather
have my body not dance here, for fear my Soul should not like the Music:
Give me that place whereall is Music, but no Dancing.

23. Fisher-woemen.
THese Crying, Wandering, and Travailing Creatures carry their shops on their
heads, and their Storehouse is ordinarily. Bilings gate or the Bridgefoote,
and their habitation Turnagaine-lane, they set up every morning their Trade
afresh. They are easily set up and furnished, get something, and spend it
Iouially and merrily: Five shillings a Basket, and a good cry, is a large
stock for one of them. They are merriest when all their Ware is gone: in the
morning they delight to have their shop full, at Even they desire to have it
empty: their Shoppe's but little, some two yards compass, yet it holds all
sorts of Fish, or Herbs, or Roots, Strawberries, Apples, or Plums, Cowcumbers,
and such like ware: Nay, it is not destitute some times of Nutts, and Orenges,
and Lemmons. They are fre^ in all places, and pay nothing for shop-rent, but
only find repaires to it. If they drink ou^ their whole Stock, it is but
pawning a Petticoate in Long-(...) or themselves in Turnebull-streete for to
set up again. They change every day almost, for She that was this day for
Fish, may be to morrow for Fruit; next day for Herbs, another for Roots: so
that you must hear them cry before you know what they are furnished withal,
when they hau^ done their Fair, they meet in mirth, singing, dancing, and in
the middle as a Parenthesis, they use scolding, but they do use to take and
put up words, and end not till either their money or wit, or credit be clean
spent out. Well, when in an evening they are not merry in an drinking-house, it
is suspected they have had bad return, or else have paid some old score, or
else they are banke-rupts: they are creatures soon up, and soon down.

24. Scauengers and Goldfinders.
THese two keep al clean, the one the streets, the other the backe-sides, but
they are seldom clean them selves, the one like the hang man does his work all
by day, the other like a theife, does their's in the night: the Gold-finders
hold the sense of smelling the least of use, and do not much care for touching
the business they have in hand, they both carry their burdens out into the
^ieldes, yet sometimes the Tha^es carries away their loads: they are something
like the Trade of the Barbars, for both do rid away superfluous excrements The
Barbers profession is held chief, because that deals with the head and face,
but these with the excrements of the posteriorums. The Barbers trade and these
have both very strong smells, but the Gold-finders is the greatest for strength,
the others is safest and sweetest: the Barber uses washing when he has done,
to cleanse all, and so do these: the Barber uses a looking glass, that men may
see how he has done his work, and these use a candle: they are all necessary
in the City: as our faces would be foul without the Barber, so our streets
without the Scauenger, and our back-sides with out the Gold-finder: The
Scauenger seems not to be so great an Officer, as the Gold-finder, for he
deals with the excrements chiefly of Beasts, but this latter of his own
Species: well, had they been sweeter fellows I would have stood longer on
them, but they may answer, they keep all clean, and do that work which
scarce any one but themselves would meddle withal.

The Country Carbonadoed and Quartred into Characters.
1. Of the Country.
THis is the Circumference of London: It is the Emblem of the City in Folio,
and the City of it in Decimo sexto: the Country iustifies that Verse to be
true, that Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Faemina, Luna. It does now of
late begin to complain that the City offers her wrong in harboring her chief
members of Nobility, and Gentry: her Gentry for the most part of late are
grown wondrously undutiful that will scarce otherwise then upon compulsion,
come and live with their mother and maintayner: She allows these more means
a great deal, then she did their Grandfathers; yet these young Storkes fly
from her; the other always lived with her, and loved her: she does much
suspect their Faith and Love toward her, because she being as beautiful, as
bountiful, as healthy, and as rich, as ever, should be thus fleighted of her
younger sons, yet three times or four in a year, perhaps they will vouchsafe
their mother their presence, but it is to be suspected, that either a public
proclamation, or a violent plague, or to gather up their rackerents moouethem
from the City, or else the pleasure of Hawkin or Hunting, or perhaps it is to
show his new Madame some pretty London bird, the credit of his fathers house,
but his own discredit to let it stand for Iack-daws to domineere in: well,
this Country is the Map of the world, the bea^ ty of Lands, and may well be
called the rich Dyamond gloriously Placed ^t may be emblem'd by these 9.
particulars, a fair great Church, a learned College, a strong rich ship, a
beautiful Woman, a golden fleece, a delightful spring, a great mountain, a
fair bridge, and a goodly m^n, to conclude, it is the life of the City, and
the storehouse of al Christendom, for peace, War, Wealth, or Religion: they
that will know more, must either travail to see, or read the desription of it
by Geographers.

2. Hospitality.
THis true noble hearted fellow is to be dignified and honored, wheresoever he
keeps house: It Is thought that pride, puritans, coache^ and covetousness has
caused him to leave our Land: there are six vpstart tricks come up in great
Houses of late which he cannot brook Peeping windows for the Ladies to view
what doings there are in the Hall, a Buttry hatch that is kept locked, clean
Tables, and a French Cook in the Kitching, a Porter that lo^kes the gates in
dinner time, the decay of Blacke-iackes in the Cellar, and blew coats in the
Hall: he always kept his greatness by his Charity: he loved three things, an
open Cellar, a full Hall, and a sweating Cook: he always provided for three
dinners, one for himself, another for his Servants, the third for the poor:
any one may know where he kept house, other by the Chimnies smoke, by the
freedom at gate, by want of whirligige Iackes in the Kitchen, by the fire in
the Hall, or by the full furnished tables* he affects not London, Lent,
Lackaies, or Bailifes, there are four sorts that pray for him, the poor, the
passenger, his Tenants, and Servants: he is one that will not hou^d up all,
nor lauishly spend all, he neither rackes or rakes his Neighbors, they are
sure of his Company at Church as well as at home, and gives his bounty as well to
the Preacher, as to others whom he loves for his good life and doctrine ^hee
had his wine came to him by full Buts, but this Age keeps her Wine-Celler in
little bottles. Lusty able men well maintained were his delight, with whom he
would be familiar: his Tenants knew when they saw him, for he kept the old
fashion, good, commendable, plain: the poor about him wore him upon their
backs; but now since his death, Landlords wear and wast their Tenants upon
their backs in French, or Spanish fashions. Well, we can say that once such a
charitable Practitioner there was, but now he is dead, to the grief of all
England: And it is shroudly suspected that he will never rise again in our
Climate.

3. Enclosures.
THe Landlords that enclose their Villages, are afraid that either the Townc,
or the Land would run away, or rebel against them. Therefore they b^leaguer
it with deep Trenches and Thorn-roots for Palliz^does: they could not make
their Trenches so easily, if all were ^ue within: But the person he is like a
false Canoniere, that came by his place by Simoniacke means, and perhaps is
sworn, either not to molest the enemy at all: or else if he does give fire,
either to shoot over, or short, or upon the side, never direct: or else he is
poor, covetous, hopes to have some cracked chamber-mayde, or some by
preferment, and so gives leave to the exacting Landlord to do as he pleases.
In this business the Landlord he is as Lord-general, the Person is as his
Horse that he rides, galls, spurs on, and curuetts with as h^ pleases: turns
him and rules him any way, by a golden Bit, a strong hand, and ticking Spurs.
The Bayliffe is his Intelligencer, which if he was either strapt, or hanged
outright it was no great matter for his news. The Surueyor is his
Quartermaster, which goes like a Bear with a Chain at his side, his two or
three of the Parishoners, who walk with him, and help him to undo
themselves. The poor of the Parish and other places are his chief Pioneres,
who like moldy Worps cast up e^rth* the Parish he either winnes by
Composition, or famishes by length of time, or batters down by force of his
lawless Engines: Most of the Inhabitants are miserably pillaged and undone, he
loves to see the bounds of his boundless desires; he is like the Devil, for
they both compass the earth about: Enclosures make fat Beasts, and lean poor
people; there are three annoyancers of his Flock, the Scab, Thieues, and a
long Rotte: Husbandmen he loves not, fot he maintains a few sheph^ards with
their Curres. He holds those that plough the land cr^ell oppressors, for they
wound it he thinks too much, and therefore he intends to lay it down to
rest: Well, this I say of him, that when he keeps a good house constantly,
surely the World will not last long: There Is many one that prays for the end
of the one, and I wish it may be so.

4. Tenants by Lease.
THere compass ordinarily is three Prentishippes in length, one and twenty
years. Once in half a year they must be sure to prepare for payment.
New-yeares day must not pass over without a presentation of a gift: If the
Landlord be either rich, good, religious, or charitable, he feasts their
bodies ere Christmas run away. If they see the Ladies or Gentlewomen, or my
Ladies Parrat, Babone, or Monkey, you may know what their talk is of with
wonder when they come home again: many fill their Tenants bodies once, but
empty their purses all the year long. They take it for no small grace, when
the Groom, or the Vndercooke, or some such great Officer convey them to the
Buttry to drink, they have done Knights ^eruice, if they have drunk to the
^ppermost Gentlewoman: And it is a marvel if they they stand not up to
perform this point of Service, or else blush a quarter of an hour after; they
^eeme merry, for most eat simpering: They dare not dislike any meat, nor
scarce venture upon a dish that has not lost the best face or piece before it
come thither, many of them Suppe better at home, then they Dine here: It Is
their own folly. He seems to be a Courtier complete, that has the wit
or the face to call for Beer at the Table: their Landlord fetches their
Charges out of them ere half the year pass, by getting them to fetch Coal,
Wood, or Stone, or other burdens to his House. The Landlord, Bailey, and other
Informers are so cunning, that the Tenants shall but live to keep Life and
Soul together, if through Poverty and hard Rents they forfeit not their
Leases. You may know where they live ordinarily, for Leases run now with this
clause usually i^ them, they must not let or sell away their right to another.
Well, he that has a good Landlord, a firm Lease, and good ground, prays for
his own life, and Landlords* and wishes he had had a longer time in his Lease.

5. Tenants at will.
THese are Continuers only upon their Masters pleasure* their own behavior,
or ability. They are men that will take short warning a quarter of a year,
they are like poor Curats in the Country that stand at the old Parsons
Liber^m arbitrium. They must study how to please before they speak; when they
are discharged, they are like Soldiers casheir'd, both want a place of stay or
preferment, as they depart suddenly, so they are sure to pay extremly: they are
not unlike courtiers, for they often change places: their Landlords love to
be upon a sure ground with them, for usually they will have their Rents before
hand, if they come not to be censured for inmates they may abide the longer,
they must always bring security where they intend to stay: London is one of
the freest places for their abode, without questioning them what they are, for
if they pay for their lodging and other charges, they need not remove: they
are like unto Servants gone upon a discharge, and they should reckon their
places of abode, no h^ritage: If they be employed in work, and if they will
stay at it, they are then most likely to hold their house the longer: they are
a degree above a beggar, and one under a Tenant by Lease: many of them will not
stay too long in a place, lest they should being* ill, be too well known: upon
their iournies many prove true Carriers, for they bear their goods, Children
and some household st^ffe: well, they are Tenants at will, but whither good or
bad, you that would know must ask their Landlord or them. I wish that yet
they may come to be Snailes, have an house of their own, over their heads.
Winter's the worst quarter to them to shift in.

6. Country Schoolemaisters.
IF they be well Gound and Bearded, they have two good Apologies ready made;
but they are beholden to the Tailor and Barber for both: if they can p^ouide
for two pottles of Wine against the next Lectu^e-day, the School being void,
there are great hopes of preferment: if he gets the place, his care next must
be for the demeanure of his Countenance; he looks over his Scholars with as
great and grave a countenance, (as the Emperor over his Army:) He will not at
first be ouer-busie to examine his V^her, for fear he should prove as many
Curats, better Scholars then the chief master. As he sits in his seat, he
must with a grace turn his Muc^atoes up; his Scepter lies not far from him,
the Rod: He uses Marshall law most, and the day of execution ordinarily is the
Friday: at ^ixe a clock his army all begin to march; at eleauen they keep
Rendeuouz, and at five or six at night, they take up their quarters: There are
many set in Authority to teach youth, which never had much learning themselves;
therefore if he cannot teach them, yet his looks and correction shall affright
them: But there are some who deserve the place by their worth, and wisdom, who
stayed with their Mother the University, until Learning, Discretion, and
Judgment had ripened them, for the well managing of a School: these I love,
respect, and wish that they may have good means either here, or somewhere else:
These come from the Sea of Learning, well furnished with rich prizes of
Knowledge, and excellent qualities, ballasted they are well with gra^ity and
judgment, well ster'd by Religion and a good conscience; and these abi^ities
make them the only fit men to govern and instruct tender age; he learnes the
Cradle to (...) several languages and ^its them for places of public note:
being thus qualified, it is pity he should either want means or employment.

7. Country Vshers.
THEY are under the Head-maister, equal with the chief Scholars, and above
the lesser boys: he is likely to stay two years before he can furnish
himself with a good cloak: They are like unto Lapwings run away from the
University, their Nest, with their shells on their heads. Metriculation was an
hard term for him to understand: and if he proceeded it was in Tenebris: the
Chancellors Seal and Lycense for the place, is a great grace to him: At a
Sermon you shall see him writing, but if the division of the Text be expressed
in Latin terms, then he could not either hear, or not understand, and so
oftentimes looses the division of the Text: it is no small credit for him to
sit at the nether end of the Table with the Ministers; he seldom speaks there
amongst them, unless like a nouice he be first asked, and then he expresses
his weakness boldly: he goes very far, if he dare stay to drink a cup of Ale
when one hour is past: His discourse ordinarily is of his exployts when he
went to School: he has learned enough in the University, if he knows the
Figures, and can Repeat the Logical Moods: usually he makes his Sillogismes
in Baralipton, if he can make any: He holds Greek for a Heathen language,
and therefore never intends to learn it: for Lati^e, his black clothes are
sufficient proofs to the Country-fellowes, that he is well furnished: For Hebrew
it would pose him hard to make a difference in writing betwixt Hebraeus and
Ebrius; in a word, he is but a great School boy with a little Beard and
blackecloathes, and knows better how to whippe a Scholar then learn him: if
he had been fit for any thing in the University, he had not left her so
soon: Yet I confess there are some that deserve better preferment then this,
yet accept of it; but its pity that Virtu^ and Learning are so slightly
regarded, and that so rich a jewel should be no better placed.

8. Country Chaplains.
THey must do as Marygolds, immitate their Master, as these do the Sun: they
are men of Grace before and after Dinner and Supper; they are men that seem
desirous of preferment, for they rise before their Lord and Master: their
habit is neat, cleanly, if not too curious its well. In a well governed house,
they perform prayer twice a day, to be commended for, because it shows and
teaches Zeal, Godliness. Their Sermons are not long, but generally good and
pithy* their Lords Respect and favor, makes the Servants to Respect and love
them; grave modesty and Learning, with an affable carriage, winnes them regard
and Reverence: the more private their persons be, the mo^e public their
praise: Their Studies generally are their best Closets, and their Books their
best Counselors: Such as these deserve to be made o^* but there are others of
the same profession, yet much different in Nature, who strive to satisfy and
please, even by smothering, counter^etting, or immitating, their Masters
faults, and love the strong Beer Cellar, or a Wine-tauerne more then their
Studies: whose ambition is to be conversant with the Gentle women, and now
and then to let an oath slip with a grace; whose acquaintance and familiarity
is most with the Butler, and their care to slip to an Alehouse unseen, with
the Servants. Their allowance is good if it be 20. Mark, and their Diet. If
they be Married they must be more obsequious and industrious to please, if
they come ^ingle, it is a thousand to one but they either be in Love or Married
before they go away: I honor both Lord and Chaplain, when they are Godly,
and Religious; but I dislike, when either the Lord will not be told of his
faults, or the Chaplain will not, or dare not: I love the life when Zeal,
Learning and Gravity are the gifts of the Preacher. But I dislike it, when by
respects Conniuency or Ignorance with Pride keep the Chapel. If they be
wise, they will keep close, till they have the Aduouson of a Living, the
better they are liked of their Master, and the more store he has of Livings,
they have the more hopes of a presentation. It Is a great Virtue in their
Patron if he do not geld it, or lessen it before they handle it.

9. Alehouses.
IF these houses have a Boxe-Bush, or an old Post, it is enough to show their
Profeshion. But if they be graced with a Sign complete, it is a sign of good
custom: In these houses you shall see the History of Iudeth, Susan^a, Daniel
in the Lions Den, or Dives and Laz^rus paint^d upon the Wall* It may be
reckoned a wonder to see, or find the house empty, for either the Parson,
Churchwarde^, or Clark, or all; are doing some Church or Court-businesse
usually in this place. They thrive best where there are fewest; It is the
Host's chiefest pride to be speaking of such a Gentleman, or such a Gallant
that was here, and will be again ere long: Hot weather and Thunder, and want
of company are the Host^sses grief, for then her Ale sowres: Your drink
usually is very young, two days old: her chiefest wealth is seen, if she can
have one brewing (...) another: if either the Hostess, or her D^ughter, or
Maid will kiss handsomely at parting, it is a good shooingHorne or Bird-lime
to draw the Company thither again the sooner. She must be Courteous to all,
though not by Nature, yet by her Profession; for she must entertain all, good
and bad; Tag, and Rag; Cut, and Long-tayle: She suspects Tinkers and poor
Soldiers most, not that they will not drink soundly, but that they will not
pay lustily. She must keep touch with three sorts of men, that is; the
Malt-man, the Baker, and the Justices Clerks. She is merry, and half made,
upon Shroue-tuesday, May-daies, Feast-dayes, and Morris dances: A good Ring of
Bells in the Parish helps her to many a Tester, she prays the Parson may not
be a Puritan: a Bag-piper, and a Puppet-play brings her in Birds that are
flush, she defies a Wine-tauerne as an vpstart outlandish fellow, and suspects
the Wine to be poisoned. Her Ale, if new, looks like a misty Morning, all
thick; well, if her Ale be strong, her reckoning right, her house clean, her
fire good, her face fair, and the Town great or rich; she shall seldom or
neuersit without Chirping Birds to bear her Company, and at the next Churching
or Christning, she is sure to be ridd of two or three dozen of Cakes and Ale
by Gossiping Neighbors.

10. Apparators.
Spiritual business is their Profession, but Carnal matters are their gain
and revenues. The sins of the Laity holds them up, Ember-weekes, Visitations
and Court-dayes show their Calling and Employment, then shall you see them as
quick as Bees in a Summer day: Surrogates, the Archdeacon, and the
Chancellor, they dare not offend: they live upon Intelligence; they have much
business with the Churchwardens and Sides-men, they ride well furnished with
Citations, and sometime Excommunications: They are glad if they can hear of
any one that teaches School, or read Prayers in that Diocese without a
special License, they are to Peccant Wenches, as bad Scar-crowes, as Bailiffes
be to desperate Debtors. The Curate must read Prayers on Wednesdayes and
Fridayes formaliter, sub paena of a further Charge: they are sworn to their
Office before admitted, but being admitted, oftentimes they dispense with the
Oath: sometimes they have eyes, and are tongue-tyed; sometimes they have
tongues, and are blind: But without Fees they will see too much, and speak
more; and fetch men into their Courts with a Coram nomine. Yet though they do
much abuse their office, they make many affraide to sin, either for fear o^
shame, punishment, or charges: Whatsoever shift a man or woman make for moneys,
yet they are sure to pay for their faults here. And if he be any thing in
Age, th^n in the Court he wears a furred Gown, and ordinarily cries Peace,
peace there, when in his heart he means no such matter. (...) are like a
company of straggling Sheep, or unruly Goats, for they will never agree, or
be under one Shephard. Most commonly when they go to the Visitation, they Ride
on poor Iades, and their accoutrements an old Saddle, one Stirrope, a Spur
without a Rowell, a black box, and an Office Seal: if the Wench that is in
fault, want moneys to pay her Fees, they will take their penny-worths in flesh:
Well, their Office is none of the best, and yet is it oftentimes too good for
the Master. When all Wenches prove Honest, they may beg, but as long as
Venus Rules, they will be sure to find employment.

11. Constables.
THere names imply that they should be constant and able for the discharge of
their Office: They have the command of four places of note, the Stocks, the
Cage, the Whipping post, and the Cucking-stoole: they appoint and command the
Watchmen with their rusty Bills to walk Circuit; and do also send hue and
cries after Male* factors. They are much employed in four occasions; at
Musters, at pressing forth of Soldiers, at quarter Sessions, and Assizes:
their Office many times make them proud and crafty: if they be angry with a
poor man, he is sure to be preferred upon the next Service: The Ale houses had
best hold correspondency with them: they are Bugbeares to them that wander
without a Pass. Poor Soldiers are now and then helped to a Lodging by their
means: They Will visit an Alehouse under color of Search, but their desire is
to get Beer of the Company, and then if they be but mean men, they Master
them; and they answer them, Come pay, with this usual Phrase, yo^ ^re not the
men we* (...) for; and demand of the Hostess if she have (...) (...) in her
h^uing got their de^re, they (...) with this Comple^ent* (...) if (...)
business (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), we would (...) (...) (...) we must
(...) (...) pl^ces vp^ (...), it is * (...) * (...) (...) King* and so (...)
with the (...) of the hone^ Com^ny, and laughter (...) them. It Is a (...) to
one if they (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)* but they will (...) (...) Bills
(...) sixe^* and (...) down laid (...) (...) (...) such matter; a fine trick
to get money by their place. They should seem to be either very poor, or
covetous, or crafty men; for they put their Charges alw^ies upon the Parish: If
an account happen to be among the Pari^hioners when such a thing, or such a
thing was done; they will answer, in the same year, o^ there abouts, I was
Constable, in thinking thereby to set forth their own Credit. I lea^e them,
wishing them to be good in their Offic^, it is not long they have to stay in
it.

12. Currant^es ^r ^eekly News.
THese commonly begin with Vienna and end wi^h Antwerpt: The Spanish and French
affairs must not be left out: The three names that grace their Letters, are
the Sweds, Tillies, or Imperialists: ordinarily they have as many Leyes as
Lines, they use to lie (as weather-beaten Soldiers) upon a Booke-bi^ders
stall, they are new and old in si^e days: they are busy fellows, for they
meddle with other men's Affairs: No Pope, Emp^rour, or King, but must be
touched by their pen: Nay they use to interline some great exploit at Sea
betwixt the Hollander and D^nkerker, or else betwixt the Hollander and
Spaniard, at the Cape or the straights of Magellan, and usually they conclude
with this Phrase, The Admiral or Vice Admiral of our side, gave a ^road side
to the utter over throw of the Spaniard, with so many men hurt, such a Rich
prize taken, such a Ship sunk, or fired: Being faithfully translated out of
the Dutch copy, with the first and second Part, like Ballads. And these are
all conceits ordinarily, which their own idle brain, or busy fancies, upon
the blocks in Paul's, or in their Chambers invented: They have used this trade
so long, that now every one can say, its even as true as a Currantoe, meaning
that it is all false. Now Swedens and the Emperors War in Germany, is their
Storehouse, with how (...), Hamburgh, Leipsich, Breame, and the other
Hans-Townes affect the Kings Majesty's procee-^dings: If a Town be Beleagured,
or taken, then they never take care, but how they may send their Leyes fast
enough, and far enough: Well, they are politic, not to be descried, for they
are ashamed to put their names to their Books. If they write good News of our
side, it is seldom true; but if it be bad, it is always almost too true. I
wish them either to write not at all, or less, or more true; the best news is
when we hear no News.

FINIS.

