LVCANS PHARSALIA: CONTAINING The Civil Wars between CAESAR and POMPEY.

WRITTEN Jn Latin Heroical Verse by M. ANNAEVS LVCANVS.

TRANSLATED INTO ENGlish verse by Sir Arthur Gorges Knight.

Whereunto is annexed the life of the Author, collected out of diverse Authors.

Fides fortibus fraus formidolosis.

London printed for Edward Blount 1614.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, LVCY, COUNTESS OF BEDFORD, MY MOST
Honored Lady and Mistress.
MADAME
THE least good documents, which we learn in our youth, may in some part of
our life serve us to use. I remember this sentence in my Pueriles, Voluntas,
vbi desunt vires, est laudanda: Where power is wanting the good will is to be
accepted. Which J presume will be my warrant in presenting your Laship with
this Poem, which by chance J did see in my fathers study, amongst many other
of his Manuscripts. And because it lay idly there, I desired him to give it me.
Who then asking what I would do with it, I told him that I would present it to
my Lady my Mistress. Which humor of mine he seemed very well to like: but he
answered, that it was not fair enough written for her reading. Whereunto J
replied, that if I might have it, I would amend that fault, and get it printed
by the help of my Schoole-maister, and in that sort offer it. Whereto my
father said, that he liked so well of my devotion to so noble a Mistress, as
that he would freely give it me. The which now (as mine own) J do humbly
recommend to your honorable acceptance, as some testimony of my devoted zeal,
until years, and ability shall second my endeavors with parts more answerable
to my desire. And in the mean season I will persuade my self that this poor
present is the more aptly offered, knowing that the reading of Heroical
actions do as properly belong to noble and virtuous Ladies, as the acting of
them to worthy and valorous Knights. Besides that, your Ladyship is an
honorable lover and Patroness of learning and the Muses, an instinct
naturally ingrafted in your excellent spirit, by that worthy blood of the
Sydneyes, wherewith you do so nearly participate, and whose perfections did so
eminently shine in that hopeful young Lord your late brother, one of the
mirrours of our Age. Now if this may but receive your honorable applause, as
some pledge of my Devotion, J will never think that I need to be ashamed to
flutter with my Fathers feathers. And so am ever ready to approve my self,

Your Ladyships most humble and faithful servant, Carew Gorges.

To the Translator.
HAD Lucan hid the truth to please the time,
He had been too unworthy of thy Pen:
Who never sought, nor ever cared to clime
By flattery, or seeking worthless men.
For this thou have been bruised: but yet those scarres
Do beautify no less, then those wounds do
Received in just, and in religious wars;
Though thou have bled by both, and bearst them too.
Change not, to change thy fortune it is too late.
Who with a manly faith resolves to dye,
May promise to himself a lasting state,
Though not so great, yet free from infamy.
Such was thy Lucan, whom so to translate
Nature thy Muse (like LVCANS) did create
W. R.

To the Translator.
HOMER and MARO, that did Poetize,
As much in matter, as in kind of style,
Did thereby dim the glorious deeds the while
Of them, whose acts they meant to memorize.
So did not LVCAN, who (in other guize)
The gests of two great Worthies did compile;
S'deining their high atchieuements to defile,
Or inter-lace with idle vanities.
Therefore how far from Fable Truth is set,
So far above all feigners LVCAN shines;
While in his Muse both faculties are met,
That with sweet Number beauteous Truth combines.
And we to thee in endless debt must dwell
For making Lucan speak our tongue so well.
S. S.

To the Translator.
AS Thetis famous son concealed lay
From that brave Troop of Greekish martial Knights,
Until Ulysses (quicker eyed then they)
Presented him vnmask't to Trojan fights.
So Lucans Spaine-borne, Rome-bred, Muse-nurc't wit,
Lay hid in lines obscure to most of us,
Till thou ( Vlysses-like) with numbers fit
Did happily vnclowd his Genius.
And though for it that Ithac bostingly
Claimed to himself Achilles acts of fame;
Thou (worthy Knight) do use more modesty:
Although thy work alike deserves the same.
For who with judgment reads thy well-tuned Lays,
Will judge thee worthy Lucans Crown of Bays.
A. I.

To the Translator.
LVCAN, that first in the Imperial tongue
(In naked truth of acted history)
The civil wounds made for an Empire song;
Has checked precedent, taught succeeding Poesy,
That flatteries and fictions may delight,
May please a Tyrant, wrong a rightful King,
May please an Orphan Judgment, wrong the right,
Enuelop Truth, proclaim an untrue thing.
Lucan, that first has shown the force of verse,
Relating only what was seen, felt, done,
Of Conqu'rors triumphs, of the Conqu'reds hearse,
All as it left, all as it first begun.
Not like the Trojan Theamers, fit for schools,
Fabling of this and that in Heaven, Earth, Hell,
Sober to madmen, turning wise to fools,
Gods to be Neat-heards, men in stars to dwell,
Has matched the faith, that History requires:
Has matched best History in choice of phrase:
Has taught, that History in naught aspires
Above the truth of deeds, it self to raise.
This Lucan for his truth a Truch-man gains
As true to him, as he to Truth remains.
T. W.

The Printer to the Reader.
THat which no Impressions have ever been free from, were now needless for me
to excuse, I mean the faults escaped in the printing; which may appear the
more harsh, because the lines be short. In regard whereof, (to do right as well
to the Translator, as also the better to satisfy the Reader) I have here set
down the Errata, with the page and lines specified where the defects are, to
be amended with the more ease.

PAge 3. line 22. for arms read harms. page 4. lin. 7. for time read twine.
pa. 9. li. 9. for brangling read brandling. p 11. l. 35. for fettred read
feltred. p. 16. l. 31 for strong read stung. p. 33. l. 5. for with read
which. p. 33. l. 19. for interposing read interposed. p. 34. l. 9. for Thebans
read Theban. p. 34. l. 39. for fettred read feltred. p. 36. l. 6. for that read
for. p. 37. l. 39 for then r. the. p. 37. l. 40. for clothed, r. choked. p. 45.
l. 14. for captive read caitiffe. p. 46. l. 39. for they read thy. p. 52. l.
40. for stream read streams. p. 56. l. 8. for thy read they. p. 64. l. 19.
for laws read sawes. p. 66. l. 37. deest a. p. 82. l. 39. for it read is. p.
86. l. 12. for this read these. p. 90 l. 40. for ease read these. p. 91. l. 12.
for event ready bent. p. 92.22. for Hernius read Hermus. p. 105. l. 35. for
cost read cast. p. 106. l. 39. for flames read frames. p. 110 l. 3. for fierce
read firm. p. 116. l. 7. for foil read soil. p. 124. l. 11. for either, read
neither. Ibid. for a read or. p. 126. l. 23. dele of. p. 126. l. 34. for To
read The. p. 130 l. 13. for fight read flight. p. 155. l. 40. for the read
these. p. 181. l. 17. deest our. p. 186 l. 9. for Moors read moares. p. 192.
l. 24. for timelesse read time lost. p. 196. l. 6. for takes delight, read
takes so great delight. p. 212. l. 1. for parties read party. p. 215 l. 1. for
a read read as. p. 225. l. 32. for place read peace. p. 226. l. 34. for slang
read slaugh. p. 236. l. 28. for suspected read respected. p. 240. l. 6. for is
read it is. p. 258. l. 2. for hi read his. Ibid. l. 8. deest are. p. 260. l. 16.
for she read he. p. 262. l. 20 for no read now. p. 268. l. 14. for valley read
valley. p. 280. l. 32. for affected read effected p. 292. l. 25 for world read
worlds. p. 300. l. 5. for Pentheius read Pentheus. p. 305. l. 3. for were read
where. p. 306. l. 14. for Achilles r. Achillas. p. 309. l. 16. dele if. p. 313
l. 18. for desired r. deserved. p. 319. l. 6. for None read Nor. p. 319. l. 38.
for Palean r. Pelean. p. 329. l. 39. for sucst r. such. p. 330. l. 2. for
stitcht read stickt. p. 333. l. 21. for we read no. p. 333. l. 25. deest do. p.
335. l. 16. for fathers read brothers. p. 335. l. 20. for spirits read
sprights. p. 337. l. 15. for Thy read Fly. p. 342. l. 37. for these read those.
p. 343. l. 3. for meant read went. p. 344. l. 10. for he read had. p. 344. l.
17. for resolves read reuolues. p. 344. l. 25. for sip read ship. p. 347. l.
31. for The read That p. 348. l. 28. for yet read erst. p. 360. in marg. for
Comely read Country. p. 362. l. 23. for (O grief) read of grief. p. 367. l.
36. for dandling read dangling. p. 373. l 3. for for no read to. p. 378. l. 26.
for bitter read better. p. 383. l. 9. for streaming read strange. p. 385. l.
11. for wretched read wreathed. p. 390. l. 5. for when read whom. p. 399. l.
39. for fury read fyry. p. 409. l. 14. for he read they. p. 418. l. 40. for
Pollean read Pelean. p. 419. in marg. for enuies read inueighes. p. 424. l.
24. for a bear, read bear a. p. 425. l. 35. for rifing read rising. p. 427.
l. 9. for Falermums, read Falernums. p. 430. l. 18. for unto read to. p. 431.
l. 19. for Neroe read Meroe. p. 431. l. 33. for Zoylan read Nylan. p. 434. l.
39. for Neroe read Meroe. p. 435. l. 6. for bands read bends.

THE LIFE OF M. ANNAEVS LVCAN.
ANnaeus Seneca coming from Corduba, (a City in the inner Province of Betique
Spain) to Rome, was presently advanced to the honor of Knighthood; whose
Orations (al-be-it of great fame and note) were by the injury of Time denied to
posterity. He had by his wife Elbia three sons, whose names were, L. Annaeus
Seneca, Julius Annaeus Gallio, and Annaeus Mela: who (because he was youngest)
was left behind at Corduba. The other two (to wit) Seneca and Gallio, he
committed to the tuition of Marullus Grammaticus, Cestius Smyrneus, and Asinius
Pollio. Mela when he came to years of discretion, was by his father made
governor of his household affairs; and being graced as well as his other
brethren (by the favor of the Caesar's) with the order of Knighthood, he
married C. Acilia, the daughter of Acilius Lucanus, a famous Orator in the
Proconsuls Court, and much esteemed for his wit among the better sort. Bt her
(about the fourth of the Nones of November, in the second Consulship of Caius
Caesar Germanicus with Lucius Cecianus) he begat Marcus Annaeus Lucan; taking
his sur^^^e from his grandfather (by his mothers side) Acilius Lucan. At
length growing weary of the care of housekeeping, and desirous to live with
his brethren in more ease and quiet; he went with his son Lucan (being then
but eight months old) to Rome, hoping that by the well managing of his wealth
which he had gathered, it would in short space come so to pass, that he should
be chosen Consul. Now as he was iourneying, it chanced that a swarm of Bees
flying about the cradle wherein the child was carried (as it is reported
happened to Hesiodus) lighted and hung at his mouth; signifying (no doubt) the
sweet and admirable eloquence that should be in that child, whereof his
works give good testimony. His Masters and Tutors were Rhemnius Palemon, and
Flavius Virginius, the one a famous Grammarian, the other a singular
Rhetorician: Under whom he profited so well (the dexterity of his wit being
furthered with his diligence) that within a very short space, he declaimed both
in Greek and Latin, to the great admiration of the Auditors. His
Schoole-fellowes were Saleius Bassus, and Au. Persius: he held a long time in
the grace and favor of Nero (who in his young years was brought up under
Seneca, this Lucans Uncle) He was advanced to the Office of Questor before due
age; at what time he set out such excellent sword-playes, that by the peoples
favor, he was the next year called to the Office of Priest among the Augures,
as Papinius Statius records.

Romam colitur chori Sacerdos.
Lucan was held in such admire,
That he became Priest of the Quire.
He took to wife Polla Argentaria (the daughter of Pollus Argentarius) of whom
Papinius in Calliope sings thus: Nec solum dabo carminum nitorem,
Sed taedis genialibus dicabo
Doctam, atque ingenio tuo decorum,
Qualem blanda Venus, daretque Juno,
Forma, simplicitate, comitate,
Censu, sanguine, gratia, decore.
The purer numbers that I write,
Shall not with empty words be dight:
But to thy geniall bed I Will bring
A Bride, that learnedly can sing:
A wench, that Nature framed to sit
The swelling torrent of thy wit.
And such a milke-white Turtle-doue,
As that the Emperesse of love,
Or else the Queen of Majesty,
Might as a boon bestow on thee.
She is so fair, so sweet, so kind,
So rich, and of so noble mind,
So match esse in her graceful port,
So moving to Ambrosian sport.


But on a certain time there being a Poetical Comedy to be act^d in Pompey's
Theater; and Nero having promised by Chuius Rufus, that he himself in person
would act the Fable of Niobe: Lucan (stepping out upon the stage) recited
certain vers^s extempore in the praise of Orpheus: for which he had a crown
of Laurel bestowed on him. Whereupon Nero conceiving a spleen against him,
forbid him ever after to frequent the Market-plac^, and Theater, or to make any
verses. Of which Papinius says thus: Ingratus Nero dulcibus Theatris,
Et noster tibi praeferatur Orpheus.
Nero thou shewd'st thy self ingrate
To dulcet Theaters, for hate
Thou bar'st to him that did rehearse
More pleasing numbers then thy verse.


Who hoping to be revenged on Nero, he joined himself to the Pisionian
treason: But the plot being discovered, he persisted not in the denial of his
fault: but craving mercy for himself, he accused his innocent mother to be
also one of this conspiracy: hoping that this empiety might be a means to
procure pardon at the hands of an impious Prince. But having received the
sentence of condemnation, and liberty given to him to choose what death he
would* he writ certain verses unto his father; and (after a large banquet)
causing the veins of his arms to be opened, he dyed bleeding. But when his
feet and hands began to wax cold, and that he was now at the point to resign
his latest breath, he recited certain verses of his, which he had made on a
Soldier in the same case. Lib. 3.

Scinditur avulsus, nec sicut vulnere sanguis
Emicuit lentus, ruptis, cadit vndique venis:
Discursusque animae diuersa in membra meantis,
Interceptus aquis, nullius vita perempti
Est tanta dimissa via.
His body made of fennie mud,
Was torn asunder us he stood,
So that his blood dropped not so slow
As that which from a wound does flow.
But from each broken hollow vain,
A stream of crimson gusht amain.
And that which wont was to impart
Life to the limbs from out the heart,
With that same element was mixed
That earth and air lies betwixt.
Never did any dying wight
So many ways breath out his spright.
He ended his life the day before the Calends of May ( Atticus Vestinius, and
Nerua Silius being Consuls) in the 27 year of his age. He was intombed in his
own garden, on whom might be ingraued this inscription.

Bethis habet natale solum, est Annaea propago,
De genitore Mela, dat matter Acilia terris,
Vix Luna octouos coelo confecerat orbs,
Cum me Roma sui, etc.
My native Country Betique Spain,
The Annaean blood I did retain,
My noble father Mela hight,
Acilia brought me to the light.
Eight times had scarce the nightly Queen,
This massy round with full face seen.
When Rome did wash my infant sides
With moisture that in Tyber glides.
Then was I from the Forum taken,
And consecrate to Phoebus Fane.
Then I composed Syluaes ten,
And flames of Rome and Troy did pen.
I did declaime against Sagita,
That foully murdered Pontia.
Then (that which moved Nero's hate)
Orpheus praise I and relate.
Next, having taken the war in hand
That rau'd throughout Pharsalia land,
The tyrant (that could not away
My fame should grow, and his decay)
Did quell my Muse with Enuies blade,
Before the work was perfect made.
My veins in sunder being shred,
He all besmeared my sacred head,
With blood which did my soul set free,
When from my body it did flee.
Papinius says, that being but a Boy, he writ the combat of Hector and
Achilles: he wrote also the feasts of Saturn, ten Books of Sylues, the
Tragedy of Medea (not perfected) the journey of Orpheus to Hell, the burning
of Rome, the sacking of Troy, with the misery of King Priamus. He wrote an
inuectiue Oration against Octauius Sagitta, that murdered Pontia, with many
other Fables and Epistles. He undertook the civil wars of Caesar and
Pompey, but being prevented by death, he wrote but only ten Books, and of them
ten perfected but three, with the help of his wife, the other seven were
diligently corrected, and published after his death. Fabius Quintilian says,
that he was rather to be accounted an Orator then a Poet, as being lofty and
vehement in his style, full of excellent sentences: so admirable and witty in
his Orations, as that he seems to express that singular Elegancie and
Majesty that is observed in Virgil. His Epitaph may yet be seen in Rome,
graued on a marble Monument in old Characters, thus.

Corduba me genuit, rapuit Nero, praelia dixi,
Quae gessere pares, hinc gener, inde socer.
Continuo nunquam direxi carmina ductu,
Quae tractum serpant, plus mihi comma placet.
Fluminis in morem, quae sunt miranda, citentur,
Haec vero sapiet dictio, quae feriet.
In Corduba I first drew breath:
By Nero I was doomed to death,
Before I made an end to write
Two Rival Romans civil fight:
Where Ensigns opposite did run,
The Father-in-law against the Son.
I have not kept a steady course
In pouring out my Muses source:
But where the matter large did fall,
A Comma pleased me best of all.
When wonders come, I make them slide
Like to a full-brim'd swelling tide.
But that which bears the stamp of wit,
Are well-couch't numbers shortly knit.
LVCANS PHARSALIA. The first Book.
THE ARGUMENT
WHat motives did this war incense,
Caesar's and Pompeys insolence.
Forbidden Rubicon is past,
Aryminum surprised in haste.
Tribunes disgraced from Rome retire:
They Caesar's heart do set on fire.
To wars his Legions he exhorts,
And calls from far his old Cohorts.
The woeful Cities mazed plight,
With Pompeys base untimely flight.
A stowt Decree the Senate make,
And then for fear do Rome forsake.
Lastly, prodigious signs are seen,
And what the Augures answers been.
A More then civil war I sing,
That through the Emathian fields did ring,
Where reins let loose to headstrong pride,
A potent people did misguide:
Whose conquering hand enraged rebounds
On his own bowels with deep wounds.
Where Hosts confronting near alies,
All faith and Empires Laws defies.
A world of force in faction meets,
And common guilt like torrents fleets.
Where like infestuous ensigns wave,
The Aegle does the Aegle brave,
And Pyle against the Pyle does rave.
A sharp reprehension of Civil war.
Dear Citizens, what brainsick charms?
What outrage of disordered arms?
Leads you to feast your envious foes,
To see you goar'd with your own blows?
Proud Babylon your force does scorn,
Whose spoils your trophies might adorn,
And Crassus unrevenged ghost,
Roames wayling through the Parthian coast.
Does now your hearts such war desire,
As yields no triumphs for your hyre?
O what a world by Lands and Seas,
Might you have won with much more ease.
Then half the blood your weapons draines,
In civil strife from out your veins!
As far as Phoebus first does rise,
Until in Thaetis lap he lies:
Or where his parching golde-beam'd ray,
Does dart down flames at mid of day:
Or frostie Hyems shiuering stands,
Glazing the Sea with ycie hands;
Whose air benumbed with Scythian flawes,
No Summers sunshine ever thawes:
The Seres, and Araxes rude,
Not to our Empire yet subdued;
Or what Barbarians else are bred,
About old Nylus unknown head;
All these might you have vanquished.
And then, O Rome, when thou had hent
The whole worlds homage to thy bent,
And played at full this mastering prise,
If Enuies spleen thee then agrize,
Against thy self, thy self oppose,
For yet thou want no foreign foes:
But Italy lies now aspoile,
Her Cities leuelld with the soil.
Their lostie walls with breaches torn, The miserable estate of Italy.

The vacant houses all forlorn.
The Markets unfrequented been,
The vntrod streets ore-growne with green:
The fruitful fair Hesperian fields,
That nothing now but thistles yields,
Cries out for hands to plow and plant,
Her laborers are grown so scant.
This dismal state wherein she stands,
Proceeds not from fierce Pyrrhus hands;
Nor yet could Hannibals despite
Inflict on us this wretched plight.
No foreign foes could so prevail, The Romans themselves work their own
ruin.

Our settled state to rent and quail:
The audacious sword worn by thy side,
Has hewn in thee these gashes wide.
And yet if Fates have so decreed,
That thou (O Nero) should succeed
By these means to the Empires throne,
Our fore-past arms the less we moan.
For Jupiter was not possessed
Of heavens sole rule in settled rest,
Before the Giants were suppressed.
Let then Pharsalia fields be spread
With iron legions scorning dread.
So to appease the whining mood
Of Punique Ghosts with Latium blood.
Let Munda be the fatal place
Where Caesar quails great Pompeys race:
And let as hard a siege betide
As erst Mutina did abide.
Yea let as great a famine flow
As ever did Perusia know:
And two such Fleetes confronting rage,
As did the Axium battle wage:
With as much broyle and hammering dinne,
As when that Vulcan did begin
To set his Cyclops to their taskes;
It should seem that this was written in the beginning of Neroes reign, which
was most excelle^tly goue^ned for the first 5 years, with singular Justice and
temperance.
Whose sparkling forges Aetna ma^kes.
And yet thou Rome shall be in debt
Unto these wrackes, that did beget
This happy peace, wherein we live,
And to our toils an end did give.
But when (O Nero) Atrops knife
Shall shred in twain thy time of life:
And thou (unto the stars bequeau'd)
With Heavens joy shall be received.
There shall thou freely take thy choice,
Whether thy humor more rejoice
To sit in the Empiring Throne,
As ruling over all alone:
Or whether thou do more desire
To sway the Carre of Phoebus fire,
And thence (with wandering flames) suruay
The earth in all her rich array:
Whom thy mild beams will not dismay.
The Deities bend to thy hest,
And Nature yields thee thy request,
To be what Godhead likes thee best,
And where thy Empires seat shall rest.
This is mere Ironicall flattery.
But I beseech thee of high grace,
Do not thy Sovereign Mansion place
About the North or Southern star,
Which is from us remote so far:
For then should Rome fall to mischance,
If thou on her look but a scance.
But if a part of heavens huge sphere,
Thou choose thy ponderous heft to bear;
O let the Axle-tree sustain
In this he teaches NERO how he should govern, by an Imagination of what is.
The paise of thy Maiesticke train.
Amidst the firmament be placed,
For that with brightest beams is graced.
So Neroes shine shall still subsist,
Never obscured with cloudy mist.
Then shall men lay aside their Arms,
And rue the shame of civil harms.
All Nations then shall be at peace
With mutual leagues, and Trades increase.
So when all iarres do end their dates,
Ianus may sparre his Iron gates.
But whilst that I some power Divine
Inuoke, to strength this Muse of mine:
If I thy favor can obtain
(O Nero) to assist my vain;
I will not then desire or crave,
Apollo's furtherance to have;
Nor yet entreat the God of wine,
To aid this Tragic work of mine:
For thou alone can life infuse
And spirit to my Latin muse.
My mind gives me the cause to write,
That did this humorous rage incite:
A task that will much labor cost,
To show what frantic fevers tossed
This peoples mood, to rave in spoil,
And banish peace from Latium soil.
It was conspiring Destiny, The causes of the civil war.

The bane of all felicity:
And that which is by heavenly reed,
As doom to greatness still decreed,
Not long to stand in settled state:
But, being too much eleuate,
The own paize must it ruinate:
And Rome her self, too powrfull grown,
With insolence was ouer-throwne.
So when by great resistlesse Fate,
The world dissolues to her last date,
Returning to that formlesse mass,
Which was before ought formed was:
Stars shall with stars confusedly,
In clusters meet within the sky:
The fiery Element displac't,
Shall down into the deep be cast:
The massy globe in this disease,
Deny due bounds unto the seas:
Belphoebe will run counter quite
To Titan, that does lend her light:
And (scorning her own oblique way)
Would guide the Lantern of the day.
So that the course of this vaste All,
Into confusions lap will fall.
For Jove to great things this doom left,
They should be crushed with their own heft.
Fortune most triumphs over great estates.
Fortune does scorn to cast a frown
On those, that mean estate keeps down:
But enuies those that lofty stand,
Empiring over sea and land.
O Rome! then bondage pressed thee,
When thou were first made slave to three.
Divided kingdoms staggring stand,
One Scepter fits one sovereign hand.
O ye contentious Roman knights,
Whom blind Ambition so incites!
What solace yields that Sovereignty
That Is gained with such hostility
As does your hands and hearts divide,
And turmoiles all the world beside?
But otherwise it never sorts:
For whilst the land the seas supports;
Or that the Air (in heats and colds)
The Earth in her soft mantle folds:
And Phoebus shall maintain his race,
Or Cinthia supply his place,
So long Competitors of States
No faith amongst Competitors of kingdoms.
(In jealousy) shall cloak debates.
Faith holds not firm twixt crowned Mates.
We need not far examples seek,
What other clymate breeds the like:
For when Rome first her walls ordained,
Romulus and Rhemus.
With brothers blood they were distained.
Yet all the whole worlds worth, that time,
Could not requite so foul a crime.
A petty structure (scarce begun)
Has this fraternall outrage spun.
Our two great Chiefetaines (for a space)
A iarring concord did embrace.
And so an outward peace maintained,
Which their ambitious hopes disdained.
But Crassus power does interpose, Crassus the means that kept Caesar and
Pompey within their bounds.

And hold them off from fatal blows.
Like Istmos, that divided keeps
The raging concurse of the deepes,
And does so strongly part the waves,
That each with other never raues.
But if this Istmos break asunder,
How would the Aegean billows thunder,
Incountering the Ionian seas,
And struggle with their counterpaise?
So Crassus whilst he was a life,
Held these two worthies off from strife;
And (with perswasiue powerful words)
Within their sheathes confined their swords.
But when the hapless Carran fight,
Brought Crassus to his latest night,
This Parthian blow dissolved the Chain By Crassus death this civil rage
brake out.

That did these headstrong Peers restrain;
And bred more scath unto our state
Then it was ware (by home-debate:)
For now the Roman Lordly guides
Divide themselves in factious sides:
And our great fortune, that had long
Subsisted by a people strong,
That conquered worlds on seas and maine, What mischief two ambitious minds
can breed in a quiet state.

Could not two haughty minds contain:
For Iulia (with like cruel fate
Untimely brought unto her date,
By Atrops life-destroying hands)
Dissolved the neere-allianc'd bands
Betwixt her father, and her spouse,
Forgetting their contracted vows. IVLIA the means to hold Caesar and Pompey
in good correspondency.

Whereas if Iulias line of life
Had longer escaped the fatal knife;
Even she had been of power alone,
Betwixt them two to make atone,
And from insulting force to cease,
With joining armed hands in peace;
As did the Sabines daughters erst,
Who sweetly all dislikes dispearst
Betwixt their Fathers and their Pheeres:
But by thy death these pride-swolne Peers,
Shake off all leagues, and strain to wars,
Where virtue emulates it iarres.
Pompeyes jealousy.
For thou great Pompey do suspect,
That new-raisd triumphs thine deiect,
And that thy Pyrate-Laurell falls
Short of the conquest of the Gauls.
Thus the remembrance of thy deeds,
In thee so great impatience breeds,
As that thou holdst it foul disgrace
Except thou run a matchless race,
None now endures a second place.
Popeys humor.
For Pompey will no equal have,
Caesar's humor.
Nor supreme Lord must Caesar brave.
Heinous it was, but to be scand,
Which of them in the right did stand:
And took up Arms with just pretense,
Great Judges do with both dispense.
The conquering part the Gods avowes,
Cato the vanquished allows:
The ambition of these captains tends
Not to the like and selfsame ends.
Pompeyes disposition described.
Pompey (surprised with elder years)
His course in quiet glory steeres.
And (keeping state in peaceful gown)
Follows not Mart for more renown.
He dotes upon domesticke fame,
And so (to glorify his name)
To State-affaires does frame his bent.
And then (to give the world content)
With largess plyes the common Rowt,
And, on the Theaters, sets out
Popular affectation.
His great exployts, and service done
Till through the peoples ears it run,
Suffis'd when their applause is won.
No new employments he requests;
But on his fore-past fortunes rests.
So Pompeyes name is like a shade,
That by a stately Oak is made,
Towering amidst a flowring field,
Adorned with many a battred shield,
With Trophies hanging on his twists,
(The gifts of famous Martialists)
And though not rooted deep in land,
With his own weight upright does stand:
With leauelesse arms spreading his spraies
From naked trunkes does shadows raise.
Yet (brangling with tempestuous blast)
Is danger'd to be ouer-cast:
When other trees, grown round about,
Against the winds standing more stout,
To this old Oak do lowly lowt,
But Caesar's name (in men's conceit)
Was not yet grown unto that height,
Nor for the wars in like request: Caesar's disposition described

And yet his virtue cannot rest,
But pricks him forth to think it shame,
By valor not to win the game.
His dreadlesse courage, and his hope
Unto his plots, gave ample scope
Never to spare his daring sword,
Where glory might him work afford,
And his success-full fate pursue,
Which in heavens favor daily grew.
Affecting all, daunts as him lists,
What force soever him resists,
Contented best when that he may
Level out paths for Ruins way.
Like lightning, gendred in the Clouds,
By force of wind itself vnshroudes,
Tears through the air with claps of thunder,
(Mazing the world twixt fear and wonder.)
The Temples filles with oblique flashes,
And of their lamps the lights out dashes,
The strongest walls asunder rents,
If they resist, or stop his vents,
And spoiling all, makes Reuell-rout
In going in, and coming out;
Collects his parted flames again,
And with fresh force does strive and strain,
Against which resistance all is vain.
These former motives led the way
Unto these Captains lawless sway.
But public seeds were after sown,
The Roman Vices.
From whence this banefull strife is grown
Which has great Kingdoms overthrown.
O this was it when conquering Fates
Had made us Lords of mighty states,
And cloyd us with abundant treasure,
Wealth the cause of all excess.
We steept our thoughts in pride and pleasure.
Then Luxury the State surpised,
And virtuous manners grew disguised:
For Avarice (that ravening gull,
Who more she has, the less is full)
To stately mansions draws their minds,
And Gluttony new dainties finds;
The moderate diet not regarded,
Our appetite must now be larded.
So men from manly humors fall,
And grew effeminate withal:
Decking themselves with queint attires,
Scarce fit for women's nice desires.
Then Poverty (that had of yore
The great alteration of the Roman humors.
Of worthy Champions bred such store)
Did scorned creep from door to door.
And Riches (michiefes pleasing guest)
Then only grew into request
Pamperd Delight spares for no charge.
Their Territories they enlarge.
Camyllus Plow ears not their lands,
Nor Curios spades will fit their hands.
Their bounds no measure can endure,
And strangers must their farms manure:
And yet this opulent increase,
Could not contain their minds in peace:
But as their plenty more did flow,
Ambition with it more did grow.
And many vices more to boot,
Which in them took so deep a root,
That Couetyse no crime was thought,
What force could win, was held as bought.
Oppression all does ouer-awe,
And wrong to right prescribes law. Division between the Senate and the people.

Then Faction vshers on this war,
The Senate with the people jar.
Force does authorize their decrees,
The laws their sacred freedom leese,
Consuls with Tribunes now contest,
Private respects their censures wrest,
All suffrages are bought and prized,
The Consulships are Merchandiz'd,
And Bribery (the Cities bane)
Did Campus Martius so profane,
That her brave Palms (the Victors hire)
The purses virtue did acquire.
Then Vsuryes moth-eating trade
So rife was grown, and lawless made,
That Debtors, at the payment day, Honors bought and sold, and not conferred by
merit.

To Creditors became a pray.
So Banque-rupts (wanting means to live)
Their hopes to war and spoil did give.
Now Caesar's Army marches fast,
And ore the frosty Alps was past:
But ere he said, The dyce are cast,
Within his troubled thoughts he scand
The boisterous storms of wars at hand:
And (having led his legions on
Unto the River Rubicon)
In gloomy night there did appear Caesar marching toward Rubicon, is forbidden
by an apparition.

(In dreams to him with trembling cheer)
Of Italy the Image vaste,
With naked Arms abroad out cast.
And (as a woman in distress)
Shaking her head, and fettred tresse,
That was ingrain'd with aged hoare,
In sobbing speech does thus deplore.
Whither (quoth she) does your march tend?
Whither (dear sons) and to what end
My famous Standard do you spread?
Can lawfully these Troops be led
Unto this place prohibited?
Therewith did Horrors heaviness
This Captains spirits so oppress,
As that his hair stood up an end,
And faintness does his pace suspend.
Then at the Rivers brinke he stays,
And with a manly voice he says:
Caesar's answer to the Apparition.
Great Thunderer, that do protect
(From thy Tarpeyan high prospect)
The Roman State with grace divine,
The Julian and the Latin Line,
The mysteries of raped Quirine;
O Jupiter the Latium guide,
That in high Alba do reside,
Preserver of our Vestall flame;
And Rome (thou type of supreme name)
From your applause do not exempt
This enterprise, that I attempt.
I do not I, with furious arms,
Caesar's Protestation to Rome.
(Dear City) seek thy wrackes or harms.
Behold thy Caesar here does stand,
That has (with his success-full hand)
Conquered for thee by sea and land.
Let me thy Champion now be hight,
And deem him heinous in thy sight,
That me prouokes to such debate,
As must disturb thy settled state.
This said, he shakes off all delay
That might his speedy passage stay:
His armed legions he will guide
Caesar will pass the Rubicon with his legions.
Unto the Rivers further side:
And as a Lybian Lion dread,
(In sunburned Deserts bloody bred)
When Hunters near at hand he spies,
Upon the sandy soil down lies,
And does a while amazed remain,
Till his fierce courage comes again;
Then rouzing up his curled crest,
His beesom'd tail, and boisterous breast,
From yawning jaws (besmeared with gore)
Does bellow out a hideous rore.
If then the Mauritanian lance
Upon his rugged hide do glaunce,
Or in his wounded bleeding side,
The Hunters Iauelin do abide;
He careless then for loss of blood,
Assailes (with ramping fiery mood)
The Huntsman; and (with out stretched paws)
By force at last himself withdrawes.
Clear Rubicon (that first is fed The description of Rubicon.

But from a bubling fountains head)
During the time of Summers sun,
With a low shallow stream does run:
His current through the valleys glides,
And Italy from Gaul diuides.
But at this time his source was more,
The Winters rain increast his store.
The Moon likewise (but young in days)
His feeding springs does higher raise.
And that which made him most to swell,
Were molten heaps of snow that fell
From down the Alps in torrents great,
Dissolved by some gentle heat.
The Horsemen first the work do wage, Caesar passes Rubicon.

And of the stream the shallowes gage.
And with thick Troops in close arrayes,
The swiftness of the torrent stays.
The passage thus more easy made,
The Foot does through the river wade.
Caesar his Army thus at last
Forbidden Rubicon has past;
And standing on the Hesperian banks, Caesar's speech when he had past the
Rubicon.

Thus spoke he to his filed Ranks.
Here do I now all peace abjure,
And laws unjustly put in ure.
O Fortune! I will follow thee,
From other bonds my self I free.
In Fate my trust I do affye,
War (as a Judge) my cause shall try.
No more he said, but (with dispach)
At the approach of nights first watch,
His well-train'd Troops he does prepare,
Who in their march as speedy are
As motions of Balarian slings,
That circling through the thin air sings.
Or showers of shafts at Parths let fly,
When they retire, that dim the sky:
His March with such great speed he plies,
As does Ariminum surprise.
Caesar surpriseth Ariminum
Phoebus by this, with dawning light,
Obscured had the lamps of night;
And now the dismal day begun,
Wherein his first attempt was done
Upon this City, that does stand
A frontier of Italian land.
And whether Fates did so forecast,
Or foggy-faced Austers blast
Did scoule upon this wretched fact,
The air with misty clouds was pact.
The Town thus suddenly possessed,
The Marketplace they do inuest.
Where their brave Ensigns proudly stands,
Guarded with many armed bands.
The Trumpets (with their dreadful notes
Drawn through their hoarse Meandry throat*
Mixed with tempestuous noise of wars)
The Burgers with Alarums skarres.
Their state, which was secure at night,
By dawne of day was in this fright.
They outh amazed, their beds forsake,
The amazement of the Ariminenses.
And to the Temples them betake.
Where they do arm them in a stownd,
With such munitions as they found,
Which in long peace hanged on the walls
Idle, vn-vsd to Martial brawles.
The Shields, that were of ancient dates,
VVorme-eaten to the very plates.
Their Piles with heads blunted and bowd,
Their glaiues the cankered rust did cloud.
But when the Egle was displaid,
And Caesar (in bright Arms arrayd)
Mounted upon a Throne of State,
In midst of his stern Legions sat;
The Citizens then silent were,
Their senses raped with numming fear,
A patient silence them possessed, The complaint of the Ariminenses.

Whilst these sad mones boil in their breast.
What dismal Planets wrathful frown,
So near the Gauls, confined our Town?
What Destiny (with endless toil)
First drew us to this fatal soil?
In peace all people live secure:
But we in peace must wars endure,
To Outrage we are still a pray,
Our seat stands so in Harms highway.
O Fortune! more had we been blessed,
In dwelling farthest East or West:
Or near the Pole to have our homes:
Or else in Tents, that wandering roames;
Then thus to keep a Frontier gate
Of Italies envied state.
We first did see that great deluge
Of the fierce Senons Army huge.
We first endured the Cymbrian brunt,
Er'e Marius force did them confrunt. The many wracks that Ariminum had endured.

And frightfull bruted Hanniball,
Did at his entrance on us fall.
Then savage Troops of Teuton swarms,
Infested us with hostile arms.
And thus as often as lowering Fate
Did please to scourge the Roman state,
(By raising up some powerful foe)
This was the way that War did go.
These sower accounts that them attaint,
They swallow up without complaint.
And so their coffeehouse hide,
Heartbreaking sorrow is tongue-ty'd.
But look what silence does possess
The air, when Winter does distress
The singing birds, and them restraines
From vtt'ring their melodious veins:
Or else as calmes the billows binds,
Not being moved with gusts of winds,
Such stiffnes ceased their grief-bound minds.
This days work done, and ouer-past,
And following night grown to his last,
The Sun his Chariot Eastward hies,
And with his beams does clear the skies.
Caesar (that doubtful yet remained
Before this entrance he had gained)
Is now, in hot blood, fully bent
To follow on his bold attempt.
The Fates likewise his humor draws
Dreadlesse to break all leagues and laws.
Caesar the child of Fortune.
And Fortune (whose he was avowd)
His enterprise, as just, allowd;
And motive reasons does provide
To trust to Arms, lest worse betide.
The Jealousy of the Senate.
The jealous Senate now forecast
What danger former times had past
By the seditious Gracchian fact,
That with the people were compact.
And thereupon (against all right)
The Court, with ouer-bearing might,
Those Tribunes presently expel,
Whose power did in the City swell,
And with the Senate so contest,
For Caesar's right, against their hest:
The Tribunes disgraced by the Senate.
The fiered Tribunes (thus disgraced)
Forthwith to Caesar's camp did have.
But he, that felt himself most strong
Was Curio, that, (with bribed tongue)
The Senate so much had upbraid,
And peoples voice for Caesar swayd.
And he no sooner was arrived
At Caesar's Camp (of fear deprived)
To Caesar he himself presents,
Whom many careful thoughts torments,
In plotting of these wars events.
Caesar, quoth he, whilst Justice, Curios oration.
laws
Gave upright hearing to thy cause;
And that a truthfull tongue might speak,
So long my words the ice did break:
And durst confront thy proudest foes,
Yea though the Senate did oppose.
For whilst I might (as Tribune) plead
The peoples voice so did I lead,
That thou had their applauses all,
A longer time to govern Gaul.
But after this the Senates might
(Against all law with scornful spite) Curio accuses the Senate.

Us as a factious party held,
And from our native Rome expeld:
Which outrage and oppressiue scorn,
With greater patience we have borne;
In hope that thy victorious arm
Their Dunghill crowing so will charm,
As shall our liberties restore
Free Roman Tribunes, as before.
Now therefore whilst surprising frights
Possess thy foes, and daunts their sprights:
Whilst they confusd (twixt hope and fear)
Know not on sudden how to rear
Such valiant Troops, and trained Bands,
As now are under Caesar's hands;
Slack thou no time: Fate guides thy game,
To men prepared, delay is shame.
And do but to remembrance call
The dangers past in conquering Gaul,
Thy toils that thou did undergo, Curio stirs Caesar to attempt Rome.

Before thou could subdue that foe;
And then compare it with this task,
Which does but resolution ask;
And thou shall find this of less pain,
But greater much in glorious gain.
Could thou ten years on Gallia spare,
So poor to Rome in all compare;
And can thou think less time worse spent,
To win the whole world to thy bent?
Fortune (that still with thee abounds)
When thou do march, her Trumpet sounds:
A strong persuasion.
Then to this work with courage fall,
In conquering Rome thou conquerst all.
But as the case now stands with thee,
No Triumphs will allowed be
At thy return, for service done,
Nor Laurels worn for Gallia won.
Envy (that does at virtue spurn)
Will at thy triumph rather mourn:
And (which is more to thy disgrace)
The honor of thy name to base.
Thy envious foes have plotted prankes
Curio persuades Caesar that the Senate conspire to wrong him.
To cut thy conquests short of thanks,
And will in lieu thereof, at last,
Some foul aspersion on thee cast.
Pompey, that matched thy daughter dear,
Admits thee not his equal Peer,
The Empire must be shared twixt none,
But thou may have it all alone.
This speech of Curio sets on fire
The mind of Caesar, whose desire
Before to war was fully set,
But with these words more sharply whet*
Like a proud Courser bred in Thrace,
Caesar incensed.
Accustomed to the running race,
Who when he hears the Trumpets noise,
The shouts and cries of men and boys,
(Though in the stable close vp-pent)
Yet, with his hoofes, does beat and rent
The planched floor, the bars and chains,
Until he have got loose the raines.
Caesar forthwith his troops does call,
To Attend him at his Tribunal:
And every Ensign to be manned,
And followed with his armed band.
So in the midst his place he takes:
Then head and hand he beckning shakes,
Caesar's oration to his Soldiers.
And therewithal deep silence makes.
Fellows in Arms and friends (quoth he)
That have this ten years space, with me,
In wars endured a thousand brunts,
With many hazards, and affronts;
And yet have brought our foes at length
Under our feet, by conquering strength.
Is this that Curio now relates,
All the esteem the Roman States
Does make of us, and our lost blood,
Expended for the Empires good,
By conquest of this Northern soil?
Is this the hire of all our toil
About the frosty Alps endured,
That many a Worthies bane procured?
Though Rome so scorn her Martial breed,
Yet is she now as hard besteed,
As when the Carthaginian sway
Over the Alps did force a way.
Her wasted Cohorts are supplyd
With men, that war has never tried:
But mere Besognios pressed in have.
And now the woods are feld as fast
To build a Navy out of hand:
And Caesar (as I understand)
Must be pursued by sea and land.
But now suppose some man will say,
What if (in one unlucky day)
When we do hope to give a blow,
Our selves receive the ouer-throw?
And that the Gauls (to venge their wrackes)
With furious swarms come on our backs?
Alas poor sprights! what doubts are these?
Since Fortune swayes which way I please,
And always prospers my designs?
And that the Gods their grace inclines
Our glory higher to advance?
When Fortune pipes, shall we not dance?
Let Pompey (whom dis-vse has made Caesar's scornful speech of Pompey, and
some other Romans.

A stranger to Bellona's trade)
Come on, with his new swaggering host,
Which cannot of one Skirmish boast.
Let Senators (in their grave gowns)
Brow-beat us with their haughty frowns.
And Marcell, that same prattling Iay,
With Stoicke Cato, that gives way
To naught but what himself does say:
Let all this rabble show their spite,
We scorn their malice, and their might.
Shall these consorts (for money bought)
Pompey to please, set us at naught?
Shall they so proudly undertake
In him a Monarchy to make?
Must our great Empires supreme sway,
Pompey taxed in diverse kinds
Him only serve, and sole obey?
Must he (with new insulting pride)
Again in Triumphs Chariot ride?
When no man knows for what, or why;
But all due course does it deny?
What, must he never quit again
The rule, that once he does attain?
Nor suffer others have their turn?
Must he at all men's honors spurn?
Who lives now that does not know
The famine that did ouer-flow
By public dearth of corn and bread,
Whereby his avarice was fed?
Who knows not that (by his affront
Contrary to the Roman wont)
The Judges, in the Marketplace,
Assaulted were with foul disgrace?
And with what pride he bolstred out
The outrage of that rascal rout?
And how, by maine oppressing might,
(Against all law and civil right)
Milo.
Milo, that so condemned stood,
For foully shedding Clodius blood,
Clodius.
By Pompeys rude presumptious bands,
Was rescued out of Justice hands?
But now, he waxing old and crazed,
Yet still affecting to be blazed,
And fearing that his date, far spent,
Will grow unfit for government, Caesar charge Pompey with the cause of this
civil war.

Lothing to lead a private life,
Now makes new work for civil strife;
Wherein he trained is so well,
As that he does by far excel
His Tutor Sylla, bloody sire,
That mischiefe-monger ruins fire.
And as a Tiger wildly fed,
In the Hyrcanian forest bred,
Who (following of his ravening damme
With blood of beasts his panch does cram)
Can never afterward allay
His savage longing after pray; Pompey a follower of Sylla.

So Pompey (nuz'led in the taste
Of Syllas sword, that made such waste
Of his own countries guiltless blood)
Cannot assuage his thirsting mood:
But that his jaws (in-vr'd to gore)
Must bathe in bowels, as before.
Shall his usurped lawless state
Nor limits have, nor any date?
How long shall he (with hands unclean)
Support his pride, that holds no mean?
His Master Sylla might him learn
By (his example) to discern,
That Tyranny at length should end,
And aged hopes to quiet bend.
Must Caesar needs give up his rest,
Because the Pirates are suppressed,
And Mithridates, with long toil,
At length received has the foil?
Although it cannot be denied
But Pontus poisons first he tried. Caesar alleges the wrongs offered him by
the Senats decree

Shall Caesar now (I say) be made
A prey to Pompeys rusty blade,
Because I scorned to forgo
My conquering Legions to my foe?
And disobeyd that proud decree,
Made against right in wrong of me?
But though I be denied my due,
And that no Triumphs must acrew
Unto our conquest, as our hire,
Yet (whilst I breath with living fire)
And these brave Troops are led by me,
They never shall defrauded be
Caesar insinuates with his Soldiers.
Of their reward for service done,
Nor after stranger Captains run
To seek new Fortunes at their hands,
In foreign wars, and unknown lands.
For if that such a course be held,
When they be ouer-growne with eld;
And not of force, as erst they were,
To broyle in wars, and arms to bear;
Where shall they then their limbs repose,
Weakened with age, with toil and blows?
What comfort should they find at last,
To recompense their travails past?
What lands to them shall be alowd?
What fields to plant, or to be plowd?
Where they in peace may eat their breads,
And rest their limbs in quiet bed?
Shall Pirates so (by Pompeys grace)
Caesar aleageth Pompeys provision for pirates whilst old Roman Veterans are
neglected.
In fruitful Colonies find place,
And Roman Veterans not have
That due regard their worth does crave?
O then resolve (without delay)
Your conquering Ensigns to display.
Employ those arms in battles tried,
By your own valor dignified.
Unjustly to withold a right,
Is to give all to armed might.
We want not higher powers to friend,
Yet do not I this Mart intend,
Pressed on for need, or greedy gain,
Or else ambitiously to rain;
Caesar's protestation against tyrannical ambition.
But to resist that Pride that raues
To make both Rome and us his slaves.
When he had said, the wavering rout
Did softly murmur many a doubt:
For though their fiery Martial sprights
In war and rapine most delights;
Their household Gods, and Countries love,
To some remorce their hearts did move.
But yet of Arms the high esteem,
And Caesar's wrath they greater deem*
Then Loelius, with undaunted face, Loelius.

(Who for his valor held the place
Amongst the Pyles as Ensign chief,
And (by his hardy hands relief)
A Roman rescued from his foes:
For which his Oken crown he shows)
Steps forth, and thus he does declame.
Conductor chief of Roman fame; Loelius oration to Caesar.

If it be lawful, and but just
To show our griefs with tongues of trust,
We may complain of these delays,
That with such lingering patience stays
Thy powerful arms; did our faith fail
In ought that might thy course avail?
Will we (think thou) whilst life retains
The boiling blood within ous veins:
Or whilst our active arms have might
To weild the Pile with Martial slight,
Endure thus to subject our State
To Senate gowns degenerate?
Is it a fault by civil war,
Their insolences to debar?
Nay, lead us through Scyths ysie fennes,
And through the Syrts unhaunted dens,
Through Lybia's thirsty parched sands;
Here are the selfsame forward hands
That help through deeps to tugge the Ores,
When thou inuadedst Britains shores: Loelius deuotes his faith to Caesar.

And (with like courage ready were)
Through stickle Rhene the boats to steare,
Our hearts shall be as forward still,
As able to obey thy will.
And whom against thy Trumpets sound,
I wish mischance may them confound.
Yea though they be right Romans borne,
As deadly foes I will them scorn.
And here I do protest and swear
By those brave Ensigns (that we bear)
Of our victorious legions ten,
By all the conquests where and when
So happily atchieu'd by thee;
Loelius most desperate protestation for Caesar's service.
If thou but give in charge to me,
To stabbe my brother to the heart,
My fathers head and neck to part,
Or to rippe up (with bloody knife)
The rising belly of my wife,
When she conceived is with child,
My hands should be therewith defiled,
Though they said nay, with mood more mild
Yea, if it were the Gods to spoil,
To raze their Temples with the soil,
Their ornaments and wealth to burn,
Until to ashes they did turn,
Or else (upon the Tyber banks)
To place and file our armed ranks,
I would be first of all the Rout,
That should the Stations quarter out,
There to incampe our legions stout.
Nay, do but say, which are the walls
That thou design'st to Ruins falls,
These hands of mine first hold shall lay
Upon the Ram, and give him sway
Unto the ground, the stones to tear;
Yea though the walls of Rome they were.
When Loelius thundering peale was rung,
The Cohorts (clustring in a thrung,
With open voice, and hands out flung)
The affection Caesar's soldiers do bear to him.
Do vow to follow Caesar's Arms,
Through heat and cold, through haps or harms
And therewithal they bellow out
As maine a cry (with hideous shout)
As do the hurling winds from Thrace,
When they the lofty Pines embrace
That on the mountain Ossa grows,
Whose stormy gusts so fiercely blows,
That tops of Trees bow to the ground,
And with such force again rebound,
As if they would the clouds confound.
Caesar, that now his Soldiers minds
So prone to war and willing finds,
(Seeing withal the Fates his friend)
Is loath more time in vain to spend.
But least his Fortune should be staid
For want of force and greater aid,
Forthwith in haste he sends for all
His Cohorts, garrisoned in Gaul. Caesar assembles his forces

Then flying Ensigns does display,
And toward Rome directs his way.
The Troops, about Lemanus Lake,
To Caesar's Camp themselves betake:
And those great forces of account,
That fortifide Vogesus mount,
And fierce Lingones held in awe,
To Caesar's tents do likewise draw.
Others, that with his wars will share,
From Isar flood to him repare,
Which (washing with his water falls
So many goodly Cities walls)
His silver streams at last he hides
In Rhodonus, that swifter slides,
And there his native name does lose,
Before that he the Ocean knows.
The gold-hair'd Ruthens left at large,
Their maistering garrisons discharge.
And silent Atax new joy greeets
Dis-burdened of the Latium Fleets.
The gallant Towns that bordering ranks
On either side of Varus banks
Do public bone-fire-feasting make,
When Roman Troops their soil forsake.
The like contentment them befell,
That by the Herculean port do dwell;
Upon which shores (in rolling flocks)
The boisterous billows sweep the rocks;
Not stird with rage of Western flawes,
But by whirle-windes that thither draws.
From off the Narbonensian coast,
Where ships so furiously are tossed,
As that no harbor can suffice
To shelter them from those fierce skies,
So joyed the people of that land,
That evermore do doubtful stand
To be orewhelm'd with flowing seas;
As often it haps to their disease:
Which floods, the ebbes again appease.
Now whether this deluge proceeds
From Northern winds, that high seas breeds
During their powerful whirling whiffes,
That raise the waves above the cliffes,
And being laid, the stilled maine
Reclaimes her mounted waves again:
Or whether Cynthias influence
Do with this breach of bounds dispense:
Or else the Suns attractiue beams
Exhale up vapors from those streams,
Thereby the watery clouds to feed:
Or else from whence it does proceed,
I leave it to their better reed
Opinions of ebbing and flowing of the sea.
That dives into the hidden cause
Of Heavens course, and Natures laws.
And as for me I will submit
The censure of my humble wit
To that great Godhead, that best knows
The reason why it ebbes and flows.
Now were the Nemetes releast
Of all the bands upon them ceast:
Where the Tarbellians bound at large
A calmed sea, with crooked varge.
Then, to the Santons turn it fell,
To bid their Latium guests farewell.
The Bituriges do the same,
And the Axones that bear fame
With their long bows, so fit for Mart,
The Rheni, trayn'd to throw the dart.
The Sequani, that rankly ride
And skilfully their horses guide.
The Belgi, that so well can steer,
And turn their Coach in maine careere.
The Auverni, that themselves do grace
For their descent from Trojan race,
And Roman parentage embrace.
The Neruij, that with faithless words
In Cotta's blood did bath their swords.
The Vangiones, that desire
To wear the Sarmatan attire.
The stout Battaui, that delight
When Trumpets call them forth to fight.
And all those people that are bred
And harbor about Cyngaes head,
Where Rhodonus so swiftly fleets,
With whom the River Arar meets,
And Neptune with their tribute greets.
Or what inhabitants beside
About Gebenna's mount reside,
All these to mirth convert their mean,
That Latin Garrisons are gone.
And Treuers turn to joy their tears,
To see the Romans by the ears.
And you Lygiers the rest among,
That vsd to wear your locks so long,
For which of old the common fame
Comated Gauls gave you the name:
(Though now you changed have that guise)
From Garrisons were freed likewise.
So all those Nations that did use
Mercurius Altars to infuse,
And sprinkle round with humane blood.
And you (that with like savage mood)
To Mars make cruel sacrifice.
And ye, that do men's hearts agrise
When you to Jove your offerings make,
And fires with humane blood do slake,
Whose Altars therewith you distaine,
As deep as Scythians use to baine
Diana's Altars, and much more,
So do they ouer-flow with gore.
And ye O Bards, that (with your rimes)
Record their fame to future times,
That valiantly expose their blood
For honor, and their Countries good.
And Druides high Priests of hell,
That in all barbarous Rites excel,
Who (by your uncouth Sorc'rous spell)
Pretend that you alone can tell
The influence of the stars that shine,
And natures of the powers divine;
Now may you freely, at your wills,
Solace your selves in woody hills,
And build your boothes on topps of Trees,
And preach your Doctrines and Decrees,
Whereof you Authors are alone;
For now the Roman Rites are gone.
Now you may silly fools persuade,
That (when death has his conquest made)
Men's souls descend not to the shades
Of silent dark Eraebus glades,
Nor where the horrid mansion is
Of loathsome deepe-indungion'd Dis:
But (when that this worlds life is done)
Their souls into new bodies run.
So loss of life to them brings gain,
That would eternity attain.
For in another world to live,
You say Death only means can give*
The great resolution of the Druides.
Ye that in this opinion dwell,
In happiness do far excel
All Northern nations that are known:
For where you have this error sown,
All fear of death is cast aside,
Which terror most the heart does gryde
And from this confidence proceeds
Your valor, and your ventrous deeds.
Whose dauntlesse brave ennobled sprights,
Meets deaths approches without frights.
And holds it base for to adiurne
Life, that (so lost) will soon return.
Lastly, those mastring brave Cohorts,
That shagge-heard Caicos tamed with forts, All that Caesar had conquered in
ten years wars was hazarded to be lost.

The banks of Rhene unguarded leave,
And Caesar's host does them receive.
Lo what a world, won with long pain,
Is at an instant lost again.
Caesar (with these collected swarms
Of valiant Soldiers, bred in Arms)
His haughty courage does advance
At greater game to try his chance.
His ranging Troops, with spirits fierce,
Through Latium fields he does disperse:
And all the Towns he does surprise,
With garrisons he fortifies.
Then Fame (that does false rumors blaze)
His foes with true fears does amaze.
The Citizens in general The fears that the rumors of Caesar's approach
breeds at Rome.

Into despairefull humors fall:
And in their daunted minds debate
The fortunes of a conquered state.
Like fearful Scowts, that set a broach
False Larums of a foes approach:
So Romes imaginary fears
With her own tongues affrights her ears.
Then from Meuania tidings came
(A Town ennobled by the fame
Of that rich soil wherein it stands)
That Caesar (with huge armed bands)
Had overrun, and prayed their lands.)
And many of his men of war
Were come unto the banks of Nar,
(Which River into Tyber falls)
And thence would march unto the walls The fame of Caesar's coming to Rome.

Of Rome itself, without delay:
And that they did, at large, display
Their Banners, and their Egles brave:
That such a mighty host they have
As never yet (the rumor ran)
Was seen in memory of man.
Yea much more fierce and truculent
Then those (that were most bloody bent)
Of all the people ruthlesse rude,
That Romans ever yet subdued.
Others again gave out reports,
That daily to this Camp resorts
Those Nations (that do dwell between
The frozen Alps and Northern Rhene)
And that they all with one accord,
From out their Countries did dis-bord,
Caesar to follow, and to aid;
And from these wars would not be stayed:
So as it cannot other be,
But that with grief they soon shall see
Rome seized and sacked by foreign fone,
(A Roman Chiefe-taine looking on)
Thus every one (raped with amaze)
Does these approaching perils blaze.
And yet no certain Authors known,
By whom this frighting news is blown:
But what their weak conceits suggest,
With that their senses are oppressed.
Neither did this unmanly doubt
Only appall the common rout;
But even the Senate, drowned in dread,
Leaving their homes, the City fled.
Yet they decreed at their adieu,
The Consuls should with force pursue
Caesar, from whom the Senate flew.
The Senate fly from Rome
To safest places then they run,
And where is hazard, that they shun.
The giddy people they exhort
To join themselves in their consort,
And with them such adventures bide,
As means and fortune could provide.
Lo thus (with many heavy hearts)
Huge numbers instantly departs.
He that their sudden flight had seen,
Would think all Rome on fire had been:
Or else some Earthquakes fearful rage
Their tottering houses did engage.
For (with such boisterous press and cry)
Out at the City gates they fly:
As if no better hope remained
To men (whom froward fates constrained)
Then to forsake their native home,
To seek for refuge where they roame.
Like as a ship with tempests tossed,
Driving upon the Lybian coast,
Entangled with Sirts wracking sands,
The crazed mast in danger stands,
With sails and cordage rent and torn,
All over ship-boord to be borne:
The Pylot, whom despair does ceaze,
First headlong leaps into the seas,
And after him (with madding vain)
The Sailors plunge into the maine:
And so themselves to death betake,
Before the vessel ship-wracke make. The Roman frights and flying.

So out in droues the Romans fly
Before that Caesar's Camp was nigh,
And left Rome for her self to try.
No parents counsel could assuage
Their headstrong childrens flying rage.
Nor loving wives lamenting tears
To pity turn their husbands fears:
Nor awe of Gods, nor Countries love
Their parting humor could remove;
Through brutish fear, with base neglect,
All Natures bonds they did reject:
The place where they were bred and borne,
They fled with shame, and left forlorn.
In their own houses, where they dwell,
They stay no time to bid farewell:
Nor any such affection show
To their dear City, ere they go,
As with full sight her to deplore,
Whom they perchance should see no more,
All fly in have from Tybers shore.
Ye Gods with bounty fortunes lend
But niggardly do them defend.
This City, that did so abound
With Citizens, for wars renownd,
Obeyed with many conquered slaves,
Now every flying rumor braues.
And (as a spoil and open pray)
Abandoned to Caesar's sway.
The valiant Romans, that were wont
The Roman Citizens fall from their old wonted valor.
(In foreign wars) to bear the brunt
Of many mighty barbarous foes,
Did in their Arms such trust repose;
That slender trenches did suffice,
To hold them safe from all surprise.
And by such means securely kept
Their guarded Tents whilst that they slept.
But thou, O Rome, from this art far,
Daunted but with the name of War.
Thy walls not deemed to be of might
To lodge thy people safe one night:
So faint of courage all and some
Are thy inhabitants become.
But yet thy Commons may defend
Themselves, and for excuse pretend,
Pompey taxed for flying from Rome at the brute of Caesar's approach.
That they were not possessed with dread
Before they saw great Pompey fled,
By whose example they were led.
Then (that no hope of future chance)
Their based courage should advance)
Apparent signs they do descry
Of worse events approaching nigh.
The supreme power wrath-threatning wills
The Air, the Earth, and Ocean filles
With Prodigies, foretelling illes.
In silent nights, that darkest been,
Many strange uncouth stars are seen.
Many prodigious signs seen before these civil wars.
The Element all flaming was,
And through the air did flying pass
Obliquous streams, like torches bright,
And tayled Comets show by night,
With Blazing stars, that do presage
Of changing stares the future rage.
Then fearful lightning flashes break
A thwart the clouds, and thundering speak:
With sundry shapes of fearful fires
The air is filled with all admires.
Sometimes like lamps, sometimes like darts,
And so to sparkling gleames conuerts,
Which over all the skies does blaze.
And (that which bred no less amaze)
Strange lightnings oftentimes did hap,
(Not seconded with thunderclap)
When as no clouds the Sun did wrap.
And Rome it self (to wrack designed)
Was scorcht with blasting Northern wind.
The lesser stars (seen but by night)
At midde of day appeared bright.
The Moon at full (that with round face
Should represent her brothers grace)
The interposing earth obscures.
Tytan likewise this change endures,
That when at Noone-steed, in his pride,
Over the earth his sheene should stride,
His face was maskt with sable veil,
And daylight through the world does fail.
So as men greatly stood in doubt,
That such a time was come about,
As when Thyestes babes were slain:
Which guilt the Sun did so disdain,
That (loathing to adorn that day)
Back to the East he posts away.
And cole-smeer'd Vulcan does the varge
Of Aetna's forge so much enlarge:
As that the sparks, wont up to hye
With rolling smoke into the sky,
Now to Italia shores do fly.
Charybdis (like a glutted wolf)
So spues up blood from her vaste gulf,
As that the sanguine dye does stain
The waves of the Cicilian maine.
And Scylla's Dogs so loud did yell,
As they had been the hounds of hell.
Then did the sacred Vestall fire
Divide it self with forked spire
Upon the Altars, where it burns:
Whose parted flames, presaging, mournes
The proud division and debate
That should confound the Roman state.
As did that flame divide in twain,
Which burnt the Thebans brothers slain.
Then follows on such huge Earthquakes,
That from the lofty Alps it shakes
The snow, that tumbles down in flakes.
And Atlas mount (whom some conceit
To shoulder up the heavens whole weight:
And Calpe, that high hill in Spain,
Were well-nye covered with the maine.
The Temple Images withal,
From out their eyes did tears let fall.
The Household Gods did likewise sweat,
To witness Romes distempered heat.
And all the sacred gifts down falls,
That hung about their Temple walls.
The Screech-owles, and the birds of night,
Were common seen in broad day light.
And savage beasts without dismay,
(Leaving their dens at close of day)
would come to Rome their rest to take,
And in the streets their kennels make:
And cattle humane language spoke.
Women likewise the sight did fear
Of their own births, which monstrous were.
Sybilla, that Cumana hight,
Her prophesies were brought to light,
Then those whom stern Bellonas ire
With frantic humors did inspire,
(Tearing their arms) did rauing cry,
The vengeance of the Gods was nigh.
The grisely ghosts of Gallicke flocks,
(Shaking their bloudy-fettred locks)
Unto the people threatening tell
Many a heavy fearful spell.
And from the shrines the heaped bones
Did often mutter ruthful groans.
Clashing or arms, and horrid sounds,
From the unhaunted groves rebounds:
And many apparitions strange
So near the Citty-walles did range,
That they, which in the Sub-vrbes won,
Did from their homes affrighted run.
An ugly Fiend, (that in her hand
Did hold a sparkle-blazing brand,
With snaky hair about her face)
Along the streets did stalking trace.
Even such a one as did constrain
Agaue with a frantic vain:
Or that Licurgus did incite
To wound himself through Bacchus spite.
Or like Megera, whose aspect
Did more Alcides spright deiect
Then Dis with his infernal look,
When Iunos task he undertook.
And often by night, when all was still,
The Trumpets sounds were heard as shrill,
And shoutings maine with clamorous cries,
As when two hoasts together flies.
And Sylla's ghost lamenting rombd
In Mars his field where it was fombd.
Which by conjecture did presage
Some bloody broiles and civil rage.
So from his broken Sepulcher,
Was Marius seen his head to rear,
That by Arriems brinke did stand,
Wherewith the Peasants of that land
Were so surpised (with trembling fits)
That some were scard out of their wits.
These tokens do the Romans cause
(According to their ancient laws)
In cases of so great dismay,
To send for those without delay,
That could by diuinations guess,
If flights of fowls might ought express.
Or else if bowels of beasts slain,
These strange presages could explain,
Then from Tuscana one ariu'd
That in such mysteries had diu'd,
Aruns, an Augur, seeks out the causes of the civil war by divination.
That he knew well the course of heaven,
And influence of the Planets seven.
And Aruns was this wisards name,
Who from the City Luna came.
This solemn sire did first decree,
That all such beasts destroyed should be
As were engendered against kind,
And unto monstrous shapes inclind.
And that same ugly fleshy clot
(Upon a barren Mule begot)
Should be consumed in Cinders hot.
Then he the frighted Burgers calls
To march about the Citty-walles
A Roman procession.
Procession-like in ordered rows,
And first the sacred Bishops goes.
And in their turns next to them trace
Prelates of an inferior place,
In short roabes with Gabinian braids.
The Matron then Vesta's maids,
(To whom it lawful was alone,
That Pallas Temple should be known)
Does follow with her virgin-traine:
Then all such Priests as appertain
To Oracles, and Sybils loare,
With those that drew unto the shore
Cybellen, out of Almon flood.
The Augures then that understood
Of all unlucky birds the flight.
And the Septemviri that dight
And ouerlooke the solemn feasts.
Then Titius Priests, whose sacred heasts
The sub-vrbs of the City swayes
In all their ceremonial ways,
Then next the dancing Salij rank,
Whose necks guilt gaudy brooches pranke,
And last of this religious fry
The holy Flamen he past by
With Lordly Turbant towering high.
Whilst (in a long outstretched drove)
They thus about the walls do roue,
Aruns the scattered ruins took,
That with the lightning blasts were struck:
And (when some muttring charms were said)
Deep under mould the same he laid.
And every place (where they were shrin'd)
With names and characters he signed.
Then does he take a fair large bull,
(Which he out of a heard did cull)
And him unto the Altar leads, A Bull sacrificed.

And twixt his horns pure wine he sheads.
Then mingled flower, and crooked blade,
For sacrifice he ready made.
But yet the beast, with struggling might,
Resists to serve that sacred Rite,
Wherein the Gods took no delight.
And yet at last the Priestly rout
Pulles down this Bull, that was so stout,
Then bound, and laid to loose his life,
Within his throat they sheathed the knife.
Which with so deep a gash they slit,
That thence abundantly did flit
A reeking stream of venom black,
Which did of blood the color lack.
This uncouth sacrifice amazed
Pale Aruns, whilst thereon he gazed. Aruns the Augur amazed.

And yet again he further seeks
To find some cause of heavens dislikes:
And up the paunch he rippeth wide,
To see what luck would there betide.
But that which more did him confound,
Were bowels spotted and unsound,
Of color pale, and blew commixt,
With clotted goare congealed betwixt.
Then rotten liver, which he saw,
Was clothed with the waterish maw;
The left side guts no ill signs wants:
The lung-veines neither stirs nor pants:
The slender rimme too weak to part
The boiling liver from the heart:
The smothered heart expressed no pulse,
The crackt-shrunke intrailes did convulse
Corrupted blood into the veins:
The cawle the paunch-hest ouer-straines.
And that of all (which he found worst)
No part appeared, but seemed accursed.
Then he amongst these inwards finds
Two massy heads of sinnoye kinds:
Wannish the one, and all fore-spent,
Flaggy, corrupt, and drooping bent:
The other with more vital heates
His veins with naughty humors beats.
All these he takes to be true shows,
Prognosticating future woes.
Aruns afeard to express the conjecture.
And then cries out, O Gods I see
It Is more then lawful now for me
To blaze abroad your high decree;
Neither, O Jove, do I design
This offering to thy grace divine.
For I suspect the fiends of hell
Within these slaughtered bowels dwell.
We fear mis-haps not fit to speak
Aruns censure.
Yet worser shortly out will break.
Heavens turn to good what is betide!
Let no presage in bowels bide!
But Tages fictions; to devise
Such mysteries in sacrifice.
Tages the first inuenter of Auguring.
Thus doubtfully his doom he shrowdes
Of what was seen, and spoke in clouds.
But Figulus that deeply looks
Into the heavens, as in his books;
And only did his time bestow
Figulus an excellent Astrologer.
The natures of the Gods to know:
Who in Astrology excelled
The Aegiptians, that in Memphis dweld.
Thus said; either the heavens, quoth he,
Disordred in their motions be,
And all the Planets (in their sway)
Do hold a clean contrary way;
Or else if providence divine
Thus strangely guide them to incline,
Sudden and heavy wrack will fall Doubtful conjectures.

Upon this City, and us all.
But whether the Earth gaping wide,
Will in her womb whole Cities hide:
Or whether the contagious Air,
With pestilence will health impair:
Or that the Land barren of food,
Will cease to nourish humane brood:
Or that the Rivers from their heads
Streams with infectious poison spreads:
I cannot say, O supreme powers!
What woes upon our mortal bowers,
Or what strange plagues do you intend
Upon this wretched world to send?
Shall now with us all ages end?
If Saturnes chill unlucky star
Had in the tenth house ranged his Carre; Figulus considers the inclinations of
the heavens.

Then might Aquarius watery vain
Have brought Deucalions flood again,
And all the earth ore-whelm'd with rain,
And raging Neptunes rising maine.
Or if thou Phoebus had combined
With Leo of Nemean kind;
The Fire would then the Earth have melt,
And with thy flames the heavens have swelt.
But now these planets being still;
O Mars! what has incenst thy will,
(With the great force of thy aspect)
Such beams on Scorpio to reflect
As that his tail all flaming roles,
With scorching claws as red as coals?
Mild Jupiter, with friendly eyes,
Into the west his progress hies.
But Venus face (with smiling lips)
Is now obscured in Eclips.
And Mercury (so swift of sourse)
Does retrograde distort his course.
So Mars as now in this discord,
Is of the ascendant only Lord,
And whilst all stars their rooms resignes,
Blading Orion only shines.
The censure of Figulus.
Fury of war comes now in date,
And force of arms will steare the State,
Justice and laws may both go sleep,
Strong hand will them in bondage keep,
Vice now shall Virtues name retain,
And many years this rage shall reign.
Prayers bootlesse against Destiny.
What boots it then the Gods to pray,
This misery to turn away?
For peace again we shall not have,
Till all become a Tyrants slave.
O Rome! post off (if thou have power)
The date of this unhappy hour.
Extend these furies off a far,
And us preserve from civil war.
These hard predictions sadly told,
The censure of Figulus discomforteth the Romans.
Did make the peoples hearts full cold;
But that which followed on behind,
Trencht deeper wounds within their mind:
For as Aedonis, Bacchus Nun,
From Pyndus hill enraged does run,
When as Ogigian wine distraines
The madding humor of her brains:
So did a Matron of the Town
The prophesying of a Roman Matron raped with a sudden fury.
In frantic wise gadde up and down,
Vttring such words as they express
Whom sprights of prophesing possess.
O Paean tell me (then she said)
Unto what place am I conuaid!
What shore will thou cast me upon,
That rapt above the clouds have gone?
Me thinks Pangeus mount I spy,
Upon whose top the snow does lie:
And thence Philippi's fields I see,
That at the foot of Haemus be.
O Phoebus tell me the intent
By this great hurly-burly meant.
Why do the Roman armies strain
Against themselves with might and maine?
By what means comes it to be so,
They war without a foreign foe?
Nay, whither am I further tossed?
Me seems I now am on the coast
Eastward, where Nylus her seven heads
Within the Ocean softly beds.
There see I him, and him deplore,
That lies upon that sandy shore,
A headless trunk distained with gore.
Thence am I raped again anew,
And now the Lybian Syrts I view,
Where Destinies transport with spite,
The remnants of Pharsalias fight.
Yet further am I forced to walk
Over the Cloud-brow'd Alps to stalk*
And in this flitting whirle-winde vease,
I pass the Mountains Pyrinees.
Thence back unto my Native Town,
Where I find all turned vp-side-downe.
Uproar, division, and debate
Turmoyles the Senate and the State.
So am I now (from mine own shore)
Hurried about the world once more.
O Phoebus, ease me of this toil,
In unknown seas, and unknown soil,
For I have seen Philippies broyle!
Thus said, a slumbring rest she takes,
Wherewith this fury her forsakes.
Finis Libri primi.
LVCANS PHARSALIA^ The second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Foreknowledge much it does bewail
Of woes, that needs must men assail.
The Roman Matrons plaints expressed
All laws and justice are suppressed.
Marius and Sylla's rage it shows,
Brutus in doubt to Cato goes,
Who once again does Martia wed,
Attired like mourners for the dead.
Pompey to Capua takes his way,
Caesar at large bears all the sway,
And does Domitius prisoner take.
Pompey does his oration make.
His son he sends for more supplies,
Himself then at Brundusium lies,
And there besieged, thence hardly flies.
NOw have the Gods revealed their ire,
The heavenly signs with wars conspire,
And Nature likewise (with foresight)
Her laws and bonds peruerteth quite
With monstrous tumults and garboyle,
Which wretchedly does humanes toil.
Great guider of Olimpus hill,
Why has it pleased thy sacred will,
That careful mortals take such count
Of what their skill can not surmount,
As that they should presaging know
Those wrackes they needs must undergo?
Whether the All-Creator high
(When first he began to rectify
This formlesse mass of Chaos rude,
And did the fire a part seclude) Whether there be destiny or chance in
worldly courses.

With an eternal fixed decree
Ordained that all should certain be;
And to that law himself confined,
Wherewith all ages he did bind:
And framed the world that course to run,
That Fates unchanging hests had spunne?
Or else of humane haps the heft
Were vn-fore-doom'd at random left?
So that in life's uncertain dance,
Things to and fro should slide and glance,
And all subjected unto chance?
But howsoever it is ordained,
O let man's mind be so restrained
From knowing chances future scope
As that his fears may live in hope! An Imprecation against foreknowledge.

When all at length had full conceived,
In what sort higher powers bequeathed
The City to resistlesse harms;
Then laws and justice silence charms;
And reverent Honor lackt his meed,
Attired in base Plebeian weed.
No Axes now (in bundles bore)
Makes way the Magistrates before.
Amazement so does grief forestall,
That Sorrow has no voice at all.
Such stupid silence does inuest
Whole families (with grief possessed)
Where husbands lie, in gasping strife,
Before they do resign their life.
The good-wife wrapped in sorrows bands,
With flaring locks wringing her hands,
Amidst her woeful household stands:
Until the living breath be fled
From out the corpse (that streacht out dead)
Does in the pale disfigured face
And closed eyne Deaths portraict place,
Sorrow does not at full complain;
But then begins her howling vain.
Whose mazement now with rage surprisd,
Does change her robes to weeds disguisd:
And (with her woeful sad consorts)
Unto the Temples then resorts.
So did our women (in their fears)
Sprinkle the Temple-gods with tears.
The Roman Matrons frequent the Temples with an extraordinary devotion.
Beating their breasts against the stones,
Power out their plaints and ruthful moanes.
And (stupify'd twixt grief and dread)
Did rent their hairs from off their head,
And sacred porches therewith spread.
And such as wont in humble wise
To pray and cast to heaven their eyes,
With outrage now the Gods would bend,
Not to use presumption in praying.
Whose ears with clamours they offend,
Neither to Jupiter alone,
Do they expose their vows and moan:
But to all Temples else besides,
Where any of their Gods resides:
The which are filled, and all too scant,
No Altar does devotion want.
So do the Matrons (with outcries)
Inuoke the Gods, and tear the skies.
And one of them amongst the rest
(With blubbered cheeks beating her breast)
Her braided locks in pieces cuts,
And then her arms she spreads and shuts,
Whilst with these plaints her voice she gluts
The speech of a Roman Matron.
O wretched Mothers now, she said,
To beat your breasts be not afraid,
Nor yet your tressed locks to tear.
Langor no longer now forbear.
Like happes did never us assail,
For which we had such cause to wail:
Whilst that the fortunes are vntry'd
Of these two Chiefetaines swelling pride.
But were once one of them subdued,
Then should our comforts be renewed:
And so their plaints they aggrauate
That sorrows self grew passionate.
Their men likewise resolved for war,
Now clustred into camps a far,
Against the wrathful Gods on high,
In this sort do exclaiming cry.
O hapless Captiue-youths forlorn!
Why were we not in those days borne,
When Punicke wars did us engage, The complaints of the Romans leaving the
City, and following the wars.

With Canna's and Trebeia's rage?
Ye heavens we do not peace desire;
But on us turn some foreign ire:
Let all the world our bane conspire;
Stir Cities up with sword and fire.
Let Parths and Persians bend their arms,
Let Scythians rampe on us in swarms:
And (from the Northern extreme parts)
Let red-haird Sweaths power showrs of darts
And with them all that people bred
About the raging Rhenus head:
Yea make us to all Nations foes,
So you divert our Civil blows.
Then let the wrathful Danes and Getes, All wars more pleasing to the Romans
then civil strife.

Assail us in their hostile heats.
Let the Iberians make descent,
With ensigns and with weapons bent:
Unto the Archers of the East
Let Rome from no strife be releast.
Nay if high powers decree the same,
To raze out the Hesperian name;
From heaven, to earth let flames descend;
That so the Latium race may end.
And then O direful Fates withal
The Romans lay a curse on Caesar and Pompey both.
Grant that some hateful wrack befall
Both Factions, and the leaders both;
For yet they have not showed their wroth*
Why should they such dominion seek,
As never yet was heard the like?
That all men's thoughts it must dismay,
Whether of them the world should sway?
Not both their worth can counterpaise
The civil strife that so they raise.
Thus Pieties declining state
Her lamentations did relate,
And parents woefully besides,
Like pressing care and cumbers grides.
In whose repining words appears,
The wretched fate of their old years:
To be preserved in life's disdain,
To see a civil war again.
And one of them thus wail'd with tears,
The example of great former fears.
The complaint of an old Citizen, declaring the bloody times of Marius and
Sylla.
No otherwise (quoth he) did fate
Stir up commotion in our state;
When Marius after victory
Obtained against the Teuton fry,
And after he in Triumphs Carre
Had rid; for the Numidian war.
A banished man he hid his head
In dikes, where flaggie rushes bred.
So did the greedy marrish fennes,
And quagmire bogges shut in their dens,
(O Fortune) they reserved a ward;
But yet anon he was not spared
From fettring gyues, nor loathsome Iayle,
Which long the old man's life did bail.
But blessed had been if he had died,
When Consul he the State did guide;
Before he felt the scourging doom
For his mischievous deeds at Rome.
But Death it self did from him fly,
When 'twas decreed that he should dye.
And that the foe was ready pressed
To rid the life out of his breast.
When he should give the fatal wound,
Numnesse his senses so confound,
And mortified his arm withal,
That from his hand the sword did fall:
Wherewith the darksome prison shone
Like Phoebus beams at height of noone:
He heard withal a fearful spell,
As from the ghastly sprights of hell,
That Marius power must come again,
Lawful it is not thy steel to baine
Within his blood; therefore refrain:
For he shall many doom to death,
Ere he yield up his latest breath.
Let thy vain rage his sword vp-sheath.
But if the Cymbrian youth desires
Auengement, for their slaughtered sires;
Let them wish him a longer race,
Who was not (by the heavens high grace)
Preserved for good; but, by their wrath,
Dessign'd to work Romes greater scath;
A murtherous man (and if Fates will)
Able much Roman blood to spill. Marius a bloody man.

This wretched wight the raging wave
Into a hostile Country drove.
Where feign he was for his relief
(Sculking in corners like a Thief)
To lodge in dens where none did won
Of Iugurths Country overrun.
And sometimes in the ruins lay
Of Punicke walls, the Romans pray.
Where Carthage fate and his did meet,
Each others misery to greet.
But soon again his fortune changed,
And then unto his party ranged
The raging scum of Lybick land:
Where he did all the Iayles dis-band,
And of the Fetters and the Gyues,
His Martial weapons he contriues.
But none he gave a Captains charge,
Unless he could make known at large,
That he had done some heinous deed,
And at his Camp so sought his meed.
O cruel Fates, what day was that,
What day that dismal chance begat?
That Marius should, with his return,
Victor again, make Rome to mourn?
How proudly then did cruel death
Both Lords and Commons reaue of breath?
Bloody Fury.
How did the sword about him lay?
No breast was free from Murders way.
The Temples human blood did store,
Their pauements stained with the gore.
No sex nor age protection gave:
On hoary heads the sword did rave,
And sent them headlong to their grave.
Nither did they a whit forbear
The silly babes, that newly were
But borne, and brought to this worlds light:
Their living day held not to night.
O what could color their pretents,
Against poor harmless innocents?
But it suffisd their tyranny
That they still found out some to dye.
So raues this force in cruelty:
And he was deemed a coward slack,
That none but faulty men would wrack.
Thus numbers dyed day by day:
For now they would not spare to slay
The strangers, whom they did not know:
But cut their heads their bodies fro.
More cruelties.
They shamed to come their Lord before
With empty hands, not filled with gore.
One saue-guard yet for life remains
To those, that such a grace obtaines,
As on their knees with vows submisse,
Fell Marius bloody hand to kiss.
O people grown degenerate,
From glory of your wonted state!
A thousand swords threatening new kinds
Of deaths, should not debase your minds.
By such means to prolong your days,
As does so foul dishonor raise.
And yet you did but life adiurne,
Until that Sylla do return.
Few live this common bane to mourn.
Scarcely shall any one remain,
That saw when thou O Bebius slain,
were into mangled morsels cut, Noble Romans slaughtered.

Their bloody thirsting blades to glut.
Or yet, O Antony, to tell
Of thee, that did presage too well
These fatal harms, how thy grave head
(with milke-white locks all ouer-spread)
Was from the murdered body tore,
And (by a furious soldier bore
Dropping and smoking all in gore)
Was on the Table set, in jest,
Where Marius kept his solemn feast.
Nor how the Crassies corpse in scorn,
By Timbria were hackt and torn.
And how the awful Rostrums beak,
Soyled with Tribunes blood did reake.
And Scoeuola thy age does plain,
To be so murdered in disdain,
Where Vesta's sacred Temple stands,
By their life-violating hands. Murder in Vesta's Temple.

Those fires that always burn so clear
With thy blood somewhat tainted were:
Yet thy old veins could yield small store,
But spared those flames from quenching gore.
The seventh time now is come in date,
That Marius takes his Consuls state.
Such was the manner of his life,
No man with Fortune had more strife,
And none her favors found more rife. Marius change of fortunes.

Who better then his course should range,
Then he that often had tried such change?
How many other bodies slain
The streets of Sacroportum baine?
What heaps of carcasses all hewd,
Before Collina gates were strewed?
And now at last the whole worlds head
(She whose high power all Nations dread)
Must be deprived of supreme grace,
And changed unto another place.
And Samnium now the world must know,
Shall give to Rome a greater blow;
Then when her Army forced was
Under the Caudium forkes to pass.
Revenging Sylla now comes in,
And monstrous slaughters do begin:
Sylla's raging time of cruelty.
For that small store which did remain,
Of blood, he searches every vain.
And whilst he does in show pretend
Corrupted humors to amend,
The medcines rage did more offend.
His hand to deep does search the wound,
Cutting of those were faultlesse found,
And only those were left to live,
That to his mischife help would give.
Then spleen did lawless leave obtain,
That headstrong wrath on law should reign.
Which power was not to one designed,
But unto every murtherous mind.
So will did all things loose and bind.
The liberty that was given to outrage.
Servants and slaves (with balefull blades)
Their masters bowels now inuades:
Children likewise their hands did stain
With blood of their own parents slain:
And strive some meed for it to gain.
So did the brothers in likewise,
Of blood fraternall make their prize.
Unto the Tombs some frighted fled,
The quick were mingled with the dead.
The sundry means that men make to dye, so to avoid the disdain of Syllas
insolences.
None safeguard seek in savage coats:
Some hang themselves: some cut their throats
Others again (short work to make)
Their necks and limbs in pieces brake,
By falling to the ground from high,
Scorning by murdrous hands to dye.
Others again do now desire
To make a pile for funeral fire,
Wounding themselves to that intent,
And ere their life-bloud was out-spent,
Into the flames their bodies cast,
And laid them there whilst strength did last.
The heads of Peers were borne the whiles
About the trembling streets on piles,
And in the Forum there lie thrown.
No villainy is left unknown,
All horrid acts are boasting blown.
The Thracian tyrant Dyomede
Never saw blood more rifely shed,
Floting in his Bistonian stalles,
Nor carcasses about the walls
Of huge Antaeus Lybicke cave:
Nor Greece to more laments it drove,
To see the heads of worthy men
Dight the Picean bloody den.
Now though the heaps of gored clots.
And tract of time disfiguring blots
The knowledge of the faces slain;
Sad parents yet would not refrain,
By stealth to get (if they could pry)
Their childrens limbs where they did lie.
And I my self can call to mind, An old man's report of Syllas time.

That then I much desired to find
Mine own dear brothers mangled head,
That there lay slaughtred among the dead.
Whereby to give it funeral,
And fires (although denied to all)
When as I saw the rage decrease
Of Sylla's sword, reputed peace;
Then heaps of Trunkes abroad I spread,
To see which fitted with his head.
What should I here at large relate,
How Catulus ghost was expiate,
When Marius (hackt and tortured)
For sacrifice was offered
To his insatiable Tomb,
By an vn-heard-of cruel doom.
A Marian cruelly tortured by Sylla's Executioners.
Whereas perhaps the wrathlesse spright
Did not affect that horrid sight;
Which we beheld when his crushed bones
With joint from joint was wrackt at once.
When he as many wounds did bear
As members in his body were.
And yet no mortal stroke of sword
Would him desired end afford.
Which manner of a cruel death
Too long deferred his latest breath.
His hands hewd off, fell from the stumpes,
His tongue out-torn, then trembling iumps.
Unable to express a voice,
His weasan pipe roares out a noise.
One pares his ears from off his head,
Another does his nostrels shred:
Whilst he the whiles (poor tortured soul)
On these rent parts his eyes did roll.
And then (to glut their tyrannies)
From out his head they plucked his eyes.
Hardly may credit us assure,
That life could so much pain endure.
So (with the fall of ruins heft)
Are bones and members crushed and cleft:
And so deformed in tempests drowned
Upon the rocks are bodies found.
What fruit or pleasure could they take
This woeful spectacle to make
Of Marius ugly mangled face?
Forsooth they knew they should gain grace
To show it Sylla in that case.
Now comes in Praenestina's turn,
For her inhabitants to mourn:
Whom she beheld (all at a trice)
To pay the bloody sword like price.
Then quailed were the Hesperian flowers,
And Latium youths now death deuours:
Then loathsome stream from bodies slain,
The pleasant fields of Rome distaine,
Where gallants in their own blood baine.
Not Famines rage, nor wrackes of seas,
Not Earthquakes dreads, Rome did never by any means suffer so great
desolation as by Marius and Sylla.
nor Plagues t'apease
The Heavens wrath; nor bloody Wars,
Ever gave us such deadly scarres.
For now the heaps of bodies dead
The murderers sway so pestered,
That they lackt room to fetch the blow,
When they would hewing wounds bestow.
And when that any one was slain,
He could not fall flat on the plain:
The dead did reeling them sustain.
But slaughters came at last so thick,
That bodies dead stifle the quick.
Nothing at all these horrid facts,
Sylla's vnmated mind distracts; Sylla beholds the slaughters without any
remorse.

But from his Turrets top does eye
(Without remorse) those swarms that dye
And careless hears their clamorous cry.
The Tyrrhen gulf at last receives
Millions (whom death to it bequeaues)
Of Syllane slaughters, whose torn limbs,
At first upon the Tyber swimmes:
But at the last it was heapt so high,
That bodies did on bodies lie:
So as the boats were stopped their course,
And Tybers streams were bard their sourse.
For heaps of limbs that thither flock,
Damb'd up the river like a lock.
But that part next unto the seas,
Had liberty to take his vease.
And that which was the heaps behind,
The clustred carcasses did bind. Tyber stopped of his course with the infinite
number of slain bodies.

Nathlesse the torrents of the blood
Did force a way, and with his flood,
Above the Tyber strand did rise,
And over all the fields it flies.
So as the streams of blood gave vent
Unto the River, that was pent.
The banks could not this flood withstand,
Which cast the bodies on the land.
And thence into the Tyrrhene maine,
The blood did fall with such a train,
That her blew waves it did divide
Into a sanguine color died.
Were these the means to mend amiss?
Was Sylla, Foelix named for this?
A speech of scorn against Sylla.
Is this the merit he does yield,
To have his Tomb in Martius field?
These mischiefs must be borne again,
This war will follow that same vain
Of civil strife; I fear this curse
To fall at last from bad to worse.
For where two armed factions meets,
Mankind with common bane it greets.
The Marian rage did only tend
His exiled state but to amend:
So Rome receives him as a friend.
And Sylla did no more desire,
But to revenge his quenchlesse ire
With bloody ruin of all those
That were of party with his foes.
But Fortune calls these Captains twain
The fear and doubt that this civil war will bring a worse event then the
factions of Marius and Sylla.
(I doubt me) to a higher strain.
These both in Arms are stout and strong,
And will together rush ere long.
The others raisd no civil strife,
And Sylla took a private life.
So did this grave old fire lament
His mindful woes of time fore-spent,
Fearing this civil wars event.
And yet no fear a place could find
In noble Brutus valiant mind,
This staggering dread that mazed all,
Brutus constancy and courage.
His constant heart could not appall.
But ere the dawning of the day,
When Parrhasis did downward sway
The oblique Axels of her waine,
And did the drowsy skies refrain.
Unto the little lodge he hies,
Where Cato his dear Uncle lies;
And at his wicket loud he rapt,
Whom he found not in slumbers wrapped:
But tossing (in his careful mood)
The fortunes of the common good,
And safety of the Cities state,
Which he more wey'd then his own fate:
Then thus with him he did debate.
O matchless Truth, and vndefil'd, Brutus speech to Cato.

Which all the world has now exiled!
O Virtue, whilome in request,
Now only lodged in thy just breast.
Which no worlds fortunes thence can wrest
Afford thy grave advice to me,
Settle my thoughts that wavering be;
And (with thy judgment sound and stout)
Direct me now that am in doubt.
Some now on Caesar's side will war:
Others of Pompeyes party are;
But reverend Cato, or else none,
Shall Brutus Captain be alone.
And whether thou resolved art
(In these frail times) to stay from Mart,
Or that thy mind be not dismayed,
One of these selfe-wild guides to aid:
And that thou deem this civil strife,
worthy the waging of thy life?
I do not know; but others all
Respects to wicked Arms do call.
Some for their filed houses cause:
Some that in peace fear Justice laws:
Others their starved estate to mend,
To spoils and civil rapine tend:
And many banckrouts (drowned in debts)
In troubled streams would cast their nets.
None take up Arms with good intent,
But all for hope of profit bent.
Only thy self no humor draws
To wars, but for thy Countries cause.
What can it now tend to thy praise
To have uprightly spent thy days?
So fraught with virtue, free from crimes,
In these our vice-corrupted times?
If thou at last this censure have,
Thy honest mind so to deprave?
That others were corrupt before
(In these vile wars) thy arms had bore.
But now thy self, this strife accursed
Has made as faulty as the worst.
But I beseech the Gods above,
That from thy heart they so remove
The humor of this mood vnmilde,
That with it thou be not defil'de:
And that thy arms thou do not strain
To cast the Pile, with might and maine,
In clouds amongst the common rout;
And so great valor spend in doubt.
For in these wars if any err,
The blame on thee they will confer:
And those whom others bring to bane,
Thy sword therewith they will profane,
And make thee author of all harms,
That in this civil discord swarms.
Peace better with thy temper sorts,
Exempt from enuies false reports.
Like as the heavenly bodies sway
With true and mild unchanging way,
The air (that to the earth is next)
With thunders rage is most perplexed:
Whilst winds earth plants does ouercast,
And lightning flashes do them blast:
Olympus above the clouds stands fast.
It is ordained by Jove's high hest,
That discord should small things infest:
But concord highest states has blessed.
How would it Caesar's ears content,
That such a Peer, as thou, were bent
To yield thy self unto the wars,
And be partaker of these iarres?
For if thou Pompey's part do take,
He would thereof advantage make,
And please himself withal to think,
Cato at Civil wars does wink.
The Senate for the greatest part,
And Consuls likewise range their Mart,
Now underneath a private head,
And many other Lords so lead;
To whom add Cato to the rest,
A Soldier under Pompeys hest,
So Caesar's power shall be increast.
For then will he sway all alone,
That in his Camp compeere has none.
But if our Arms we needs must take,
For Laws defense, and Countries sake,
Brutus to neither part will go,
As Pompeys friend, or Caesar's foe:
But which of them shall victor stand,
Him Brutus means to take in hand.
So ends his speech; To whom again
Cato replies, with sober vain;
And from the secrets of his breast,
Like Oracles these words expressed.
O Brutus, needs we must confess,
Most heynously they do trangresse, Cato's answer to Brutus.

That wilfully raise civil war,
Which thought be ever from us far.
But whither fates do men constrain,
Thither may Virtue safely train.
Let heaven, for me, bear all the blame,
If I amiss my course do frame.
For who can view (with dreadlesse eye)
The falling of the starry sky?
Or else contain his helping hands,
If he in doubt and danger stands
To be ore-whelmed with the fall
Of earths gross weight, and this vaste all?
Or that the air on flaming fire,
Our present ruin did conspire?
Shall unknown Nations parties take
With factions that the Romans make?
Shall Kings, from Clymes remote so far,
Assisting be unto our war?
And shall I hold an idle place?
Far from me be a mind so base!
These bloody broils like to ensue,
Might move the Dakes and Getes to view
Our hard mishaps; and yet shall I
Careless let Rome her fortune try?
Or rather as the parent shows
His tender love, that mourning goes
(Accompaned with many friends)
His child's sad funerals intends;
When Nature does his heart enforce
Unto the grave to guide the corse;
And then with sorrow takes in hand
To fire the stack with blazing brand.
No: otherwise can I remove
From thee (O Rome) my loyal love,
Whilst that my limbs with life do move,
And liberty thy name embrace,
Or thy vain shadow in thy place.
But let the world go how it will,
And let the wrathful Gods up fill
The full amends for Romes offense,
In this War with our bloods expense;
No drop thereof will we defraud,
But if my wish ye would applaud,
O powers of heaven and hell, vouchsafe
To cast the burden of this scath
Alone upon my wretched head.
No hostile harms the Decij fled,
To free their Country hard bestead.
Let both the Armies me enclose,
Let all the barbarous ruthlesse foes
Of Rhene, on me bestow their blows.
Yea let my body bear the scarres
Of all the wounds given in these wars.
My limbs thereto I would bequeaue,
And willingly them all receive.
And happy would my death esteem
The peoples wrack so to redeem.
Could sacrifice of my blood spilt,
Propitiate the Roman guilt?
Why do the people fondly throng
To Tyrants, that our State would wrong,
And willingly the thraldom trust
Of kingly reigns, proud and unjust?
O let me witting only feel
The fury of the murdering steel!
Let me that still have been afraid
To violate what Justice said,
And thus in vain have laws obaid.
O let this throat be carved in twain,
If peace by it we may obtain,
And give an end unto those broils
Which now the Hesperian nation toils!
For if with me these wars had end,
No man would Monarchy intend.
But as it is wars we must make,
And Pompey for our leader take.
And all our force and courage bend,
The public standard to defend.
For I assuredly do know
If Pompey give the overthrow;
He is of mind too just and meek
Supreme command alone to seek,
But does such tyranny dislike.
To make him victor I Will be one:
He shall not claim the baies alone.
Thus Cato spoke; whose feeling words
(Like pricking neelds, or points of swords)
Stirred up stout Brutus martial ire,
And his young blood does set on fire,
Too much on Civil wars desire.
By this time Phoebus shining bright,
With beams had chaste the chilly night. Martia, Cato's old wife returns to
his house again.

When all the house did ringing sound
With blows, that from the gate rebound,
Given by modest Martia's hand,
Who mournfully without did stand,
But newly thither come withal
From her Hortensius funeral.
That whilome (in her virgins state)
Was spoused to a better mate.
And now again she was enlarged
From nuptial bonds, and vows discharged.
Which for a time she did fulfill,
So to obey her Cato's will.
And fruitfully her children boar,
Wherewith two houses she did store.
And then with child she was conceived,
When first Hortensius her received.
But after she (with funeral fire,)
Had paid his bones their latest hire:
And ashes in the Vrna placed,
With mournful cheer, and look defaced,
Her hairs about her shoulders spread,
Sprinkled with cinders of the dead,
Beating her breast with mournful cry,
No presence to delight the eye.
Thus she her heavy tale began.
Martias speech to Cato.
Whilst youths pure blood through my veins ran,
And I (repleat with fruitful seed)
Obayd the hest by thee decreed,
Yielding my self to husbands twain,
Posterity to both did gain.
But now with pains maternall worn,
And weak with many children borne,
With thee I seek my days to spend,
Fit else for none to wedlockes end.
Restore me to thy love again,
That never did thy bed distaine,
And (to content my wretched life)
Afford me but the name of Wife.
That my sad Tomb this style may bear,
Cato's true Martia rests here.
So that the wrong of future time,
Slander me not with blameless crime,
And deem I had defiled thy bed:
Because I did Hortensius wed.
When well thou know, in thy just mind,
I was thereto by thee designed:
Yet seek I not to be thy mate,
Thereby to live in better state,
Or to enjoy a life of ease:
To share thy cares me best will please.
Part in thy travels I desire,
To camp with thee shall be my hire:
Should I in peace and safety shroud,
Whilst that Cornelia so has vowed
To follow Pompeys civil war?
Do not my love such grace debar.
These faithful words so won the man,
That though the time unfit were than,
Whilst strife and tumults were in date, Martia again married to Cato.

To enter into wedlockes state:
Yet they agreed, the knot was tied;
But solemn pomp was laid aside.
The Matrimonial bond alone
Suffisd to make the nuptials known:
All Ceremonies they forbear;
Only the Gods their witness wear.
The Porch with Garlands was not dight, What Ceremonies Cato would have at his
wedding.

The Pillars want silke-ribbone white,
No Tapers lent a flaming light:
No stately steps of Ivory
Joined to the bed where they should lie:
The Curtens and the Couerlets
No gold embrodery besets:
No matron there, with crown of state,
To guard the bride till it were late,
From companing her spoused mate:
No veil of lawne did hide or grace; Martias attire.

Her modest looks, and bashful face:
Her mantle that did loosely fly,
No fair imbossed belt did tie:
Rich Carkanets her neck had none,
Set out with pearl, and precious stone:
But from her shoulders there did traile
Down to her waste a simple veil;
These doleful weeds her state did wail.
But as she did her children bear
In sorrow, and in doubtful fear,
Such now her spousall pleasures were.
And over all her purple gown,
A mourning mantle trailed down:
No melody, nor musickes voice
Did with these nuptials rejoice:
Nor suiting with the Sabines trade:
No solemn feasts at all were made:
Her Stoicke husband them forbade.
No children then the house did grace,
No kins-folkes flockt unto the place:
The match they made up secretly,
Suffisd with Brutus company.
The Bride groom had long time deferd
The description of Cato and his manner of life.
To cut or shave his wild grown beard:
It ouer-spred his reverend face,
In his sad looks no mirth took place.
For when he first did understand,
That Faction furiously did band;
Unshorn he left his hairy head,
Vnkemb'd his rugged brow to spread.
And in like sort about his face,
His shaggy beard did dangling trace.
He thought it fit that some just mind,
(Unto no partial mood inclined)
Should wail this rage in humane kind*
His recreation was not fed
With comfort of a nuptial bed:
Loves vigor now in him lay dead.
And (with the common care fore-spent)
From troubled thoughts could not relent:
This course strict Cato does content.
The modest mean he still intends,
And of his actions casts the ends.
With Natures laws he holds no strife,
And to his Country vows his life.
He does not think that he was borne
His own state only to adorn:
But that he is in duty tied,
And zeal, to all the world beside.
His dainties were but hungers stay:
Large Palaces he did not way:
But that sound structure that did hold
Out Summers heat, and Winters cold.
And never in the pomp exceedes
Of garments, or of costly weeds:
But as the custom old did bear,
When Roman Quirites vsd to wear
Gowns, made of wouen shaggy hear.
He lent no lust to Venery,
But to maintain posterity.
He Father was, and Husband sworn
Unto his City, now forlorn.
Justice most strictly he observes,
From honest faith he never swerues.
Voluptuous life he did detest,
It could not breed in Cato's breast.
Now Pompey, Pompey having forsaken Rome, comes to Capua.
and his gathred Troops
Of Soldiers, that with terror droopes,
To Capua's walls themselves betake,
And there their randevous do make.
A Town built by the Trojan race,
Where they a Collonie did place.
This for a seat of war he chose,
And in the Country round bestows
His bands, and Cohorts to withstand
The force of Caesar, now at hand.
Here are those hills of Apenine,
That in the midst run like a line
Along the whole Italian land,
Where these vmbragious mountains stand, The mounts Apenius.

Towering their lofty tops a high;
None to Olympus comes more nigh.
This tracke of hills (between two maines)
Just in the midst his race out-straines.
The higher and the lower deepes,
These hills conioyn'd a sunder keeps.
On this side does the Pisan land
The rage of Tyrrhene seas withstand.
On the other side Anconas soil
Makes the Dalmatian floods recoyle.
These mountains in their bowels breeds
Many springs heads, that Rivers feeds:
Which diversely their streams conuart
Into both seas on either part.
Metaurus swift, on the left side
Names of sundry rivers that flow from the Apenius.
And fierce Crustumium thence do glide:
With Senna, and Isapis waves,
Isaurus walls that mildly laues:
Then Aufidus, that takes his vease
Into the Adriaticke seas:
Eridanus, that roots up woods,
And sweepes them with his swelling floods,
And (from the fair Hesperian lands)
Conuayes them to the Oceans strands;
This River (as old laws suppose)
With poplar shades did first enclose,
And crown his banks with circling rows,
Phaetons flames.
When Phaeton (out of the way,
Leading his blazing Carre astray)
Did set on fire the air and sky,
The earth did singe, and waters dry;
Whilst yet this rivers flowing streams
Held tacke against those burning beams:
And does maintain as broad a course,
As Nylus, with his seuen-fold sourse:
Except when Nylus ouer-bounds
The Lybicke and Aegiptian grounds:
Nor less then Istar; but when as
He does through many Nations pass,
And other streams unto him takes,
That to the seas their progress makes:
Whereby alone he does not pay
His tribute to the Scythian bay,
Now from this mountains steep right side
First does the River Tyber glide:
And high-bankt Rutuba withal:
Vulturnus likewise with swift fall:
And Sarnus, from whose muddy lists
The air about is stuffed with mists:
And Lyris that the province trades
Of sweet Maurica, clad with shades,
Whose back Vestinus water lades:
And Syler, that through Salerne floates:
With Macra, that will bear no boats,
But does dis-boage into those deepes,
That by the City Luna sweepes.
These mountains (as they longer streach)
Their tops withal do higher reach
Toward the confines of fair France,
And on the Alps their prospect glance,
The Vmbrians and the Marsians soil,
Where the Sabellian plowes do toil.
So do these Pine-treed hills embrace
The coasts of Latiums ancient race;
And never leaves the Hesperian ground,
Till Sycils seas their limits bound.
Yet long ago did further wend,
And to Lacinia's Temple tend;
Until such time as her confines
(By seas encroach) their length declines.
For Italy to Sycill joined,
Before the double seas purloyn'd
The land away, and cut the shore,
That erst was fixed unto Pelore.
Caesar in Arms with furies sway,
Not without blood will shape his way. Caesar's humor and expedition.

Hesperians he accounts his foes,
And would not gain them without blows,
Least in that kind he being slack,
Might leave a war behind his back.
Those gates more please him that withstand,
Then those set open to his hand.
Best sorting are to his desire
Those Countries won with sword and fire,
Then such as would his peace acquire.
He scorns to march through beaten ways,
Or to deserve a Patriots praise.
At the first beginning of the war the Cities of Italy stood wavering to
which side to incline
The Latin Cities yet repine,
And doubt which way they should incline:
For though at first they stood at gaze,
When as the war began to blaze;
Yet now their walls they fortify
With Ramparts, and with Bulwarks hye,
And cast about them ditches deep;
Then to the Towers, and Turrets steep,
Round stones of hugye weight they bring,
And darts amongst the foes to fling.
The vulgar do more affect Pompey then Caesar.
The vulgar most to Pompey bends;
Yet with their love their fear contends.
Like as when whistling Southern wind
(Unto tempestuous storms inclined)
Shoouing the seas before his blast,
The rolling billows follow fast,
Although that Aeols changing hand
From his vast cave do them dis-band;
And Eastern gale, that checkes the maine,
Whose puffes the very Rack does strain:
The sea his first voage yet does trace,
And still the Southern wind embrace.
So dread these men in doubt did hold,
Their faith so fortune bought and sold.
Libo flies from his charge.
And Libo first (with base dismay)
Hytruria naked left a pray.
Pompeyes great Commanders fly from their garrisons before they saw the enemy.

Sylla flies from his charge. Varus flies from Auximium.


Thermus (with his example led)
Left Vmbria guardlesse, and thence fled.
So Sylla (with opprobrious shame,
Forgetful of his Fathers fame)
Trembled to hear but Caesar's name.
Varus likewise himself enlarged,
And all the garrison discharged,
That in Auximium he had placed,
Ere any foe the walls had faced;
Out at posterne gate he rides,
And in the woods and mountains hides.
Lentulus forsook Aesculea his garrison.
Aesculea, Lentulus forsook,
And unto flight himself betook.
But him the Victor did pursue,
Making them turn again that flue;
And of so many armed bands,
Only the leader escaped his hands:
No Ensigns among those Cohorts stands.
And Scypio thou too soon did leave Scipio forsook Nuceria, that was manned
with a brave garrison of Roman Veterans.

Nuceria, that their state bequeaue
Unto thy trust, which so did fail,
Ere any force did them assail;
When as that warlike Town was manned
With many a gallant trained band
Of valiant youths, from Caesar's arms,
Called to relieve the Parthian harms.
But first employed on Pompey's cost,
To venge the blood in Gallia lost.
And now himself does wars intend,
For these stout troops again did send,
To be his father-in-lawes sure guards:
This use of Roman blood awards.
But thou Corfinium, strong-fenc'd hold,
Commanded by Domitius bold,
That with huge walls inuiron'd art,
With Flanks and Ramparts, fit for Mart;
Thy garrison were those new bands,
That Milo took from Justice hands.
Now from the walls (with watchful eyes)
Domitius first near hand espies
Great clouds of dust aloft to rise.
And with the glittering sunshine beams,
Fair armed Troops cast flaming streams.
Soldiers and friends, quoth he, make haste,
This bridge forthwith must be laid waste, Domitius speech to his garrison
Soldiers.

That does upon this river stand:
See it be razed out of hand.
And you huge mountains now let fly
Your fountain heads, and raise so hye
The flowing Rivers with rough tides,
That all the boats that thereon glides,
Upon the shelues may wrack their sides:
Stay here the limits of this war,
This Town their proud attempt shall bar:
And on these banks those ravening bands
(With hopeles gains) shall make their stands.
Here first shall Caesar's force desist,
And victory yield to our fist.
He said no more, but hastes withal,
The swaggring troops from off the wall,
That headlong to the work do fall.
When Caesar from his Camp perceived
The Rivers passage was bereaved,
And that the breaking of the bridge,
His iournies speed would much abridge;
Caesar's words at the siege of Corfinium.
Enraged with wrath: what now? quoth he,
Are not strong walls esteemed to be
Sufficient sculking dens to hide
These crauen Soldiers terrifide?
O cowards will you ouer-flow
The fields, thereby my march to slow?
When Ganges with his stickle sway,
Nor any other flood can stay
Caesar, from holding on his way;
Now he the Rubicon has past,
Ye troops of horse set forth with have:
And bands of foot come follow on,
This shaken bridge go set upon.
No sooner he the word did speak,
But out his forward horsemen break,
And do the rivers banks assail,
Like to a stormy drift of hail.
To the other side then they let fly
A shower of darts, that cloud the sky.
And Caesar's self the passage takes,
Where none to him resistance makes.
Then quickly he does force them all
To make retrait within the wall.
And then the Rams for battery
Unto the work he does apply.
With other Engines brought in place,
That Towers and Bul-warkes will deface.
But see the villainy of war!
The garrison the gates vnbarre, Domitius delivered to Caesar by his own men.

Their Governor they do betray,
And him a prisoner forth convey,
Before proud Caesar's feet to lay,
But yet his state and noble face
It seemed no terror did imbase:
For often he stoutly called for death;
The Victor knew he loathed breath,
As one that did despair of life.
But Caesar said; Our grace is rise:
Live therefore though against thy will; Caesar's words to Domitius his prisoner.

And by our gift (said he) live still.
Let others (whom I shall subdue)
In thee a perfect pattern view
Of Caesar's mercy; and now choose,
On whose side thou thy Arms wilt use:
Or if thou will retired live,
Thy choice to thee I freely give.
But do not think this moves my mind,
That I thereby like grace would find,
If thou hereafter conquest gain;
That base respect I much disdain.
Thus said; forthwith he gave in charge
His hands from fetters to enlarge.
But better much had him bety'd,
If he that present hour had died:
And Fortune more had freed from shame
The honor of the Roman name.
He holds it now a grievous scorn
(With reputation so forlorn)
To war for his dear Countries sake,
And therein Pompey's part to take;
Whom all the Senates forces aides,
Whilst hostile pardon him vpbraides. Domitius his inward troubled thoughts

These thoughts his heart do still infest,
And with himself does thus contest:
Shall I in Rome go make my nest,
And (as a man degenerate)
Shut up my self in peaceful state?
And not this noble war pursue,
That wished for death, so lately due?
Nay rather into hazards run,
Until thy life's twist be out-spunne,
And Caesar's gift with glory shun.
Report did not as yet relate
This Captains base subdued state
To Pompeys ears fraught full of cares,
For his designs that now prepares
To strength his part with foreign shares,
And order gives the following day,
With Trumpets sound to set in ray
His troops, and then to feel their mind
How they to battle were enclinde.
To whom, when they did silence make,
With reverend voice he thus bespake.
Pompeys oration to his soldiers.
Ye vengers just of guilty hands,
Ye Soldiers of right Roman bands,
That for defense of Justice stands,
Whom now the Senates supreme hest
Does not with private arms inuest;
Dispose your forward hearts for fight,
Since now Hesperia (in our sight)
Does flame on fire in wretched state,
And her fair fields depopulate.
This clew of rage (in Gallia spunne)
Over the yeie Alps is run,
And Caesar in this raging mood,
Pollutes his sword with Latium blood.
The Gods him justly charge with blame,
As Author of this civil flame.
And now even now Rome to me calls,
Whom she her president installes)
To chastise these rebellious brawles.
Whose arms (with countries blood defiled)
Cannot as worthy wars by styled:
To ours that honored name belongs,
He compares Caesar to Cataline.
That do revenge our Countries wrongs.
His war is of no better kind,
Then that which Cataline designed,
When Rome he meant to set on fire,
And had with him that did conspire
One of the Lentulij his mates,
Caethegus, bare-arm'd in debates. The house of the Caethegi used always to
fight bare Armed.

O wretched rage that so do reign
Within this leaders wilful brain,
Whom Fates would raise to no less fame,
Then those of the Camillan name!
Or those brave Lords Metellij hight.
But thou art of another spright:
Yhy humor follows just the strain
Of Cinna's and of Marius vain:
Whose infamies do still remains*
Like Lepidus that was suppressed
By Catull', or as we distressed
Proud Carbo, that (by Justice hest)
Our Axes fatal edges tried,
Whose bones Sycilia soil does hide.
Or as Sertorius, Sertorius.
justly slain
For his rebellious course in Spain.
Although in faith it grieves me much
So to compare with any such
Thee Caesar; but that Romes offense
Cannot with our revenge dispense.
But would it had been so ordained
That Crassus victory had gained
Against the Parthes, and from the coast
Of Scythia, brought again his host;
Whereby he might thy self subdue,
As Spartacus he overthrew.
Or if the all foreseeing eye
Will that we two our forces try; Spartacus a Rebel.

My arm as well as thine shall show,
That it the pearcing Pile can throw.
And that my blood, for courage bold,
Disdaines by thee to be controld.
And that a heart to peace inclined,
Is not therefore of cowards kind. Pompeys ostentation recounting all his own
great deeds.

For though he term me spent with years*
Let not my age put you in fears.
My Camp experience so shall guide,
As fits an ancient leader tried.
Let his be ordered by the sway
Of a young Captains heady way;
I have arrived to highest place
That freemen gain by peoples grace:
And have all honors palms possessed,
But Monarchy, which I detest.
He (whom ambition so does feed,
A vainglorious speech.
That Pompeys power he would exceed,
In swaying of the Roman state)
Affects more then a private fate.
The Roman Peers this Camp do grace,
The Consuls here do hold their place.
Shall Caesar's pride them all outface?
O Fortune! can it thus betide,
That thou so blindly things should guide,
And shameless tolerate such pride?
Because that he (in ten years space)
Had near subdued the Gallicke race,
Where he so long a time has war'd,
And often from Rhenes cold bank been scard,
Pompey charge Caesar to have fled from the Brittons.
And laid the fault upon the deepes,
That with such rage their channel sweepes
As no ships there safe harbor keeps;
Thereby his dastard flight to cloak
From Brittons, whom he did provoke.
But now, since he does proudly boast,
That (at the fame of his fierce host)
The Senate left their homes for dread,
And from the armed City fled;
Vain fool, for fear they fled not thee,
A poor excuse.
But for good will all followed me;
That have my glittering streamers showd
Through all the Seas, with pirates strowd,
And did those Rouers force to seek,
Their refuge, in a little creek.
I likewise did, with conquering hand,
Subdue the Sovereign of that land,
That Romans force did long withstand:
And made an end of Pontus war,
More blessed thereby then Sylla far.
No part of all the world is free,
But has been conquered by me.
The cold North streams of Phasidos
My powerful hand and conquest knows,
With Aegypts parching sands besides,
And Syen, whom no shadow hides:
My name is fearful to the west,
And Spain likewise I have suppressed:
Where Baetis river last of all,
Into the Ocean sea does fall.
Arabia conquered felt my hands,
And fierce Aenochians warlike bands.
Colchos renownd with fleece of gold,
And Capadocia I controld.
The Jews, the unknown God that serve,
And dainty Sophens that preserve
Themselves so choice; the Armenians,
The Taurynes, and Sylicians:
All these are vanquished by me,
And nothing from my hands left free: Pompey recounts his actions.

But Civil wars unwieldy heft,
Which to my father-in-law I left.
Thus Pompey did his mind make known,
Whereat no showts of joy were shown.
Neither seemed they much to desire Pompeys Soldiers but little moved with his
great words.

The Trumpet kindling Martial ire.
And he himself (dismayed at this)
The Bands and Ensigns does dismiss.
Not trusting to his staggering troops,
That basely so halfe-conquered droopes,
To hear the sound of Caesar's fame,
Before that he a near them came: Pompey's men amazed at the fame of Caesar.

And therefore would not hazard fight
With cohorts in that daunted plight.
But as a Bull his lease forsakes,
When he a foil in combat takes,
Into some grove, and desert wood,
Does range and run with furious mood.
In which mad plight, (with rage repleat)*
With hoof and horns the shrubs does beat,
And to his pasture comes no more,
Until his strength he do restore.
And his rug'd neck, and furrowed hide
Please him again with puffed up pride;
Does then at last return again,
And more insult ore all the plain;
Leading the heard with him to go,
Whether the heards-man will or no.
So Pompeys force (too weak for fight)
Leaves Italy to Caesar's spite.
And (like a sculking runaway)
Does through Apulia roaue and stray,
Till at Brundusium he arriues,
The which strong fortress him reuiues.
Pompey comes to Brundusium.
This Town of old was first possessed,
By a strange Collony distressed,
That were as banished men outcast.
From Creet, and through the Ocean vast
Conuay'd by ships of Athens state,
(As ancient fables do relate)
When Theseus did black sails advance,
Breading false fear of his mischance.
This part of Italy does show
An indraught, compast like a bow,
In midst whereof a piece of land
(Formed like a tongue out-stretcht) does stand
Which bow the Adriaticke maine,
With horned compass, does contain.
Brundusium described.
And yet thereby ships could not find
A harbor safe from every wind;
But that an Island of high rocks
Safe from the storm, this indraught blocks:
And does repel the raging waves,
When so the stormy tempests raues.
And here and there, on every side,
Nature does safely so provide,
That boats and ships may safely ride,
But by a little Cable tied.
And thence they may free passage take;
If they a voyage mean to make,
For the Corcyrian Island bound;
Or else would seek their anchor ground
On the Ilyrian left-side lands,
Where Epidamnus City stands.
Here also often seafaring men
Their tempest-driuen ships up pen,
When Adriaticke storms arise,
Or on Ceraunia cloudy skies:
Or when Calabrias Sason shores,
With foaming billows swelles and roares.
When Pompey now did plainly find
Assurance none remaind behind
His back, in Italies affair,
Nor that he could himself prepare
To turn the war another way
For Spain, where his chief forces lay:
Because the Alps were just between
And from that course debarred him clean;
His son unto him he does call,
That eldest was amongst them all:
And him commands the world to try, Pompey his words to his eldest son, whom
he sends for aids.

For aid whereon he might rely.
Search Euphrates and Nylus shore,
To whom our fame was spread of yore:
And all those Nations draw to head,
Where I have Roman Armies led:
With all those Pirates vanquished,
Whom I in Collonies did spread A brief Catalogue of the nations that aid
Pompey.

Throughout the large Cylician soil,
Bid them unto the seas recoyle.
Stir up with all the Pharaoh's King:
Let my Tygranes his force bring;
But therewithal have special care,
Pharnaces do his arms prepare,
With both Armenians wandering rout,
And Pontus people warlicke stout:
Together with Ryphaean bands,
And those that coast along the strands
Of slow Meotis lake, thick frorne,
Whereon the Scythian Carts are borne.
But what, my son, needs many words?
Bid all the East now whet their swords,
And Cities all where so they stand
That have been conquered by our hand:
And to my Camp summon them all,
That to my Tryumphes have been thrall.
Pompeys words to the Roman Lords at Brundusium.
And you likewise, brave Latium Lords,
Whose names our Holy Days records,
First to Epyrus get you gone;
Then through the Grecian fields march on:
In Macedon new force receive,
Whilst winters season lends us leave.
When he had said, they all agreed
To follow what he had decreed:
And that there might no time be lost,
They hoise their sails, and leave the coast.
But Caesar not enduring peace,
Nor liking long from Arms to cease,
Caesar follows Pompey close at the heels.
Least Fortune should estrange her face,
Still hotly does pursue the chase,
And presses Pompey at the heels,
As one that no contentment feels,
In ought that yet by him is done:
That has so many Cities won
In so short time; and has distressed
So many foes, of Forts possessed:
And finding Rome, the worlds chief head,
So easy to his conquest lead,
The greatest prize that war could gain:
Yet Caesar (in his maistering vain)
With nothing done contents his mind,
Whilst ought to do remains behind.
Caesar's humor.
But onward in this war does trace,
Though all Italia gives him place:
And much at Pompey's state repines,
That he should rest in her confines.
And no less does it him displease,
That he should pass from thence by seas:
The Havens mouth he strives to shut,
And therein heaps of rocks does glut. Caesar goes about to shut up the Haven
of Brundusium to keep in Pompey from flying away.

But that his labor lost in vain,
Swallowd by the devouring maine.
And like the sands are spearst abroad,
Faster then hands can them unload.
For of those heaps no mark was seen
More then if Athos mount had been
Orethrowne, and in the middle cast
Of the Egaean Ocean vast.
Or as if G^urus hill so steep
Were into the devouring deep
Of foul Auernus headlong thrown:
So this huge work was overflowed:
No sign at all thereof was shown.
Now therefore he means to assay
Another course to stop the bay.
With piles of wood (hereto designed)
And huge Oak trees with chains combined, The like was used by the Spaniards
before Antwerpe, which they termed a Stockado.

This harbors mouth must be confined.
So fame reports that Zerxes tried,
The raging seas to ouerstride,
Framing on Hellespont a way, Zerxes.

Over the which he would convey
From Asias side his mighty host,
Unto Europas fertile coast.
And on this floting bridge transport
Old Abydos to Sestus fort.
Not fearing to be ouer-cast
With Eurus, or with Zephirs blast,
When he through Athos forced a way,
Safely his Navy to imbay.
So was this harbors mouth chained fast
With woods cut down into it cast;
VVhereon they did large Towers advance,
That on the rolling billows dance.
When Pompey now at last perceived
The outlet of the sea bereaved;
With firm compact foundation wrought
Whereby the work to pass was brought,
A world of cares torment his thought,
How to set free the bay again,
And sparse these works into the maine.
He therefore now stout ships prouides,
(With hoised sails, and force of tides)
Against this linked bridge to rush,
Which with huge Engines they do crush,
Po^pey forces a way through Caesar's work before the harbor.
So that peece-meale it tears and splits,
And on the weltring Ocean flits:
In cliffes and rocks lie linked trees.
Thus for his ships a passage frees.
And in the dark (with force of flings)
Great wilde-fire balls amongst them flings.
Then he commands, in still of night,
That all prepare themselves for flight.
That Mariners no clamours make;
When to their ships they them betake:
Nor that the Trumpets warning give,
When they their watches do relieve.
But that the troops do come aboard,
Not thereto called by Trumpets word.
It seems Lucan is here mistaken, for that this beginning of the war was in
the Spring of the year, as Appian writes.
The Sun in Libra now does shine
On Autumnes Equinoxiall line,
When (with the dawning of the day)
They do prepare to pack away,
And wey'd their Anchors with no cries,
That in the oafe deep buried lies.
And whilst they hoise their tackled yards,
The fearful Masters silence guards.
They cut their sails, and cables coil,
Pompey leaves Brundusium, and flies by sea in the night.
The Sailers without noise do toil.
Then Pompey Fortune did desire,
That now he safely might retire
From Italy; since she designed,
That he no resting there should find:
But seemed it did the Fates displease;
For (with the working of the seas)
The ships pell-mell encumbered were.
Which did a sudden clamor rear.
And falling foul (with blustering weather)
Their beake-heads clattring meet together.
The enemy the City takes,
As soon as Pompey it forsakes.
The Townsmen straight set open the gates.
So faith does change when fortune mates.
The walls they had no sooner won,
But straight the armed troops do run
To both ends of this compast land,
Which at the harbors mouth does stand.
And much were vexed to look thereon,
How Pompey with his fleet was gone.
O shame! a little conquest it is,
To see great Pompey flying this.
He slipped out at a narrow breach,
And so the Ocean wide did reach: A reproach to Pompey.

This breach by which his ships did pass,
Through this huge work, no bigger was
Then the Eubaean straight, whereon
There beats the waves of Calcydon.
And here two of these ships stooke fast,
Into the which these Soldiers cast
Huge grapling hooks, with mighty chains,
That them unto the shore constraines.
Here civil blood the sea first stains.
The whole fleet else free passage find;
But these chief ships were left behind.
Even so when Jason took in hand,
First to attempt the Colchos land; Jason.

Cyanea's cliffe let fall two rocks
Into the sea, whose boisterous shockes
One of his lesser vessels hits,
Whose stern abaft it somewhat splits:
Yet safely from those rocks she flits
Into a sheltring creek, and theare
Her wrack forthwith she does repare.
By this the breaking of the day
A differing color does display:
Yet Phoebus (with his glistering head)
Had not Aurora's cheeks made red,
Though his approach drew on a pace:
To which the nearer stars give place.
The Pleiades no longer shines:
Boots to the East inclines:
The greater stars that shine by night,
And Lucifer, that lamp of light,
Hides from the heat of Tytans sight.
Now Pompey through the seas does scower,
But not with like Empiring power,
As when he did those Pirates foil,
That all the maine did rob and spoil.
Thy fortunes have their race out run,
Tired with thy great conquests won.
So as mishap thee now does call,
With thy dear spouse and children all,
Into a war far off to flee,
And all thy household Gods with thee.
And yet (in this exiled fate)
A noble train supports thy state.
But oh some foreign shore is sought,
Whereas thy ruin must be wrought.
Not that the Gods in wrath desire,
That thou should want thy funeral fire
Vntomb'd in thine own native land;
But with thy death curse Egypt strand:
And free that heinous wretched deed
From Latium, that thy worth did breed.
For her so Fortune does provide,
In coasts remote that guilt to hide.
To keep the Roman land from stain
Of blood, of her dear Pompey slain.
Finis Libri secundi.
LVCANS PHARSALIA^ The third Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis does declare Whilst Pompey flees,
The vision that he dreaming sees.
To Sicill I Will is Curio sent,
Caesar to Rome makes his descent.
The Treasury as spoil he takes,
Metellus some resistance makes.
In these wars who takes Pompey's Part.
Caesar to Spain transferres his Mart,
And in his passage takes in hand
Marseilles siege by sea and land.
Yet onwards still he does proceed,
And leaves Brutus in his steed:
Who by a battle on the Maine
With conquest does the City gain.
WIth friendly gales the sails do fly,
Whilst through the deepes the ships do plye;
And all their looks as they do wend,
Upon Ionias coast they bend. Pompey flying by sea, still casts his eyes toward
Italy.

But Pompey's eyes still fixed stand,
Gazing on the Hesperian land,
And whilst he viewes his native shore,
(Which he is like to see no more)
The high lands seem as clouds to sight,
And then at last do vanish quite.
Now whilst a slumbring sleep did ceaze
His wearied sprights, to give them ease;
In dreams, a vision he descries,
That from below did ghastly rise.
The sad aspect of Iulias face,
Pompeys vision in a dream on the sea, and Iulias speech to him.
Seemed to appear in that same place,
Whereas her funeral fire was made,
And said, I come from Stygian shade,
Where ghosts afflicted haunt and trade,
Chased from those fair Elisian fields,
To blessed souls that solace yields.
Constraind I follow civil war,
Where I beheld the Furies jar,
Sparkling abroad their blazing brands
Amongst thy troops of armed bands.
And Charon, Ferry-man of Hell,
More skiffes prepares then tongue can tell.
And Dis new torments does devise
For souls, that posting to him flies.
And now the Fatal Sisters try,
With all their speed, their work to ply.
Yet their three hands can scarce suffice,
Their webbes so fast in sunder flies.
O Pompey! whilst I was thy wife,
In Triumphs thou did lead thy life:
Thy Fortune since, it seems, it fled,
Clean changed with thy new nuptial bed,
Which is ordained (by wrathful Fates)
To bring her Pheeres to doleful dates.
Cornelia, that same strumpet vile,
That did her spousall bed defile,
Before the funeral fires were spent,
Wherein her husbands bones were brent.
She still thy Ensigns does accost,
By land or sea where so thou ghost.
Whilst, me in memory to keep,
Thou will not break one hours sleep.
No vacant time there does remain,
Your mutual loue-sports to restrain.
But Caesar shall thee chase by day,
And I by night will thee dismay.
Laethe from me cannot remove
The memory of thy dear love.
The powers infernal license me
Throughout the earth to follow thee.
Amidst the fierce batalions rage,
I dreadlesse will my self engage.
For by my ghost I do protest,
Within thy power it shall not rest,
(O Pompey) that style to profane
Of Sonne-in-law, which thou have taken.
Thou seekst in vain with thy swords edge
To cut the knot of that vowed pledge.
Do what thou can, these Civil harms
At last shall cast thee in mine arms.
Thus having said, the wandering shade
From the embracements softly fade,
Of her old spouse, herewith adrade:
Yet though the Gods his ruin threats,
And ghosts would move him to regreats,
The fiercer he to arms does fly,
Resolved his fatal chance to try.
What now (quoth he) shall slumbring sights Pompeys words having seen the
vision.

Of visions vain, appall our sprights?
Either the bodies laid in grave
Of mortals here, no feeling have:
Or nothing it is when death does rave.
By this time Tytan dipped his head
Down into Thetis azur'd bed:
And only so much light he lends
Unto the Earth, as Phoebe sends
From her pale face, with horns new closed,
Or when her orb has been composed.
Now this desired stranger coast,
Affoords him leave to land his host:
And to that end they did prepare
Their Anchors, and their Cables yare.
And as they do approach the shoares,
They strike their sails, and ply their oars.
When Caesar saw that from the bay
The winds had borne the fleet away,
Caesar discontent with Pompeis escape
Which now the seas hid from his sight,
Although his only power and might
Commanded all Hesperia soil;
No glory yet in him did boil,
So to put Pompey to that foil.
But did his mind much more displease,
That so his foes had escaped by seas.
Fortune by no means could content
The height whereto his mind was bent:
He weyes not so much conquests gain,
As still in raging wars to reign.
And yet now seems that he does mean,
From care of wars his thoughts to weane:
And to intend the public peace;
Hoping by that means to increase
The peoples vain unconstant love,
And discontentments to remove.
Caesar affects to win the peoples favor.
Which to effect, the grateful'st way
Was how the common dearth to stay:
For now the Cities, and the rest
Famine most grievously oppressed.
Then Awe, and Love are surest bread,
When by the rich the poor are fed,
The starued vulgar nothing dread.
Curio therefore to this intent,
Curio sent into Sycilia.
Into Sycilia I Will is sent:
Whereas the seas with furious waves,
Either the mouldring shores still shaues,
Or else the clyffes so beats and shakes,
As in the land great indraughts makes.
And still their fury so maintain
As keeps the parted confines twain
That they can never join again.
Now rage of war (but new begun)
Does over all Sardinia run.
Both of which Islands still abound
With fertile croppes upon the ground; Sycilias fruitfulness,

So as no coast on all that maine
Hesperia serves with so much grain.
The Roman barnes no land so feeds,
Scarcely the stalks the ears exceeds.
Not Affricke does afford like store;
When as the clouds, with Boreas rore,
Breeds fruitful years, and moists the shore.
Thus Caesar did, with care provide
How these defects might be suply'd:
Then marches on (with stately port)
But not in any warlicke sort:
His countenance seemed to peace designed,
And so to Rome his course inclined.
O had he come unto that Town,
Only adorned with the renown, Caesar comes to Rome.

And Trophies of the Gallicke spoils,
And glory of his Northern broils,
How great a train, what worthy shows
Might he have made of conquered foes?
Of all his Rhene and Ocean thralles,
His conquest of the noble Gauls,
And with them all his captive flocks,
Of Brittons, with their yellow locks.
O what a triumph did he leefe,
In winning more then all of these!
The Cities now as he remoues,
Did not (in troops to show their loves)
Meet him with shouts and friendly cries: Caesar not applauded by the Cities,
as he past toward Rome.

But silent, and with fearful eyes.
No flocks of people in the fields
To see him there, applauses yields:
Yet his contentment stands in this,
That he to them a terror is.
For he did ever more approve
The peoples fear, then their vain love.
Now he the steepy Towers had past
Of strong Anxuris, and at last
The fennie way withal he takes,
That lies between Pontinas lakes:
Near which the grove aloft is seen,
Of Diane, Scythians heavenly Queen.
And not far thence, high Albas way,
Where Latium rites make Holiday.
From whence upon a rock on hye,
A loofe, the City he did eye:
Which (since his Gallicke war began)
He never yet had seen till than.
And now (admiring that prospect)
To Rome this speech he did direct.
O seat of Gods! could this men so
Caesar's speech looking upon Rome.
Forsake thee, ere they saw a foe?
If thou can not, what City can
Deserve to be fought for by man?
Well have the higher powers represt,
The humors of the armed East,
From joining with the Hungars stout*
And all that fierce outrageous rout
Of Dakes, of Getes, and Sarmatans,
From bringing down their bloody bands
To thee (poor Rome) by Fortune spared,
Whom fearful Pompey durst not guard.
So weakly mand, more blessed art far
With Civil then with Foreign war.
Thus said, forthwith he did invest
The City, then with fears possessed:
For sure they thought, that (in his ire)
All should have been consumed with fire,
Caesar is not so cruel as the Romans suspected.
And Temples should to ruin run,
As soon as he the walls had won.
Such was the measure of their fright,
His will they construed by his might.
And in such sudden mazements wear,
That they their sacred rites forbear.
The common sort to sportings bent,
Their merry tunes turned to lament:
No spleen they had, their sprights were spent
The Roman Fathers reverend troop
In Phoebus Palace sitting, droope:
Not thither called at an hour,
By order of the Senates power.
No Consuls with their presence grace
Their sacred seats in supreme place.
Nor next to them the laws to sway
The Praetor sat in his array.
No Coches at the Senate gate,
That thither bring the Peers of state.
Caesar alone was all in all,
His private voice the Court does thrall. Caesar's great authority in Rome.

The Fathers to his hests give way,
Rady his pleasure to obey.
Whether he Monarchy desire,
Or would to sacred rites aspire:
Or lives of Senators would wast,
Or them into exile would cast.
But he (more modest and more mild)
Did blush his power should be defiled; Caesar's modesty.

More to command (with threatening fear)
Then well the Roman state could bear.
But one there was amongst the rest,
For liberty that would contest:
And in a rage he took in hand,
To know if Caesar might withstand Metellus a Roman Tribune contests with
Caesar.

The ancient Rules of their free state,
And in that point would right debate.
This stout Metellus was, who saw
A swarming troop of Soldiers draw
Near to Saturnus Temple gates,
That were locked up from dire debates,
Steps forth enraged, and does assay
Through Caesar's bands to force a way.
So much of tempting gold the love Metellus would protect the Treasury of Rome
from Caesar's spoil.

The minds of mortal men can move,
Danger of sword and death to prove.
The laws no Valor does protect,
The care thereof all do neglect.
But (that which is most vile of all)
Riches, whereto base minds are thrall,
Stirs up a foolish idle brawle.
This Tribune, with a tongue at large,
The outrage lays to Caesar's charge:
And tells him plainly that before
He shall break open the Temple door,
The sword should first his breast invade,
And bathe in sacred blood his blade.
And that the Gods for justice sake,
Vengance would pay if spoil he make,
Or do by force the treasure take.
The Tribunes curses in like case
(Said he) did greedy Crassus trace.
And did against him so prevail,
That woeful war his pride did quail.
Do thou so now vnsheath thy sword,
That do such lawless leave afford
To this injurious foul contempt
From peoples rage thou art exempt.
What can this forlorn town attempt?
Thy wicked Soldiers must not crave,
The treasures of our state to have:
Elsewhere thou have sufficient spoils
Of conquered Towns in other soyles.
No want at all thy troops constraines,
Of our long peace to share the gains:
In war (O Caesar) loose the raines.
With these proud words the Tribune has
So far provoked Caesar's wrath,
As that with scorn he did reply;
Caesar's words to Metellus the Tribune.
In vain poor soul thou hop'st to dye
So brave a death, as by my blade:
Naught has Metellus worthy made,
So great a grace as Caesar's ire,
It sorts not with thy proud desire.
Think thou that freedoms state must stand
Supported by thy feeble hand?
My glory won in so long war,
Thy vain conceit exceeds so far,
As that the laws would less detest,
By Caesar's hand to be suppressed,
Then by Metellus voice to hold,
The freedom that they did of old.
So Caesar spoke, and yet before
The Tribune left the Temple door,
His rage increased more and more.
And to the wrathful swords he pressed,
Forgetting what his gown professed.
But Cotta checked, and stayed than, Cotta's discreet words to Metellus.

The saucy boldness of this man.
And said; the freedom now they held,
To sovereign power in spite must yield.
For though this act thou could maintain,
Thou should but freedoms shadow gain.
Since our dejected state obayes
So many other servile ways.
This comfort and excuse we have,
If slander us as base deprave.
Resistlesse power does all men brave.
And I would rather wish to hear,
These seeds of war dispersed wear.
With loss of wealth those may be vexed,
That freedom have for their pretext.
For want more grievously does rave
Upon the master then the slave.
Metellus being put aside,
The Temple was set open wide:
And such a noise the rushing shockes
Did make, when they did force the locks,
That the Tarpeian cliffe did sound,
Loud with the Eccho's that rebound.
Out of the Temple clean they swept
The wealth, The treasures of Rome taken by Caesar.
that had full safe been kept
So long ago by conquests gained,
Whereof scarce memory remained.
The treasures got in Punicke broils,
The Persian, and Macedons spoils;
With heaps of gold, that were a pray,
When Pirrhus trembling fled away, A Catalogue of those places from whence the
Roman treasures came

That had Fabritius faith assayed,
In vain our Rome to have betrayed.
And whatsoever heretofore
Our frugall sires laid up in store:
With all the tribute and the rent,
From time to time that Asia sent:
And all the spoils from Creta fot,
By conquest that Metellus got:
With Cato's wealth, which he did bring
(By long seas) from the Cyprus King:
With all the treasures of the east,
And those rare Trophies that did feast
The eyes of all that them beheld,
When Pompeys triumphs so excelled:
And was the latest conquest won
On those great kingdoms overrun.
All these the Victors use supplies
By woeful rapine made good prize.
Caesar richer then all Rome.
Whereon might truly pass this doom,
Caesar was richer now then Rome.
Pompey mean while a world had won,
That would in war his fortune run:
Great Cities on his side did band,
The aids that came to Pompey.
That shall at Caesar's mercy stand.
The Graecians first their succor lends:
Amphisa her brave Phoceans sends;
Then those that do the Countries fill,
On both sides of Parnassus hill;
With rocky Cyrrha, to him swarms
The Captains of Boetian Arms.
Where Cephisos, with his swift waves,
Old Cadmus City weltring laues.
Whose water fatal answers raues.
To these, Pisean people ioynes:
With sweet Alpheus, that purloynes
Her secret current under ground,
Till she Trinacria has found.
Menala then the Arcadians leave,
And to these wars themselves bequeaue:
And Trachine Soldiers thither fly,
From the Herculean Oeten hye:
The Thesprotes and Driopes
Do likewise march along with ease.
The Sellae, that his part do take,
Their solitary groves forsake,
That on Chaonians top do shake.
And though the Athaenian bands were spent
In former wars whereto they went,
Yet loyal Salamina lent
Three little ships, which now they rigge,
That in Phoebeian docks did ligge.
The ancient Creet, Jove's loved land,
Where Cities ten times ten did stand,
Her Gnossian quiuers thither sent,
With people using bows event:
Gortinae shows the like good will,
Whose Archers equals Eastern skill.
Then Orithow sent Dardan strength:
With Athamus that far in length
Disperseth many woods she ownes.
And old Enchyle, where the stones
Show Cadmus metamorphoz'd bones.
So Colchis, and Absirtos flud,
Whose froth filles Adriaticke mud.
The Paeni, that (with clownish skill)
The Countries all about there till.
And with Thessalian Plowes do toil,
And furrough up Hialcons soil.
From whence (into the raging maine)
Was carried first that stranger train,
Of Argonauts, whose boisterous bands
Did range and spoil in foreign lands.
They first the practice did contriue,
How men against the seas might strive.
And how with sails to take the wind,
Whereby remoted shores to find.
And therewithal they did display
To loathsome Death a new found way,
On mortals lives to rave and pray.
The Thracian Aemus is left bare:
And Pholoe, whose manrood are
(As lying fables leave to mind)
By nature shaped of Centaurs kind.
Strymon (that does to Nylus sands
Send birds of the Bistonian lands)
Her aid sets out in warlicke bands:
And barbarous Cone, when she leaves
Sarmatian streams, and after cleaues
To Peucens spreading channel deep,
One of those heads alone does keep,
That from great Istars current sweep:
Then Misia and Idalis land,
That mingles with cold Caicos strand,
And the Arisban barren mould,
With those that do Pitanen hold;
Then the Celenes most accursed,
Lamenting that their Marsia durst
(O Pallas with thy gifts elate)
Stir conquering Phoebus to debate.
And high shoar'd Marsia whose swift race,
Crooked Meander does embrace,
And with her, wheels about her pace.
With Pactols sands, that do unfold,
The precious grains of glowing gold
To foreign coasts, and Hernius strands,
That equals it with precious sands.
So likewise all the Ilium bands,
To fruitless wars for Pompey stands.
Neglecting the old flying fame,
That Julius of the Trojans came.
Caesar supposed to be come of the Trojans.
So Syria her assistance gives,
And the inhabitants that lives
About Orontes desert coasts,
And Ninus town, whose bliss fame boasts:
Damascus subject to high winds:
Gaza likewise; and where men finds
Palme-trees so rife, and thick to stand,
Named the Idumean land:
The sea-washt City Tyrus hight,
The Tyrians and Sidonians skillful seamen.
Sydon with precious purple dight,
Their ships (when to the wars they fly)
Range not the seas uncertainly.
No seamen have the Art more tried,
How by the Pole their course to guide.
So likewise (if we credit fame)
Phoenicians were the first had name, The Phaenicians the first that invented
letters.

The use of characters to find,
And letters to express our mind.
Memphis the practice had not found
Of those broad flagges upon her ground, The Memphites kept their magic art
carved in stones, with the figurs of Beasts and Birds before they knew letters.

How they together should be bound.
Of beasts and birds (this was their trade)
The shapes deep cut in stones they made.
And so their magic art presaru'd
In brutish Images fair carved.
Then those inhabitants that roues
About mount Taurus woody groves.
And Persian Tarsus, with those men,
That cut rocks for Coricum denn.
The Mallians, and the Aege coast,
Whose ships do ring with billows tossed. These were the Pirates that Pompey
conquered, and triumphed for long before the civil war began.

And Silix now the seas frequent
Allowd, but not as Pirates sent.
So are the Eastern Countries led
Unto this war by fame far spread.
That Ganges now her troops forth brings,
The current of whose floating springs
Of all streams in the world dares run,
A course contrary to the Sun;
And headlong flies against the East, Ganges runs his course contrary to the
Sun.

Here it is said the warfare ceast,
That Macedons great Captain made,
When he the Ocean did invade.
And did himself ore-come confess
With this vast worlds vnweldnesse.
There Indus fiercely forth does sweep, The place where Alexander ended his
war.

With mighty streams, and channels deep,
Divided into gulfes alone,
But with Hidaspis mingles none.
Then those that the sweet liquor swilles,
Which from the sugarcanes distilles: A people that do paint and adorn their
hair with Jewels.

And they that use with saffrons grain,
To give their hair a shining stain.
And so in dainty lawnes do dangle,
Which they with glistering Jewels spangle.
And those that make their funeral piles,
Before that Death their Life exiles.
And do without constraint embrace,
The furious flames with dreadlesse face.
O how great glory do they gain,
A people that do burn themselves, and not attend their natural death.
That death can hold in such disdain,
With their own hands (in spite of fates)
To hasten on their welcome dates;
And whilst in perfect health they live,
Their souls unto the Gods do give!
Then those fierce Capadocian lads
Whom hunting humors so much glads,
A hunting nation.
With bruske Ammannian plowing swads:
Armenia, where Nyphatem flows,
And rowles huge pebbles as she goes,
With the Coastrae forests hye,
Whose lofty tops do threat the sky.
And ye Arabians (that do view
An uncouth clime unknown to you)
Do wonder much the shade to see
Stream from the left side of a tree.
Then came unto this Roman war
The Orestians, that do dwell a far:
The leaders of Carmania bands,
Whose climate to the Southward stands,
Not wholly hid from Arctons light,
But see his Carre part of the night.
And Aethiop near to all the signs,
That in the cirkling Zodiaque twines.
Excepting Taurus cloven heels,
When cowring crookedly he reeles.
And where great Euphrates is bred
With swift streamed Tygris from one head,
In Persian fountain jointly fed.
Who when they mingle here and there,
Breeds doubt which of the names they bear
But Euphrates (with fruitful streams,
As she does trauerse sundry realms)
Resembles Nylus in her course.
But Tygris in her rapid sourse, The river Tygris runs a great way under the
ground and then rises again.

Is suddenly devoured quite,
Into the earth from all men's sight,
And under ground does run her race
Till with new head her stream she trace,
And with the Ocean enterlace.
This while the Parthians held them coy,
Either to help or to annoy,
Any of these two mighty guides, The Parthians refused to join either with
Caesar or Pompey, but laugh and look on.

They Will war on none of both their sides:
But laugh which way the world it slides.
The wandering Scyths, with poysned darts,
Their aid unto this war imparts.
And Bactrians closd with chilly gulfes,
With Hircane forests fostring wolfes.
Then the Henochians bring their band,
A part of Lacedemon land.
That headstrong are where they withstand
And of Sarmatia all that track,
That ioynes to Mosko back to back.
And where rich Phasis cuts and bounds
The Colchos fields, and fruitful grounds.
With Halis bringing heavy fate
To Craesus, in his rich estate*
And where as Tannais tumbling down
His streams, from off Rypheus crown.
Gives unto Nations sundry names,
As she her winding channels frames.
And Europe does on either side,
From Asia with her banks divide.
Now here, now there, which way she bends,
The limits of the world extends.
And where the Euxine sea does take
Huge torrents from Meotis lake,
And so the glory does abate
Of Gades, whom (as tales relate)
Did only through her pillars twain, Hercules Pillars set up at Gades.

That way let in the western maine,
Wrought by the huge Herculean pain.
Then aids come from Scythonian ports,
With whom the Arimasps consorts.
The delicacy of the Arimaspes.
Those do with golden phillets dress
Their curled locks, and combed tresse.
The Axij, Pompey's part profess,
With Massagets, that did let blood,
Their horses hoofes in steed of food,
So to releieue their hungry mood,
In the Sarmatick lingering brawle,
The Massagets in their wars for want of victuals let their horses blood, and
so relieved themselves.
And Gelons swiftest of them all,
So huge a mass of Martial bands
Came not from the Memnonian lands,
When Cyrus did his armies make,
For wars that he had undertake.
Nor Zerxes with his boisterous crew
That all his thousands only knew
By counting of the darts they threw.
Nor Agamemnons navy strong,
Which to revenge his brothers wrong,
With Grecian Princes past the seas,
In number ever equaled these.
The variety of Nations, Languages and attires that were in Pompeys camp.
So many Kings to battle pressed,
Never obay'd one Chiefetaines hest.
Such diverse forms of habites strange,
Of language such confused change,
So great a train of royal Peers
Was never seen in former years,
As Fortune now did lead in dance,
To mingle with this wars mischance.
Like funerals for Pompey's sake
A fitting exequie to make.
Then Corniger, that Hammon hight,
Jupiter Hammon.
Did not forbear with supreme might,
To summon all Marmatick lands
Unto these wars to lead their bands.
Or whatsoever force did rest
Even from the furthest of the west,
Of parching Lybs, and sunburned Moors;
Together with the Eastern powers,
As far as Paratonia strands,
Unto the bounds of Syrtes sands.
That Caesar's fortune yet may know
He had not won all at a blow:
But should in the Pharsalian fields
Encounter worlds with spears and shields.
Now Caesar following on his Mart, Caesar takes his journey from Rome toward
Spain.

From trembling Rome he does depart:
And (with his valiant expert host)
Over the cloud-brow'd Alps does post.
And whilst that other Cities fear,
The thundering fame of him to hear,
Massilian youths dare take in hand,
As N^^ters in these wars to stand.
Not with Greek lightness vnresolu'd, The courage of the Massilians.

But with a constant courage bold,
They do entend for to debate
The laws and freedom of their state,
And not to change or follow fate.
But yet before they do engage
Their City unto battles rage,
They will attempt (with all their skill)
To qualify his headstrong will
With courteous and perswasiue words,
And not till need vnsheath their swords.
Now therefore when they understand
That Caesar's force was near at hand,
Ambassadors to him were sent,
Who with them Olive branches hent,
To show that peace was their intent.
Your Latium Annals do make known
Massilia still such faith has shown The Oration of the Massilians to Caesar.

Unto the reverend Roman state,
As that in all the dire debate,
That they have had with foreign foes,
She has partaked with their blows.
And now if thou do undertake,
Conquests in unknown Climes to make, Massiliians offer to aid Caesar in
foreign wars, but not to intermeddle in this civil strife.

Command our true devoted hands,
To war with thee in foreign lands.
But if ye (with infestious Arms)
Prepared are for discords harms,
To civil wars, then give us leave
Our tears in secret to bequeaue.
Against all piety it stands,
In blood of friends to bath our hands.
But if the Gods (to wroth inclined)
With venging arms would show their mind,
Or if the earth-bred Giants fell,
Against high heavens would rebel,
Yet humane duty should not dare
With an inferior bootlesse care,
Either by treaty, or by might,
To offer for the Gods to fight.
Little can we poor mortals guess
What humors higher powers possess:
When Jove from high his anger wreakes,
He thunderbolts and lightning speaks.
Admit that many nations strange,
Amongst these broils their forces range.
And that the sottish vulgar sort
Would this contagious crime support,
And not repine (constrained from far)
To whet their swords for civil war;
Yet be it far from honest hearts
To follow any factious parts.
A reprehension of this civil war.
Let no brave Soldiers venture life,
To bolster out domesticke strife.
What hand would not with fear be taint,
To see his wounded father faint?
Brothers that war on either parts,
Will doubt to throw their fatal darts.
And sure your Empires state will end,
The sum of the Massilians Petition to Caesar.
If wars unjust you do intend.
But now our suite we do commend,
Which is, that from our City gates,
You would withold all dire debates;
And no infestious Ensigns send,
The Massilians offer to receive Caesar unarmed, and without his Troops.
Nor Egles fierce us to offend;
But that as to your friends most just
Your person with our walls would trust.
Where Caesar may (deuoid of doubt)
Assure himself his arms shut out.
Our Town is free from enuies wroth
To Caesar and to Pompey both.
But if that Romes vn-vanquisht state
Shall still subsist by favoring Fate;
And that your humors it might please,
Your wraths with friendship to appease*
Here may you both unarmed meet,
And peaceably each other greet.
But if provoking wars of Spain, Massilia indifferent between Caesar and
Pompey offer their Town for a place of parley.

Your forces thither do constrain;
Why range you then so far astray?
Our City lies not in your way;
Whose worth of no importance is,
Our state stands still exempt from bliss.
We could not erst with happy arms,
Defend our selves, and countries harms.
But exiled made our last retreat
From Phocis Towers, our native seat;
Arriving in this stranger port,
Where we securely raisd a fort,
Rounded with walls of no great haigth, The strength of the Massilians
consisted in their loyal dealings with their neighbors.

But always guarded with our faith.
Now if you will besiege our Town,
And tear our gates and ramparts down,
And set our houses on a fire,
Spending on us your hostile ire,
Our watercourse turn awry,
And all our fountain heads draw dry,
And suck the moisture from those fields,
That fruits and grain unto us yields.
O then behold a loathsome sight,
When Famine shall (with ravening plight)
Constrain us for to eat and gnaw
Our fleshy limbs to feed our maw;
Our liberties we hold so dear, The resolution of the Massilians.

That we no toils nor torments fear.
But as Saguntum, with renown,
When Hannibal besieged that Town,
Our mothers so, with dried pappes,
Will cast their infants from their lappes,
Into the fire, to end mishaps.
The wife will beg with watery eye
Of her dear husbands hand to dye.
And mischiefs measure up to fill,
The brother will the brother kill.
Such civil war they will rather make,
Then any other undertake.
Thus the Massilian Legates said,
Which speech did Caesar so vpbraid,
As that in him it stird up spleen
Which in his very looks were seen.
And in these terms expressed his teene.
Caesar's answer to the Massilians.
Your Grecian race conceiues in vain,
What course we mean to entertain.
For though our journey seem to bend
Westward for Spain, yet we may spend
And spare sufficient time to boot,
To raze your walls up by the root.
Rejoice my Cohorts, at this hap;
Fate casts a war into your lap.
The blustering winds do loose their grace,
When in the vacant air they trace,
If no thick woods withstand their race.
Caesar's Army cannot endure idleness.
The flaming fire is but a blast,
If fuel be not on it cast:
So is it noisome unto me,
Without a warring foe to be.
My troops that idle life do rue,
When they meet no rebellious crew,
That with their force they may subdue.
Caesar disdains that the Massilians offer him to come disarmed into their
Town, or else to shut their Gates against him as an enemy.
Massilians think they offer fair,
That Caesar may unarmed repair
In private sort safe to their state,
Or else they will shut up their gate:
I needs must scorn this double flout,
To shut me in, or shut me out.
Then they will seem to banish far,
Contagion of a civil war;
But they shall smart in that they dare
Entreat of peace in my affair,
And by experience well shall see
None are then those more safe and free,
That by my arms protected be.
So having said, his troops he leads
Toward the Town that nothing dreads,
Whose gates were shut, and walls well mand
With store of youths that on them stand. The siege of Massilia.

Not far from thence Caesar espies
A hill, that loftily did rise.
Whose top extends a pretty space,
Fit for a little camping place.
This he esteemed a piece of ground,
Which all their tents might safely bound,
Casting a trench about it round.
The Cities side next fronting this,
A strong and lofty Castle is,
Whose top even with this hill is seen,
And then a plain lies both between:
Where with great labor up were cast
Diverse high mounts with Ramparts vast.
But first on all parts to the land,
VVhereon the City walls did stand,
He did inuiron round about
With trenches and with bulwarks stout. Caesar inuirons Massilia with a
trench on all sides of the land.

And this huge work so did convey,
That all was shut up but the bay.
How great and eternising fame
Was it unto this Cities name,
That never ouer-awd with fear,
In this distress, that now they were,
Did still undaunted courage bear.
Seeing that Caesar had so late
Subjected all in so short date,
That one town should oppose his fate. Massilia shows more valor in resisting
Caesar, then all Pompeys towns in Italy.

Bootlesse it is that to fore-slow,
Which Fate sets down how it shall go.
Fortune, that hastens this man's sway,
And says the world shall him obey,
In this but crifles time away.
Down goes the woods hand over head,
The Oaks are from the forests shred.
With which their works of earth are bound,
Whereby they stand more firm and sound:
That their foundation well may bear
The structures that on them they rear,
which else their heft would mouldring tear
A Grove there stood full long of yore,
Which none durst violate before,
Whose arms so thick did interlace,
That it obscured all the place.
The description of a strange and hideous grove near Massilia.
And with cool shadows kept off far,
The glowing beams of Tytans carre.
The rural Nymphs here did not won,
Nor Syluane Gods, nor Fairies run:
But with a barbarous sacred rite,
For sacrifice had Altars dight.
The rugged rindes (throughout this wood)
Were smer'd and staind with human blood.
If we may credit give to eld,
That heavenly powers in reverence held;
The very birds it did affright,
Upon the boughs to perch or light.
The sauadge beasts did it forbear,
And would not haunt or kennell there.
No winds on these trees showed their force,
Lightning did thence her flames divorce.
An ugly horrid den it was,
That neither bred green leaf or grass.
But many swarthy springs there rise,
From whence froth-bubling black streams flies:
And there rough hewed pictures stands
Of Gods, framed by some bungling hands.
In rotten trunkes of hollow treene,
Strange uncouth shapes are often seen.
The hideous seat of this stern place,
With dread makes pale the gazers face.
Strange sights in this grove.
The usual figures daily seen
Of God-heads, not so fearful been,
Nor holds men's minds in so great awe
As those they never knew or saw.
Oft-times from out the hollow ground,
Strange howling voices did resound.
Huge Ew-trees sometimes seem to fall,
And straight spring up again withal.
The fires that run by night in fields,
Twining these trees no blasting yields.
About the Oaks fell Dragons twist,
Thither to come no people list.
It Is left unto the powers divine:
For be it when the Sun did shine,
Or when dark night the earth does hide, This should seem to be a very
melancholy God.

The Priest there scarcely durst abide.
To meet (in so great fear he stood)
The God that patronized this wood.
This grove that near the camp did stand,
Must now be feld down out of hand.
Of which in former wars with Gaul,
No stick was ever cut at all;
But safe untouched did stand upright,
Near other woods destroyed quite.
But yet the Soldiers daring mood, Caesar's Soldiers make scruple to cut this
grove.

To cut these trees dismayed stood,
The reverent place so cooled their blood.
They thought that if this grove they fell,
The Axes edge would then rebel,
And in revenge (as thereto loath)
Upon their limbs turn back his wroth.
When Caesar saw his Cohorts put
In so great dread this grove to cut;
He takes an Axe, and fiercely stroke
Upon a mighty high-growne Oak:
Which when he had half hewne a sunder, Caesar by his own example causes his
Soldiers to cut down this grove.

Why mates (quoth he) is this a wonder?
Fear not with me to do the same,
Upon my head lay all the blame.
Which said, they his command attempt: The Soldiers doubtful whether to anger
Caesar or the Gods.

But yet from fear not full exempt.
Their minds in doubt were held at odds,
To anger Caesar, or the Gods.
Then down is feld the long-grain'd Ash,
The knotty Holme in twain they slash.
The great Dodonian Beech high-growne,
Now with the Axe lies ouer-throwne.
The Alder, bred by rivers sides,
As did the rest, like wrack betides.
The Cypres, vsd by those that mourn,
Whilst noble funerals do burn.
Then did the place so fleeced and shorn,
In stead of shade, let in the morn:
So near they grew, that being feld,
One tree another upright held.
The Gallicke peasants at this sight,
The peasants of Gaul grieved to see this grove cut down.

But the Massilians being glad of it.


Condole the spoil with heavy plight.
But all the Burgers (from the wall)
Rejoice to see this huge downfall.
They hope this sacrilegious deed
Against the Gods, would vengeance breed.
Yet Fortune often we see does spare
The mighty that most guilty are.
And heavenly powers their fury slakes,
In plaging wretched harmless snakes.
When they had trees sufficient store
To serve their turn, they feld no more.
But round about they seek all parts,
To bring in carriages and carts:
Which did the country much annoy,
The Gallicke peasants repine that their plowing is hindered by Caesar's
carriages.
Their plowes in that sort to employ.
This season served the lands to till,
And much it went against their will
To let their husbandry stand still.
Caesar likewise was much enraged,
About this siege to be engaged.
His forces were designed a far,
To be imployd in greater war,
Caesar offended to be thus stayed before Massilia.
Against his enemies in Spain,
Whose armies coast the Western maine.
And therefore to cut off delays,
A wooden Turret he did raise,
Of so great height, and large withal,
As was the castle and the wall. Caesar erects Engines against the walls of
Massilia.

Which was not fixed unto the ground,
But borne upon huge truckles round.
And creeping forward like a snayle,
Was not discernd how it did trayle.
And when this mass did crackling shake
The Townsmen thought that some Earthquake
This hugious structure did surprise,
And musd their walls shook not likewise, The Massilians wonder at Caesar's
Tower, to see it go and shake.

Yet still their courage did subsist
The Romans stoutly to resist.
And not alone with casting darts,
But with great slings they pierce both parts
Of this huge frame, and make such way,
That armed troops downright they slay.
And with those maine stones from them cast,
When bones are bruisd, and lives laid wast.
More wounds they leave so gaping wide,
That darts had way from side to side.
Such mighty blows these stones do give,
As when fierce winds do whirling drive, The Massilians resisting engines

Against some old high tottering rock,
Which so the cliffe does tear and shocke,
As that on whom the ruins fall,
The bruised corpse to death does sprall,
And mingles blood and joints withal.
But then to give them more offense,
With thick conjoined Target fence,
They do assail the City wall, The walls assaulted by Caesar's soldiers.

And to that sight with courage fall.
Target to Targe, borne with high hand,
One does behind another stand.
The sides whereof so wide extends,
As that their Murrions it defends;
And now the darts that cost from far
Their enemies did wound and scarre,
Could not prevail against this close fight,
But ouer-slipt their bodies quite.
Then were the Townsmen new to seek
Some other means that were more like
The strength of the Romans target-fence.
How to offend, which did them pain
How to begin to learn again
To use their darts with fashions strange,
And practisd weapons now to change.
Therefore (in stead thereof) they chose
With arms unarmed upon their foes,
Huge stones to ding down from the walls,
Whose weight might crush them with their falls.
But so firm stood their clustred sheelds,
That to those stones no more they yields
Then tops of houses break or fail
With whirling showers of rattling hail:
Which on the tile stones sound and dance,
So from this fence the stones did glance.
Yet still the Burgers grew more fierce,
And with continual heaps did pierce
This Target-fence, and at the length
The Target-fence at last broken, and Soldiers retire.
Disioyn'd their strong connexed strength:
So as the Cohorts ouer-toyl'd,
Seuer'd themselves, and then recoy'ld.
But therewithal came new supplies,
Who then another Engine tries.
Their Vinias to the wall they brought,
Couerd with green turfes all aloft.
Whose hollow pent-house sheluing steep,
With an other Engine the walls are begun to be undermined.
Did them from blows and danger keep:
Then with the Pick-axe and the spade,
The walls foundation they invade,
And so began to undermine,
Safely protected with their Vine.
The battering Ram then forth they bring
Whose hanging huge heft with a swing
The Ram brought to the walls.
Firm couched stones down tottring bring
And whilst the force thereof they try,
The Burgers heap down from a hye
The Romans retire to their camp, seeing their Engines burnt and spoiled.
Such monstrous logs and quenchlesse flames
With fiered brands to burn these frames.
And still these fires do so renew,
That the scorch't flames in sunder flew:
VVhereat the Soldiers tired with pain,
Seeing their labor lost in vain,
Home to their Tents retired again.
The Burgers then the Gods did crave,
Their City walls from wrack to save.
And therewithal with courage stout,
Their youths by night did sally out;
Pressing upon the Roman bands,
And closely carried in their hands
Fierce wildfire balls, The Massilians sally out, and set fire on the Roman
fortifications and engines.
which they with slings
Amongst the hostile army flings.
No other Arms with them they took,
Their darts for that time they forsook.
Their bended bows were laid aside,
Only those whorling fires they tried:
Which kindling flame with wind enraged,
Their camp most desperately engaged.
And with such fury did invade,
The works and Towers that they had made If Caesar had been as well resisted
by Po^peys Captains in Italy, or by Pompey himself in Rome, he had not found
so easy and speedy a conquest.

Of wood and timber, though but green,
Yet did the flames so creep between
With smouldring heat the ioints and floores
That searching fire the boords deuoures.
Which spread abroad such swarth-thick smokes,
As that the air it dampes and chokes.
At last this flame was grown so fierce,
As that it did not only pierce
Their timber-frames so strong compact,
But with like force in sunder cracked
The very stones new dig'd from ground,
Wherewith their structurs were compound Great spoil by fire in the Roman Camp

So wasting fire did all confound,
And these maine ruins ouer-cast
In hugeness far the works surpast.
The Romans thus distressed by land,
Do now resolve to take in hand
To try their fortunes on the seas;
But not with ships the eye to please, The Romans do now prepare to attempt
the town by sea.

Adorned and painted on their sides
With forms of Gods their sails that guides,
But rough and rude made up in haste,
Of trees new cut, strong built, and vaste,
Compact with knees and timber sure,
That seas and tempests would endure.
This navy rig'd, forthwith they guide,
Assisted both with wind and tide,
The Roman fleet, whereof Dectus Brutus was Admiral.
Unto the mouth of Rhodanus,
Where being all assembled thus,
On Brutus they attendance gave,
Whose ship was stout, high carg'd, and brave,
Then hoysing sails, they ranged the seas
Along the shores of Staecades.
The Greek Massilians in like sort,
Provide themselves within their port:
No less resolved to venture blows
The Massillians provide to encounter the Romans on the sea.
Upon the seas, against their foes.
And in this mind with courage bold,
They man their ships with young and old.
And do not set out to this fight,
Only those vessels in good plight;
But rig'd up ships decayed and torn,
That in the dockes lay then forlorn.
Phoebus no sooner with his beams
Glittered upon the Ocean streams,
Blunting his darts on Neptunes face,
And from the skies the clouds did chase.
The North-winds laid, the South Wind still,
The seas all calm for fight at will:
But they wey'd anchor, and did load
Their yards with sails, and left the road.
Here Caesar's fleet their Oars do plye,
There do the Greeks like labor try:
And with such sway their strokes they take,
As that the very keeles did quake.
The lofty ships are drawn on fast,
By those that to the fight make haste.
The Roman wings composed were
The Roman wings on the sea.
Of many ships, whereof some bear
Three banks of Oars, and four some,
Others had more the seas to scumme.
And with this strength into the deep
They lanch, and crescent order keep.
Whereas Liburnian Galleys go,
With Oars of two banks and no more.
Yet Brutus Gallion Admiral,
With six banks went stoutest of all, Brutus his Gallion.

And with long Oars their strokes let fall.
When in the maine both of these fleets
In battle ranged together meets:
Confronting with their force so near,
As that their Oars could scarce go clear, The battle on the sea begun.

Such shouts and clamors they did make,
As that the very air did shake.
And with the voices that rebound,
The clashing of the Oars were drowned,
And did suppress the Trumpets sound.
The rowers then the blew waves tear
And on their benches fall and rear,
Whilst Oars each other ouer-beare.
Their beak heads first together foyne,
Then cast about their sternes to join,
And did so fast their darts let fly,
As that their numbers cloud the sky,
And on the sea in heaps did lie.
About again with speed they tacke,
Prow against Prow does shocke and crack:
And many ships scattred abroad
Again relying, lay on load.
As when the Eastern winds oppose
The Southern gales, that sternly blows.
One way with force the billows sweepes,
Another way the current keeps.
So in the deepes the Galleys range,
Uncertainly with flitting change.
For when their Oars have forward plied,
Back are they checked with wind and tide.
But the Massilian galleys are
Of sail and stirrage much more yare, The Massilian ships nimble and swift.

Nimble and light to leave or take,
And on their stays quick speed can make,
Whereas the Roman steady ships
The Roman ships stout, and or deep draught.
With deeper draughts their bottomes dips.
And in the seas do upright stand,
As fierce for fight, as on the land.
The master of that Gallion stout,
That Admiral'd the Roman rout,
Sitting upon the puppe on hye,
From whence he all the course might eye.
Brutus stout words to the master of his Gallion.
Brutus to him aloud thus spoke.
What work (quoth he) mean you to make?
Shall my fleet idle range the coast,
That you your marine Art may boast?
We hither come prepared for fight,
Against our foes to show our might.
Come bring us therefore sword to sword,
Lay me the stoutest Greeks aboard.
These words of Brutus he obayes,
His broad side to the foe he lays.
But whosoever of the foes
Did shocke their sides, or changed blows
Brutus ship still victorious.
With Brutus ship, him grappling fast,
He boords, and overcame at last.
The other Galleys wast to wast,
With hooks and chains do grapple fast.
And by the Oars did hold each other,
The fighting ships the seas did smother.
But now they do not make their war
With slings and engines cast a far.
Those deadly wounds the life that parts,
Are not from Iron-headed darts.
The fury of this sea fight when the fleets joined.
But now they buckle hand to hand,
The sea fight does on sharp swords stand.
The ships aloft are manned and armed,
And fist to fist incountring swarmed.
Dead bodies on the hatches fell,
Their blood amongst the waves do mell
In such abundance, that the froth
Of clotted gore, made Neptune wroth.
And whilst with force their arms they strain
To link themselves with grappling chain.
The bodies slain in heaps so rides,
They cannot join their sides to sides.
Some half dead sprawling downright sink,
Some their own blood with salt-waues drink.
Others half drowned resisting death,
Struggling for life with latest breath,
With timbers from cracked ships that slid, A terrible description of a
sea-battle.

Out of their pains are quickly rid.
And many darts that ouer*slips
The fight, into the Ocean dips.
Missing the marks their force to stay,
Embrue their steel another way.
Lighting on those that swimming fleet,
Who in the waves new wounds do meet.
The Romans now are thoroughly tried,
Encompast round on every side.
And then the fury of the fight,
Strains on the left hand and the right.
Where whilst that Tagus deals his blows
From his high puppe on Greekish foes,
Two dismal darts light on his breast,
And steep their steel deep in his cheast.
So as the blood did stand in doubt A Roman called Tagus, slain with two wounds.

At whether wound it should gush out.
Until at length the boiling blood,
Drove both the darts out with their flood.
So life departed with the gore,
The wounds did open death a door.
Massilian Telo, wretched wight,
The Gally guided to this fight,
A better Mariner was none,
That had more Art and practice shown
Of any ship to find the trim,
In wrought seas how she best might swim.
Nor better knew his marks a far,
Nor how to take the Sun and Star. Telo, an excellent Pilate of the
Massilians slain.

Nor better gest which way the wind
Was likeliest to be inclined.
This master with his brasse-beake head,
Out of a Roman ship had shred
A mighty planke; but lo the while,
His breast was pierced through with a pile.
And as this worthy Pilot died,
Out of his hand the helm did slide.
Gayareus, a Massilian.
Then whilst Gayareus Gallicke Greek,
Another ship does bordering streeke,
And strains to enter her by fight,
A Iauelin pierced his bowels quite,
And to the ship side nails him fast,
Where he must hang if steele-head last.
Two Massilian brothers twins slain in this battle whereof one showed
admirable valor.
Two brothers did this fight adorn,
Twins hard to know, at one birth borne.
These glorious testimonies were,
Of that rich womb that did them bear.
But sundry fates did them pursue,
Though from one self-same root they grew:
For one of them in this stern fight,
With fatal stroke was rest the light.
And him the parents better knew
That did survive, wanting the view
Of him late slain, of semblant hue,
A chance that much lamenting breeds,
His halfe-selfe lost, his dolor feeds.
This brother that as yet suruiues,
Against a Roman Gally strives,
Who though the oars his breast withstand
Yet on her side he graspt his hand,
Till one dire stroke the hand did reaue,
Which to his hold still fast did cleave;
Not utterly deprived of sense,
True valor increases with misfortune.
Whose ioints would not be losd from thence
Now valor with mishap increast,
The noble stumpe more wrath expreast.
Stirring up then his left hands might,
To take revenge of this despite,
But as he stoop't for to recover
The first lost hand, he lost the other;
And both into the sea did fall,
Slasht from the body arm and all.
Thus of his limbs dispoild and wrack't,
His Target both and sword he lack't:
Yet for all this aloft he bides,
And under hatches never hides.
But his bare trunk he did display
On his slain brother where he lay,
Whilst many wounds he did assay.
And then as one that life disdaines,
Other men's harms he entertaines;
Until at last, with wounds oppressed,
Finding that life would leave his breast,
That little strength that yet remains
He does collect into his veins;
And with that small store of lifeblood, A revenging humor strangely expressed.

He arms his legs, and with fierce mood
Into the ship did leaping rush,
That with his weight he might her crush.
This ship oppressed with slaughtered limbs,
The blood about the hatches swimmes:
And being cracked with many a crush,
That often a-thwart her ribs did brush:
Her knees were loosd, her joints did open,
The leakes in her did give free scope
The waves so fast to suck and gull,
That all her deckes at last were full.
Then to the bottom down she sinkes, A Gally fighting is sunk downright.

Making a gulf with circling crinkes.
The hollow where the ship did ride,
That did before the waves divide,
Is now again with seas supplied.
This day in midst of Thetis lap
Many strange accidents did hap.
Then whilst into another ship,
The Harping-irons they did slip,
Which in her sides their hooks should fix, Lycida miserably tortured betwixt
his foes and his friends.

In Lycida one of them sticks;
Which would have hald him ouer-boord,
But that his mates their help afford:
And by the legs still held him fast,
Till he in pieces flew at last;
Whereby his blood dropped not so slow
As that which from a wound does flow:
But out at every broken vain
A stream of crimson gusht amain.
And that which wont was to impart
Life to the limbs from out the heart,
With that same element was mixed,
That earth and aier lies betwixt.
Never did any dying wight
So many ways breathe out his spright.
The lower parts of that torn trunk,
Deprived of spirits, fainting shrunk.
But where the lungs and liver lies,
And noblest parts that heat supplies,
That did a while his breath prolong,
And still for life did struggle strong.
But he with stretching grew so lither,
That limb with limb scarce held together.
Now whilst the fight is fiercely tried,
The Soldiers all run to that side,
Whereas the foes do thickest stand,
And left the other side vnmand.
A ship overwhelmed by the running of the men all to one side.
With which unequal poise ore-way'd,
One ship is topsie-turuy swayed,
And does into the Ocean reele,
And over head turns up her keele:
Which so oppressed all the swarm,
That none could stretch a leg or arm,
So was the Mary Rose lost before Portsmouth in a fight against the French in
the days of Henry the 8.
Whereby to swim and save their lives,
And so the sea their breath depriues.
Thus death amongst them al does rave
For whilst one youth did strive to save
His life, by swimming on the wave,
Two hostile ships together ran,
Which 'twixt them bare this hapless man,
And with such force their powers did rush,
That flesh and bones together crush.
A miserable destiny.
The body was not of such proof,
To keep those ships so far aloof:
But they so close together fall,
That their brass beakes did ring withal.
Herewith his belly being ripped
Into the panch the water slipped.
And at his mouth he powered out
His blood and bowels like a spout.
But now the Oars do backward steer,
So as their beake-heads were set clear:
And so this carcass rent and slit,
Upon the waves did weltring flit.
There were beside a hugie rout,
That suffering shipwreck swamme about
To save their lives, and to that end
Sought for some ship that was a friend.
But by mischance they light upon
A Greekish Gally of their fone, The diverse strange adventures of a sea fight.

Hanging upon her sides and helm,
So thick, that might her ouer-whelme:
Wherewith the soldiers then aboard,
Hewd off their arms with edge of sword.
And left the hands claspt on the sides,
From whence their maimed bodies slides.
So as they could no more sustain
Themselves, by swimming on the maine.
Now in this battles long event,
Were darts and weapons almost spent. The weapons all spent, what shift was
made to offend one another.

But fury then prouides for Arms,
With Oars now one another harms.
The staves that flagges and Ensigns bear,
They from the banners snatch and tear.
With benches whereon they did sit,
The rowers one another smit,
And pieces from the ship sides split.
Their fellows that in heaps lie slain,
Upon the deckes they search again,
That they their weapons might retain.
Others to show their dreadlesse hearts,
Out of their wounds do rash the darts,
And with their left hands close the sore,
So to repress the bubling gore,
Which strives that way to find a vent,
Whereas the lance had made a dent.
But all this havoc by the seas,
Was not to be compared to these,
That last of all they did invent,
By a contrary element.
For now enraged with greater ire,
The cruelty of fire in a sea fight.
They cast abroad such desperate fire,
Composd of brimstone, pitch and oil,
Wherein their darts they wrap and foil.
And then such wildfire balls do make,
Whose flames no waters force can slake,
But on the ships quick hold will take:
Where they encounter ropes and boords,
That tar and rosin store affoords;
Stuff that will quickly flame retain,
And hard to be extinct again.
The boords that from the ships sides shakes,
These fires hand-fast on them takes.
To avoid fire, some drowned themselves.
Here some do plunge into the seas,
The scorching flames so to appease.
Others in danger of the waves,
Others to escape drowning adventure upon the flames.
Hold by those plankes that flaming raues;
So whilst among many deaths they run,
No death so much they strived to shun,
As that which first they apprehend
Any death seems more easy to men, then that which they most doubt.
Did threaten them their lives to end.
Yet all these ship-wrackes naught avail,
Their courage to abase or quail:
But on the seas the darts that flow
They gather up, at ships to throw,
With those faint hands that them sustain,
By swimming in the rolling maine.
And when they cannot meet with darts,
Great malice expressed.
Another way they play their parts.
When one foe does another spy,
They straight together struggling try,
Till both down to the bottom fly.
Amongst the rest in this fierce fight,
A man there was that Phoceus hight,
Phoceus an excellent swimmer and diuer drowned at last.
A Soldier of a gallant spright,
That well could swim, and well could diue,
And under water long survive,
So as for need the bottomes sands,
He would take up with diuing hands.
Or if the Anchors hook were bound,
He could unloose it from the ground.
Or fix the cable, that by chance
From out the Anchors ring did glance.
This fellow singles out a foe,
And in his arms does graspe him so,
That to the bottom both do go.
There him he strangles in the mud,
Then lifts himself above the flood.
But after this again he tries
In semblant sort to diue and rise:
And as his head aloft he reares,
Against a ship his skull he tears;
Wherewith he downright sunk amain,
And never rose alive again.
Some now the hostile oars by might
Would hold and stay their ships from flight.
But that which most did all offend,
Was unrevenged their lives to end.
Many that saw their death draw nigh,
Would on the ship sides hazards try.
And so the beake-head brace and clip, Some that expose their bodies to save
the ships from bruising.

To bear the blow from off the ship.
Then Lygdanus by chance did eye,
Tyrrhenus mounted loftily,
Strowting upon a Gallions puppe,
A sling and bullet he takes up,
And sent it with a strength so fierce,
That both his temples it did pierce; Lygdanus.

From whence a stream of blood forth flies,
And after it starts out his eyes.
His sight thus raped, amazed did stand, Tyrrhenus a valiant Roman.

And thought this darkness was deaths hand.
But when his sprights were come again
That did true valor still retain;
My mates (quoth he) that so well know
The piercing dart a far to throw,
Direct me now a right to stand,
That I may use my darting hand.
Then to himself a loud he spoke,
Tyrrhene go now and undertake
In war all hazards that may chance,
Thy end more bravely to advance.
Such noble thoughts this man half slain
Did in his haughty heart retain.
My wel-steel'd dart, Jove grant thou light
Upon some gallant worthy wight.
So said, his dart he forth did strain
It seemed that blind Fortune guided this blind man's hand.
With his blind arm, yet not in vain,
But did a lusty younker smite,
Of noble blood, he Argus hight.
The point his very navel hit,
But pierced it not half through as yet;
Argus a noble youth slain.
Until he groueling down did fall,
Which pressed the head home shaft and all.
When this hap Argus did betide,
His father on the other side,
Did in a conquered Gally stand,
Great was his worth by sea and land;
For he in all the Phocians wars,
Gave place to none that doing dares.
But now with eld was weak and spent,
And yet unto this battle went;
Not as a Soldier to obey,
But in high place to rule and sway.
Now when this dismal chance he spied,
Over the seats he strains to stride:
And so poor man still clambring up,
Made shift to come unto the puppe:
Where when he saw his Argus lie
Gasping for life, at point to dye,
The grief of a father for his slain son, not expressed by tears, not cries,
but by a resolute death.
No tears fell from the old man's eye,
Neither did he outraging cry;
But numnesse did his sense surprise,
And darkness did benight his eyes.
His body suddenly grew cold,
His hands out-stretcht could nothing hold.
And in this trance and senseless plight,
He had forgot his Argus quite.
But he sweet youth his head did beck,
That faintly reeled on his neck.
And lifts it up a little space,
When first he glimpst his fathers face. A lamentable meeting.

His Iaw-falne mouth no voice forth sends,
But silent to his father bends;
And beckes his head as latest bliss,
From his old lips to get a kiss.
And with best means he could devise,
Pointed to him to close his eyes.
The griping sorrow that did strain
This poor old man in every vain,
Puts rage and spright in him again.
Well now (quoth he) I Will loose no time,
This wrack is chanced for my crime.
The direful Fates as they ordain
Shall have me, by mine own hand slain. Old Argus his speech to his dying
son.

Dear Argus my sweet boy dispense
With thy sad fathers late offense,
In that I did not thee embrace,
Nor with last duties kiss thy face.
As yet thy wound does not so draine,
The lifeblood out of every vain,
But that thy looks good hope do give,
That thou a while may longer live.
No sooner had he said that word,
But straight he fell upon his sword,
Which he drove to the very hilt;
Yet not content with his blood spilt,
Into the sea he headlong flies,
One way to death could not suffice. The old man pursues a double death.

This fortune now draws to an end
Which way the victory shall tend.
No longer cause there does remain,
Hazards of battle to maintain.
Most of Massilian fleet is drowned,
The rest for Roman service bound. The Massilian ships serve the conquering
Romans.

Whose rowers when they changed were,
The Roman victors in them bear.
A few with speed away did fly,
For shelter in some harbors nigh;
But now what tongue can well express
The lamentation in Massilia
The Cities fright and heaviness?
How fathers for their sons lament,
What tears the wailing mothers spent.
And how the wives upon the shore,
In forlorn troops would search and pore
Amongst the waves distained with gore:
Where they their husbands corpse might have
The Massilians affection to their slain friends.
Disfigured weltring in the wave.
But oftentimes their marks did miss,
And for a Greek, a Roman kiss.
The fathers with like strife desires
To give their sons their funeral fires.
But Brutus with triumphant hands,
Brutus victorious on the sea.
Victor upon the Ocean stands.
And on the sea first purchased fame
With victory to Caesar's name.
Finis Libritertij.
Lucans Pharsalia. The fourth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Caesar upon a lofty mount
Encamped, does his foes afront,
Near to Ilerdas stately walls;
Where by the rage of water falls
Being distressed; thence his Cohorts
He over Sicoris transports:
And does Petreius host pursue;
Where both the Camps a league renew.
Which wickedly Petreius brake,
And Friendship did with Slaughter slake.
His Camp then Caesar does enclose,
And so oppressed his staruing foes,
That proud Petreius and his bands
Seek mercy now at Caesar's hands.
Mean while Antonius men are slain
Upon the Adriaticke maine:
Whereas Vulteius and his mates,
Most gloriously do end their dates.
Then Curio on the Lybicke coast
Is ouer-throwne with all his host.
FIERCE Caesar now in Climes a far,
Does seriously pursue his war:
And yet his Mart does mildly wage,
Free from revenge, or bloody rage.
Chiefly he does affect to see,
Of what import these Captains be;
Afranius and Petreius command in Spain for Pompey.
Afranius and Petreius were
The two that all the sway did bear.
The power was equal that they held
Over the Troops, in Town or field:
In camp they no precedence have,
Either of them the watchword gave.
These had besides their Latium bands,
Swift Soldiers from Asturian lands:
And to them joined the Vectons light,
With all that people that took flight
From Gaul, to mix their race with Spain:
Who Celtiberian name retain.
A place there is that naturally
Does raise it self up loftely;
And is a fertile plot of ground,
In midst whereof a hillocke round
Extends it self with ample bound.
The City Ilerda.
On top whereof Ilerda stands,
Founded long since by Antique hands:
Whose gallant seat, and stately walls,
Are washed with the water falls
The River Sicoris.
Of pleasant Sicoris, not least
Of those sweet streams that Spain do feast;
Shaped like a bow on either sides:
A bridge of stone this flood bestrides.
And unto it a rock is nigh,
Afranius camp
Where Pompey's men encamped lie:
Caesar's Camp.
Whence Caesar's Tents are plainly seen
High pitched upon a lofty green;
The River runs the Camps between.
Which field in largeness does extend
Further then sight can comprehend.
And this great Champion circling round
The River Cinga.
Swift Cingas streams does safely bound.
Which is restrained to dippe or laue
His silver breast in Neptunes wave:
For he his streams has intermixed
With one great Flood that runs betwixt:
The River Iberius.
And Iberus it has to name,
From whom that word Iberia came.
At first sight no exploits were vsd,
But was from bloody Mart excusd:
For both the Captains spent this day
To view their strength, and bands suruay.
This strife remorce of mind did rue, Remorse in both the Armies.

And shame the rage of Arms withdrew:
Their Countries sake, and wronged laws,
Gave one days leisure for a pause.
No sooner day began to lurk,
But Caesar sets great Troops a work, Caesar's speedy expedition.

As long as all the night did last,
About his Camp a trench to cast.
And then before this work, the whiles
His armed bands he ranks and files,
And with this slight his foe beguiles.
No sooner day his first light lends,
But Caesar straight some legions sends
To take a hill, that midway rose
Between Ilerda and his foes.
Afranius then ('twixt fear and shame)
Was forced to entertain this game,
And first with speed possessed the same.
The one by sword and valor straue,
At his command the hill to have: An encounter between Caesar's and Afranius
Soldiers.

The others for their right contest,
Already of the place possessed.
But Caesar's men laden with Arms,
The Rocks do clamber up in swarms.
And though the place were crag'd and steep,
Where footing fails, they crawle and creep:
And when they hold or handfast lackes,
Others with shields support their backs. The admirable courage and
undertaking humor of Caesar's men.

No fitting room that place affoords
To throw their darts, or fight with swords.
Their Piles into the bank they stake,
And by them mounting steps do make.
And whilst by shrubs and cragges they stay,
Through bushes they hacke out a way.
But Caesar (seeing that his Troops
For want of help in danger droopes)
Forthwith his aids of horsemen sends,
Commanding them to back their friends.
And that they should with circling ring,
Charge home upon the left hand wing.
So by this means up to the top
Caesar winnes the hill from Afranius.
His footmen gat, and found no stop:
For they that first the hill did gain,
Did now retire from thence amain,
Their honor lost, and labor vain.
Only this while the chance of war,
On either side did make a mar.
But now the hazards that ensue,
From the uncertain motions grew,
Which then the aires vntemperance drew.
The winter seasons chilly frost,
With Northern winds are turned and tossed.
And now the air within it shrouds,
Abundant heaps of clustred clouds.
The hills lay cou'red thick with snow,
And all the fields that lie more low,
Wanting the comfort of the sun,
A description of winter.
With hoary mists are overrun.
The utmost coasts that Westward lie
Were hardened with the freezing sky.
But when the bright-beam'd Tytan came
To lodge him with the gold fleeced Ram,
That in the seas did Helles bear,
When from his back she fell for fear,
And with his flaming rays did bring
More warmth unto the moisty spring.
And with an equal poyse upright,
Did balance out the day and night.
Then Cinthia's horns but late renewed,
Did Boreas from the air exclude,
Which was with Eastern shine endu'd.
This East wind with Nabathean blasts,
A loofe from his own quarter casts
The clouds that with him did reside,
And those that in Arabia bide.
And all those vaporing mists that mounts
Into the air from Ganges founts:
Or whatsoever else the Sun
By his attractiue power had won,
Or any fogges that North-west wind
Has to the Eastern clime designed,
Or that the Indian air did bind.
These clouds removed from out that sky,
The days began with heat to fry:
Nor South nor North do tempests feel,
Their rackes with cleared face do wheel.
But now the Western world of Spain,
These rowles of clouds does entertain.
So this part of the globy round,
That with his cliffes does Thetis bound,
These clustred wool-packes so confound,
As that the air all thick is seen,
That lies the heaven and earth between;
And hardly room there did remain,
These bundled vapors to contain,
But pressed, do power down showers amain.
The thunder now the flash holds back
Of lightning, that precedes the crack, Foul and tempestious weather in
Spain.

They are no sooner set on flame,
But the moist clouds do quench the same.
Here Iris now begins to show
Some part of her halfe-circled bow; The Rainbow

But not in wonted colors died,
The beauty thereof thick clouds hide.
Her thirst she in the Ocean slakes,
And to the clouds bears what she takes:
And when they are dispersed again,
They showring fall into the maine.
And now the Pyrenean hills,
Whose heaps of snow never distilles The mounts Pyrenes.

By any vigor of the Sun,
In torrents down do swiftly run;
Dissolved with mighty raines that fall,
Which those steep rocks do bathe withal.
So as the monstrous streams that slides
Down from those hugie Mountains sides;
So fast into the rivers fly,
A great inundation.
And do their channels raise so hye,
As that their banks they ouer-stride
For want of room, their course to guide.
And over all the field so skimmes,
That Caesar's Camp now floting swimmes:
And with the rage of this fierce flood,
The tents are swept from whence they stood.
The meadows and the pastures dry,
All in a poole do bathing lie:
So as no cattle they can get,
Famine in Caesar's camp.
Nor ought else whereof to make meat,
Nor fodder for their horse to eat.
For those that go to fetch in pray,
In unknown paths do range and stray,
And doubtful roame on every hand,
The floods so couers all the land.
Now mischiefs mate, dire famines rage,
So plays his part upon this stage,
That Caesar's troops to ruin goes,
And yet besieged with no foes.
One Soldier gives a heap of gain
Only to buy a little of grain,
Yet therein shows no prodigue vain.
O hateful humor Couetise,
Whose quenchlesse thirst naught can suffice.
A starued man cannot withold,
The force of Avarice.
But he will sell his food for gold.
The mountains now and hills are hid,
The floods has all things ouer-strid:
One only face of waters vaste,
Has all the lands clean ouer-cast.
No troops of craggy cliffes are kend,
To sauadge cotes where wild beasts dend,
A great deluge.
Upon this ore-growne waters drives,
Where beasts swim struggling for their lives*
There flote the neighing Coursers brave,
Snatched up with this all-sweeping wave:
Which more then did the Ocean rave.
The Sun to darkness so gave way
That night was all as clear as day.
Heavens face with such confusion mourned,
That all was topsie-turuy turned:
And as the Poles, and Northern Zones,
So under cold this mild clime groans.
No twinkling stars by night are seen,
The frozen earth brings forth no green;
The chill num'd air did cool the heat,
That makes the Torrid Zone to sweat.
Great guider of this endless All,
Let these dire mischiefs so befall:
And Neptune, thou that have next place,
Assist us with thy powerful mace.
O Jove! do not these clouds restrain, An imprecation against civil war.

But let them fill the air with rain.
And Neptune, when thou forth do send
Thy streams, forbid them back to bend
Their course, nor let them have
Retrait to thee; but with thy wave
Repulse the refuge that they crave;
And with thy Trident strike the ground,
That fountains may from thence abound.
Let Rhenus ouer-whelme these fields,
And Rhodanus that swift stream yields.
Yea let all spring-heads fly at large,
And on this soil their sourse discharge.
Let mount Rhypheus snowes descend,
And every lake to this place bend.
Let ponds and Pooles that stand at stay,
With oblique course incline this way;
Whereby the world may find release
From civil wars, that us oppress.
But Fortune, with this little tutch,
Is pleased to think all done, to much,
Until she Caesar do restore
Unto her favors, as before.
And all the Gods are now in pain
To make this man amends again.
The air therefore is rarefy'd,
And Phoebus with his wonted pride
Dissolues these wool-packes in the skies;
Aurora blushing red does rise.
Each thing his wonted order takes,
The stars from them moist humors shakes;
And where dampe mists too much abound,
They are confined within the ground.
The groves begin with leaves to bud,
The hills are seen above the flud.
The valleys and the pleasant meades
Firm grass and flowers ouer-spreades.
When Sicoris had left her prankes,
And drawn her self within her banks;
Caesar small skiffes prepares and rigges,
Composed of green willow twigges.
And over it does Oxe-hides dight,
Wherewith to keep them staunch and tight.
Thus able made their load to take,
By them he does his passage make.
So the Venetian frames like boats,
Wherewith on Padus stream he floates.
And so the Brittons in such skiffes,
Do coast along their Oceans cliffes.
And so with Canes conioyn'd together,
Couerd upon with vntan'd leather.
The Memphites do on Nylus trade,
Of which Canes leaves they paper made.
Now Caesar with all speed transports
A many of his chief cohorts.
Who being on the other side
Do timber for a bridge provide,
Wherewith this river to bestride.
But doubting that it might again
Above the banks his channel strain,
He would not on the rivers brinke
The groundwork posts drive down and sink.
But somewhat farther in the lands,
On both sides the foundation stands;
And least that Sicoris should rise
With new floods, he did then devise
Deep trenches cut along the sides,
To draine away all swelling tides.
Now when Petreius plainly found
That Fate with Caesar went so round,
His courage was therewith plucked down,
And left Ilerda's lofty Town.
And thus his Army he withdrew Petreius leaves Ilerda.

From those he trusted less then knew:
And takes his way, with all his train,
Toward the utmost coasts of Spain.
A Nation that he heard was manned
With many a stout and warlike band:
Of courage fierce, in broils still bred,
Affecting Arms, and scorning dread.
When Caesar saw the hills left bare,
And Tents no longer standing their,
He bids his troops their Arms to take,
And would not stay this bridge to make,
Nor gage the river for a foord,
But bids them swim; and with that word Caesar passes his Army over Sicoris.

They cut the stream with nimble hands,
And in that sort transport the bands.
The Soldiers being grieved at heart
To see their foes should so depart,
In headlong swarms do fly to Mart.
No sooner dried, they fall to Arm,
And then their chilly joints do warm
With speedy march, and never stay
Until the noone-tide of the day.
By this did Caesar's horse out-goe
The marching battle of the foe:
Who were with that vnlook't-for sight
Doubtful whether to fly or fight.
Here where they met, a large field lies, The place where Caesar's Army pursues
Petreius.

In which two ample hills did rise
That rocky were, and nothing green,
And there a valley lay between.
Which barren earth of stony ground
A ledge of hills does both sides bound:
And by them trending there did stray
A crooked and uncouth by-way.
The entrance whereof if the foe
Had gained first, he safe might go
(As Caesar saw) and lead the war
Into a Quarter strange and far:
The Country wild, and ill to pass,
Whose people fierce and sauadge was;
Therefore he bids his men be bold,
Haste on (quoth he) no order hold.
Turn back again your flying foes,
Caesar encourages his Soldiers.
The face of Mart against them oppose.
With threatening looks show them their death
Let cowards draw no lingering breath.
If they by fight away would escape,
With your sharp blades their bosoms rape.
No more he said, but did prevent
His foes, ere they the hills had hent.
Then there a sunder they did pitch
Their Tents, fenc't with a little ditch:
From whence each other did descry
With ease, how they encamped lie.
Then they began to know each other,
Father the son, brother the brother.
Their civil malice waxed cold,
Yet for a while from speech they hold;
Only with swords they beckning make,
The two Armies take acquaintance one of the other.
And so their first acquaintance take.
At last unto such terms they fall,
That love suppresseth raging brawle.
For then the Soldiers undertook
Into each others camp to look:
And with free hearts and dreadlesse face,
With friendly arms their guests embrace.
This man his host calls by his name,
Others to kinsfolks do the same.
Another he espies his mate,
That was his schoole-fellow but late.
No Roman was on either side,
But he some old acquaintance spied.
Their Arms were all with tears besprent,
Their kisses do in so^^es lament.
And though no blood were drawn at all,
Yet did they fear what might befall.
Alas! why vex you so your breast?
What need you wail this mad unrest?
These needless tears were banished quite,
If you consider but a right
That you your selves nurse this despite.
Do you so much the mischief fear And exhortation to peace.

That your own humors bred and rear?
Why let the Trumpet sound his fill,
Regard it not, but keep you still:
And though the Ensigns fly at large,
From civil brawles your Arms discharge.
So shall you end Erinnys date,
And Caesar then in private state
Shall cease his son-in-law to hate.
O Concord with eternal grace!
That sweetly do all things embrace:
Within this mixed massy sphere,
Worlds sacred love be present here;
For now in danger stands our age, An Apostrophe to concord.

To be distressed with future rage:
Wars mischiefs secretly deuisd,
Is now discovered and despisd.
The misled people see with shame,
What is the cause of all their blame,
Each friend does know his friend by name.
But (ah) dire Fates, that do advance
With a sinister ordinance,
The bloody strife that shall increase
For this small time of pleasing peace.
Truce now in both the Camps did swarm,
With visitations free from harm.
Upon the green turfe is their seat,
Where they together friendly eat. The kind entertainment between the
Soldiers of both Camps.

And Bacchus liquor does abound,
Huge fires they kindle on the ground.
Together they do Cabbins make,
But all the night no sleep do take,
The tales they tell keep them awake.
One tells how he the trench defends,
Another how his pile he bends,
With strength that from his arm he sends.
And whilst that some thus brags and boasts
What they have done in sundry coasts:
Others again will give a glance,
And say that this fell out by chance.
Yet they poor souls do find content
That with such faith the time is spent.
But (ah) this new contracted love
Must greater future malice prove.
For when Petreius heard report,
How both the Camps in friendly sort
With mutual love each other greets,
And in such kindness daily meets;
Petreius violates the friendly complements between the two Camps.
He then imployes some trusty bands,
Who with their armed wicked hands,
Do fall on the unarmed foe,
And ore the trenches them do throw.
Then their embracements and kind words
They separate with bloody swords;
So in a sauadge brainsick mood,
He washed away this peace with blood.
Then he enraged with words of ire,
New fuel adds unto old fire.
O Soldiers, that with base neglect,
Do thus your Countries cause reject,
And with a loose forgetful mind,
To your own Ensigns are unkind;
By this means you can never show
Petreius oration to his Soldiers.
The faith that you the Senate owe.
Can this league that you have renewd,
Witness that Caesar is subdued
By you? and can it be maintained,
Your countries freedom thus is gained?
Believe me, now you rather go
The way your selves to ouer-throw.
Will you become proud Caesar's slave
Whilst in your hands you weapons have?
And whilst the Victors happy state
Depends upon a doubtful fate?
And whilst your sturdy limbs and veins
(Not soak't with wounds) fresh blood retains?
Will you as men that ill deserve,
Under condemned Ensigns serve?
Must Caesar without more ado
Now needs be su'd and sought unto?
That he would you vouchsafe the grace,
To serve in some inferior place?
And must we (that command in chief)
Of Caesar seek our lives relief?
Oh no, that scorn we much disdain,
Treason shall not our safety gain,
No wicked price can us retain.
This civil war we do not wage
To save our lives from furies rage;
Our liberties, and Countries cause,
Us willingly to dangers draws.
What need we deep mines undertake
For Steel and Iron, Arms to make?
Or why should we our Cities wall,
And raise huge Ramparts therewithal?
What need such troops of Coursers brave,
As in our Camps we daily have?
Or to what use should we maintain
Such towering Gallions on the maine,
If we be willing to release
Our liberties, to gain a peace?
A wicked oath our foes does bind
To sue these wars with constant mind.
And can you with your faiths dispense,
That is engaged with just pretense?
Need you from guilt to be acquit,
Because you for your Country fight?
O shameful and unmanly act!
That would such heinous leagues contract.
Pompey, that art estranged by Fate, An Apostrophe to Pompey.

From knowledge of the Cities state,
And Armies do prepare for war,
With aids from Kings remote so far.
Perhaps thou buildst upon our trust,
Ready to aid thy quarrel just.
Thus said, again he sets on fire,
Their minds with wicked wars desire.
An apt comparison.
Like as the cruel sauadge beast,
That long from forest prey has ceast,
Shut up within a closed cage,
More mildly bred, dis-vsd from rage:
At length his nature being tamed,
To humane bent is brought and framed.
If he again but taste the smacke
Of blood, that he so long did lack;
And therewith warm his ravening Jaws,
Will then with furious ramping paws,
Thirsty of blood, expose his power
His fearful keeper to devour.
So to all villainy they go,
And monstrous treachery they show.
The which vile fact they cloak with night,
Blind Fortunes deed, and Fates despite.
For now behold, 'twixt bed and board,
They brutishly do bathe the sword
Within their breasts, whom they before
With dear embracements did deplore.
And though at first they moaning yearne,
So to employ their weapons stern:
The thirsty sword that peace withstands,
Offers it self into their hands.
Yet whilst they kill, they loath the fact,
Their faint blows show their minds distract.
But now the Camp is raging hot,
Petreius men unwillingly betray their adversaries.
All faith is brutishly forgot:
Their ravening hands with blood they glut,
The sons their fathers throats do cut.
Yet that the Soldiers may be freed
As guiltless of this heinous deed:
Before their two great Captains eyes
They did show forth this bloody prize,
Which sight did them with joy surprise.
But Caesar, though thy gallant bands
Be thus despoiled with treacherous hands,
Yet thou the Gods do still regard,
And did not such revenge award
Upon thy foes; when thou did stand
Triumphant in Pharsalia land.
Nor when thou did on seas of late,
The stout Massilian force abate.
Nor when thou did in Aegypts soil
At Pharos, give thy foes the foil.
But their outrage, and thy mild course
Betters thy cause, and makes theirs worse.
For now these Captains spirits droopes, Caesar's clemency graceth his cause.

They dare not with polluted troops
Longer incampe in Champian lands,
Their Tents too near to Caesar's stands.
But to Ilerda they willl flee,
Whose walls they think much safer be. Petreius minded to fly to Ilerda.

But Caesar's horsemen them prevent,
And in dry hills they are vp-pent.
Where want of water they sustain,
For Caesar did their ditches draine;
And them with Troops incompast so,
That from their Camp they dare not go
To fetch in water, where springs flow.
When these men saw their deaths at hand
No longer now in fear they stand,
But carried on with raging will,
Their horses first of all they kill;
Which now can serve them to no use,
Being thus pent up in a muse.
And therefore set aside all hope,
Seeing to escape was left no scope.
Toward their armed foes they fly:
But when that Caesar did espy
In them this furious desperate vain;
Soldiers (quoth he) your Arms refrain, Caesar's advice to his Soldiers.

Though rushing thus, they you confront,
Do not receive their headstrong brunt:
I know a better way by far,
In blood I list not bathe my war.
He conquest gains at too high price,
That strives with those that death entice.
These laddes now weary of their lives,
Together with their ruin strives,
To bring some wrack on us withal;
But on our swords they shall not fall:
Though they desire in this starved mood
To loose their lives, to spill our blood.
O this is but a madding fit!
Let them a while champe on the bit.
Bar them that death so feign they would,
Their courage will be quickly coold.
Hold them but lingering off from fight,
Until the Sun withdraw his light,
And in the Ocean dip his head,
And that the skies be ouer-spred
With stars; let Tytan siluer-bright,
Give them but space to pawse a night.
Thus when they saw their Mart was marred,
And means of fight they were debarred;
Their furious humor waxed cold,
And in their minds more temper hold.
Like him whose breast the sword does pierce
With wounds, grief does become more fierce:
Whilst gushing from the nerves and veins
Hot blood, his striving spirits strains
To show the force that yet remains:
And yet until the bones begin
Nearer to draw the blood-puft skin,
The whilst the witting victor stands
Retired, and does withold his hands,
Until a chill numme heaviness
The joints and spirits do possess
Of this poor wounded man, at length
Who finds himself deprived of strength,
When as the gore no longer flows,
But on the wound stiffe-dried grows.
Now want of water them constraines
Petreius Camp distressed for want of water
To dig and search out hidden veins
Of springs and streams, that have their birth
Deep in the bowels of the earth.
And whilst about this work they stand,
They do not only take in hand
The Pick-axe, and the deluing spades,
But do employ their martial blades.
And tops of hills they deeper sink
Then any low-lodg'd rivers brinke.
The pale-hu'd Myners (that do toil
For gold, in rich Assyrian soil)
Do not sink deeper pits downright,
In dungeons more remote from light.
And yet for all they can devise,
They cannot see a spring to rise.
Nor any stream could be descried
That underneath the ground did slide.
Nor from the sides of rocky hills,
A drop of liquor out distilles,
Though dig'd and pierced with pick-axe bills.
No drop of deaw or moisture laues
The hollow dampish airy caves.
Nor in the pits of grauill sand,
Does any plash of water stand.
Their men thus ouer-laid with sweat,
And fainting now twixt thirst and heat;
Seeing that they but loose their pain,
Raise them from out the mines again.
But by this diuing under ground,
Whereas some dampish mists they found,
When they come up, can scarce endure
The air, that is more hot and pure.
Neither are they refresh't with meat,
They faint for drink, and loath to eat.
Hunger to them best help does give
Their thirsty humor to relieve.
But if that any moisty field,
Do grassie roots, or green turfes yield,
Between their hands the same they squees
Into their mouth, and no drop leese.
Or if they meet with standing puddles,
Where slime and black mud stinking huddles;
The Soldiers there (to get a draught)
Will strive, as though a world they sought.
And staruing, will contented drink
That, which they would else odious think.
And then will take it for their feasts,
To suck the vdders of bruit beasts;
And when therein no milk remains,
They suck the blood from out the veins.
Others fresh leaves and herbs will pound
With dew that on green boughs is found;
But chiefly, those crude stalks that twines
About the tender-budding vines,
They press, and sap from young tree rinds.
O happy souls, full blessed were ye,
That whilst your barbarous foes did flee,
They did in all the ways they past
Poison amongst the waters cast,
And so destroyed you all at last.
Our Roman youths will never shrink
Witting those water streams to drink;
Though Caesar should the springs defile
With vennome, or with carrion vile;
Or wholesome wells should in despite,
Infect with deadly Aconite:
But now their bowels drowth has fried,
Their mouths resemble parchment dried.
Their tongues the baked froth does furre,
In their shrunk veins no blood will stir:
Their lights and lungs do scarcely pant,
They all refreshing humor want.
And it does grieve them to the death,
Through their chopped pipes to draw their breath.
Their jaws wide gaping they do stretch,
The cooling deawes by night to ketch.
They watch when some sweet showers will fall,
Which but of late ore-whelmed all:
And evermore they cast their eyes
Upon the niggard cloudy skies;
And so much more it did them grieve,
Because that now they did not live
Amongst Meroens parched plants,
Nor with the naked Garamants,
Nor under Cancers fiery lamp,
But their starved Army did encampe;
Where they (like Tantalus) might view,
Sweet Sicoris, with silver hue,
And Iberus so swift and clear,
Both hard at hand, they nere the near.
These tamed Captains now are calm,
In stead of Bays they carry Palm;
Afranius with a carriage meek,
Peace for his guilty Arms does seek:
And so with all his crest-falne troops
(That now in starued languor droopes)
Unto the hostile Tents he wends, Petreius and Affranius submit themselves to
Caesar.

And there at Caesar's feet he bends.
But though he sue, yet holds his grace
Not with misfortunes daunted face;
But carries all in fitting sort
For his now fate, and his late port:
And with a brow secure and bold,
To gain his peace, this tale he told.
Had Fate ordained that I should stand
Thus vanquished by a strangers hand: Afranius Oration to Caesar.

My dreadlesse Arm I soon would frame
To reaue my life, and shun that shame.
But now this reason does me lead
For safety of my life to plead;
Because thou Caesar do believe
He nobly does, that life does give.
Of faction we no parties are,
Our charge we held before this war:
And to that former Martial trust,
Whilst we had power, we have been just,
To strive with Fate we do not lust.
Spain we deliver to thy hands,
We opned have the Eastern lands:
Those coasts shall be secured from wrack,
That thou do leave behind thy back:
This conquest now on us so gained,
Is not with loss of blood obtained,
Thy hand or sword it has not stained.
This only boon in thee does rest,
To spare thy foes that are distressed.
It is not much that we do crave
On our mishaps remorse to have.
Permit our lives that thou do give,
From civil discord free to live,
And rest secure of our intent;
These prostrate troops their spleen have spent.
It fits not with thy happy Arms,
To mingle our subjected swarms:
Nor that our captive Troops should dare
Triumphs with thy brave Host to share,
These with contentment know their fare.
Only this grace let us obtain,
The sum of Afranius Petition.
That thou do not our Arms constrain,
And force us (conquered men) to be
Hereafter Conquerors with thee.
Thus said, Caesar (of nature mild)
With gracious looks was reconciled:
Caesar's clemency.
All punishment he did remit,
And them from use of Arms acquit.
No sooner was this grace obtained,
And their faith bound to be maintained,
But straight in heaps the Soldiers flee
Many of the Soldiers kill themselves with greedy drinking.
Unto the rivers, then set free:
And on the banks did groueling fall,
Striving for that was free for all;
So greedily the streams they swill,
And suddenly their panches fill,
As that their breath they never take,
Striving their thirsty jaws to slake:
Whereby the air that should relieve
Their empty veins, and comfort give,
No passage to their lights can find;
And so withal they life resigned.
This scorching pestilent disease,
So still does on their bowels ceaze,
That though they ready be to burst,
The more they drink the more they thurst.
Yet many comfort find at length,
And well refresht, receive new strength.
O Luxury! thou prodigue vain,
That never can the mean retain; A reprehension of Luxury.

And thou insatiate Glut tonie,
Pampered with superfluity,
That rak'st and rob'st both land and seas,
Thy wanton appetite to please.
O learn, and better do advise,
How small relief will life suffice,
For Nature does excess despise.
The strong old wine that we do keep
Time out of mind in Cellars deep,
No health or help at all can bring
To sickly sowles, whom fevers wring.
They mixed liquors do not suppe
Delitiously in golden cup:
Fresh water, and the hearty grain,
Does strength restore, and life sustain.
O! with what storms do they contend,
That in the wars their lives do spend?
The Soldier now his Arms bequeaues,
To Caesar, whence he grace receaues.
And more securely he does rest,
Then with his corslet on his breast.
For freed thus from carke and care,
Unto the Cities they repare.
And now do they that find release
From wars, by this so happy peace,
That bloody trade and travail scorn,
Wishing they never Arms had borne,
To have endured such thirst withal, A detestation of war.

And on the Gods in vain to call,
For conquest on their side to fall.
The wished hope of good success
With doubts does stoutest hearts oppress.
When Armies stern confonting strives,
Such toils the wretched world contriues,
That Fortune never should have rest,
If she should tend to their request,
As often as men do call and cry,
When they do doubt of victory.
For through the world must blood be shed,
Where troops with Caesar's fate are led.
And therefore we may think him blessed,
That knows where in quiet rest
His head to shelter free from scarres,
Since all the world is set on iarres;
So that this wretched civil broyle,
Men wearied do not ouer-toyle.
And slumbring souls are not affright
The security and contentment that poor men live in.
When Trumpets sound calls men to fight.
The wife may have her dear consort,
Parents may with their children sport.
And lodged in simple Cotes secure,
Their fields may labor and manure,
Vnforc'd wars hazards to endure.
Thus Fortune now becomes more kind,
And has releast from cares our mind,
So as no cause of fear we find.
Caesar is founder of our rest,
But we were led by Pompey's hest.
And now this boon thereby we have,
That whilst these civil wars do rave,
For neither side success we crave.
Fortune does not her grace express
On Caesar's side with like success
In other coast, but there she shows
That she dares cross him with some blows.
For where the Adriaticke maine
His waves does on Salona strain.
And whereas lukewarm Iaders sourse
Into soft Zephyr bends his course.
Antonius with his troops resides;
Which coasts upon the utmost sides,
The Adriaticke sea does bound:
There is he shut up in that ground,
And trusts unto those valiant bands
That he had from the Curets lands.
And able was his war to wage
Against the force of hostile rage;
Had Famine not his camp distressed,
Wherewith strong forts are often oppressed.
This soil for horse no fodder yields,
Nor any grain grew in the fields.
The hungry soldiers from the turfe
Pluckes up for food the heathy scurfe.
And with their teeth do gnabbe the green
Of meadows, that erst mowed had been.
But when these men their friends descried
Upon the shore on the other side;
And saw Basilus Ensign spread,
Under whose conduct they were led:
A new device they undertake,
By sea their secret flight to make;
But not with ships of common wont,
With sails or oars the waves to front: Distress puts men to their shifts.

But with vn-vsed stratagems,
Together they did bind huge beams,
That would a mighty freight sustain,
And safely swim upon the maine:
With empty Caske supported up,
Which would not sink, nor water sup.
These bundled trees great chains did strength,
With doubled ranks combined in length.
Not drawn with oars on either sides,
Upon the waves these vaste piles slides.
But by the floating of the beams,
They are borne up upon the streams.
And in that sort does slily wend
With secret course not to be kend.
For neither sails do make them fly,
Nor any oars they do apply:
But now they do the tides attend,
For then the seas did backward bend.
And with the ebb the shores and sands
All bare and dry uncovered stands.
But after when the swelling maine
With turning flood did rise again,
These structures that they did compose,
Were slidde into the floting Oase;
With two ships that before them go,
And after them these Raffes did tow.
These ships had turrets built upright,
That plainly did appear in sight;
And on the deck the trembling mast
Did bow, and stoop with every blast.
But now Octauius Admiral,
That on the seas did govern all
For Pompey's part, would not in have
Assail these Raffes, but still stood fast.
And did his nimble ships restrain
From ranging out into the maine,
Until the foe were in his way,
Aloof at sea, far from the bay,
Securely running on his race,
Doubting no sails to give them chase.
So does the fearful Heart refrain
To scour or range upon the plain,
But sculkes and hides amongst the brakes,
When by the wind the sent he takes
Of bow or shaft, or human breath,
Which he does shun unto the death.
Thus while the hunt withholds the sounds
Of his fleet-hunting wel-mouth'd hounds;
And therewithal in cooples clogges
His Spartane, and his Cretan dogs;
And suffers none the Chase to sue,
But some old hound that can hunt true^
On dry-foots sent, with nusling snowt,
That will not put the beast in rowt,
With spending of his open jaws;
But when the tapise near he draws,
Will shake his tail, and quiet stand,
To fit all for the hunters hand.
Now these huge Raffes with speed they load,
And then convey them from the road,
When as the last of days twy-light
Withstood the first approach of night.
Then Cilix, that same Pirate old,
That did on Pompeys party hold,
A slight deuisd them to betray,
When on the seas they were midway.
A long huge chain there he did sink,
And to a rock the end did link
Of the Ilyrian cliffie shore,
But lets the first ship pass it ore,
And so the second in likewise,
And then the third he did surprise,
With his hook't chain, the which he drew
Unto the shore, with her armed crew.
This land does sheluing hollow lie
Over the seas, strange to the eye.
VVhereon a tuffe of huge trees grows,
That on the waves great shadows strowes.
Hither from ships by North-windes torn
Many dead carcasses are borne,
And in the creekes a while lie closd,
But after are again exposd:
For when the Cauernes of this bay
With ebb returns his circling sway,
These whirle-pooles spue up from their maw
More then Charybdis gulfie iaw;
Here now this Raffe enclosed is,
Deep laden with the Colonies
Of Opiterge; and then the fleet
Of enemies about them meet.
And all about the neighbor strands
In Clusters gazing on them stands.
Vulteius now discerned plain,
That he was taken in a train:
For of this Raffe he was the chief,
And seeing no means of relief,
Nor that this cumbrous tangling chain
By any force would break in twain,
He takes his Arms with doubtful hope,
Whether by flight to compass scope,
Or with the sword a passage open.
Yet in this hard distressed plight,
Valor affoords her manly might;
For being closed in a pownd
With thousands that this raffe did rownd,
Which scarcely had aboard it than,
One Cohort full the same to man.
(Although not long) they maintained fight
Until at last they wanting light,
The fray was parted by dark night.
Then did Vulteius stoutly brave
With dreadlesse speech himself behave,
And cheereth up his staggering band,
Amazed with the fate at hand.
Vulteius manly oration to his distressed troops.
Brave youths (quoth he) weigh in your breasts
This little time of night that rests;
And do resolve in this short date,
How you will seek your latest fate.
Scarce have we so long time of breath,
With leisure to fore-thinke our death.
More glory we shall give our end,
To meet our Fate, then it attend.
Those minds do merit no less praise,
That dare cut off their doubtful days,
Then those, that shorten do the scope
Of longer years, that they do hope.
A Pagan resolution.
For he that does with his own fist,
In sunder break his life-spun twist;
A conquest to himself has gained,
Willing to dye comes not constrained.
To escape, no means us hope affoords,
We are empal'd with Romans swords.
Outface proud death, lay dread aside,
Freely affect that must betide.
But let us not (take heed withal)
Like slaughtred beasts in clusters fall,
With hostile hands hewed down and hack't,
Be in a cloud obscurely wrack't:
Confused fighting in Troops, obscures particular valor.
Or else be slain whilst night does last
With showers of darts from our foes cast.
For they that so confusedly
Fighting, do intermingled dye,
True valor shades from sight of eye.
The Gods on us this stage bestows
In open view of friends and foes.
The rolling seas, and mountains hye,
Shall see our courage death defy:
This Island witness shall the same,
And to her rocks record our fame.
The coasts on both sides shall behold
Valor vn-vanquisht vn-controld.
O Fortune! we unwitting are
What endless fame thou do prepare What felicity the Romans took to
acquire unto themselves future fame.

Wherewith to glorify our Fates.
For all records of future dates,
That endless ages can retain,
Our memory shall still maintain;
And for our sakes repeat with ruth,
To constant Mart our spotless truth,
Eternizing our famous youth.
And Caesar, The affection that Caesar's Soldiers did bear unto him.
for thy sake we know
In this too little we bestow,
With our own swords our selves to gore,
But thus beset, we can no more.
This constant death that we will prove,
We dedicate unto thy love.
But envious Fate our praise did grutch,
And from it has detracted much;
In that our Parents and our sons
With us none of this fortune runs.
Then should they know (had we some aid)
What dauntlesse spirits they way-layd.
And, doubtless, we should make them fear
To mell with us, that such minds bear.
But they may hold them well-a-paid,
That no more of our ships they staid.
For then must they some means have found
For our enlargement to compound;
And sought with some vain offers base,
Our living honor to deface.
O would (that now to give our death
One glory more, ere our last breath)
A glorious wish.
They would but us some offer make,
Whereby we might our pardon take:
That we with scorn might it forsake:
That thereby they might plainly know
How dreadlesse we to death do go.
And not as men in hopeless mood,
With our own swords cool our own blood.
Let us such virtue now express,
That Caesar may with right confess,
That he in us has undergone
A bloody loss worthy of moan.
Although we few are but a mite
Among thousands that for him do fight,
The resolution of Vulteius.
Though fate would set us free again,
That offer yet would I disdain;
Dear mates, this life to me is scorn,
Deaths motives do my thoughts suborne.
Fury divine has raped raped my mind,
The Gods in favor have designed
That we to death should give our mind.
To be willing to die is a heavenly blessing
To others they such grace deny,
To think it happiness to dye;
Because here in this world of strife,
They should protract a wretched life.
Now are these noble youths on fire,
To haste their fates with true desire.
How much Vulteius speech did animate his little troop
Who did before gaze on the skies
With heavy hearts and watery eyes,
Expecting death when sun did rise.
And did behold (with grieuing fear)
The stooping of the greater Bear,
Before that they this speech did hear.
But then they wished to see days light,
So free they were from deaths affright.
For now their Captains glorious words,
Prouok't their hearts like points of swords.
The Sphere with all her lamps of night
Haste in the seas to plunge their light.
The Sun his parting then begins
Castor and P^ll^x.
From out the arms of Laeda's twins,
And now this lofty star him draws
To lodge more near to Cancers claws
And for a farewell night imparts
With us, her two Thessalian darts.
The day spring does descry abroad
How Istrian troops the Cliffes do load,
And how the stout Liburnian fleet
With Greekish ships in consort meet.
But first, the rage of war to cease,
They offer them to treat of peace:
And only this contract would have,
To yield themselves, their lives to save;
Except they more desired death,
Then to preserve a Captive breath. A parley offered, but refused.

But these brave yonkers did disdain
Parlie for life to entertain.
They were resolved that their own Arms
Should free them from all scornful harms.
Their minds prepared for utmost woes,
Could not be moved with clamorous foes.
Few hands of theirs sustained the brunt
Of multitudes, Vulteius assailed on all sides
that them affrunt
By land and seas on every side,
Constant to death they firm abide.
And when they saw of hostile gore,
That they had shed sufficient store;
They turned their fury from the foe,
And with themselves in hand they go.
The noble Captain led the way
Vulteius brave, that does display
His naked breast, and thus did say:
That hand amongst you most of worth
My blood with glory to let forth;
Let him give proof by wounding me,
That he likewise himself dares free
From captive fate. No more he spoke, The resolution of the Romans in scorn of
their foes.

But therewithal short work to make,
More swords then one became so fierce,
That all at once his bowels pierce.
Yet he that on him first did light,
Him with like kindness to requite,
His dying hand did then bestow
On him again a fatal blow.
Then all the Troop hand over head,
With mortal wounds each other sped.
In such sort raged the Dircaean breed,
Cadmus.
That did spring up of Cadmus seed,
Which did presage the dismal fate
Ocdepus two sons, Etheocles, and Polynices.
Of Theban brethrens dire debate;
Whose earth-bred race their linnage draws
From that same waking Dragons jaws,
Whose teeth sown in the Phasian fields,
Such cankred bloody natures yields;
As that the furrows flowing stood
With foul enraged allied blood,
Contrived by wrathful Magickes mood.
Medea.
And vile Medea, that these harms
Did bring to pass with sorcerous charms,
Feared what thereof might more betide,
Because those spelles she had not tried.
In this sort died those gallant laddes,
Whose mutual fate each other glads.
Death to great virtue did expose,
To quell such valiant men as those.
Yet they together dye and fall;
No one man's hand did fail at all
To give a wound, but it did bring
With dying hand, deaths deadly sting.
Neither did they to strong blows trust,
But through their breasts the swords did thrust;
And for it should be thoroughly done,
Up to the hilts they did them run.
In this blood-thirsty slaughtring fray,
The brother does the brother slay;
A cruel slaughter.
Sons fathers send the selfsame way.
And yet their hands were not affright
Against natures laws to show their might.
But this was deemed a pious deed,
With one blow and no more to speed.
Now did the bowels all bestrow
The hatches, and the blood did flow
Over the sides into the seas.
To see the light did them displease;
But that with proud disdainful grace
They might look in the victors face,
And scornfully their deaths embrace.
The Raffe was heap't, and ouer-spred
With these brave youths that there lie dead.
To whom the Conquerors impart
Due funerals, as their desert.
And all the Captains wondering stood,
At this brave Captains dauntlesse mood.
And now the fame of this deed done,
(As matchless) through the world did run.
But yet this pattern cannot make
Many base minds like heart to take:
Dread will not let them understand,
That Virtue with her valiant hand,
May easily their woes release,
If slavish Fate do them oppress: What power rests in valor

But Tyrants swords do them appall,
Their freedom under force does fall,
Because they do not understand
Why swords were fitted to the hand.
O Death! therefore do not affright
The poor dismayed coward wight;
But show thy tyrant murdrous dart
Unto the dauntlesse noble heart.
Like courage he in Mart expressed
That does the Lybian fields inuest:
For noble Curio leaves the rode
Of Lilybey, where his abode
With all his fleet, a while he made
Which now the Ocean do invade. Curio with an Army goes into Affricke.

When as a friendly Northern gale
His ships unto the port did hale,
Whereas the waves the ruins beat
Of great Carthagoes famous seat.
And then unto the harbor came
Clupea hight, of noted name.
There first he makes his discents,
Curios landing in Affricke.
And far in land did pitch his tents
Hard by the stow Bagrada's sides,
That furrows up the sands with tides.
Then to the hills his Army goes,
And to those hollow rocks that shows
The Giant Antaeus.
Where great Antaeus reigned king,
As old bards do not vainly sing.
Here Curio seriously desires
To hear report of ancient sires,
And what the peasants of the land
Did by tradition understand;
From what occasion that tale rose,
That through the world this rumor blows.
The tale of Antaeus
Long after that same monstrous brood
Of Earth-borne Giants, Jove with-stood,
Our Libian Country did not rear
Such ore-growne creatures as they were.
The Giants that rebelled against Jupiter
Neither was Typhons worth so much;
Nor Tityos, nor Briareus such,
As in the world they glory bare;
But sure the earth the heavens did spare,
That then Antaeus was not borne,
A right Heathen conceit.
Nor did in Thessaly soiorne.
A man so dear unto the earth,
Antaeus the son of the earth.
From whom he took his living birth;
As that he never touched the ground,
But his maine force did more abound.
And when his huge limbs fainting grew,
Fresh strength in them it did renew.
This cave the house where he did dwell,
And under this high rock the cell
Where he did lodge, and for his meat
The flesh of Lions he did eat.
The manner of Antaeus life.
On wild beasts skins he would not lie,
Nor on the broad leaves soft and dry;
But on the bare mould he would rest,
Wherewith his vigor still encreast.
The people over all the lands
Were mangled with his murdrous hands.
Of strangers, that the coast did trade,
A slaughter and a spoil he made.
But for a time (proud of his force)
He did the help of earth divorce.
And though he were of so great might,
That none durst him withstand in fight;
Yet when the fame abroad was spread,
Of this foul monster so a-dread,
And what great mischief he had done,
It moved Alcides noble son Hercules.

To pass to Affricke on the maine,
To buckle with this surly swain.
But ere his task he did begin,
From him he casts his Lions skin,
That in Cleoneae he had slain:
Antaeus likewise did refrain
To wear his Lybicke Lions spoil.
Then Hercules, the sovereign oil
Upon his brawny limbs infusd,
That in Olympian games he vsd.
But now Antaeus (erst so stout)
His proper force began to doubt;
And therefore stretched himself at length
Upon the sands, that gave him strength.
Now with their hands they hand-fast take,
And fiercely do their straind arms shake: The combat between Hercules and
Antaeus.

Then did they long (but all in vain)
Each other by the collars strain,
And brow they do confront to brow,
Which neither of them both would bow:
But each of them did muse to see
One that his equal match could be.
Alcides yet forbear to show
His utmost vigor on his foe:
But urged him so with cunning slight,
That out of breath he puts him quight;
Which by often panting he expressed,
With cold sweat trickling down his breast.
Then both their necks with straining shakes
Breast against breast resistance makes,
Whilst their crossed arms, with stooping chine
About each others thighs they twine.
Then does Alcides leave that hold,
And fiercely both his arms did fold
About Antaeus bending waste,
And wringing girds his bowels fast;
Whilst he his foot with skill did slide
Betwixt his shankes, and made him stride.
Then with an in-turne following that,
Upon his back he threw him flat.
The parched earth the sweat receaues,
And unto him new force bequeaues:
Antaeus strength renewed by touching the earth.
Fresh blood reuiueth every vain,
His sinowy neck grew strong again.
His joints more firm and nimble were,
And with such force himself did bear,
That all that Herc'les did before,
His body now annoyed no more.
Herewith Alcides grew amazed,
And on this strength increasing gazed,
For he was not so much affright,
Hydra.
When he did with that Hydra fight,
That new heads for his old could dight,
In the Inachian plashie fenne,
Though he were but a stripling then.
Long doubtfully did they contend:
One trusts the strength the earth did lend;
The Other did on the virtue rest
That lodged within his manly breast.
Juno.
His bitter step-dame never had
Such cause as now her hopes to glad,
In seeing him so hard bestad:
For now she sees his limbs to sweat,
And his strong shoulders stark with heat,
Whereon he wonted was to bear
The burden of the starry sphere.
But now again he did begin
His arms about his foe to cling,
Which when Antaeus did perceive,
He straight unto the earth did cleave,
From whence new force he did receive.
And all the help the earth could give,
Her son therewith she did relieve;
And labors with her might and maine,
His wearied limbs to strength again.
Now when Alcides found at length,
That still he did renew his strength
By virtue of the touched earth
His mother, whence he took his birth.
Stand now (quoth he) and trust no more
As thou did to the earth before: Hercules words to Antaeus.

I will restrain thee from that hope,
Within my arms shall be thy scope.
Thy heft shall stay upon my breast,
Here is the place that thou shall rest.
And with that word aloft him hent,
That struggling to the earth-wards bent.
But there the ground no whit auailes
Her child's crushed chest, whom death assailes.
Thus did Alcides gird him fast,
Until his chine he brake at last.
And now deaths pangues, with crazie cold
On all his limbs did lay sure hold.
Thus he a long time did him strain, Antaeus killed by Hercules.

Ere he would let him fall again.
This combat has been since the cause,
From whence our Countries ancient sawes,
Admiring this great Giants fame,
Unto his mother gave his name.
But since a name of greater grace,
Was given unto this hilly place
By Scipio, that brave Roman knight, Scipio Africanus.

That did by valor and by might,
Constrain the hostile Punicke powers
Home to return from Latium bowers.
And here when first the Lybicke land
He did invade,, his camp did stand:
And in this place still may you see
Where ramparts and huge trenches be;
So as the fields did first of all,
Unto the Roman conquest fall.
Curio is pleased that he has found
The chance of such a lucky ground,
And thinks the fortune of the place
Curio's vain conceit.
His war with like success would grace,
As it had done that noble Peer
Scipio,that erst encamped here.
And therefore on this happy land,
His hapless tents he causd to stand:
Too loosely he does range his host,
And of these hills the vantage lost.
Then with unequal force does go
To dare a mighty armed foe.
In Affricke all the Roman bands
That served, were under Varus hands;
Actius Varus Pompey's captain in Affricke.
Whose Latium forces might suffice,
Yet he seeks all the best supplies
That Lybicke kingdom would afford,
And subjects were to Iuba's sword:
Who far and near his force did raise,
And so his standard he displaies.
King Iuba.
In all that continent no King
Could so great powers together bring.
His Territory from the west,
Where Atlas mount near Gades does rest
Begins, and so forth Eastward runs
Unto the Syrtes, where Ammon wonnes:
And then in breadth takes all that cost,
Whose lands the Torrid Zone does tossed;
With those vaste kingdoms stretched a far,
That bounded with the Ocean are.
Unto his Camp repaired these,
The Nation of Antololes,
The vagrant fierce Numidaeans,
The still prepared Getulians
That do unarmed horses ride.
Then Moors, whose skins are cole-black died
The Nasamons that riches wants,
And all the parched Garamants.
The Marmaryds so swift of foot,
With Maxans, that as strongly shoot
Those darts that from their arms they throw,
As Medes can shafts out of a bow.
And those Massilians that bestride
Their horses bare-back't when they ride, A nation that ride and rule their
horses without bridles.

And never does a bridle need,
But with a wand can guide his steed.
The hunting Aphers, that did use
No steady dwelling house to choose, The several nations under Iuba.

But ranged in Tents from place to place,
As they pursue the Lions chase;
And trusts not to their headed spear,
But with their clokes his eyes will bleare, A strange manner of hunting the
Lion.

And nothing do his raging fear.
Neither did Iuba raise his Mart,
Only regarding to take part
With one side in this civil fight,
But was drawn on with private spite.
For Curio in his Tribunes time,
That had committed many a crime
Against the Gods, and humane right,
Did practice then with all his might, Iubas particular malice to Curio.

By his own Tribunitian law,
King Iuba's realm from him to draw:
And to disgrade him from the Throne,
By true descent that was his own.
Wherein thou did thy power display,
When Rome gave thee too great a sway.
Iuba remembering this abuse,
Did of this war make private use,
Hoping thereby that uncontrolled
He should his crown more freely hold.
The fame of this offended king
With fear in Curios Camp did ring: The rumor of Iubas malice troubles
Curios Camp.

For most of all the troops he led,
In Caesar's Arms were never bred;
Nor in those Gallicke wars were trained,
Nor with their blood the Rhene had stained.
But from Corfinium garrison
They were with-drawne when it was won.
And to new leaders bare small trust,
As they to former were unjust,
Still thinking to do what they lust.
When therefore Curio plainly saw
Base fear their minds did ouer-awe;
Whereby the trenches every night
Were barely manned by sluggish fright:
And that his Soldiers day by day
From out the trenches fled away:
His mind these ill presages mates,
And with himself he thus debates.
Daring attempts do cover dread:
Curio finding his Army staggering, debates with himself what course to take.
My Ensigns therefore I will spread,
And with my Soldiers take the field,
Whilst they to me obedience yield:
For Idleness breeds mutiny,
But action voids conspiracy.
Whilst that the valiant mind is pressed,
And sees the sword against his breast,
His helmet then does shelter shame;
He leisure wants to scorn, or blame
His Captains will; or to compare
How martial causes ordered are.
But on which part in arms he stands,
There he imployes his hired hands.
So do the fencers, for rewards
Expose their skill and ventrous guards
Against their riuals in their fight,
Not led thereto with ancient spite.
But when they meet, their force they strain,
Which of them shall the conquest gain.
This when he had revolu'd in mind,
He to the field his host designed.
And Fortune gives him one fair day,
Whom afterward she did betray.
For he in battle Varus meets,
Curio overthrows Varus in the field.
And with such force his Army greets;
As that he made him turn his face,
Put him in rout, and gave him chase;
Who never turned his face again,
Until his Camp did him constrain.
These heavy news abroad were blown,
That Varus now was ouer-throwne:
Which when to Iuba's ears it came,
He was well pleased with the Fame, Iuba glad of Varus overthrow.

Presuming that this warfare stays
For him, thereof to win the praise.
And therefore secretly ordained
Great force, which he with speed retained
For this exployt, by him conceald
With charge it should not be reueald.
He only feared that his intent
His foe would fearfully prevent.
Sabbura was the second man
That ruled all his kingdom than;
And unto him he did commit
A little troop that he thought fit
To march before, and with no more
Into the field to tyce his foe:
Pretending that unto his hands
He had committed all the bands:
Mean while the King with his huge Train,
Lay hidden in a hollow plain.
So does the Serpent, enemy
Unto the Aspicke, hidden lie, A Simile.

And with a subtle shadow draws
Him near unto his murdring jaws:
And when the Aspicke naught suspects,
He suddenly his head reflects,
And with his teeth the throat does squise,
Not where the lurking poison lies;
And therewithal this vermin dies.
Who then his venom forth does cast,
But all in vain, and all in wast.
So fraud sits now in Fortunes lap,
For Curio haught with his late hap,
Did not forecast the deep deceit
Of his strong foe, that lay in wait.
But ouer-night he gives in charge
That all his horse-troopes should enlarge
Curio too venterous, neglects good advice.
Themselves, and range the fields about;
And in the morning he draws out
From forth his Camp, his armed bands,
Who in the field imbatteld stands.
Yet he was warned (but all in vain)
That close his camp he should contain,
And wary be of Lybicke baytes,
And of the Punycke wars deceytes.
The Punicke deceit in war.
But Destinies resistlesse date,
Gave up this young man to his Fate.
And now this civil war betrayed
Him, that her first foundation laid.
His troops and Ensigns he displayes,
And leads them over rocky ways;
Which when his enemy espyde,
From hills a far where they recide;
With fraud they seem (as men affright)
To make retrait in open sight;
Until thereby they could procure
Their foe to leave a place so sure,
And strong, as those high mountains were;
And that the Army did not fear
To range it self in martial wise,
Where as the open Champian lies.
Now Curio thought his foes did fly,
And did not their device descrye;
Curio deceived with an ambush.
But as a Conqueror, in haste
His Army in the fields he placed.
And then the Lybicke guile brake out:
For those that fled but for a flout,
With horsemen ceiz'd the hills about;
And with huge troops they did enclose
On every side, their Roman foes.
This Curio somewhat did amaze,
His hope-lost troops stood at a gaze;
Yet sought they not for fear to fly,
Nor strong enough with force to try.
Their tired horse, when Trumpets sound,
Would neither snoring bray, nor bownd:
Nor with their hoofes the earth would stamp,
Nor strain their bridles whilst they champe
The foamy bits, nor creasts vp-reares,
Nor with a courage prick their ears.
Nor strive amongst the thronging troop, Curios horse-troopes spen and tired.

But all fore-spent, their heads down droope.
And crest-falne smoking in a sweat,
Their mouths are dry, and parcht with heat.
Their tongues do hang below their jaws,
Hoarse groans they send from out their maws
With thick drawn wind they puff and pant,
Their flanks do rise, and breath do want.
And all their bits were smeared ore
With dusty dried frothy gore.
So as they hardly could be got
With whips or wands to keep a trot.
Nor yet with often stroke of spur
Could they at last be made to stir.
It naught auailed him that rides,
To rent and tear their bloody sides.
His pace he would not so advance,
With force thereof to break a lance;
Which greatly did the foe avail,
For they the while did them assail
Aloof with darts as thick as hail. The battle betwixt Curio and Sabbura.

Now when the ranging Aphers pressed
In with their troops amongst the rest,
Their trampling steeds so beat the ground,
That all the hill therewith did sound.
And therewith raisd such dusty smokes,
That all the air it dimmes and chokes.
Like as when the Bistonian blasts,
With rage whole hills of sands up casts;
Which in such clouds aloft do rise,
As that they dim and dark the skies.
No sooner now their raging Mart
Upon the foot they did conuart,
But that the fight was out of doubt, Curio's Army oppressed with numbers of
foes

Death spent the time amongst the rout.
Forward at all, they could not press,
Nor use their Arms in this distress.
So were they compast round with foes,
That room they want to deal their blows.
Their spears held upright in their hands,
Were thronged together in whole bands.
So heaps of foes their help confounds,
Neither fall they alone with wounds,
This fighting in an orb was the last refuge that the Romans used ever in
extremity.
And blood; but this them death affoords,
The clouds of darts, and weight of swoords.
And then for last refuge of all,
The troops now left that were but small,
Into a little orb did fall.
And those that utmost bare the stresse,
If they into the midst would press
For fear, thereby relief to gain,
Hardly escaped, but there was slain.
This battail'd Orb now grew so thick,
And did so close together stick,
And foot to foot so pressing stands,
They could not use their martial hands.
Their thronged bodies so are pressed,
That armed, they crush each others breast.
The conquering Moore did not delight
So much to hear of their hard plight,
That Fortune prostrates to his might;
Not having seen the bodies slain,
Nor how the streams of blood did draine,
Nor that the limbs bestrewd the land,
For now the Orb so thick was mand,
That bodies dead upright did stand.
Thus Fortune sends new slaughtred wights
To please Carthagoes envious sprights:
The sacrifice of this brave Host,
May well appease the thirsty ghost
Of bloody Hanniball, and those
That Punicke wars has made our foes.
But (O ye Gods) this Roman spoil
That now is made on Libicke soil,
To Pompey cannot yield content,
The Senate will this wrack lament.
Let Affricke thereof make her gains,
Whose fields our Latium blood distaines.
When Curio saw his host in rout,
And that their blood so streamed about,
As that therewith the dust was laid,
And with the gore the land beraid;
His heart could not endure the sight
Of his poor men's distressed plight,
Nor would he save himself by flight.
But on his foes he pressed amain,
And so amongst his Troops was slain. Curio and his Army destroyed.

He now disdaines longer to live,
Valor to him his end did give.
What can the Rostrum thee avail?
Or Forum now, when Fates assail?
What boots it, that in thee it lay
The armed peoples wills to sway?
What profits it thy voice did draw
The Senate to infringe the law?
Whereby the Father and the Son,
This hateful civil war begun.
Since thou to death thy date must yield, He taxes Curio for faction.

And shall not see Pharsalia's field:
Where these great Captains, led with rage
To battles chance, their states engage.
For crosse-bent Fate denies to thee
The issue of these wars to see.
So you disturbers of the state,
Make your own selves a prey to fate;
And pay the price with your own blood,
For which you sold the common good.
O happy Rome! could thou but find
Thy Citizens so just and kind,
As that the Gods their minds would move, An Apostrophe to the Roman Lords.

Rather to cherish and to love
The public freedom of the state,
Then to revenge their private hate.
O noble Curio it is thy meed,
The rau'ning Libicke fowls to feed;
For to thy lot will never fall
The honor of a funeral.
But yet our lines might merit blame,
To silence that which for thy name
Deserves to be in brass inchast,
That with all ages it might last.
I yield this therefore to thy spirit,
The due commend that it did merit.
Curio's praise.
Rome never bred a greater wit,
That did within the Rostrum sit:
Nor more did dignifie the laws,
Whilst thou did stand for justice cause.
Avarice and Bribery the ruin of Rome
But after Pride and Luxury,
With auaritious Briberie,
Possessed the headstrong wills of youth;
They swamme in streams that led to ruth.
So with the times things changed then,
That age corrupt, corrupted men;
And Curio blasted with the rest,
Was chiefest cause of Romes vn-rest.
For Caesar did his mind inthrall,
With golden gifts of conquered Gaul.
Though Sylla's power, and Marius wrath,
And Cinna's rage bred Roman scath;
Though Caesar's ancient noble line,
With glory long did sway and shine:
Yet for all this, their swords lack't might
To frame a tyranny outright:
They all did still attempt with gold,
To purchase Rome, which Curio sold.
Finis Libri quarti.
Lucans Pharsalia. The fifth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN Greece the Senate do decree,
That Pompey shall their leader be.
Then Appius does to Delphos go,
The Oracles advice to know.
Now Caesar having maistered Spain,
His mutiners suppressed again.
And then to Rome in haste he goth,
There Consul and Dictator both.
Thence to Brundusium he departs,
And to Epyrus bends his Marts,
He rashly venters on the Maine:
Then comes Antonius with his train.
Pompey Cornelia does betake
To Lesbos, whilst he war does make.
THESE Captains now on either side,
The wrackes of Civil war had tried,
And Fortune partial unto neither, Fortune as yet stand: indifferent between
Caesar and Pompey.

Mingled good luck and bad together;
Bringing them with an equal hand,
Into the Macedonian land.
Mount Aemus now was thatch't with snow,
That from the Atlanticke skies did blow.
And then the feast days onward drew,
Which did their Magistrates renew.
And that prime season began appear,
That leads the vaunt-gard of the year.
But whilst some latter time remains
To those that yet do rule the raines,
The Consuls both did then decree
The Senate should assembled be,
With those great Lords both far and near,
In Provinces did office bear.
Epyrus the randevous of Pompey's forces.
And then Epyrus they did choose
The place for this wars Randezvous.
But oh this foreign sordid seat!
For Roman Peers was far unmeet.
It needs must be a scornful jest,
That their high Court should be a guest
In stranger lands, there to debate
The Councels of the Empires state.
For who a Camp will deem this place,
That all the Consuls axes grace?
The Senates reverend order says,
Pompey follows the Senate, and not the Senate Pompey.
They run not after Pompeys ways.
But Pompey for the public cause,
Says he observes the Senates laws.
Now when these sad assembled Peers,
With silence gave attentive ears:
Lord Lentulus from his high Throne,
In these words makes his meaning known;
Lentulus oration to the Senators in the Camp.
If courage such your minds do feed,
As worthy of the Latium breed:
Or ancient blood boil in your breast,
What matter is it where Romans rest:
Regard not how far we reside
From Rome, by Caesar vilefi'd.
But know you now with love and grace
Your native Country peoples face.
First therefore reverend Fathers hear,
By all your powers make it appear
That you the rightful Senate are,
Whose high decrees in peace and war,
Nations must reverence near and far.
For be it so that Fortunes sway
Would carry us so far away,
As where the ycie lesser Bear
Does dimly twinkle in the sphere:
Or else whereas the Torrid Zone
Refreshing vapors casts none.
But always with one counterpaise
Equals the length of nights and days;
Yet wheresoever we should roame,
There always is the Empires home.
With us we hold, as proper mate,
The supreme care and rule of state.
So when with fire the furious Gauls
Assailed the high Tarpeian walls; Camillus.

At Veia did Camillus won,
And there did Rome her fortune run.
The Senatorian ordered state
Is never changed by place or date.
Caesar the City does retain,
Whose houses empty do remain.
The mourning Courts he ouer-awes,
Where Arms have silenced the laws.
The Roman Courts know but the face
Of Senators which he did chase
From out the City swarming than;
And him that Caesar did not ban
Of that great Senatorian train,
His fellowship we must disdain.
That fury first did scatter such
As did at wicked discord grutch;
Who with their children and their wives,
In peace desired to lead their lives.
But yet for all this raging vain,
Here are we now well met again.
And all the Gods in recompense
Of Italy (though chaste from thence)
Has given us (to cheer our hearts)
The whole worlds force that takes our parts.
And now in the Ilirian maine,
Vulteius and his troops are slain.
And Curio, that was greatest part
A speech of scorn to Caesar.
Of Caesar's Senate in his Mart;
Lies foiled, with all his Martial bands,
In Affrickes filthy parched sands.
Therefore your Ensigns now display,
Brave Captains thrust on Fortunes way;
In Jove's high grace your hopes repose,
Your minds as forward now expose,
Against the forces of your foes,
As you were ready then to run,
When their approches you did shun.
Our power no further does extend,
For with the year the Consuls end.
But reverend Lords your powerful state
Is not confined to any date.
Therefore conclude amongst you all,
Pompey chosen General of the Army for the Senate.
That Pompey be your General.
Hereat the Senate did rejoice,
And then decreed with one voice,
That they would lay on Pompey's fate,
The public and their private state.
That done, to honors they preferred
The Kings and people that deserved.
And unto Rhodes, Apollo's seat,
(Whose power by sea was stout and great)
They presents gave, and for their truth,
The like unto the homely youth
Of Taygety; and then the Town
Of ancient Athens they renown.
And to Massilians (Caesar's spoil)
They freely gave the Phocean soil.
Then Sadalen, and Cotyn strong,
And Deiotarus that had long
Been loyal to the Roman state,
To honors they did eleuate:
And therewithal Rhasipolin,
The Lord of that coast whereas binne
The chilly sharp winds fostered;
All these with praise were honored.
Then by the Senators decree,
Iuba designed was to be
The sovereign of all Libicke land,
To sway that scepter with his hand.
But oh dire Fates, thou that have name
Of Ptolomey, thou Fortunes shame! Ptolomey descended of the race of Peleus.

To thee a kingdom was designed,
Whose people were of faithless kind:
The Gods herein most faulty were,
To grace thy wretched head of hair
With that brave Alexandrian crown,
That had from Peleus his renown.
Thou boy did take the sword in hand, Young Ptolomey king of Aegipt, that
caused Pompey to be slain, and had almost betrayed Caesar.

To rule the people of this land.
And would to God to them alone
Thy tyrant sword had been made known;
But Lagus Realm was given thee more,
And thou defiled with Pompey's gore,
Thy sisters Crown thou did deprive,
And Caesar's wrack wel-neere contriue.
This great assembly now dismissed,
The multitude in Arms persist.
Whilst Soldiers and the Captains all,
Fore-casting naught what might befall,
Their Ensigns and their Arms advance,
Guided by giddy Fortunes chance.
But Appius was the only man
That did this purpose better scan: Appius seeks to know of the Oracles what
shall be this wars event.

For he did fear with rash attempt
To hazard doubtful wars event;
And therefore he the Gods besought
To show to what end twould be brought.
Which done, he takes his journey then
To the Phoebeian Delphicke Den,
That he this Oracle might hear,
Which had been shut up many a year.
Parnassus mountain top is spread
With lofty double forked head.
And in the worlds mid way does rest,
It was a little before Christ came that the Oracle, ceast, as was
foreprophesied by the scriptures.
Just placed between the East and West.
This sacred hill, as eld designs,
To Phoebus, and the God of wines
With equal hest was consecrate,
Where they their Oracles relate.
His only top surmounting stood
Of all the earth above the flood,
That in Deucalions time did drown
The world with her high towering crown,
And only as a confine seen
The Pagans conceit of Parnassus mount.
The waters and the skies between.
Yet thou Parnassus did not rise
So high, but that one forkes point lies
Under the water hid from eyes.
Revenging Paean there did show
The vigor of his arm and bow.
Calling to mind his mothers wrong,
Whilst he within her womb did throng:
She from her native home expeld,
He with his arrows Python queld,
Which yet he scarce had skill to weld.
Themis, the Goddess of Justice.
This sacred soil as then did rest
With Trypods under Thaemis best.
As soon as Paean first beheld
The sounding voice these caves did yield,
Divinely breathing out such sawes,
With windy words from earths deep jaws,
He secretly himself with-drawes,
And in the sacred dens did shade,
There Paean was a Prophet made.
What God (quoth he) is here inclosd?
What supreme power (from heaven deposd)
Vouchsafes confined thus to dwell
Within this solitary Cell?
What Deity of heavenly birth
Can be partaker with this earth?
Within whose all conceiving breast,
Eternal secrets live and rest.
Whose high foreknowledge has descride
What shall in future times betide. This seems to hold great correspondency
with the description of the incarnation and life of our blessed Savior.

That preaches to the peoples ears,
That humane form and nature bears.
Dreadful and potent in his state,
And whether he does sing of Fate,
Or do command that which he sings,
He Fate unto perfection brings.
Perhaps of Jupiter entire,
A great part does his soul inspire;
Which was unto the earth down sent
To sway this or by continent
With true proportioned upright paise,
Whereby amidst the Air it stays.
Which power divine, accustomed then
To haunt in this Cyrrhaean Den, Cyrrha a City at the foot of Pernassus.

And was withal conjoined nigh
To thundering Jove above the sky.
This power that had such grace received,
Was in a virgins breast conceived.
With humane soul it did subsist,
Sounding his voice when as him list:
The mouth he opened of the Priest,
With so great force as flaming blasts
That Mountain Aetna's top out casts.
Or as Typhaeus ouer-prest
With hugie weight upon his breast,
( Whom great Inarymes does hide)
Constrained (from his stomach wide)
To vomit up, with rattling groans,
Campana's flinty rugged stones.
This power exposd to all men's good
No mortals prayers has withstood;
Only his nature does disdain
To be defiled with humane stain.
Wicked inchanters never dwells
Nor yet converse within his celles:
There witches mutter not their spelles.
A constant truth his speeches are,
To alter which none ought to dare.
Forbidding mortals that desire,
His favor is the just man's hire.
For unto such (cast from their seat)
He has restored Cities great.
The Tyrrians so he did relieve,
And gave them means away to drive
The threatenings proud of hostile Lords,
As Salaminian sea records.
The barren lands he fruitful makes,
Contagious aires away he takes,
And teaches how the same he slakes.
This age of ours with griese may say,
The Gods from us hold not away
A blessed gift of greater grace,
Then was this Delphicke sacred place.
Which prophesing no longer sings,
The grief that the Pagans conceived for the ceasing of their Oracles.
So future fear does hold our kings:
And in that jealous doubtful vain
All Oracles they do restrain.
Yet Cyrraen Prophets naught lament,
That so their voices are vp-pent,
Or that their Temples none frequent.
For if this God-heads spirit lights
Within the hearts of mortal wights,
They that this power divine receaues,
Death unto him thereby bequeaues
The opinion of the Pagans concerning this Oracle.
The full reward of present bliss,
Or else his pain eternal is.
For those weak powers of humane life
Faint in the waves and urging strife,
That in this fury reigns rife.
So can the Gods, when they do streeke.
Shake mortal minds, and make them meek.
Now Appius that searches out
Appius comes to the Oracle.
To understand this latest doubt
Of the Hesperian hidden Fate;
Addressed himself unto the gate
Of this same silent uncouth cave,
Whose Oracles no answers gave
Long time before; nor Trypods drove.
There he the Prelate does entreat
Then to set open his sacred seat,
And to let in the fearful Nun
Phaemonoe, that now did run,
And gadde about in shady woods,
And by Castalio's secret floods,
Where wandering careless she was caught,
And so unto the Temple brought.
The Nun whom fear did now dissuade
This ugly entry to invade,
Vsd all the Art she could invent
To hold this Lord from his intent, Phaemonoe disswadeth Appius from searching
this Oracle.

Whereon his mind was so hot bent.
Great Roman Lord, I muse (quoth she)
What wicked hope inueagleth thee
To search to know thy future Fate,
Where Oracles are out of date.
Parnassus long has silent stood,
The God suppressed has his mood:
His voice is either dumb or hoarse,
Or else this seat he does not force.
But rometh in by-waies vntry'd,
Or Pythons Trypod-couering hide,
Is by Barbarians burnt and fried:
Whose ashes in the Cauernes lies,
And Phoebus passage so denies.
Or whether that the Gods high hest
With Cyrrha's prophesies shall rest,
And that the Sibylls old presage
Of things to come in future age,
Which are committed unto verse,
Sufficiently may Fates rehearse.
Or Paean (that is vsd to chase
The spirits of a harmfull race)
Cannot find out in this frail time,
A truthfull tongue deuoid of crime.
Now in this virgins words and cheer, Phaemonoe fearful to enter the Cauerne
of the Oracle.

Dissembling fraud did plain appear.
Her guilty fear did then descry
She falsely did the Gods deny.
Her writhed fillet she does dress
Upon the forepart of her tresse.
Her locks hung down her back behind:
Upon her crown she wreathing twinde
A garland green of Laurel dight,
With Phocian veil of lawne pure white;
But in the porch she made a stay:
The priest then pusht her on her way.
Yet she, poor soul, was sore adread
Into the horrid cell to yed:
Lothing the ghastly dens to prove,
Nor from the Porch would she remove.
But there right does a muttring feign,
As though the spright she did retain,
And yet her breast he did not strain.
In this sort she untroubled stood,
With quiet voice, and sober mood;
Which showed no sacred furies guise
Did her distracted sense surprise:
Neither could that smooth tale she told,
With Appius more credit hold,
Then it was able to abuse
The Trypods, or Apollos muse.
No trembling sounds do stop her words,
The Cauerne vaste no voice affoords:
Her garland does not brandling rear,
With the vp-rising of her hair:
The Temples steeple no whit shakes,
The shady grove no blustering makes.
And she poor wretch the whilst still fears,
With Oracles to trust her ears.
This while the Trypods yield no signs,
And Appius unto rage enclines:
Wherewith he said, thou false for-sworne,
That have both Gods and Me in skorne;
Thy fraud thou dearly shall abye,
Except thou enter presently
This cauerne, and do truths relate,
Presume not of thy self to prate
In matters of this great advice,
No less worth then the worlds whole price.
Herewith the Nun was so aghast, Phaemonoe enters the Cauernes by the
constraint of Appius.

That to the Trypods she makes have.
And to the Cauernes being come,
She stands amazed, and waxes dumb.
And with an vnaccustom'd breast,
The spirit she receives her guest:
So as not any long of yore
This cave so fully did explore.
Then did the Cyrrhen Fury run
So fiercely through this rapted Nun,
That never any had like part
Of this divine Phoebaean Art.
Her proper wits it drives away:
Now now (quoth she) hear whilst you may
And trust upon the words I say.
Her neck she whirles, and winds about,
And madding through the dens does strout.
Her phillets, and Phoebaean bays,
Her upright staring locks did raise.
And through each horrid vacant place, The description of one inspired with the
fury of prophesying.

She flings about with ghastly face:
And where the Trypods she does meet,
She ouer-whelmes them with her feet.
She frets and burns with inward fire,
Phoebus on her expressed his ire,
Not only with his stripes and threats,
But he her bowels flaming heats,
And her inspires with so great skill,
That she was stinted of her will.
For 'twas not lawful she should show
Those wondrous things that she did know.
All times beginnings, and their ends
She sees, and fully comprehends.
And every ages destiny
Within her racked breast does lie.
Huge heaps of things to her appears,
She swells with guess of future years,
Whose fates whilst she conceald does hold,
In her did struggle to be told.
The worlds last days she viewed than,
With that first hour that it began.
The secrets of the Ocean vast,
Revealed were to her forecast:
And therewithal she understands
The just account of all the sands.
So great a Prophetess some time
There lived in the Euboean Clime,
That did disdain her secret Art,
Sybilla Cumana
With foreign nations to impart.
And yet amongst so great a troop
That under fatal bonds did droope,
With haughty hand she framed her sprite
The Roman destinies to write.
Phoemonoe so with fury filled,
Labors the like content to yield
To thee (O Appius) that seek'st out
To be resolved of thy doubt.
But much a do she has, God wot,
To light upon thy single lot,
Amongst so many destinies,
As in Castalia hidden lies.
With flowing foame her mouth grows white,
And raptures agonize her sprite:
She groans, and therewith gasping throbs,
And yelling shrill she sighing sobs.
With heavy howling then she raues,
Which rings throughout the vaulted caves.
Then growing tame, her work begins,
And thus her latest words she sings.
The words of the Oracle to Appius.
Thou Roman shall the dangers great
Of these wars escape, that do thee threat.
And in the vast Euboean soil
Thou shall rest safe, and free from toil.
So said, she did conceal the rest,
And Paean then her tongue suppressed.
Ye Trypods that the Fates do keep,
And of the world the secrets deep.
And thou (O Paean) that wantst power
To hide the future of one hour
From knowledge of the Gods on hye,
Why strangely do thou so deny
The latest ruin to relate
That shall oppress the Empires state?
The Captains slain, the death of Kings,
The fall of Nations that it brings.
Whose lives the destinies think good,
To mingle with the Latium blood?
Have not as yet the powers divine
Resolved, how this wrack shall incline?
And are so many Fates obscured,
As though the stars were not assured
That Pompey's head is doomed to dye,
Or else do these things silent lie?
That Fortune may due vengeance take
Upon that sword that makes all quake,
With chastisement his rage to slake.
And raise the Brutes, to quell the reign
Of Tyrants that would rise again.
Then with her breast the virgin push't The Bruti, suppressers of Tyrants.

Against the gate, which open rush't.
Out of the Temple so she went,
But yet her fury was not spent:
Though not a word at all she spoke,
For yet the God did not forsake
Her breast, but there his stay did make.
She still does whirle her gogling eyes,
And wistly stares upon the skies.
One while she shows a fearful grace,
And sometimes look with scowling face.
A steady eye she never keeps,
Her lips red flaming color steepes.
Her cheeks were deadly pale to sight,
Not as when terror brings affright.
But bloodlesse wannish, and her heart
Did beat, as though her life did part.
But as the seas, when storms do slake,
Will swell, and hollow roaring make;
So with her many sighs out-sent,
She grew appeasd, her breast had vent.
And when she seuerd had her sight,
A while from out the sacred light,
Which had revealed to her all Fate,
She was restored to her old state.
Her humane notions came again.
And Paean did her bowels baine
With water of the Lethe flood,
All was forgot she understood.
The secrets of the Gods were fled,
And she no longer prophised.
All future forecast that inspire,
To Phoebus Trypods did retire.
Downright she fell into a trance;
Appius misconstrues the words of the Oracle to his own advantage.
But Appius though thy death advance,
Thou do not yet a right conceive
What doubtful fate to thee does cleave;
For thou deluded with false hope,
The whole worlds rule take for thy scope:
And with an idle misconceit,
Do think to make thy safe retrait
In Calcis and Euboian land,
And fondly bearst thy self in hand
(O fool!) with that which cannot be:
For how can thou from cares be free,
Amidst this whole worlds storm of strife,
The true meaning of the Oracle concerning Appius.
Except the Gods bereave thy life?
And that is true; for thou shall have
Prepared for thee a worthy grave,
Near to the strict Euboian costs,
Whereas huge rocks of marble posts,
Charistos has such quarries store,
And whereas Rhamnis does adore
Nemesis, the Goddess of Revenge.
Great Nemesis, that there does keep
Near to the straits of that vaste deep
Euripus called, whose rapid course
With checking tides, and changing sourse:
The Calcidonian trading masts
On Aulis wracking channels casts.
Caesar mean while remoues his host
From the Iberian conquered coast,
And his victorious Aegles fly
Unto another stranger sky.
And then the Gods had wel-neere quel'd
That good success which long he held.
For now whilst he no war did wage,
He stands in doubt that mutines rage
Within his Camp would raise some broyle,
And so his plotted warfare spoil.
Whilst that his chiefest troops now filled
With blood, in many battles spild:
Their faith did from their Captain fall,
And were it that the Trumpets call
Had not of late stirred up their sprights,
Or that from their accustomed fights Caesar's Army returning out of Spain,
Mutinies.

Their swords to scabbards now confined,
All martial rage chaste from their mind.
Or whether that the swaggering sway
Was to procure some larger pay.
But so it was amidst these flawes,
They curse their Captain, and the cause;
And do accuse their proper Arms
As guilty of these civil harms.
Never was Caesar better tried,
Then now this mutiny to guide.
He sees all in a staggering way,
Uncertain how men's minds would sway:
And like a body rest of hands,
As vnassisted now he stands:
And almost left to his own sword, Caesar perplexed.

Saw now what it was that did afford
Him means such wars to entertain,
Against all the world by land and maine;
That 'twas the Soldiers ready arms,
And not the Captains fatal charms.
But now amazed murmr rose,
Their rage they openly oppose:
For that same cause that is of wont,
Of wavering minds to stay the brunt,
Is when that men their private fear,
And his own dread each one does bear.
But now them all one humor draws,
The Camp takes interest in the cause,
As tyranny against their laws.
They make no stop, for all the rout
Dreadlesse run on, and cast no doubt.
For still a general offense
Does with all chastisement dispense.
Then one of them amongst the rest,
Their public griese this wise expressed.
The mutinous oration of one of Caesar's Soldiers.
Caesar let us at length in peace
From wicked war find some release.
By lands and seas thou do devise,
To make our throats a sacrifice.
And do (as vile) expose our blood,
To every hostile raging mood.
A part of us in France were slain,
Many in these hard wars of Spain;
And Latium, some with blood did stain.
So all the world our Troops deuoures,
Whilst thou displai'st thy conquering powers.
But what are we the more of worth,
For all that blood shed in the North?
For Rhodanus, and Rhene subdued,
Our labors are but still renu'd.
And for those wars both near and far
All our reward is civil war.
Rome we have taken, and made waste:
The Senate from our Country chaste.
What spoils of Gods or men remains,
For us to ask more for our pains?
Yet still with ravening swords and hands
Pressed to all spoil our practice stands.
Patient in poverty we pine,
O when will these wars have a fine?
If Rome too little be esteemed,
What as sufficient can be deemed?
O now respect our hoary hair,
Our hands that scarce can weapons bear,
Our weakened arms with wounds and scarres,
Our lives decayed, youth spent in wars.
Their death in peace let old men take,
O it is a strange request I make, A pitiful description of the lives of
common soldiers.

That dying we might not of force,
Upon the bare earth life deuorce;
And with our cold caskes crush our powles,
Whilst we are yielding up our souls:
And want a hand to close our eyes
When deaths last strain does us surprise.
No wife at all by us to moan,
Nor yet to have a grave alone,
But upon heaps in ditches cast,
Let old age beded dye at last.
And some thing get by Caesar's fate
More then sharp swords, and dire debate.
Why do thou ( Caesar) hope to draw
Us all as stupid under awe.
As though we wanted sense the while
To judge of employments vile?
Think thou, we cannot guess aright
Upon whom all the wrack will light?
And whose lives blood shall pay the price
Of all thy civil wars devise.
What in thy Mart effected was,
But that our hands has brought to pass?
We have done all, and what I say
No law nor right can me denay. The Soldier braues Caesar behind his back.

Caesar my Chiefetaine was in Gaul,
My fellow here I may him call.
The crime that does coinquinate,
Does likewise yield men equal fate.
Besides the merit of our acts,
Wrong censure now from us detracts.
For whatsoever we have won,
Is deemed by Caesar's fortune spunne.
Yet let him know we are his Fate,
Though he hope Jove supports his state,
For if thy Soldiers with thee jar,
Caesar thou may shut up thy war.
Thus said, in all the Camp throughout
Together they do clustring rout,
And raging seek their Captain out.
Ye Gods so did Romes forttune quail,
When piety and faith did fail,
And wicked manners void of grace,
In steed thereof did come in place.
O let our discords raging iarres
Once make an end of civil wars!
What Captain of the greatest spright
Would not this mutiny affright?
But noble Caesar (that dares run
Into all Fates, and nothing shun,
The admirable undaunted valor of Caesar
Delighting then to try his chance,
When dangerss most their threats advance)
Comes dauntlesse now with courage bold,
Not staying till their fit was cold.
But in the midst of all their rage,
Himself amongst them does engage.
He never would have blamed their fact
If they had Towns or Cities sacked;
Or had they reverend Temples burned,
Or Jove's Tarpeia ouer-turn'd.
The Matrons, and the Senate spoiled,
Infants, and mothers great with child.
For Caesar would his Soldiers have
All cruelties of him to crave;
And that they surely should desire
The spoil of warfare as their hire.
He only feared his furious troop
With quiet hands would loytring droope.
O Caesar! art thou not ashamed,
That still to war thy mind is framed?
When thine own Arms do thee forsake,
Shall these their thirst from blood so slake?
Shall they the murdring steel disdain,
An Apostrophe to Caesar.
Whilst thou do ruthlesse still remain,
And prosecute this impious vain?
Be weary, and learn without Arms,
To suffer, and shun civil harms.
Affect a life of peace at last,
These heinous humors from thee cast.
Cruel why do thou still persist,
Provoking men against their list?
For Caesar thou may plainly see,
This civil war thy sword does flee.
He stands upon a little hill,
His stout looks he retains still.
Deserving to be feared of all,
For that no fear could him appall.
Then to this swarm his mind he breaks,
And wroth does dictate what he speaks.
Soldier that so took'st on yer-while, Caesar's oration to the mutiners.

And absent did my name revile;
See here thou have a naked breast
Ready for wounds, now do thy best,
And get thee hence if fault thou find
With wars, and leave thy Arms behind.
Sedition that such swaggering makes,
And nothing manly undertakes,
Discouers but a coward mind,
And such as come of crauen kind.
These youths so pampered up with pray,
Study but now to run away;
To sloth they would themselves bequeaue,
And their victorious Captain leave.
Be gonne, (such abject minds I hate)
Leave me to war, and to my fate.
These arms of mine will find out hands,
When I have casht seditious bands.
Fortune with gallants will supply
My weapons, that vn-vsd shall lie.
Can Pompey, whom I chaste away,
Be followed with so great a sway
Of Latium ships, with him to fly?
And think you that my victory
Will not my camp with troops supply?
Yes, and those troops we must prefarre
To have the honor of this war:
And they will share away the gains
Of all your former taken pains.
Then shall you Veterans relent,
To see your blood in vain so spent
And when my Triumphs come in place,
Your selves have nether gifts nor grace.
Think you that I shall loss receive,
Because that you my Camp do leave?
Yea all as much, as it the course
Of rivers, threat to change their sourse,
And from the seas their streams detain,
Were able so to slake the maine,
That ebs and floods 'twould not maintain.
What do you now your selves persuade
That you in ought my fortune made?
The Gods do not their care abase
To men of your inferior place.
A proud Heathen conceit.
They give no leisure to their eye,
To see where such men live or dye.
Of great men's Fate they have a care,
That of this world supporters are.
To Spain, and to the Northern coast,
You terrors were, led in my host.
But had you followed Pompey then,
You would have proved but conquered men.
Labienus was a valiant knight,
Whilst he in Caesar's Arms did fight.
But now (a run-a-way most base)
Does after a new Captain trace,
By sea and land from place to place.
Your faiths to me no better are,
If you shall show your selves in war,
Of so debaushed minds to be,
As neither foes nor friends to me.
For he that does my Ensigns leave,
And will not unto Pompey cleave,
Of me no favor can receive.
Surely the Gods my Tents protect,
And will I should your fraud reject.
And that I do unto me call
New troops to wage this war withal.
O Fortune! how do thou enlarge
My weary shoulders of a charge?
To give me means now to despise
Those hands, whose hopes naught can suffice;
No not the whole worlds spoil and pelf,
But I will war now for my self:
Therefore from out my Camp depart,
And those brave Ensigns of my Mart,
Ye slothful Romans lay them down,
They shall be borne with more renown.
And now the Authors of this rage,
Justice, not Caesar, does engage.
Prostrate your selves therefore with speed,
And on the block receive your meed: Punishment for the mutiny.

For of this mutinous device,
Your faithless heads must pay the price.
And you new Soldiers, on whose hands
The strength now of my Army stands;
Behold these pains, learn laws of Arms,
Know how to dye for factious harms.
The common rout whilst thus he spoke,
Under his threatening voice did quake.
And this great bragging factious troop,
That might have made one head to droop,
Unto his will with awe did stoop, The awe that Caesar's Soldiers stood in of
their General.

As though the very swords conspired
To yield to what his will required:
And that the steel it self in spite
Of hands, would yield him duties right.
Yet Caesar's self did stand in doubt,
That most of all the armed rout
Would have maintained their cause in field,
And not to execution yield.
But yet their patience past the scope
Of their offended Captains hope:
For they not only held them still,
But gave their throats unto his will.
Then did he fear that their stern hearts
Inured before to ruthlesse parts,
Would now grow dull, unfit for Marts.
Lo thus did Justice direful stroke The mutiny appeased.

To former peace their minds revoke.
Chief Mutiners received their pain,
The rest restored to grace again.
Caesar's Army goes to Brundusium.
The Army then directed was,
Thence to Brundusium to pass
In ten days march, and there to meet
The Mariners, and Caesar's fleet.
Some of them called from Hydrus bay,
And from old Taras, where they lay:
Others from Leucas secret shores,
And those in Salapin, that Moors,
With some that did in Sipus ride,
Whose streams near to those cliffes do tide
Where the Apulian Gargan hill
Fruitful to husband men that till,
Stretching along Ausonia's soyles,
By North Dalmatia entoyles.
And on the South Calabria bounds,
Thence like a Promontory rounds
Into the Adriaticke sounds.
Mean while does Caesar take his way
To fearful Rome, taught to obey.
Caesar comes again to Rome.
In peaceful gown, the victors mind;
His armed troops he left behind:
And there the people by request,
In sign of love, would needs inuest
Him with the high Dictators name,
And Consulship joined to the same.
Observed with joyful solemn feasts,
And suffrages to his own hests
So generally, as that before,
Never was any flattered more,
With Lordly phrase him to adore.
And for to grace with just pretense
His war, as for the states defense;
The swords that they before him bear,
With Consuls axes mingled were.
And where the Aegles Ensigns wave,
He ioynes the Faggots ribbond brave.
Caesar made Dictator and Consul at one time.
And so usurps, with idle fame
Of Empires rule, Dictators name.
Thus marks he out that woeful time
With worthy Titles free from crime.
And so to give Pharsalia's fight
The color of a quarrel right.
That year the Consuls name he hends,
And public good his cause pretends.
To solemn shows in Martius fields,
A forced fained form he yields;
The peoples voices he obtaines,
For will, or nill, power them constraines.
The Tribes he partially diuides,
With show the Vrne the lots decides.
The heavenly signs no credit bears,
Thunders moves not the Augures ears.
They swear the birds with good luck fly,
Whilst dismal Owls are heard to cry.
So breach of laws that high power stained,
Which reverence had so long maintein'd.
And that times names might full agree
With his designs, he does decree
A monthly Consul to install, A monthly Consul.

Distinguished with times festival.
And that high power that Latium brights,
Should have his Ceremonial rites
Performed by Torches in the nights,
Though sacred honors scarce were due
To Jove, that naught our wrackes did rue.
From Rome then Caesar hastes away,
Through those low meads that yields the hay
That the Apulian people makes
With handy pitchforkes, and with rakes.
And in his speed he is more swift
Then is the flash of lightnings drift,
Or Tiger of the female kind,
Until the houses he do find
Of Craetan frames, Brundusium hight,
Where with the aires tempestuous spite
He finds the havens mouth winde-bound,
And trembling barks within the sound,
With winters storms like to be drowned. No dangers must hinder Caesar's designs

But yet this daring Captain thinks
That shamefully his business shrinkes,
If doubts, or dreads should him delay,
Or him confine within a bay.
Whilst that he sees the tossing maine
Is scoured by Pompey's lucklesse train,
And to add courage to their sprites,
His mariners he thus incites.
The Northern sky, and winters wind
Caesar exhorts his mariners to take the sea
We always do more certain find;
And current of the Ocean vast,
Continue with more constant blast,
When once they take, then those slight puffes
Which from the chopping changing huffes
Of the spring season do proceed,
Either for certainty or speed.
Besides, our course needs not to fear
How sore the seas do break and tear:
We need not gaze for marks of lands,
Whereby to void the rocks and sands.
But with a forth-right leading wind,
By North we shall our harbor find.
And would to God this Northern rack,
Would whirle to make the mast to crack,
And fill the sails with such a gale,
To make the topmast stoop withal;
A stout request.
And bring us to the Greekish shores,
That Pompey's Galleys, with their Oars,
May not in calmes our fleet surprise,
Whilst in the seas it hulling tries.
Therefore my hearts your Anchors way,
Do not our happy fleet delay:
For all this while we loose but time,
Since winds and seas are in their prime.
Now Phoebus falls unto his rest,
And brightest stars the skies invest;
When Cinthia shows her silver eye,
The ships out of the harbor fly.
With Anchors weighed, and Cables coyl'd,
Amongst the waves the Seamen toiled.
They hoise their yards a cross the mast,
And then to take the friendly blast,
Their climing feet their hands pursue
To cut their sails, and spread their clue.
But for the wind they began to doubt,
Their top-sailes likewise they heave out,
With all their helps they can devise,
To take the least breath of the skies.
Yet now more slowly slides the rack,
And all their sails began to slack;
Wherewith came on such slender blasts,
That sails did flat unto the masts.
Of land no sooner they lost sight, Caesar becalmed.

But they were all becalmed outright.
The gale that blew off from the shore,
At sea did follow them no more.
The rolling billows of the deep
Were now grown calm, and still a sleep.
The waves all smooth, were as but one,
The maine scarce felt a motion.
So Bosphorus does dully stand,
Bound with the flawes of Schythia land.
When Istar cannot move that maine
Which freezing vapors do restrain, An ycie sea.

That sea becomes an ycie plain:
And ships brought thither by the winds,
In beds of ice fast locked it binds.
So as the men by toil, nor Art,
Can make a way thence to depart.
Whose waves condensed with the cold
The hugie weight of Carts do hold.
With hollow sound that thereon run,
And there the Besseans do won,
Until Meotis feel the Sun.
With such a froward still, the deepes
A soft and sluggish wallowing keeps;
As if in slumber they did rest,
And of their nature dispossessed.
And like a standing poole grown sad,
That neither spring nor motion had;
But changed from his nature quite,
Forgotten had his wonted plight.
For he will neither rise nor fall,
Nor with his wonted roaring call;
He trembles not, nor frothing chides,
Nor Phoebaes influence gives him tides.
This fleet mean while with much disease,
Lay tumbling in this dead grown seas.
On this side did the adverse fleet
Prepare their oars with them to meet,
Whilst they in this dead calm do ride,
And could not move with wind or tide.
The dangers of Caesar's fleet by a calm.
On the other side they stood in dread,
And danger to be famished.
So as in this disasterous state
New fears, new prayers eleuate.
Upon the Gods they call and cry,
That all the fury of the sky
Would bend it self to boisterous rage.
And so the stupid waves engage,
As that the fury of the maine
Would show it self a sea again.
But wind nor waves became so stout,
That they of ship-wracke need to doubt.
Yet after when the night was past,
The day with clouds was ouer-cast.
The hollow seas began to stir,
And then Ceraunia winds did whurre,
Wherewith the fleet began to quake,
And so the air the sails did shake,
At length the crooke-back't waves did rise,
And in the sternes the ships surprise,
That with full sails now forward plies.
Caesar arriues with his Army at Palesta in Greece, where Pompey lay encamped.
So as these friendly seas and gales,
Them to Palestes havens hales:
Where when they safely were arrived,
They Anchors cast, with joy reviu'd.
This was the first confronting coast,
Where these two Captains host to host,
Encamped were in eithers view.
And through these fields two rivers drew
Their pleasant streams, on Apsus hight,
And Genusus, more swift of flight.
Apsus by reason of a lake,
That into her his course did make,
With steady slye sought stealing pace,
Could shipping bear from place to place.
But swift Genusus headlong goes,
When as the Sun melts heaps of snowes,
Or that the falls of showring raines,
Her swollen channels higher strains.
Yet neither of them with long race,
Within the land does winding trace.
Fortune to this place gave the fame
Of two brave Captains great in name:
And here the worlds vain hope decayed,
That now their furies could be stayed;
Since that the stations were so nigh,
Where now they both encamped lie; Caesar's and Pompeys Camp confront each
other.

That each might others face behold,
And hear the tale each other told.
And many years were past between
Since thou great Pompey last had seen
That loved father-in-law of thine;
And did so near a league combine
Of strict alianc'd blood with blood,
Though froward Fate the same with-stood.
When Caesar's daughter reft of life
His sonne-in-law made fit for strife.
And but upon the Nylus shore,
He after saw thy head no more.
Now Caesar's thoughts were much dismayed
That many troops still lingering staid:
Which for this place were ready pressed,
And (straightly charged by his own hest,
With speed to meet him on that coast)
Does vex to see wars time so lost.
The leading of these wanting bands
Was under fierce Antonius hands. Caesar troubled with the delays of Antonius.

Who now (belike) did meditate
Upon his own Leucadian fate.
Caesar on him calls with intreates,
And checkes his staying thus with threats.
O thou that in the world do cause
Caesar's messages to Antonius.
Such mischifes by thy tedious pause.
Why holdst thou both the Gods and Fates,
Suspenced from our happy dates.
By mine own speed and proper care
All other things dispatched are;
And Fortune now does call for thee,
That thy right hand might aiding be:
The chiefest service to intend
That must our prosperous warfare end.
No Lybicke Syrts, nor doubtful deepes
Us in this sort a sunder keeps.
We do not seek with new device
Thy armed troops now to entice
Into an unknown desperate maine.
O no thou sluggish idle swain,
Caesar bids thee to come, not go,
I lead the way, and pierced the foe
Throughout these stranger seas and sands,
And safely have conuaid my bands.
My tents art thou afraid to see?
This timelesse hap is death to me.
Caesar taxes Antonius with backwardness
My words are spent to waves and wind,
Yet do not thou their humors bind
That to the seas are well inclined.
For if I be not much deceau'd,
Thy Troops so truly have bequeau'd
To Caesar's Arms their might and maine,
That shipwracks doubt they would disdain.
And dolours voice now must I use,
Thou do thy self to much abuse.
The whole worlds hopes twixt thee and me,
Yet in no equal balance be;
Caesar does in Epyrus Camp,
A Jealous speech.
And there is all the Senates stamp:
Whilst only thou (so vncontrol'd)
Do but Ausonia's limits hold.
When Caesar thus had twice or thrice
Reprou'd him for his loytring vice,
And saw that he so often did spend
His treats, and threats unto no end.
But Fortunes favors thus neglects,
That his success so much protects.
He undertakes ('against this despite)
To make a strange attempt by night.
And maugre frights of seas mischance,
He dreadlesse does himself advance.
Whilst stern Antonius so did fear,
So often commanded to be there.
For Caesar saw his rash attempts
Fortune from danger still exempts: Fortune Caesar's friend.

And now he hopes with passage good,
To furrow through the raging flood,
Embarked in a Fisher-boate,
When ships could scarce in safety floate.
Now had the silent night with rest
From care of Arms freed every breast,
And slumbring souls with sweet repose
Their eyes in quiet thoughts do close.
And those most soundly take their ease,
Whom lowly poverty can please.
Now all the Camp dead silent binne,
The second watch did new begin.
When Caesar with a carefull-pace
Along the whusted guards did trace; Caesar unknown steals out of his Camp.

Not of his own attendants heard,
When his own Tent he first vnspard.
Fortune was then his mate alone;
So through the Camp he past unknown,
Who now were all possessed with sleep,
But scarce good watch the while they keep.
And he dislik't this fault to see,
That they could so surprised be. Negligence in a Camp.

He romes about the crooked shores,
Where he a creek at length explores:
And there a fisher-boate did ride,
That by a sturdy rope was tide.
The owner of this pelting skiffe
Hard underneath a craggy cliffe,
Not far from thence had his poor coat;
The bottom of a rotten boat
A description of a Fishermans cottage.
Was all his roof; and for the side
It Was made of platted bul-rush dried,
Combined with canes and fenny flagges;
And on no stronger proppes it swagges.
Caesar knockes at the Fishermans door.
Here Caesar with his fist so knockes,
That therewithal this cottage rocks,
And did Amyclas frighted wake,
Who soundly then his rest did take;
But now his soft couch does forsake.
Amiclas speech
Whose there (qth he) what shipwrackt wight
Beats at my door this time of night?
What wretched man my help does crave?
Or who can hope relief to have
Of this base cottage where I won?
Great Fortune does such corners shun.
Thus said, he hastes a fire to make,
And does the heaped ashes rake,
Some kindled sparkles to find out,
And them with dry leaves strawes about:
And so with blowing kindles flame,
Whilst he of wars fears not the name.
He knew his simple home was free,
His house no prey of worth could be
For soldiers spoils, or civil strife.
The happy and secure estate of poore-men
O safe and blessed poor man's life!
O sweet secured quiet state!
This precious gift, and heavenly fate,
That on mean wights the Gods bestow,
The mighty ones do scarcely know.
What Cities walls, or strongest Forts
When Caesar's hand beats at the ports,
Could like security possess?
But that some fright they would express.
His little wicket he sets open;
Then Caesar gave his speech this scope:
Caesar's words to poor Amyclas.
Young man (quoth he) advance thy hope
Beyond the thoughts thou can conceive,
Fortunes full bounties now receive.
If my directions thou obey,
And to Hesperia me convey,
A Skippars trade thou shall not need,
Nor toil in age with hungry feed.
Spare not therefore thy wealth to raise,
Since that the Gods show thee the ways:
And (whilst thou may) receive that Fate,
Which will for ever store thy state.
So Caesar said; for though but clad
In rusticke habit like a swad,
Yet could he not his tongue constrain Caesar's natural inclination to speak
like a Prince.

In speech to use a private vain.
Then poor Amyclas thus replies,
Too many dangers us denies,
To trust this raging sea by night; Amicl^s speech to Caesar, describing the
signs of foul weather at sea

For first I marked the suns last light,
When he declined to Thetis bed,
His face was nothing flaming red.
But his bright beams contracted were; The Sun.

For on the middle of his sphere,
A foggy cloud his face did hide:
So as his beams it did divide.
One part of them did Northward bend,
The other to the Southward tend.
And mean while in the midst he quail'd,
And setting pale, his brightness failed.
So as his beams did not offend
The lookers eyes his face that kend.
And when the Moon did mount the skies,
With sharpened horns she did not rise. The Moon.

Nor did her hollownesse appear
Within her Orb right azure clear.
Nor as she wont in calmy night,
Her horns thin tops did bear upright.
But (that which is a sign of wind)
Her color was to red inclined.
And with a faintie pallid look,
With dull aspect, a cloud she took.
Besides the murmr of the woods,
The rut and rocking of the floods
Diverse signs of a tempest.
I do not like; nor this sign neither,
The tumbling Dolphins boad foul weather.
The Cormorant me no whit likes,
That he unto the dry land seeks.
And that he takes delight
To trust his wings with towering flight,
That naturally affects the waves:
His head the Sea-crow often laues,
As though that he some storms attends,
And on the low shores ietting wends.
But if it be thine own desire,
And urgent cause do haste require,
I Will give thee all the help I may,
To bring thee to thy wished bay:
And where thou bidst we land will touch,
Or winds and seas shall fail me much.
He ends his tale, and therewithal
The fastened cable in they hale;
And with the wind his sails lets fly,
Caesar puts to the sea in a little Fisherboate.
But with their motion suddenly:
Not only over all the deepes,
Huge flaming streams from starers down sweepes.
Spearsing in surrowes through the sky,
But those chief fixed stars on hye,
That next the pole do stand so nigh,
Did sensibly appear to shake.
Then did a black mist ouer-rake
The vast wild back of Neptunes maine,
And with a long stretched rolling train,
The threatening billows sparkling burn,
The winds uncertainly did turn.
And by the swelling waves they find,
The hollow seas were filled with wind.
Then quoth the Pilot of this barge,
See how this tempest does enlarge.
Besides we cannot certain find,
Amyclas words to Caesar.
Yet from what quarter blows the wind.
Whether from out the South, or East,
In no place he does constant rest.
Again, if we the rut do mark
Which in the sea does murmuring bark,
A North-west wind it signifies,
Which slat our course to Latium stries.
So as no means we have to tacke
That way, nor on that coast to wrack.
This desperate course we must reject,
If we our safety will respect:
And cast about to lay the land,
From whence we now directly stand,
Before our Skiffe be too much tossed,
And we too far run from the coast.
But Caesar scorns that he does say,
Hoping all perils will give way
To his attempts; and tells him plain
No fury of the wind; or maine,
For fear shall make him turn again. Caesar's answer to Amyclas.

If froward skies be all thy fear
For Italy, that fault I Will bear.
Thy only dread and doubt does grow,
Because (poor soul) thou do not know
Who it is that with thee now does sail,
Whom Fortune never yet did fail.
But she would think she did me wrong
To hold back my desires so long.
Therefore pass boldly through this rage,
Secured in my safe presage.
This is but toil of winds and seas,
Which shall no whit our bark disease.
Thy ship for freight does Caesar bear,
To free thee from the Oceans fear.
And these fierce winds that blow so hye,
Shall be appeased by and by:
And even the very raging maine,
Shall by our ship his quiet gain.
Thy course in no case see thou change,
But from a loofe, this next shore range.
And then believe thou shall attain
Calabria coast, and end thy pain.
When no lands else beneath the sky
Does for our ship and safety lie.
Caesar's conceit of Fortunes favors to him.
Thou little know that all these threats
That so the waves with tempests beats,
Is but that Fortune would declare
To me her tender love and care,
When skies and seas most furious are.
The word he had no sooner spoke,
But from a cloud a whirle-winde broke
The cordage and the tackling rownd,
So that the sails aloft did bound,
And whirle about the tottring mast,
The ships joints open with the blast:
And all the perils of the earth
Were here delivered at a birth.
For first from the Atlanticke maine,
The billows rolled with western strain.
And when they had this sea engaged,
Against the rocks they roared and raged.
With that comes in the Northern blast,
Which does the waves repel as fast;
So as the seas did stand at stay
Which of the two they should obey.
But yet the rauing Scithian flawes,
Did wrest the waves unto his laws.
And so the Oceans bottom rakes,
A description of a furious Tempest.
That in the sands it pathway makes.
Neither did Boreas with his freate
Against the cliffes the billows beat;
But even against those raging waves,
That with the Western Tempest raues.
And now the seas are grown so hye,
That wave against the wave does fly,
Although the wind do calmed lie.
But yet the East-winde did not cease
His fury likewise to express:
Neither think I that in this storm,
The South-winde did his blasts conform
To milder mood, with showers suppressed,
And still in Aeols dungeon rest.
But that the winds from every part,
Incensed were to striving Mart. A description of enraged seas.

And that each one expressed his most,
To blow the billow from his cost,
And twixt them held the maine embost.
For now the lesser seas likewise
In mutiny began to rise.
The Aegean against the Tyrrhen waves,
Impetuously resisting raues.
And the Ionian roaring vease,
Confronts the Adriaticke seas.
How often that day were steepy rocks
Clean ouerturn'd with whirlwind shocks?
Against which the billows beat in vain,
And could not such huge mountains strain,
As quite did ouer-whelmed lie,
Whose towering tops did threat the sky.
Never (I think) did any shore,
Endure the like sea-storme before:
Nor any clime twixt either pole,
Did from her coasts such billows role.
These seas where they the lands surrownd,
In diverse parts with indraughts drowned.
So did high Jove in former times,
Weari'd with scourging worldly crimes,
His thunderbolts at last forbear,
And causd his brothers Trydent spear
To help him vengeance due to take, He means Neptunes and Deucalions flood.

Which did a second Empire make:
When Nations were in waters drowned,
And Thaetis would admit no bound Those that sail to the west Indies, do
sometimes meet with the like falls of rain in whole clouds, wherewith ships
are often drowned: they are called by the Spaniards, the Huricanos; and by our
men, the Spouts.

Unto the lands, but heavens high cope;
Neither could that have been her scope.
But to the stars it would have rose,
If Jupiter did not oppose,
And her with weighty clouds foreclose.
This night was not the heavens night,
But hellish dark depriving light.
And thickened with such clouds of showers,
That whole vnparted downright powers,
So as the feared lightning flash,
And his swift brightness, it did quash.
The clouded air becomes obscure,
The conuex spheres quakings endure.
The Axle that the world sustaines,
Does sound aloud with cracking strains.
The joints and structures of the poles
With laboring motion tottring roles.
Chaos.
Nature suspects the Chaos old,
And that discording uncontrolled
The Elements again would war,
And in their harmony would jar.
Right Paganism.
And that with Gods, the fiends of hell
Would now all mingled be pell-mell.
One only sign some hope did give,
That in this storm this bark could live.
But look how far the distance shows,
Down where the pleasant Ocean flows,
To him that on the top does stand
Of mount Leucades lofty land:
Even so the trough of seas appeared
To him that now the rudder stear'd:
When as the ship was borne aloft
The billows of a wrought sea described.
With swelling of the billow soft.
And when again she did descend
Between the billows, as they bend;
So hollow in the furrow lies,
As that her mast is hid from eyes.
Sometimes as high as clouds her sails,
Sometimes her keele the bottom trailes.
For where the sea does break a sunder,
The sands are bared that lie under.
And when the parted billows filles,
They rise in heaps like mighty hills.
Fear now all hope of Art exceedes,
To guide the helm the master dreads:
To port, or wear, or serve the seas,
The laboring ship he cannot ease.
Only by this they did survive,
The waves so contrary did strive,
As that it kept the ship upright
Betwixt them both with equal might.
For as one billow down did strain,
Another checked him up again.
And by this means not ouer-set
With every surge aloft they get.
Of Sasons shelues, and lowly sand, Sason, an Island betw^en Brundusium and
Epirus.

Nothing at all in fear they stand.
Nor yet of the Thessalian shore,
Whose crooked strands the pibbles store. A City of Epirus.

Nor yet Ambracia's noisome bay,
Where ships so often are cast away.
But that which fears these seamen most,
Is the high-clift Caeraunian cost.
Now Caesar thinks this dangerous state, A mountain in Epirus, that runs into
the seas.

Is worthy to confront his fate.
How now (quoth he) are powers Divine
So troubled with this life of mine,
As that they should such care bestow
How they the same might ouer-throw?
That sailing in this trifling boat
Such monstrous seas together float.
If that the glory of my end
Unto the seas the Fates do lend,
And wars no more we must intend; Caesar's brave resolution in this tempest.

Ye Gods above, with dreadlesse mind,
I take what death you have designed:
Although this hastened date preuents
The finishing of brave events.
But I have done acts great enough,
I made the Northern Nations bow. A b^^efe relati^n of Caesar's atchieueme^ts.

The forces of my enemy
For fear of me I made to fly.
And Rome it self does plainly see,
Pompey a second is to me.
The fagots me by war denied,
With peoples voice to me were cried.
No Titles of the Roman state,
Have wanted to adorn my Fate. Fortune only of Caesar's counsel.

And no wight now but thou alone
Fortune, to whom my vows are known,
Shall know the secrets of my will;
For though that I have had my fill
Of honors, and enjoy the grace
Of Consul, and Dictators place:
And so to Stygian shades will trace.
Caesar shows how he desires to dye.
O yet it is my desire to dye
In private sort, and secretly.
O Heavens! no funerals I crave,
Let my torn body for a grave
Be kept amidst the weltring wave.
Both fires and mournings me deny,
Whereby my fame the more shall fly.
For no man witting of my end,
All coasts with dread will me attend.
So having said, the surging whifts
The ship ten times together lifts,
And (that which wondrous is to say)
She on the waves top still did stay;
And did not down decline again:
But with a sweeping billows strain,
Caesar cast a shore in his boat.
The bark was cast upon the sands,
Whereas their last forsaken lands,
Does make a narrow hollow bay,
And there a shore do safely stay.
Here at one cast again possessed
With all his Fortune, so much blessed:
And with so many stately Towns,
Such Cities, and such Regal Crowns:
But Caesar thus returned again,
And Phoebus rising from the maine,
He could not so himself conceal,
Caesar returns again to his Camp.
As when he from his Camp did steal,
And all his Army did deceive.
For now about him clustring cleave
His loyal troops, to see his face,
But tears a while all joy did chase,
And then their Chieftaine they reprove
With such complaints as grow from love.
Stout Caesar, whither now (quoth they)
Did thy rash valor thee convey?
And to what Fate (when thou were fled) The complaint of Caesar's ^ouldiers.

Were we poor souls abandoned?
Why did thou to unwilling waves
Thy body give, where danger raues?
When thou well know how many friends
What peoples safeties, lives and ends,
Only upon thy Fate depends.
And that the world with love and dread,
Has chosen thee her sovereign head.
It Is inhumanity (I say)
Li^e wilfully to cast away.
Was none of us of that desert,
With thee in this to share a part?
Of all thy friends that yet remain,
In this would thou no one retain?
Dead sleep (alas) did us deceive,
Whilst that the seas did thee bereave:
And thereof we are much ashamed,
But must this cause therefore be blamed,
That thou did seek Hesperia land?
A desperate deed thou took'st in hand,
In such fierce cruel storms as these
To trust thy self with raging seas.
In most extremes, and last of all
When doubtful wrackes we would fore-stall,
Then men are wont (to cut off strife)
Stoutly to end a loathsome life.
But thou with all this worlds good blessed,
The seas must be therewith possessed.
Why weariest thou the Gods above?
Fortune has showed her care and love Caesar taxed f^^ abusing the favors of
Fortune, and the care of the Gods.

Sufficient, if she do no more
But thy safe landing on the shore.
And this may serve, thee to debar
From hoped fortune in thy war.
No better use can Caesar make
Of that great care the Gods do take
For his affairs, the earth that swaies,
And to whose heast all men obayes?
Then that such grace they him behight
To be a happy ship-wrack't wight?
But whilst they thus expostulate,
The sun his beams does eleuate:
And so breaks off this dire complaint,
The swelling seas now growing faint
With huge turmoyle; her waves deprest,
When as the winds were laid to rest.
And then the leaders of those bands,
That lay so long in Latium lands,
Antonius brings his bands from Italy to Caesar by sea.
Seeing the maine now spent with rage,
And cleansing Boreas did assuage
The lowering gusts of seas and sky,
They loosd their ships the waves to try.
Which long and often had trial made
Twixt sailers skillful in their trade,
And the resisting stubborn winds,
Which so each other equal binds,
That they the broad seas could not scour,
And come to Caesar with their power.
But now aboard the Soldiers get,
The ships in order they are set.
When as the night with froward gale,
Kept Mariners they could not hale
Their tackes aboard, nor ply their sails,
Amongst the ships all order fails.
So do the Cranes in strained ranks,
When they forsake Strimonian banks,
Shunning the rage of winters frost,
Go seek their drink on Nylus coast.
And when they first begin their flight,
Their ranks so orderly they dight,
That diverse figures they retain,
Whilst they throughout the air do strain*
Until at length some Southern blast
Amongst their wings his puffes do cast:
Wherewith they are enforced to fly
A higher pitch in windy sky.
And then confusdly do begin
To break their order filed thin.
In clusters soaring round together,
Framing their flight to serve the wether.
And puts the letter out of square,
Whose form in flying first they bare.
But with the dauning of the day,
The wind began to bear a sway,
Stirred with the sight of Phoebus face:
And now it has this fleet in chase.
Which as it saild, did strive in vain, Lissus, a City of Macedon.

The shores of Lissus to attain.
But yet that land they could not lay,
Till North-winde gave the South-winde way.
And to Nymphaeus port did guide
The fleet, which Boreas blast denied, Nymphaeus, a Port town of Macedon.

In keeping back the checking tide.
Now Pompey sees provision made
From sundry coasts him to invade.
And Caesar's force at point to Arm,
From every place about him swarm.
So as his Camp must now withstand
The daily garboyles near at hand.
He does resolve to place a part
His nuptial care, secure from Mart.
And unto Lesbos means to send Cornelia, Pompey's wife, daughter to Scipio.

His fair Cornelia, there to spend
This bloody time, remote a far
From clattring Arms, and noise of war.
Good God, how just love rules and binds
Those men that are of worthy minds.
Love so in Pompey breeds remorce,
That dread and doubt do wars divorce.
For now Cornelia is the cause
That he himself a while with-drawes,
From hazarding the doubtful scarre
Of Fortune, in this civil war, The force of just love.

When all the world and Roman state
Was now exposd to martial Fate.
He now wants words to show his mind,
And to delays is whole inclined.
Whereby he may protract event,
And trifle Fate in loue-time spent.
Now when the night was almost past,
And sleepy rest had lent his last
To slumbring eyes, Cornelia than
Sweetly embracing her good man,
Seeking withal his lips to smacke,
Whose breast deep cares did strain and rack
To her the whiles he turns his back.
When wounded she with blinded fears,
Seeing his eyes besprent with tears,
Durst not desire the cause to learn,
Nor seem she did his tears discern.
Then sighing, thus he said; Dear wife,
To me more pleasing then my life,
Pompeys words to Cornelia.
Whilst I in happy state did live;
But now do cause of sorrow give,
Since that the heavy day I see,
That our sweet joys must parted be.
Too short a date for our delight:
Though all to long to stay from fight.
For Caesar now is ready pressed,
And war is only in request,
During which time, Lesbos shall be
A safe retiring place for thee.
Forbear requests to me to make,
I have resolved this course to take.
And have denyd mine own desire,
Thou shall not long from me retire.
But things are now in desperate chance,
And when as ruin does advance,
The greatest states must lead the dance.
It may suffice thee still to hear
When perils are to Pompey near.
But sure thy love deceiues me far,
If thou affect to see this war.
How foully I might be ashamed
That now for Mart have all things framed;
Pompey's persuasions to his wife.
To sleep securely with my wife,
Sequestered from this civil strife?
And when the sounding Trumpets shall
The wretched world to battle call,
That Pompey then with drowsy eyes,
Should from thy tender bosom rise.
To woeful Pompey 'twere a skorne,
That he no prejudice has borne
Amongst the rest, in civil strife,
Nor bard so much as of his wife.
But thou mean while shall live secure
From perils that the rest endure.
And safer then great Kings can be;
For being thus removed from me,
Fortune shall never thee perplex
With those great cares that must me vex.
But if the Gods will have it so,
That we be conquered by our foe; Pompey terms his wife the best part of
himself.

My best part yet shall safe remain.
Or if the fates do me constrain
The cruel victors force to shun;
Then know I whither safe to run.
The grieved dame waxt faint and pale
When she had heard this heavy tale.
Her senses rapted in a sound,
Sorrow a while did her confound:
Until her voice was come again,
And then did murmuring thus complain. Cornelia perplexed with Pompeys words
sorrowfully replies.

No cause (dear Pompey) I do find,
To think the Fates, or Gods unkind,
For wronging of our nuptial bed:
Our lives have happily been led.
Death does not separate our love,
Nor funerals need we to prove.
But that now (as the common sort)
I should be held from my consort.
And like the base Plebeian rout,
From thee I should be so cast out
It grieves my soul; what must our foe
With his approach work me such woe?
Thy father-in-law we honor do
To break this league betwixt us two.
What, is the love that I have shown
To Pompey, yet no better known?
Think thou that ought so safe can be,
As thy dear self is unto me?
Have not we still, with mutual hearts,
Withstood all scorns, and Fortunes thwarts?
And will thou cruel now me leave,
And (separate from thee) so bequeaue
My careful head to ruins state,
And to a thundering fearful Fate?
Think thou, thou do my life protect,
Whilst my desire thou do reject?
As though to me a harm it were,
With thee in perils part to bear.
No, no; for whilst I draw my breath,
Cornelia's dear affection to Pompey.
I Will follow thee unto the death.
And after thee so long surviue,
Until the heavy fame arrive
Upon this far removed shore;
But after that will live no more.
Mean while thou do but me inure
To Destinies, and to endure.
O pardon me (confess I must)
In this I fear my strength to trust.
But if my prayers may take place,
Or that the Gods do rue my case,
Cornelia's petition.
Let thy poor wife know last of all,
What ever Fortune shall befall.
For though at last thou conquest gain,
Perplexed yet shall I still remain.
And Lesbos will hold me in awe,
Though thou thy sword with conquest draw.
For I as much shall stand in doubt,
That Caesar being put to rout,
Will (flying in a desperate case)
Cornelia's doubt.
Surprise me in this strengthlesse place.
This coast will now be more of fame,
So honored with my noble name:
Who will not know that place the while,
Where Pompey's wife lives in exile?
For every one when serves the wind,
Mitelen, a city in Lesbos.
The way to Mitelen will find.
But now I make this last request, Cornelia's last request to Pompey.

If thou in battle be distressed,
And that thy conquered Arms thou leave
And safety must by flight receive:
If thou thy self to seas bequeaue;
O let thy lucklesse vessel strive,
On any shore first to arrive,
Then on this coast to seek relief;
Such meeting would increase our grief.
Thus said, as one distract with dread,
Enraged she leaves her loathed bed, Cornelia's impatient sorrow

And her prouides to haste away,
Impatient of her griefs delay.
Her Pompey (ere she left the place)
She did not kiss with sweet embrace:
Nor yet her arms she ever twinde
About his neck, with favors kind,
So to relieve his grieved mind.
So quail'd the last fruit of that love,
Which they before so long did prove.
Outragiously they both lament,
Their streaming tears their bosoms drent.
And neither of them had the heart
To say, Farewell, when they should part.
Never had they in all their life,
Endured such a storm of strife.
All other harms that could betide,
With constant minds they did abide. Pompey and Cornelia more troubled with
this parting, then when Caesar chased them out of Italy.

The hapless dame the place does leave,
And then her train did her receive.
And to the seas do her convey,
Where on the sands she prostrate lay,
And to the banks she clinged fast,
But her aboard they bare at last.
They did not with such heavy plight,
At that time leave their Countries sight,
Nor from Hesperian coast depart
When Caesar's Arms did make them start;
Great Pompeys faithful wife does this
Forsake her Lord without a kiss:
And from him flies, now left alone,
But both of them do part in moan.
When night approch't she could not sleep,
Cold then did her long waking keep;
Not vsd before to widdow'd bed,
From cares she could not weane her head.
Nor take her rest alone to lie,
Her husbands sides not being by.
How often could she (but all in vain)
When sleep her tender eyes did strain,
With arms deceau'd, hug and embrace
The empty bed in Pompey's place?
And now forgetful of her flight,
Did seek to find her Pheare by night.
For though her fervent dear desire
Her heart and marrow sets on fire,
Yet took she not delight to spread
Her limbs throughout the cooling bed.
But still that side reserved free,
Fearing he should vnfurnish't be.
But oh! the Gods did not provide
That so great joy should her betide.
For now the fatal day draws near,
That she (poor soul) shall see her dear
Repair to her with heavy cheer.
Finis Libri quinti.
Lucans Pharsalia. The sixth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Unto Dyrachium Pompey goes,
Which guards him safely from his foes.
Then Caesar with a mighty wall,
Does Pompey's Army round enthrall;
But he breaks out by open fight.
Scaeua's brave mind, and manly might.
Then Thessalies description shown,
And what her old Records makes known.
There Sextus, Pompey's worthless child,
With sorceries himself defiled:
And does Erictho's counsel take,
Which she learnes from the Stygian lake.
And does a carkas raise, that tells
Much future wrack, and heavy spelles.
Thus having served Sextus turn,
The speaking carkas she does burn.
WHEN these two Camps were lodged so nigh,
Confronting in each others eye, The two Armies in sight of each other.

Their Arms and Ensigns glittring stand,
Brauing upon the hills at hand:
And both the Captains prone to fight,
Having assembled all their might,
The Gods each parties then beheld,
Of forces equal in the field.
But Caesar holds it in disdain,
Caesar's desires not to win towns but to fight once for all.
The cities of the Greeks to gain:
And does his Destiny debar,
To value that success in war.
For nothing now could give him rest,
Until that Pompey were suppressed.
But does affect with what he may
To give the world one bloody day.
And thereby all to ruin bring
That of his name the earth might ring.
The Fates indifferent threw the dice,
Which of their heads should pay the price.
Thrice Caesar all his troops displaide,
Upon the hills ranged and arraide;
And thrice provoking signs had shown,
Of joining battle with his fone.
Caesar could not provoke Pompey to ioyn battle.
But when at last he plainly saw
To fight he could not Pompey draw,
Who in his Camp more trust reposde,
That with a trench was strongly closde.
His tents and ensigns he did raise,
And secretly through bushie ways,
With all the have he could devise,
He marched Dyrachyum to surprise;
Caesar remoues to Dyrachyum and Pompey follows him.
But Pompey knowing his intent,
By Seas does this design prevent.
And on a hill that Petra hight,
He lodge his Camp by his foresight.
So to defend Dyrachyum walls,
Which Caesar sought to make his thrals,
Although this Cities towers were strong
To have repulsed any wrong.
Yet her best strength and rampars stands
Not by the work of ancient hands,
That bulwarks framed by art and toil,
The description of Dyrachyum.
With clustred heaps digd from the soil.
(Although such structures mighty power
Nor war, nor time can well devour.)
But it was strongly fortified,
All Engines forces to abide,
By only help of Natures hands,
And by the seat whereon it stands.
For it is almost enclosed round
With a maine sea, large and profound.
And craggy steep cliffes tottring hye,
Against which the roaring billows fly:
And but by this hill hindered,
With sea it would be Ilanded.
The walls foundations are of Rocks,
Most dangerous for ship-wracke shockes.
When as the Southern raging blasts,
The Ionion furious waves up casts.
For Temples then, and houses shake,
And froth of seas their tops ore-rake.
Hither the heinous hopes of war,
Drew Caesar's rage; his foes to bar.
But when he saw their troops at large,
Dispersed on every mountains varge.
He unawares to them, assaies
Far off a mighty trench to raise:
And brings it with a compass round,
Enclosing many a mile of ground.
The lands he measures with his eye,
And so casts up a Rampart hye;
Not only framed of earth and clay,
But hugie rocks therein does lay.
And stones from flinty quarries dig'd,
The Grecian houses he vnrig'd,
And goodly walls in pieces shakes,
Wherewith this lofty trench he makes
So sollid, and so firm withal,
That it would neither sway nor fall,
With force of battery, near or far,
Of Rams, or Engines for the war.
Down go the hills hand over head, A huge trench raised by Caesar to enclose
Pompeys Army.

With which the vales are leuelled,
Till Caesar's task were finished.
Ditches he casts up large and deep:
Then mantled Towers square and steep,
He reares upon his trenches tops;
And in this sort he rounding stoppes
A long fetched compast monstrous bound,
Of bushy woods, and forest ground,
With plowed lands, and pasture fields,
And some that naught but briers yields:
And in this vast incircled soil
The sauadge beasts he did entoyle.
So as now Pompey's Army needs
Nor fields, nor fodder for their steedes;
So large a territories space,
Did this Caesarean trench embrace.
And Pompey had sufficient change,
From place to place his Tents to range.
Through it fair rivers took their sourse,
And in the seas did end their course.
Caesar surueyes this wondrous feate,
And when he saw it was complete:
He and his troops (with toil oppressed)
Amidst the large fields took their rest.
Now let us hear those fables old,
That of the Trojans walls were told,
Ascribed to the God-heads cares,
Although but framed of brittle wares:
And those great wonders that do fly
Of Babylonian walls so hye,
That seemed to front and threat the sky,
Made by the Parthian turn again,
That flying does his fight maintain.
But look what spacious fields and lands,
Are compast with fierce Tygris bands,
Or swift Orontes does embrace,
From which the Kings of Eastern race
Did at the first with sudden might,
The compass of Caesar's trench.
Small kingdoms share unto their right.
Even so much ground with rapted close
In broils of war fronted with foes,
He quickly wal'd and finished;
Yet those, and this all perished.
Those hands might with a little toil,
Join Abidos to Sestus soil.
And with like heaps of earth have made
The Hellespont a land-way trade.
And might that Istmos have purloyn'd,
That Pelops land to Greece has joined.
Or else have made a way direct
For ships to pass without reflect
Through that long stretching Malean strain
That shelues so far into the maine.
Or any part of all the earth,
Have changed from her proper birth
Unto some clime of better mood,
Though Nature had the work withstood.
This martial terrace frame of rage
So furnished, does enclose the stage,
Whence factious strife, and bloody streams,
Shall ouer-flow so many Realms,
Here the Thessalian slaughters won,
And Lybick murdrous deeds mis-done.
And here now flames the civil brand,
Within this compast plot of land.
This work, when first it was erected, Pompey never suspected this trench to
be in hand, until it was finished.

Of Pompey was no more suspected
Then are the clashings of the waves
That loud against Pelorum raues,
Hard by those people, that far wide
In midst of Trinacry reside.
Or then the Britton Calidons
Can hear the blustering motions
That Thetis billows when they rake
Against the Kentish cliffes, do make.
But he no sooner found it out,
What fields this vaste trench closd about,
But straight his troops he did convey
From Petra, where secure they lay:
And them about those hills disposd,
That this maine Rampart had enclosd. Pompeys policy to weaken Caesar's forces.

And this he practisd to this end,
That Caesar should of force extend
His troops, and weaken so his strength,
Dispersed to guard the trenches length.
For so much quantity in ground
This new-raisd Rampart did surround,
As is Aricia's little wood,
Distant from Rome, whereas there stood
A sacred Altar eleuate,
Unto Diana consecrate.
Or as the river Tybris falls
Into the sea from Roman walls.
If so it ran straight in a line,
And did not crooked trending twine,
But yet no Trumpets sound alarmes,
Nor weapons marshalled to harms.
Although sometimes (their Arms to try)
The wounding darts on both sides fly.
These Captains now are kept a part
With greater cares from bloody Mart.
For Pompeys camp found penury
Of fodder for his Caualry:
That daily galloping these fields,
Want of fodder in Pompeys Camp for his horses.
Which erst such store of herbage yields,
Their horned hoofes so bare had beat,
That grass nor green was there to eat.
The lusty Coursers than waxt faint,
When as their lease was thus attaint,
And to another feed were brought,
Where rackes with hay were fully fraught.
But then they mourned and pined away,
Changed from fresh grass to dried hay.
And whilst their Riders spur their sides,
And in the rings their gallop guides,
With trembling joints all suddenly
They sink down right, and gasping lie,
Till death their stretched out limbs surprise,
And so the lusty courser dies.
Besides all this, there did ensue
An air, that such infection drew,
By heavens distempered foggy sky,
Wherein contagious heates did fry,
That through the Camp a pest does fly.
Such banefull Stygian loathsome sents A plague in Pompeys camp

Do rise from out the dampish vents
Of Nesis hollow moldy caves;
And such like vapors breathing raues
From forth Typhaeus nasty den,
That chokes with stench both beasts and men.
Herewith in heaps the Soldiers fall,
And that which plagues them worst of all,
The poisned waters more offend
Then all those dampes the air does send:
For that their bowels so does freate,
And parch them with such inward heat,
As that the skin it scorching swarts,
Their very eyes with swelling starts,
Their faces flame with fiery hue,
Cangranes and Calentures ensue.
And thus tormented sundry ways,
Their heads for pain they cannot raise.
This raging violent disease
So forcibly does still increase,
As that they do not life maintain
In languishing, and dye with pain; Sudden death in Pompey's Camp.

But all as soon as sickness takes
Without delay an end it makes:
And in such troops so fast they dye,
That whilst the dead unburied lie,
With noisome stench amongst the life,
This foul contagion grows more rife.
For these poor souls have not at all,
Any dig'd graves, or funeral.
But as they do yield up their last,
Out of the Camp their corpse are cast.
Yet (that which somewhat calmed these wrackes)
The open sea was at their backs, The sea a friend to Pompey's camp.

And now and then from Northern wind,
They some refreshing blasts did find.
And so the foreign stranger shores,
Their Camp with victuals plenty stores.
Mean while this dull infectious air,
Did nothing Caesar's camp impair.
For they enjoyed at their wills
The large fair fields, and lofty hills;
Nor yet their waters noisome were,
But streaming sweetly, fresh and clear.
Although another cross they find,
Penury and famine in Caesar's Army.
For famine plagues them in her kind.
Wherewith they were as much distressed
As if a siege did them inuest.
The bladed corn the earth did bear,
Was not yet grown unto an ear,
So as the Soldiers for their feasts,
Were feign to share their food with beasts.
Gnabbing upon the bryar buddes,
And gathering green leaves in the woods.
And therewithal such herbs find out,
Whose qualities they well might doubt.
For that upon such roots they grew,
The shift that Caesar's Soldiers make for victuals.
As never erst they saw nor knew.
And some of these upon the fire,
They boil and fry with sharp desire,
And some they chew and swallow raw,
Wherewith to fill the hungry maw:
And many other things they eat,
Unknown before to be man's meat.
Yet these starved souls, besieged and dared
Their foes, that with full dishes fared.
But when that Pompey did desire,
To force a way with blood and fire
Through this huge trench, whereby his bands
Might range at large in all the lands.
Pompey determines to overthrow Caesar's large trench.
He would not take the dark of night,
To cloak a base unmanly fight.
For whilst they both from Arms refrained,
To steal on Caesar he disdained.
But breaches large he means to make,
And thorough them his way to take.
The Rampart he would lay full low,
And her high Towers ouer-throw.
The sword and slaughter must hew out
The way, to bring this work about.
The part that did most fitly stand
For Pompey now to take in hand,
And of this trench the nearest side,
Was one high turret dignifide
With Scaeuas name; obscured from view, Scoeua's, or Minutius name.

With trees that thick about it grew.
Thither did he address his Mart,
And sets upon this vast rampart.
With sudden charge; but raisd no dust, Pompey's forces assault the trench.

Whereby to give the foe mistrust
Forthwith such noise of Trumpets sounds
Throughout the fields and air rebounds,
Such store of Ensign'd Aegles blazed,
To hold the enemy amazde.
Whereby the sword should not alone
Claim all the honor as his own.
And now to show their courage brave,
That valor would due glory have,
What place soever any took,
He never afterward forsook,
But did that ground with force maintain, A bloody fight at the trench.

Or clouds it with his body slain.
This fight so many lives confounds,
That bodies wanted to take wounds.
And darts that fly like showers of rain,
Were spent, and cast away in vain.
Then wildfire streams, and flaming pitch,
Flies on the Rampar and the ditch,
So as the turrets shake withal,
And totter as they meant to fall.
The rams, the engines, and the slings,
Their battry now with fury dings,
Whose often shockes did make such wrack,
That tower and rampart gins to crack.
Then Pompeys men withouten stop,
Do mount upon the trenches top.
And there their Aegles do display,
Who hoping they had won the day:
Think now the world shall them obey.
That which so many thousand hands,
Nor yet all Caesar's armed bands,
Could not from utter conquest hold:
One man of courage uncontrolled,
Scaeua, one of Caesar's Captains defends the trench.
Did change the fortune of this day,
And reft the victor of his pray.
His foes still brauing in the face,
With his own arms made good the place,
And still, not vanquished, nor slain,
Great Pompey's conquest does restrain.
And Scaeua was this worthies name,
Who formerly had purchased fame
In Caesar's Camp; a private man,
Where he this height of honor wanne.
For valor all those to exceed,
That Rhene and Rhodanus did breed.
There was he made for bloody hand,
Centurion of a Latium band.
And of that order ware the weed,
Prone to each doughty daring deed.
But yet he skillesse was to choose
Just times his courage stout to use.
For valor shown in civil wars,
Is virtue maimed with vices skarres.
When he at last beholds in sight,
His mates retiring from the fight,
Seeking out corners to recoile,
In safety from this furious broyle.
With manly voice he began to cry,
Scaeua's words to his flying companions.
VVhither (base cowards) do you fly?
In Caesar's Arms you were not trained,
With fearful scorns to be distained.
O wretched beasts, whom terror drives!
Without fight will you loose your lives?
What shame is this that you so droope,
To shift your selves from all the troop?
And not to covet to be found
Amongst the dead, with honors wound.
Ought not your furies to be such,
Although no duty did you tutch?
Because the foe this choice has made,
To pierce through us with his proud blade,
This day shall not be faintly tried,
Without blood shed on Pompeys side.
How much more happy should I die
Were I but graced with Caesar's eye.
But though that Fortune so detracts,
His testimony of my acts;
Yet will I so shut up my days,
That Pompeys self shall give me praise.
Come, show the signs of noble hearts,
On your foes bosoms break your darts;
And that they may your vigor feel,
Upon their throats retort your steel.
The clouds of dust so high are flowne,
And this noise through the air so blown,
As that the very dinne, and rage,
Does Caesar silent ears engage.
Dear mates we yet vnuanquisht stand,
Caesar will come with speedy hand;
Whose power this place will soon relieve,
Before our foes us death can give.
This only word so stird their sprites, The name of Caesar and hope of his
coming reuiueth his discouraged troops.

As trumpets sounds at first incites
And calls men unto Martial fights.
The dauntlesse valor of this man,
They all admired; and then they ran
With eger minds him to behold,
The youths likewise with spirits bold,
Stood fast to know, if possibly
A man in such extremity,
Enuiron'd with so many foes,
When as the place did him enclose,
By virtue could his life retain:
And hold it safe in Deaths disdain.
He stand fasts at the Towers defense,
Those that assail he drives from thence.
Then carcasses in heaps that lie,
He trowles from off the turret hie.
And bruiseth them with bodies falls,
That seek to scale or mine the walls.
Sceua's toil and valor in defense of the trench.
Then he the ruined stones convarts
To martial use in stead of darts;
Huge timbers he ore-turnes, and frames,
Wherewith the foe he killes and lames:
And threats on them himself to cast,
Then pitchy brands, with flaming blast.
And those that on the walls would rear,
He quels with Iron-pointed spear:
And with his blade sheares off their wrists,
On battlements that lay their fists.
Their chines he cracks, and breaks their bones
With casting down huge weights of stones.
And those whose Morions are but weak,
Their sculs in sunder he does break.
Others again he burns and scalles,
With streaming shoures of wild fire balls:
So as their cheeks, their hair and eyes,
Rapt with the flames, loud bissing fries.
Now when the bodies that were slain,
Did rise and mount above the plain:
Off from the turrets top he leapes
Upon the corpse, that lay in heaps.
And in the midst of them he stood,
With threatening brows, and raging mood,
As if a Leopard should skippe
Out of the Hunters toil to slip:
So he enclosd with trooping swarms
Engaged, repelles all force of Arms:
His looks with dread their courage charms
His sword that like a razor cuts,
The dried blood now blunts and gluts,
That it abated had the edge,
And turned dull like to a wedge:
So as when Scaeua with it stroke,
Where as it lights, the bones it broke;
But drew nor blood, nor gashing wounded,
The steel with hewing was confounded.
On him the burden of the fight
Did lie, and many a dart did light.
No hand in vain against him bent,
No Iauelins push unlucky spent.
Fortune now sees new wars in hand,
The prowes of one does all withstand. Caesar in his Commentaries does
admirably co^me^d this man, and says, that in his shield there were 230 darts
found sticking.

The Target of this valiant Knight
Did ring, with blows that on it light:
His hollow caske so cracked and brys'd,
That it his brows and temples squis'd.
And yet this while no mortal blow
Had he received by his foe;
Only the darts were thrown so thick,
That in his bones the heads did stick.
O witless gulles! why do you spend
Your shafts and darts thus to no end?
These many shoots that you have driven,
Not yet one deadly wound has given.
Your mighty slings you should have brought
And so this one man's end have wrought:
Or hugie stones from off the wall,
Whose weight on him you might let fall;
Or else your battering Ram, whose force
Quickly from him would life divorce.
Or your Balista's you might prove,
If force thereof could him remove
From off the entrance of this port,
Where he does so your force retort;
And as a mighty Bul-warke stands
For Caesar's side, and scorns your hands,
And Pompey's force in idle wastes.
But now those Arms away he casts
That should protect his breast from foes,
And in his shield no trust repose:
His left arm does therewith dispense
For having lived by his defense,
And naked does expose his breast
Unto all harms that him oppressed.
And in his body fixed he bears
A wood of darts, of shafts, and spears.
Then he with fainting steps seeks out
Some one in all this hostile rout,
Whom he might crush, and on him fall
Like to a marine monstrous whale.
And as the beasts of Libicke shore,
And Affrickes Elephants do rore,
Oppressed with multitudes of spears,
When from their bloody backs they tears,
And do shake off the pointed darts,
Which in their rugged tough hide smarts.
Whose hidden wounds not dangerous are,
But pierce the flesh, and give a skarre.
Nor all those darts that hang so thick,
Nor all the shafts that do them prick,
Can fix on them so deep a wound,
To lay them flat dead on the ground.
Scaeua receives a mortal wound.
But now behold with skillful art,
Far off Gortinus thrylles his dart,
And Scaeua's head therewith he smot,
And in his eye there sticks the shot.
Yet not appal'd, when he did feel
The blow, he brake the crooked steel;
And from the wound the shaft did pluck,
Whereto the tender eye fast stuck.
Then on the ground he lets it fall,
And spurns the dart and eye withal.
So does the grisly Poland Bear,
When he is wounded with the spear,
And madded with the sticking steel,
Which he with pricking smart does feel;
Gnawes on the wound, and like rage spends
Upon the dart that him offends.
But whilst he flying raues and kickes,
Within his flank the lance fast sticks.
The rancor of this direful shot
His visage did most ugly blot:
For all his face was swollen, and smeared
With clotted blood, no shape appeared.
Herewith so loud the foes did shout,
The joy that the enemies made for Scoeua's wound.
As if from heaven some storm burst out.
More joy in them could not be seen,
If Caesar's self had wounded been,
Then they expressed; which did surmount
At this man's hurt, of mean account.
But he with haughty steadfastness,
Hereof does the offense suppress
Mildly in show, and with a grace,
As though in him wroth had no place.
Forbear dear Contrymen, quoth he, Scaeua's subtilty.

And turn your weapons off from me:
No more wounds now my death does need,
You have already done the deed.
These darts but plucked out of my breast,
Of blood I shall be dispossessed.
O take me up, and let me lie
In Pompey's Camp before I dye.
Do not your Captain so betray,
To hold from him what I do say.
Scaeua had rather Caesar leave,
Then not an honest death receive.
Unlucky Aulus credit gave
To those false words that he did rave;
And to his sword he did not list,
Which he held ready in his fist.
And as he came for to disarme
This Captain; (not suspecting harm)
Quite through the middle of his throat, Aulus slain by Scaeua.

Scaeua his pointed fauchion smote.
Then he new courage takes again
As soon as he had Aulus slain.
And said, so let him be embru'd,
That hopes that I am yet subdued. Scaeua's proud speech before his death.

Let Pompey know that Scaeua's sword
No other place will him afford;
Until his Ensigns he do yield
To Caesar's will, and quit the field.
Think you (base men) that ever I
Like Pompey's Cowards mean to dye?
Deaths love gives me more powerful laws
Then Pompey's, or the Senates cause.
These threats no sooner from him flies,
But that huge clouds of dust did rise;
Whereby they all did then descry
That Caesar with his troops was nigh.
And he arrived in good time,
For thereby he takes off the crime
And foul disgrace from Pompey's part,
That they deserved in this Mart.
Else Scaeua thou perhaps alone
All Pompey's troops had ouer-throwne:
For with the ending of this fight
Thy life likewise did take his flight.
But whilst that any did withstand,
The wars gave vigor to thy hand.
But lying now stretched on the ground,
Thine own friends swarm about thee round;
And strive to whom the grace may fall
To bear thee to thy funeral.
And him withal they did adore,
As if within his breast he bore
Some heavenly gift, or power divine,
That made his virtue lively shine.
The honor done to Scaeua after he was slain.
Then all of them did strain and strive,
Out of his limbs the darts to riue:
Which to the Gods they consecrate,
To memorize his noble fate.
And with the Arms of Scaeua's breast,
The God of war they did invest.
But yet how blessed had been thy name,
And thou obtained more glorious fame;
If Spaniards fierce of thee adread
Had turned their backs, and from thee fled.
Or the Cantabrian martial wights,
That broad short glaiues use in their fights.
Or those rough Tewtons brusky swart,
That use long slang-swords in their mart.
This civil war allows no place
For Trophies; nor affoords the grace
Jove's Temple with thy spoils to dight,
Nor Triumphs showts for valors right.
O thou unhappy, that in vain
Did Caesar with such valor gain!
Pompey repulsed in this sort
By Caesar's forces from the fort,
Having at last withdrawn his troops
From out this Ramparts trenching coopes,
No more was tired therewithal,
(But to the war a fresh does fall)
Then wearied is the raging maine,
Whom Eastern wind does hoise and strain;
When as the waves their wroth would wreake,
The rocks resisting do them break.
Or when some huge cliffe side it beats,
Although at first no part it freates;
Yet does the weltring wave at length
Moulder it down for all his strength.
For now he has discovered plain
A Castle, standing near the maine,
Which of this Rampart was a part, Pompey enlarges his room for his camp.

Whither he turns his speedy Mart:
Which he by sea and land diuides,
And it assailed on either sides.
Then all the quarters as he goes,
With Cohorts armed, abroad he strowes;
And does at large dispose his Tents,
Now freed from former noisome sents:
This fresh air much his camp contents.
So Padus channel swelling hye
Over his banks with streams does fly;
And all the lower pasture fields
Unto her raging current yields;
Who with her heaps of gathered waves,
At last on all the Champian raues:
And with her torrents does explore
New channels, never known before.
Which likewise frontier lands confounds,
From some Lords taking their due bounds:
And unto others gives again
More then they ever did retain.
Caesar had scarce discovered out
This plot that Pompey went about,
But that a Beacon it bewrayes,
That suddenly huge flames displaies.
And therewithal the dust that flies
A Bulwark of Caesar's trench razed by Pompey.
In scattered clouds up to the skies;
Now laid again, the air was clear:
Then to his sight did plain appear
This Ramparts turret razed and torn,
He finds it ruined and forlorn,
The cold signs of a hostile scorn.
The place was void, no war he meets,
Whereat the more he frets and greets,
That Pompey so should take his rest,
As though that Caesar were suppressed.
He therefore now his force prepares
To run into all mischiefs snares,
But that he would their new joys quail;
And then he fiercely did assail
The quarter where Torquatus lies,
Torquatus, one of Pompey's Captains, whom Caesar sets on.
Who Caesar's march as speedy spies,
As is a ship with all sails borne,
Swift driven in a Circean storm.
Torquatus draws his troops withal
Closely within the Ramparts wall;
And to combine his small strength fast,
Into a ring he did them cast.
By this time Caesar's force drew nigh,
And ore the Ramparts fence they fly.
Then Pompey all his troops of Arms
Calls from the hills, that come in swarms,
Whose Army couers all the lands,
And now incloseth Caesar's bands.
Those people that dwell in the fields,
Where Aetnas mount such sparkling yields,
Are not with greater fear possessed
When from Encelads boiling breast,
Caesar's troops engaged and put to flight.
Out of the cauernes fuming hye,
The fiery flints abroad do fly:
Whose heaps of burning cinders cast,
All over, strowes the Champian vast.
Then Caesar's troops that saw with fears
The dust that Pompey's army reares.
But blind with clouds of trembling frght,
Amazed betook themselves to flight.
And then amongst their foes they fall,
So fear to ruin them does hall;
Here so much blood might have been shed,
As might of force have Caesar led
To yield unto a settled peace, Pompey withholds the rage of his soldiers
against Cesars troops which he had at an advantage.

And so from civil Arms to cease:
But that mild Pompey now withstands
The rage of his own armed bands,
And with his own appeasing words,
Holds back his soldiers forward swords.
O Rome how blessed had been thy fate,
How free thy laws had held their state,
And how exempt from Tyrants mace
Had Sylla been in Pompeys place.
Alas the grief thereof does smart,
And still that grief will grieve my heart.
That Caesar thou have thus suruiu'd,
And to this impious haight arrived.
Because in fight thou chanst to find,
And meet a Son in law so kind.
O most accursed fatal teene,
No Libicke slaughters then had been,
Nor Spain had Mundas fury seen;
Nor yet that corpse with goare polluted,
Nobler then Egypts king reputed;
Had so on Pharus shore been slain,
Nor Nilus blushed with that blood stain,
Nor on Marmaricks sandy plain
Had Iubas naked carcass lain.
Nor Scipios blood been shed with these
The Punicke spirits to appease.
Nor sacred Cato in this strife
So soon had left his blessed life.
But this might well have proved the day
All Roman wracks to wipe away,
And therewithal anticipate
The dismal black Pharsalian fate.
Caesar thus crossed by heavenly powers,
Forsakes these Ramparts and these Towers,
And with his tottered troops defeated
Unto Emathias fields retreated.
Caesar takes his way toward Thessaly after this Defeat.
Now those that favored Pompeys part,
And all the leaders of his mart
Do him persuade all that they may,
His forces now to turn away,
And not his father inlaw pursue,
Seeing that he his presence flew;
Pompeys Captains persuade him to return into Italy after this defeat that he
gave Caesar.
But that he would with his brave host,
Return unto his native coast,
For since no foe did him withstand,
He well might visit Latium land.
But Pompey flat did that deny,
And in these terms he does reply.
Pompeys answer in denial thereof.
I never will to Rome return
As Caesar did, to make her mourn,
Never shall she see me again,
But freed of a Martial train.
I could have staide in Latium than,
when first these civil iarres began,
Would I our Temples so betray
To make of them the soldiers pray,
Or in the Forum arms display.
Nay rather then I would conuart
To Italy this bloody Mart,
I sooner would pursue a war
Under the freezing Northern star,
Amongst the Scythes, or in that soil
Whose plants the Torrid Zoane does broile.
Shall I for one victorious day
Now take from Rome her rest away?
O Rome why fled I first so far
But to preserve thee free from war;
And rather then I Will change that mind
Now to become to thee unkind,
And draw this hateful strife on thee,
Let Caesar take all Rome for me.
So said, he then prepared his host
To march unto the Eastern coast.
And through by ways his army past, Pompey pursues Caesar.

Pearcing those desert forests vast,
That frontyer on Candauias sides,
And in Thessalia he abides,
The place that Fate for war prouides.
This land mount Ossa does enclose
On that side where Aurora shows
The rising of the winters sun,
When he his lowest course does run. The description and situation of
Thessaly.

But when the worlds eye looks up higher,
The cold air warming with his fire,
Whilst clyming up the lofty skies,
His beams yet somewhat oblique flies.
And as those beams the land enuades
On that side Pelion casts his shades.
But when amidst the heavens he draws
Chasing the raging Lions jaws,
And makes his solstice for those lands
There woody Othrys bordring stands.
Then Pyndus frounts those milder blasts
That Zephirus on that side casts;
And hastens on approaching night,
With his high top shading the light.
And they that in the vale are bred
Where mount Olympus lifts his head,
Those bitter blasts never offends
That Boreas from his cauerne sends,
Nor know they whether that the Bear
Be all night glowing in the sphere.
Whilome this vallie, that did lie
In midst of all these mountains hie
Was fennish grounds, and moorish muds,
Still ouerwhelm'd with standing fluds:
And those vast lakes that drowned this plain
Ran not through Tempe to the Maine;
But in one pond stood always still,
And ever more did waters swill;
Until that the Herculean wonder,
With mighty strain did rent asunder
The Ossan mount from Pelion hill,
And then these waters did distill,
Into Nereus brakish fields,
And so to Thetis son it yields
Emathias kingdom; where abounds,
Pharsalos goodly champion grounds:
But how much better had it been
A watery plash, then grassie green:
There now Philaces city stands,
The chief Cities of Thessalie.
That first sent ships to Ilium lands.
There Ptelos and Dorion town,
Wailing the Muses wrathful frown.
Trachin likewise is seated there,
And Melibaea freed from fear
By Hercules Artillery;
The bitter price of perjury.
Larissa likewise of great power,
And noble Argos here did tower.
Where now the cultor shares the soil
And plough-men daily ear and toil;
Here stood (as fables old relates)
Echions Thebes with seven fold gates.
Whereas Agaue banished
The Bacchanals she worshipped,
By Pentheus her kingly son,
Him all enraged to death has done.
Whose head though cast into the fire,
Could not appease her frantic ire.
This hugie lake that now had vent
To let out all her waters pent,
In many parts it self deuides,
Then Aeas with small current slides,
But with clear stream bends to the west,
The chief Rivers of Thessalie.
Till in Ionian seas she rest.
Nor yet with stronger course then this
Does run the sire of Isidis,
Whose maiden shape high Jove restores,
And her transports to Egypts shores.
So Achelous thence does pass,
(O Caeneus that almost was
Thy son in law) and then defiles
With slimie waves Echinads Isles.
With Euenos that bare the stains
Of blood from Nessus wounded veins.
And with his current streameth on
Through Meleagers Calydon.
Then Sperchios that with greater speed,
The waves Maliacan does feed.
And sweet Amphrisos that does sweep,
With cristall streams and channel deep
The fields where Phoebus fed his sheep.
And still Anauros, whence does rise
Nor vapors that the clouds supplies,
Nor airie dewes that moisture casts,
Nor gentle breathes of windy blasts.
All other rivers else beside,
Into the maine that do not glide
With their own strength and proper course
Into Paeneus yield their source.
Then stickle streamed Aepidanus,
With never swift Enipeus,
Till she with other waters bed;
Thence does Asopos take her head;
Phoenyx and Melas do the same, A river in Thessaly that runs overthwart
another river without mingling.

And Tytaresse that holds his name,
And waves so firm, and from his springs
A virtue takes, which never mings
With other stream; but safe and sound
A path has on Peneus found,
As if it ran upon dry ground.
And as Fame says, this rivers head
Is in the Stygian waters bred.
And being mindful of his fount,
Does hold it self in more account,
Then with the common waves to mix,
But keeps the majesty of Styxe.
As soon as all these ponds were drained
Which erst this tracke of land retained, The first inhabiting of Thessaly
after the land was drained.

Bebicius with his furrowing shares
For tillage these fat fields prepare;
And all the Lelegans then tried
How they the plough thereon could guide.
Thereto the ploughmen put their hands
Of Dolop, and Aeolian lands.
The Magnetes there their horses stoares
And people known to Minyen oars.
Here did the Centaure, birth of clouds,
That in Pelethron dark dens shrowds,
Engendered of Ixions race
Disperse themselves, for dwelling place.
And thou Moniche did won there
That Pholoes rocks did riue and tear.
And Rhetus that on Aetnas top
Those hugie trees did wresting lop.
Which Boreas with his boystrous blast
Could hardly tear or ouercast.
And Phole in this soil did rest,
Where great Alcides was his guest.
And wicked Nessus here resides
That afterward gained bloody sides.
With Lernean shafts that Hercles guides.
And thou O Chiron now grown old,
Converted to a star so cold,
Thy strong Aemonian bow do draw
Against great Scorpios poisoned maw.
So on this land in every part
Did shine the direful seeds of Mart.
Here first of all the goodly breeds
Of the Thessalian fiery steedes,
For use of war so prone and fit,
Did rise, when as Neptunus smit
The flintie stones with Marine mace,
Engendring so the coarsers race,
That champs the bit with praucing pace.
And here the Lapiths hands first strains
Their foaming mouths with bridling raines.
Hence galleys cut the waves with oars,
Sent from the Pagasaean shoares;
And Inland men did first engage
To venture on the billows rage,
And here Ionos that did reign
Over the vast Thessalian plain, Coin framed

Did first of all his stamps conioyne
To molten metals, framed for coin.
And makes silver run in streams,
Swelting amidst the fiery gleames.
The gold likewise at first he brake, The melting of Copper.

And thereof money he did make,
And in the boiling furnace vast,
The copper he did liquid cast.
Then thence did all that garboyle spring,
And mischief that the wars did bring,
Enticing all the world to arms
For riches gain, the seeds of harms.
Here was huge ugly Python bred,
In Cyrrhan dens lurking his head.
And then was used Thessalian bays,
To yield the Pythian games their praise.
Wicked Alaeus brood from hence
Was sent, that made that high offense
Against the Gods waging their wars,
On Pelions top near to the stars,
Heaping mount Ossa on his back,
Whereby heavens course they thought to slack.
Now when in these unlucky lands,
Both Chieftains had incampt their bands,
The doubt of future wars events,
Their minds with equal cares torments.
For now they see approaching nie,
The day that must their fortunes try.
And as the hour did draw more near,
So coward minds the more did fear,
And still the worst their thoughts retain,
But yet some few of these again
Gives to their courage better scope,
By ballancing their fear with hope. He taxes Sextus Pompeys eldest son.

And Sextus now amongst this rowte
Did show himself a crauen lowte.
As one that no way did inherit
The glory of great Pompeys spirit.
For he will take a Pirates trade,
And will the Scycill seas invade;
Whereby those Triumphs he distaind
That on the seas his father gained.
But now his fears stirs up his mind,
To know how chances stood designed:
And grown impatient of delays,
Longed to foreknow his future days.
The Delos God he does not heed,
Nor yet consults with Pythias reed.
Nor what Dodona sawes relates,
That breeds the Akorne swynish cates
Which grove from Jove's mouth sounds fates.
Nor yet the Augures skill he tries
Of bowel'd beasts for sacrifise;
Nor what the flying birds presage,
Nor yet observes the lightnings rage;
Nor does he search to understand
The knowledge of the Assyrian land,
By motions of the stars on hie,
And how the planets qualefie;
Sextus given to trust to forcery.
Or any hidden lawful means,
But he the hateful secrets gleanes
Of Magicks spells, and them does prove
So odious to the Gods above.
And woeful murdrous altars dights
To Dis, and the infernal sprights
Whom he believes, and as dejected,
The heavenly powers he naught suspected.
And now this place where he resides
His wicked humor more misguides,
For many sorcerers, and witches,
Dwell there, where now his tents he pitches.
Whose foul illusions fraught with lies
Does modest piety despise.
And of their art this point is chief
To undertake things past belief.
For Thessaly on her rocks breeds
Many enchanting balefull weeds.
And sensibly her very stones
Those damned spells did seal with groans.
And many charms it eleuates, Thes^ly much inclined to witchcraft.

The heavenly powers it violates.
And fell Medea from those fields
Fetched herbs, that Colchos never yields.
Their wicked charms were of such force,
That they could wrest unto remorse
The Gods deaf ears, that hardened wear
Against those that more devotion bear.
And nations that their hests did fear.
Their damned voice and hellish cries,
Could force a way to pearce the skies.
And with their powrefull words incite The opinion of the force of Thessalian
Witches.

The higher powers in heavens dispight.
For that same supreme care divine
How heavenly orbs and spheres incline
Is cast aside, when they have sent
Their charms unto the firmament.
For though the Babylonian clime,
And Memphis do retain the prime,
Of all such sages as can tell
What deep and hidden skill does dwell
Within the ancient magicks spell;
Yet the Thessalian witch can bend,
Those powers their altars to entend.
Their charming words are of such might
That those hard hearts that naught delight
In sports of love, nor naturally
Retain thereof the quallity
By their enchantments set on fire,
Shall flame in fervent loves desire.
Yea crabbed sires, forespent with age,
They will infect with lusting rage. The opinion that ancient times held of the
power of sorcery and witchcraft.

Nor only noisome potions use,
Nor only do that lump enfuse
Which on a young colts forhead breeds,
That slimie humors swelling feeds:
Before the loving damme do share
It with her teeth, and make it bare.
But with the charms that they do chatter,
Not using any poysnous matter,
They will the strongest minds infest,
And at their pleasure force and wrest.
And those whom discord has misled
To leave and loath their nuptial bed
They have reclaimed; and that great force
Of beauty wanting kind remorse,
By means of Magicks twisted twine,
To gentle love they made incline.
And things from natures course estranged
The days to lengthned nights they changed
The firmament kept not his course,
The spheres forbear their rapted source;
Their motions dully languishing,
When as their charming spells they sing.
And Jupiter himself did wonder,
Wat made the Poles so slowly blunder.
And why they did not turn more swift,
Being urged with their woonted drift.
All things are ouerlaide with showrs,
When Phoebus shines the dark clouds lowrs.
Unknown to Jove they make it thunder,
As though the skies would rent in sunder.
With one self voice they clouds disperse,
And then again to rain reuerse.
When no wind blows, the seas shall rage,
And in huge storms their wrath assuage.
And (most contrary unto kind)
Here the Poet shows the opinion that was held of the power of Thessalian
sorcerers.
The ships shall sail against the wind.
The torrent from the mountains top
Amidst his course shall stay and stop.
The river shall run countermount,
And turn his course unto his fount.
The Summer shall not Nylus raise,
Meander straight his crooked ways.
The Rhodanus shall become slow,
And Arar him shall ouergo.
The mountains whelme their steepy head,
And as a plain be ouerspread.
Olympus vnderlooke the clouds:
Scythia from whom the Sun still shrowds
In midst of winters frostie flaw,
Her snowes shall then dissolve and thaw;
And with their charms they will restrain
The settled flowing of the maine.
And force him with those bonds dispense
Designed by Cynthias influence.
They will so strike that fixed weight
The Axe, that bears the worlds whole freight
That turning in the Orbs mid wheel,
It beckning somewhat seems to reele.
And with one word this heaped mass,
And pondrous load so crazed was,
That it would prospects through tear,
To see the other Hemispheare.
All animals of deadly natures
That Lethall been to humane creatures,
In fear of these inchanters live,
Or to their art assistance give.
The Tygre with his bloody jaws;
The Lion that all ouer-awes,
On them will fawn with mild aspect.
The water Snakes with like respect,
Their chilly circles will unfold,
And streatch themselves on dewy mould,
If these vile hagges do them behold.
The vipers womb, when it is torn,
By that damned brood that she has borne,
They will make whole; and humane breath
Shall give the Serpent present death.
How are the Gods perplexed with pain,
To yield unto this sorcerous vain? A conceit^ ^f the Authors.

And held in awe them to disdain?
What contract have they made withal?
That they can hold them so in thrall.
Are they oppressed by Witches might,
Or in their charms take they delight?
Are they dear to the Deities,
For any secret pieties.
Do they prevail this by entreates,
Or do they use some secret threats?
With all the Gods have they that hand:
Or do those powerful charms command?
Some one peculiar Deity,
That can with such facility
Constrain this world to yield and tend
To that which is so forced to bend.
These witches first did headlong tear
The stars down from the lofty sphere,
And modest Cynthias silver hue
Unto a pallid color grew.
Infected with their venomed phrase,
And with swarth earthly face did blaze.
As if the earth had been between
To bar her of her brothers sheene.
And that his orb with duskie shade
Those heavenly beams kept from her glade
And with these charms is so oppressed
That she can never be at rest,
Until the slimie matter fall,
That they do oint their herbs withal.
These wicked rites and charming spells
Practisde whereas those vile hags dwells,
Erycktho fierce seemed to disdain,
Pretending her more pious vain;
A tedious d^scription of Thessalian witch called Ericktho.
And into new forms would conuart
The errors of this loathsome art.
She would not lodge her damned head
In town, or house, or any shed.
But still amongst the graves would rest,
And tombs of corses dispossessed.
Grateful to hellish Deities,
Conuersing silent companies.
Life unto her no hinderance was,
Into the Stygian shades to pass.
And there the secret will to know
Of Dis, that woonneth still below.
Her bleasme and megre looks detect,
A loathsome hellish swarth aspect;
That bright days light will never see,
The Stygian shades her prospects be.
She has withal a ghastly face,
And feltred locks about it trace.
When showers, or duskie clouds by night
Obscure the stars from humane sight,
Out of the silent graves she hasts,
And catches at the lightning blasts.
Then through the fields she pacing spurns,
And full-ear'd corn she blasting burns:
And with the very breath she sends,
The healthy air taints and offends.
Unto the Gods she never prays,
Nor powers of heaven to guide her ways.
She takes no keep of Augures skill,
How sacrifice bodes good or ill:
But most of all she does desire,
The funeral piles to set on fire;
And whilst they burn, to filch from thence
The Spices and the Frankincense.
The Gods even at the first request,
Do grant to her each wicked hest:
And fear to hear her twice to crave
The thing that she desires to have.
She buries bodies yet alive,
Before that death their souls deprive:
And though their date might long subsist,
In spite of Fates she cuts their twist.
And others dead brings back again
From funerals, with joyful train;
Restoring life to every vain.
Out of the midst of funeral fires
She rapes, and greedily desires
The smoking cinders as they lie,
And young men's bones that flaming fry.
And raging, will not doubt nor fear
The torch from parents hands to tear.
Then all the flakes that she espies,
Which from the coarse with black smoke flies,
And garments unto ashes turned,
And oily fragments scarcely burned,
Together she does scrape and glut;
But when into a Tomb they put
A sollid body, moist within,
With marrow closd in hardened skin,
Then will she rave on all the parts;
Into the eyes her fingers darts,
And never digging leaves withal
Till she tears out the very ball.
Then from the dried hands she rents
And gnawes the pallid excrements:
The knots her teeth in sunder share,
Of ropes wherewith men strangled are.
The hanging carcasses she fleeces,
And then the gibbets breaks in pieces:
The wether-beaten paunch she cast
Out of the corpse, and then at last
She lets the sun thereon to sprout,
And vn-sod marrow so takes out.
Those that are hanged in Iron chains,
Whose hands the rusty fetters strains
From all the joints, whereof distilles
The oily moisture, that down trilles
In greasy filth, and swarthy gore,
She gathers up for poisons store.
Whilst gnawing on the nerves she files,
Fast by the teeth she hangs the whiles;
And if that she by chance do find
A carcass on the ground vn-shrinde,
Amongst the ravening beasts and foul,
There will this Sorceresse sitting scowle:
But will not with a knife select
The flesh, and parts she does affect:
But she will only pry and watch,
The morsels from Wolves jaws to snatch.
From murder never stays her hands,
When as in need of blood she stands
That freshly flows from wounds at first,
Such she finds out to quench her thirst.
Nor will she stay her murdrous mood,
When she would sacrifice lifeblood:
Or that some funeral rites require
The trembling intrailes on the fire.
The babes within the mothers womb,
With gashing wound she will vntombe
Ere nature bring it forth to light;
Her flaming Altars so to dight.
And whenever she needs most
Some cruel sturdy humor'd ghost,
Her slaughtring fist the souls prepares,
No humane life she ever spares.
From off the chinnes she rents and tears
Of flowring youths the downy hairs.
And with left hand the locks will shave
Of striplings, lingering to the grave.
This Witch her own kin has not spared,
That death of her dire hand has shared:
But first she would them coll and kiss,
And then the head from corpse dismiss.
And when that death their jaws had fixed,
She then would gnab her teeth betwixt,
And so bite off the labbring tongue,
That to the dry throat fast was clung:
And with her cold lips then would babble
Of whispring charms full many a rabble.
And then at last with some vile spell
Would send their sprights to shades of hell.
The fame that of this Witch did run,
Had made her known to Pompey's son,
Who in the depth of silent night, Eryctho's fame reported to Sextus.

When Tytan had conuaid his light
Unto the middle of that sky,
That to our feet opposd does lie;
Abroad at that time Sextus traces
Into the solitary places,
Attended by a company
Prepared, and true to villainy:
Who ranging up and down the land,
Where graves and Tombs did use to stand,
By chance a far they spied this hagge,
Close sitting by a rocky cragge,
Near to a path that straight does guide
The way unto mount Aemus side:
There she such charms did mu^bling chatter,
That no Magitians knew the matter:
Nor yet the Gods of Magickes art,
Of her strange spells knew any part:
New fictions she did cunne by heart.
And fearing that this bloody war
Would be transferred yet more far,
From Thessaly to other soyles,
Whereby the blood that these garboyles
On either side would flowing yield,
Should be deprived Pharsalias field
Which she already had defiled
With spelles, and incantations vilde;
Did what she could that might withstand
To draw the wars from out this land.
For now she hoped to glut her mood,
With use of flowing humane blood:
And that in such a world of strife,
She should have deaths, and slaughters rife;
That cinders of the Romans dead,
Might in Emathia's field be spread,
And bones of noble Peers there slain,
Whose ghosts she hoped should be her gain.
This was her drift, this her desire,
Wherewith her heart was set on fire;
Proposing to her self the spoil
Of Pompey's part upon his foil.
And with like rage to rave and rampe
Upon some wrackes of Caesar's camp.
Then to this hagge, with words full mild,
First spoke great Pompey's worthless child.
Sextus words to Eryctho.
O thou that art the greatest grace
Of Sages of Aemonian race,
That can at large to men relate
Their destiny and future fate:
And have the power to turn aside
Events of harms that should betide:
I thee beseech do me that grace
To let me know this doubtful case.
What is the scope and certain end
VVhereto this civil war will tend.
I am not least of Roman heirs,
That intrest have in these affairs;
Great Pompey is my noble sire,
And I his son that must aspire
Either to be the Lord of all,
Or heir of his great funeral.
My mind does doubtful dread retain,
And yet resolved I am again
To carry all with courage stout,
Were I but sure what would fall out.
Do thou therefore resolve I pray
The doubt of this uncertain day,
That we be not surprised unawares,
Nor blindly led to Fortunes snares.
From higher powers extort the truth,
Or on the Gods thou may have ruth;
And all the Stygian ghosts below
Urge to thy power, the truth to show.
Go search Thessalian fields about,
And also learn which of our rout
Death is resolved to him to call,
That in these civil wars must fall.
This labor is of no base kind,
But worthy thy inspired mind:
A work of glory by thee done,
To know how so great Fate shall run.
This glorifide Thessalian Witch,
To hear her fame, for joy did itch, Eryctho's answer to Sextus.

And thus replied; O noble youth,
Did thou desire to know the truth
Of future chance, in lesser fate
As thou requir'st I could relate,
Although the Gods it disavow'd;
For so much is to Art allowed.
For though the planets influence,
Did call some one man's life from hence;
Yet could we thereof make a stay,
And so likewise can take away
With special herbs, his living hour,
That all the stars united power
Did unto eldest years design,
And in the midst break off his twine.
But since the order of all things
From one first chief beginning springs,
And Fates do labor in this all,
And thou of that a change would call,
Whereby one only mortal stroke
Might this worlds universe revoke.
All our consorts must needs agree,
That Fortune can do more then we.
But if it may suffice thy hope,
Of one man's hap to know the scope,
It Is easy certainly to do,
And many means do help thereto.
The earth, the air, the Chaos old,
The fields with herbs so manifold,
The rocks of Rhodopeian land
Would sound that we should understand.
But since that daily there is store
Of new slain bodies with fresh gore,
It Is easy for Emathia's field
One head for our designs to yield;
Whose carcass warm, and newly slain,
Does yet a sound of voice retain:
Whose corpse not parched with the sun,
Nor warmth as yet from members run:
This Stygian ghost not yet will stutter,
But to our ears will plain words utter.
When she had said, her sullen head
She artificially ore-spread
With doubled darkness of the night,
And with a foggy mist bedight;
About the bodies slain she pries,
That in the fields unburied lies.
And with her looks she did affray
The ravening Wolves, and birds of pray,
Who from the bodies fled away.
Whilst that this hagge a carcass prold,
And searched the marrow deadly cold,
Wherein the lungs and lights she found
Quite stark, but free from any wound.
Then for a voice she seeks and pries,
Within this body where it lies.
Mean while there hung in question than
The fate of many a slaughtred man,
Whom she again from death would call;
For had she tried to take them all,
That of both Armies there lay slain,
The wars she had supplied again,
And silenced Erebus law;
For could this powerful monster draw
From Stygian lake so great a crew,
Their fighting always would renew. Eryctho chooses a slain body to enchaunt.

But now a body she has got,
That had no wound but in the throat.
Him she elects, and him does hook
With halter, and with Iron crook,
And through the rocks the ruthlesse hagge
This miserable corpse did dragge,
That life must take, and does it trace
Whereas a hollow vaulted place
Under a lofty cliffe does rise,
Where she (fell Witch) does sacrifice.
Here is a land not far from hell, Erycthos place of habitation.

Where lies a deep obscured cell
Sunk under ground, with cauernes vast,
Whose top with shades is ouer-cast;
For bows of trees so enter-lace,
That they obscure and veil this place,
So as no where can mortal eye
Discern the Sun, or glimpse of sky;
But deadly darkness, and long night
In this sad Den be-clouds all sight,
And but by charms has never light.
The foggy air within this cell,
More loathsome is then dampes of hell.
And this swarth Region on all sides,
Auernus from our world diuides.
And hither the infernal King
His ghosts does never fear to bring:
For though this witch of Thessaly
The Fates by force can qualify,
Yet doubtful is it whether she
From this place into hell can see:
Or whether personally this fend
Unto the Stygian shades descend.
A smokie foul raged weed she wears
With open face, and back-cast hairs:
The fillets that her locks do trace,
She does with vipers inter-lace.
And when she saw in how great fear
Young Pompey and his followers were,
As men that horror did confound,
Looking down wistly to the ground.
What now (quoth she) be of good cheer,
Eryctho encourages Pompey, and his men affrighted.
Lay doubt aside, and do not fear,
For now you shall forthwith perceive
A figure new true life receive,
Though dread do make your spirits weak,
Yet may you hear him plainly speak.
If I should show you Stygian lakes,
And helles banks breathing fiery flakes,
And that you may the Furies see
Safely, safe-conduited by me.
And Cerberus with curled breast,
Shaking his hideous snaky crest,
And Giants huge, whose feter'd hands
Behind their backs, are tide in bands.
Why stand you cowards in such frights,
To look upon poor trembling sprights?
Then she does lukewarm blood convay
Into the body as it lay,
And with new wounds the same does gash,
And clotterd gore away does wash.
Then she together working mings
All uncouth births that Nature brings.
The froth of mad dogs jaws she takes,
That fear to see fresh watery lakes.
The Lynx his bowels laid thereon, A rabble of sorcerous drugges.

With the Hyena's ioyntlesse bone.
The marrow of a stagge new dead,
That has a serpent swallowed.
And that same little fish whose force
Can so withold the forward course
Of any ship amidst the maine,
When all her sails the wind does strain.
A Dragons eyes therewith she pressed,
And that stone in the Aegles nest,
That rattling sounds, and heat does catch
Amongst the eggs that she does hatch.
The Arabian Serpent that makes wing
The poisonous Viper, whose sharp sting
The red sea Cockle does defend,
Wherein the precious pearl is penned.
And therewithal the skin new flead
From the Coerastae but half dead;
With those burnt ashes that arise
Out of the Phoenix sacrifice.
These venomed heaps she works and frames,
Distinguished by their several names.
And leaves she adds repleate with spelles,
And growing herbs, wherewith she melles
The spittle of her driueling jaws,
And every other poisons cause,
Devised by her sorcerous sawes.
Then with a voice that far exceeds
The strength of all herbs that earth breeds,
She calls and charms the Gods of hell,
And mutters first a confused spell
Of varying sounds, that wistly jar,
From humane language diffring far.
She has the barking of a hound,
And of a Wolf the howling sound. Eryctho's sundry sorts of voices.

The hollow whooping of the Owl,
The skryching of the black night foul.
The bellowing of the sauadge beast,
With hissing of a Snake expressed.
The hollow murmures of the waves,
Beating against the cliffie caves;
The whistling of the woody leaves,
And thunders noise, the clouds that cleaues.
So many sounds from one voice fly,
The rest her direful charms supply:
And with her tongue she frames a spell,
That pierced down to the depth of hell.
Ye Destinies, the Stygian scourge,
That torments on offenders urge.
Ericthos charm.
And thou Auernus gulf profound,
That swalowing can whole worlds confound
And thou that all this earth do sway,
Whose death the heavenly powers delay,
That thereby thou for longer times
May be reserved, to plague thy crimes.
O Styx, and ye Elizian fields,
That solace none to witches yields!
And thou Persephon that do loath,
The heavens, and thy mother both.
And Hecate our dearest friend
That to my tongue do cunning lend;
Whereby commerce and use I have
Of ghosts, and the infernal grave.
Thou Porter of infernal gates,
That do on bowels share for cates
With thy devouring ravenous jaws;
And you three sisters that forth draws
And cuts in two each living line,
Of power to break this work of mine.
And thou o Ferry-man grown old,
That have so long those waves controld,
Do not these souls from me withold;
But grant to me that I request,
If my petition be expressed
With wicked words sufficiently,
And vows repleat with villainy:
Or if I never yet did charm,
But that with blood and bowels warm
I first of all did break my fast,
And bodies full to you have cast.
And if that I the brains have dashed
That were bloud-warme, and then have washed,
And to your Altars, heads did give
Of infants, that might longer live:
Observe my suit, that does not crave
A body smoldred in the grave,
Or that in darkness long has been,
But one that late the light has seen;
And newly did his soul discharge,
And scarce arrived at helles varge;
Let him my charms now entertain,
And he shall soon return again.
Let this ghost of a Soldier late,
Great Pompey's destiny relate
To Pompey's son, if in your sight
A civil war deserve that right.
When she her charming spell had sed,
She raisd her frothy mouth and head:
Wistly a while she did behold
The ghost of that same carcass cold,
That stood in fear, and great amaze
Upon those liuelesse limbs to gaze;
And did that loathsome pinfold hate. The ghost amazed, loath to enter into the
carcass again.

That was her prison but of late.
She dreads into that breast to pass,
That now so hack't and mangled was.
And in those bowels to reside,
Whose veins were cut with wounds so wide.
Ah wretched Ghost whom deaths last stroke
Could not exempt from life's frail yoke!
Eryctho maruailes much, and frets,
That Fates should use these lingering lets.
And in her wroth this dead corpse takes,
And scourges it with living snakes.
Then through the earth by that same glade
She pries, which she with charms had made.
And barking, to the sprights she speaks, Eryctho enraged, threatens the
infernal powers.

Which noise Erebus silence breaks.
Tysiphone thou hateful spright,
And thou Megera, that setst light
By my request, come tell me plain,
When this sad soul you did retain
With you in hell, did she not bear
Your torments, and your scourgings there?
By your true names I will you call,
You Stygian hagges I will enthrall,
And captives hold in this worlds light,
And follow you with all despite
Through Graves, through Tombs, through Burials,
And banish you from Funerals.
And Hecate I Will make thee known
In perfect shape that is thine own:
Thou shall no more thy self adorn
With borrowed figure, so to scorn
The Gods, with falsehood and decait,
When thou art called on them to wait.
Thy vile pale form I will display,
Helles looks thou shall not put away.
And I ( Proserpina) will tell,
That under earths huge weight does dwell,
What feasts and iunketing you make,
And what disports in love you take;
And how you set your whole delight
In dalliance with the King of night:
Which life of thine, if Ceres kend,
Thou never more to her should wend.
To thee of wretches all most vile,
As judge of this, I Will send the while
Bright Tytan, with his beams so fierce,
That through the chinks of earth shall pierce,
And all thy shiftings open lay,
By sudden sending in of day.
Will you assent my will to do,
Or shall I him compel thereto,
Upon whose name I never call,
Meaning Demogorgon.
But that the earth does quake withal?
He that with face uncovered,
Dares look upon Gorgona's head;
And with his whippes and fell aspect,
Trembling Erinnis does correct.
And he that can far better tell
Then your own selves the dens of hell.
His mansion under you he takes,
And he may swear by Stygian lakes.
Forthwith when she had vsd her charm
The chill blood in this corpse grew warm.
The black wounds now more fleshly shows
And through the veins the thin blood flows
Strengthening withal each outward part; The dead body begins to take life.

The tender strings that feed the heart
Under the cold breast began to beat,
As soon as they did feel the heat.
The marrow that was dulled long,
Taking fresh force was grown more strong
New life was mingled death among:
Then pulses all and artyres strike,
The sinews streach and motion seek.
But now the body never tries
To streach his lims whereas it lies,
With easy strength and by degrees;
But suddenly rebounding flees
From off the ground, and stands upright
With eyes wide open to the light,
And yawning jaws that breathed rife,
Yet in his face was no great life.
But rather of a deadly hue,
Stiff wrinckled and a pallid blew.
He stonisht was at this worlds wonder,
His tied tongue no sound could blunder.
His voice and speech had but in task,
To answer what the witch did ask.
Tell me quoth she what I require, Eryctho speaks to the carcass

And for it great shall be thy hire.
If to the world we truths impart,
The fame of our Aemonian art
Will ever, after glory gain,
And our free sawes, as soothes remain:
In such a shrine thy lims shall lie,
And in such wood thy corpse shall fry.
And will so charm thy funeral,
Erycthos reward she promises the carcass that takes life.
As that the spells of Magicks call:
Thy ghost shall never hire at all.
And to thy self this boon bequeaue,
For that thou did new life receive.
That herbs nor charms shall be of force,
Thy long sleep ever to divorce,
That death receiuest at my hand,
None do those answers understand
That Oracles and Trypods tell,
Who Fates requires from ghosts of hell
Shall ever in assurance dwell:
He valiantly to work does go,
That dire deaths Oracle would know.
I pray thee therefore do not spare
To show things names right as they are.
Describe the places, and speak plain
That I true Fates may entertain.
To this withal she adds a spell,
Whereby the ghost had power to tell
What so of him she sought to know,
Whilst his sad face tears ouerflow.
The ghost replies to Erictho and makes his relation.
Truly I had not time (quoth he)
To mark the Fatal sisters three,
How they their spinning twists did guide,
I was called from the river side,
So secretly and in such have,
I could not know how all things past.
But that which I did learn was done
Amongst the souls where I did won,
Fell discord and outrageous strife,
Amongst the Roman ghost was rife.
So as their broils and armed riet,
The Infernal state did much disquiet.
Diverse great Captains were divided,
About their quarrel undecided.
One part does in Elysium dwell,
The Other in those dark dens of hell.
And both sides readily inclined,
To try what destiny designed.
The blessed souls did then appear,
But sad and mournful in their cheer.
The Decij both I there beheld,
The father and his worthy child*
Brave spirits that did expiate
The Tyranies from Roman state.
Camillus, and the Curij,
There wayling stood with watrie eye.
And Scylla one amongst this rout,
Against thee Fortune does cry out.
And Scipio there I saw deplore,
That so the hateful Affricke shore
Their noble blood should now distaine,
With his own grandchild thereon slain.
And Cato mayor of renown,
The ancient foe to Carthage town,
Did here lament his Nephews fate,
That died in scorn of servile state.
And Brutus in his Consuls gown,
That Tyranny did first put down,
We here beheld in joyful mood,
Amongst blessed souls whereas he stood.
There Catilyne with proud disdaines,
Insults amongst his broken chains.
And Marius with his bloody harms,
Cethegi with their naked arms.
There likewise I the Drusians saw,
That made their liberty a law,
Rejoicing in a popular love
And Gracchi that great things durst prove,
Though hampered with lasting chains,
Whose liberties hell-gates restraines.
Yet clap their hands that plaudits yields
These wicked ghosts crave blessed fields.
Then this infernal Realms great guide
His stations did enlarge more wide.
And therewithal he sharpes the rocks,
Hard adamantine chains and locks,
With iron links he does prepare, The ghost speaks to Sextus.

As torments for the victors share.
But yet o youth take now with thee
This comfortable word from me,
Expect a blessed resting place
For thy sires soul and all his race.
For in that kingdom deep of Dis
A pleasant part reserved is
To entertain great Pompeys spright.
Let not the glory him delight,
Of this short life's uncertain date,
The hour draws near, whose present fate,
Shall these great captains fortunes mix;
In death therefore your comforts fix.
Go proudly and with high desires
Unto your lowly funeral fires,
And spurning scorn those haughty souls
That Roman rites like Gods controules.
For now the strife is who shall have
Pompey on the one of them: and Caesar on the other.
On Tybris or on Nyle his grave,
And all the war these Captains wage
Is where shall be their funeral stage.
But as for what concerns thy fate,
Do not desire I should relate,
Spare me, for though I silence keep
A Prophet of more knowledge deep,
Will let thee all things understand,
And thou in the Sicilian land,
Shall have it at thy fathers hand.
Whose mind as yet I do not know,
Whither he means that thou shall go;
Or from what place thou should refrain,
Or what unlucky coasts disdain.
Or in which part of this worlds clime
Thou should abide and spend thy time.
But hapless ye, Europe forbear,
Affricke and Asia, likewise fear,
Fortune your tombs will there divide,
Where erst triumphant you did ride.
O wretched house! the world you yields,
Naught safer then Pharsalias fields.
Thus having his relation told,
With mornefull looks did silence hold.
And death was his desired meede,
But Magicks charms thereto would need,
And herbs to make the carcass fall;
For Fates could not again recall
The soul that once at large did rome,
By laws expired of Stygian doom.
Then did Erictho frame withal Eryctho burns the carcass.

A pile of wood for funeral,
Thus to the fire the body went
Which kindled, was laid down and brent.
Where when Erictho saw him lie,
She left him in that place to die.
And so along with Sextus went,
To visit Pompey at his Tent.
But now the mornings dawne drew near,
So that the days peep did appear.
Therefore that they might secret pass
To Pompey where he camped was,
She did inchant the scowling night,
With sable vailes to clowd the light.
Finis Libri Sexti.
Lucans Pharsalia. The seventh Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis does great Pompeys dream relate,
And wailes withal hi hapless Fate.
His eager troops would battle have;
Tully the same does likewise crave
With filed speech, to give content,
Pompey (though loath) yields his consent.
Prodigious signs appear in sight:
Both Armies in point to fight.
The Chieftains with courageous words,
Inuit the soldiers to their swords.
The battles join, and Pompeys host
Is overthrown, his Camp is lost.
To save himself away he flies;
Caesar a victors Fortune tries.
The spoils he freely does bestow.
Pharsalias field with blood does flow.
MOre slow then ever was his guise
Tytan did from Aurora rise,
And contrary to Natures will,
Clymes heavily the Eastern hill.
He never more unwillingly
Did drive his Teeme against the sky:
And lasily hung dragging back.
Though fiercely rapt with sweeping rack;
So prone he was to show defect,
Under Ecclips his bright aspect
Does labor now, and black clouds breeds
Not such as fed his flaming steeds.
And all this was but to delay
From Thessaly the light of day.
But now Boots with his cart,
Draws on dark night, the latest part
Of woeful Pompeys happy life;
Whom pleasing dreams so free from strife
Did entertain, and fained shows
His troubled thoughts did interpose.
It seemed in this dreaming fit,
That he with stately pomp did fit, Pompeys dream.

In that Theater he did frame
At Rome, which carried Pompeys name.
Thither the Roman people thrung
In multitudes, whose voices rung
With joyful shouts unto the stars,
To see him safe returned from wars.
And more to show how they rejoice,
They clapped their hands with thundering noyce
Even such applauding shouts they raise,
As they did in his youthful days;
And with such fawning him beheld,
As when he had Sertorious queld,
That fugitive, in arms so fierce;
And when he did with conquest pierce
The westermost Iberian pride,
And did for it in triumph ride.
Then being but a youthful knight,
Attired in a robe sun-bright,
And in a lofty Chariot placed,
Whom with applause the Senate graced.
Now whether that this did portend
Of all his happiness the end,
And as a last retraite of joy
Did but presage future annoy;
Or that this sound revealing sleep
That does our thoughts in fancies steep,
Did with accustomed ambages,
Express his fate by contraries.
All turned to Pompeys miseries.
Or that Romes fortune did bequeaue
To him this sight for her last leave;
Knowing that he should never more
Set footing on his native shore.
Ye that the Camping watches keep,
Do not break off this pleasant sleep,
Let not the sound of trumpets charms,
Pierce through his ears with wars alarmes
The next night she shall have dire rest,
And sad sights shall his soul inuest.
On both sides armed hoasts shall meet,
And raging war each other greet.
Whence then could soldiers free from care
Such sound sleeps, and such sweet rest share
O happy would that day have been
If thy Rome so could thee have seen.
O Pompey would the Gods of heaven
That one desired day had given
Unto thy country, and to thee,
Of eithers fate assured to be!
Whereby you mutuallie might prove
The latest fruits of your dear love.
The event of war is doubtful.
Thou Pompey to the wars did wend,
As though thy days in Rome should end.
And Rome, that knew her conscience clear,
(Tender of thee, to her vows dear)
Did never think that foul offense
Had with the Fates hung in suspense,
That Rome should not the fortune have
To give her Pompeys bones their grave.
For then would youths, and aged sires,
Unbidden boys with self desires,
Have mingled howling plaints with tears,
The Matrones with disheueled hairs,
And virgins would their breasts have torn;
Even as the people then did mourn, That Brutus that did put down the tyranny
of the Tarquins.

When Brutus was laid in his vrne.
And now although they fear the hand
Of him, that does the victor stand,
Though Caesar's self should first relate
The news of Pompeys wretched fate,
Yet would they not forbear to mourn,
Whilst Caesar were in triumph borne;
And that the incense burning were,
And that to Jove they Bays did bear.
O wretched Citizens that hate
The plaints of your own grieved Fate!
Because all could not with one hail
In full Theater him bewail.
Now Hesprus wiih his dauning day
Had banished the nights lamps away,
When in the Tents through all the rout
A secret murmuring burst out,
Where fate had drawn the world together
The wretched people trooping thither
To Pompeys tent, Pompeys army importune their General to ioyn battle with
Caesar.
with fury driven
Would have the sign of battle given;
The most not like to see next even.
And with huge cries the hours they have,
Of their near deaths that drew on fast.
Such direful sudden rage them bends,
Headlong to run unto their ends.
Pompey is slow and coward called,
And unto Caesar too much thral'd.
And that he kingdom did affect,
And would the world to him subject.
Who seeing now that he could draw
So many nations to his law,
Would still his glorious power maintain,
And therefore did all peace disdain.
The Kings and Nations of the East,
Complained the war was turned to jest;
And so protracted to their wrong,
Who from their homes were held so long.
O heavenly powers such is your wills,
When you design ought to our ills!
And all with us shall go awry,
The blame on our own faults must lie.
To mischief headlong run they all,
For dismal fight they cry and call.
In Pompeys camp Pharsalias fate,
Is vowed to try this dire debate.
Then Tullius that patron great
Of Roman eloquence; must treat
In all their names; he that of yore,
In his long robe did Rome restore
To settled peace; and to the law
Brought dreadful Catiline in awe.
But then did he the wars detest.
Only with him was in request
The Forum, and the Rostrum seat,
Long silenced with martial heat.
His eloquence no grace does add
Unto a cause in it self badde.
Ciceroes oration to Pompey for the giving of battle to Caesar.
O Pompey, for her favors great,
At thy hands Fortune does entreat,
That thou to her thy trust commend.
The nobles that thy Camp attend,
And all these kings, thy constant friends,
That to thy aid their forces lends,
Do now beseech thee to agree
That Caesar may subdued be.
Shall he so long have means to find
A bloody war with all mankind?
The nations that thy self has won,
And did so quickly ouerrun,
Will Pompeys glory disauow,
That is so slow in conquest now.
VVhither is thy brave courage fled,
Ungrateful do thou stand in dread,
That heaven has thee abandoned?
Or with the Gods dare thou not trust
The Senate, and thy cause so just?
Thy Host their ensigns will display
And give the foe a bloody day:
Unto thy glory 'twere a taint
That thou should vanquish by constraint:
Since thou by us appointed art
The Chiefetaine, and for us do Mart.
Let it be lawful for our Host
To war when we affect it most.
Why do thou so by force hold back
The whole worlds Arms from Caesar's wrack?
The darts do brandle in their hands,
And all the troops impatient stands
Whilst Ensigns do draw out the bands.
Have therefore now thy Arms to take, He urges Pompey either to profess
himself a tyrant, or give way to the Senate.

Lest thine own Trumpets thee forsake.
The Senate craves to know of thee
Whether that they thy Soldiers be:
Or whether they do in this Mart
As thy compeeres retain their part.
Sighing the Cheifetaine sorrow shows,
He found the Gods became his foes,
And Fate did his entents oppose.
If such, quoth he, be your desires,
And that this time rather requires
Huge troops, and many an armed band, Pompeys answer, and reasons to the
contrary.

Then such a leader as will stand
Upon advantage, when he may,
I never will your fates delay.
Let all to ruin headlong go,
By Fortunes hand at one dire blow.
And let this day the last light be
That most of us shall ever see.
But Rome I thee to witness call,
That Pompey cannot do with all,
The time to him appointed was
Wherein all should to mischief pass.
This war might well have been made good,
Without a blow, or loss of blood
Caesar might have been captiued,
Without a battle hazarded,
And wonted peace recovered.
What wicked rage (o ye most blind)
Makes you to be of this strange mind?
That since you civil arms do bear,
Is victory to you a fear,
Except you rauing wound and tear?
Our foes have now but little scope,
And are bereft all marine hope.
We have compelled the hungry bands
To eat the green corn of the lands.
And they have often wished withal,
That they upon our swords might fall.
Rather then this to starve and wither,
So we and they might fall together.
That war is near brought to his last,
And al' the difficulty past.
When to avoid a greater fright,
New soldiers shall desire to fight.
And with the spur of valors shows,
And kindled fury covet blows,
For fear of future worser harms,
The minds of many so much charms.
That to prevent what they suspect,
All present hazards they neglect.
But truly valiant is that man,
That with a settled patience can,
Approaching perils so resist,
As to defer them at his list.
Must I leave such security
To Fortunes mutabilitie?
The whole worlds hap must we afford,
Unto the hazard of the sword?
You rather I should hazard fight
Then conquer foes by martial slight,
Fortune committed to my cares
The government of Romes affairs,
And I deliver to her charge
The same again with power more large,
Let her as well now play her part,
And guard them safe in blinded Mart.
For in this course all praise or blame
Pompey for his part does disclaim.
O Caesar! with the powers divine
Thy prayers more prevail then mine.
Fight when you please, and fall to Arms;
But yet how many wicked harms,
How great and many peoples wrackes
Will this next day bring on our backs?
How many Kings will shed their blood?
And how will Enipheus flood
Her Crystal streams pollute and stain
With purple gore of Romans slain?
But first I wish the hostile lance
Of bloody war, with deaths mischance,
Might pierce this wretched head of mine,
If that my fate might bring to fine
These ruins, and with it divart
All mischiefs from my Countries part*
The conquest if we do obtain,
Cannot to Pompey's fame add gain.
If victory for us do stand
By slaughter, and by bloody hand,
The peoples hearts it will agrise,
And odiously my name misprise.
Or if that Pompey loose the game,
Pompey will be a wretched name.
All miseries the conquered find,
But blame and malice stil's assigned
Unto the victor as his share,
That acts the wars last woeful chare.
So having said, he did give way
To Arms, and Soldiers raging sway:
As does a Pilot sore distressed
With a strong tempest, blown by west; That a multitude left to their own
will, are like a ship without a Pilot.

Leaving the helm, and leaving Art,
Does to the storm all rule impart;
Whereby the ship does heave and set,
Drawn with the fury of the fret.
Now in confusion does this Camp
With fearful tumults rave and rampe,
The Soldiers fear.
Their minds with horrid thoughts oppressed,
Unconstant moods boil in their breast.
Many with pallid looks bewray
Of deaths approach the dismal day,
And in their faces do relate
A countenance suiting to their fate:
And that the hour drew on with speed,
When humane chance should be decreed.
And in what terms Romes state should stand,
Must in this battle now be scanned.
No man his perils deemes aright,
But greater doubts do them affright.
For who is he that sees the maine
With surges swallow up the plain,
The highest mountains overflowed
With billows from the Ocean blown,
The skies and Phoebus blazing crown
Unto the earth come tumbling down,
In such a public wrack each where
Would of his private stand in fear?
No man had leisure now to dread
The harms that hanged ore his head,
Romes destiny, and Pompeys fall,
Was it that did distract them all.
Pompeys Soulers fit their Arms.
Unto their swords they put no trust,
Except new ground and scoured from rust;
Their darts are sharpened at the end,
With stronger strings their bows they bend.
Their quiuers also stored full
With choycest shafts that they could cull.
The rowels of the horse-mens spur
Enlarged, to make his courser stir.
If it were lawful to compare
Man's labors with the supreme care,
So Mars did grind his fauchion
Upon the rough Cycilian stone;
When the Phlegrean Giants fierce
Did make attempt the skies to pierce.
So Neptune his three-forked mace
With fiery temper did enchase,
And Paean so new steeled again
His shafts, when he had Python slain.
So Pallas furbusht up her Targe
With Gorgons head, and locks at large.
And so to chastise those reuolts,
Vulcan then changed Jove's thunderbolts.
Nature did not that time refrain Many prodigious signs seemed to presage
misfortune to Pompey.

By many signs to show most plain
The fearful accidents at hand,
The skies the armed troops withstand,
Marching to the Pharsalian land.
The tearing clouds with thunderclaps
The Soldiers on their faces raps;
Contrary flames, and pillars bright
Of scorching fire, did them affright.
Typhons commixt with sparkling beams, Typhon a kind of fiery Meteor.

That did affect the water streams,
Brake out withal; and lightning flashes
Dazzled their eyes with findging dashes;
From off their helmes it struck the crests,
And from the blades the hilts it wrests:
It also melts the headed Pile,
The sulfrie air rusts murdring steel.
The swarming bees in clustred flights,
By heaps upon their Ensigns lights;
So as the Ensigne-bearers might
Could not from ground raise them upright,
The weight thereof was grown so dead,
It made them bow both back and head.
Their public Standards in a swet,
And Roman Aegles weeping wet,
Whilst forward to the field they set.
The Bull brought for the sacrifice,
With fury from the Altar flies;
And running headlong, himself cast
Into Emathias field at last.
So as no offering could be found
To expiate that lucklesse ground.
But what malignant Deities,
And Furies of impieties
O Caesar have thou called upon?
What power of Stygian Region?
What wicked damned infernal sprights,
That range about in gloomy nights,
Has stirred thee up, and whet thy rage
This odious wicked war to wage?
But now this doubt again does rise,
Whether that fear abused their eyes,
Or that these monstrous visions seen,
Of Gods the Revelations been:
For many thought they did behold
How Pindus to Olympus rold,
And that mount Aemus that same hour
A gaping velley did devour.
And that throughout Pharsalia's ground
Strange howlings did by night resound.
That streams of blood by Ossa's hill
Did to Boebeida's lake distill.
That they beheld in dark shades veiled,
How men with force their foes assailed.
The day pale dimnesse ouer-whelmes,
Dark shades likewise incloud their helmes,
Their parents buried ghosts did rise,
And fluttring do accost their eyes:
But this one comfort did remain
To ease them in perplexed pain,
These prodigious signs did encourage those that were bloody minded.
That those who with a guilty mind,
Did hope the wicked means to find,
Their aged fathers throats to cut,
And in their brothers blood to glut;
Rejoiced at the monstrous sights
That with such horror mazed men's sprights:
And hoped these sudden furies rage,
Did unto them success presage.
But why should it seem strange at all,
That those for whom death now did call,
Should changes feel as life grows slack,
And trembling fits of natures wrack?
If to the mind of man be given
Knowledge of future things to steeuen,
The guest that wonnes in Tyrian Gades,
The Roman that Armenia trades:
And those that under any clime
Of all the world lived at that time
Did grieve, and yet wist no cause why,
And took their griefs offensiuely;
But little knew what they should lose
At these Emathian fatal blows.
If old Records we credit may,
Upon Euganeo's hill they say,
An Augure sitting near those streams
Where Aponus breath-reeking steames
Do rise, and spread their springs abroad,
And in Timavas flood unload,
Where was Antenors first abode.
Now comes (this Augure then did say)
A great and lamentable day, An Augure sitting on Mount Euganeo, foresaw the
battle of Pharsalia, and that Caesar should overcome Pompey.

The might things of humane state,
Are like forthwith to have their date;
Pompeys and Caesar's wicked Arms
Will now rush on to civil harms.
But whether that the thunders rage,
And Jove's dire darts did thus presage:
Or that the gazing on the skies,
The heavens discordant humor spies;
Or that the sad duskt firmament
Did note to him this days event
By dimnesse of th'eclipsed sun,
That was with darkness overrun.
Nature in this days form expressed
Such difference from all the rest,
As that if men did understand
(As did this Augure) to have scanned
And well observed the novel change
Of heavenly signs, how they did range,
Then all the world might plain have seen
(As well as he) Pharsalia's teene.
O worthy wights by Fate reserved,
Of all the world to be observed,
Whose destinies to bring to end
The whole heavens leisure did intend!
If after ages hear the same,
And to our Nephews come their fame;
Or if to men of great estate
Our labors care Time shall relate,
So as their minds it recreate;
A pretty conceit of the Authors for those that shall read his book.
When as these civil wars they read,
It will provoke both hope and dread,
And draw such wishes from their thought
As shall be lost, and profit naught.
For reading, they will be distracted,
As though these were not matters acted;
But as if they were strifes depending,
Whose Fates as yet had not their ending,
And all that while wish from their heart
The best success to Pompeys part.
As soon as Pompey's armed bands
Marched toward the Pharsalian lands,
The shining Sunne-beames bright aspect
Against their armours did reflect;
So as the valleys and the hills
All round about with light it filles.
The order of Pompeys Army
They did not rashly take the field,
The hapless Army order held;
Lentulus had the left wing.
And Lentulus had for his part
The ordring of the left wings Mart,
And those two Legions therewithal
That of the Camp was principal,
The first and fourth they did them call.
Domitius had the right wing
And unto thee Domitius stout,
Was given in charge the right wings rout;
All-be-it with unlucky hand
Thou for thy Countries cause did stand.
The middle battle strong compact,
With thick ranged troops that were extract
Scipio had the middle.
Out of the Cilician host,
That came with Scipio from that coast:
Who here held but a Soldiers place,
Though Afric after did him grace
As chief Commander in the field,
The mountain Capadocians held,
Their Cohorts ranged in ordered ranks
On Enipheus rivers banks; How the re^t of Pompeys aids were bestowed.

And with them all along that flood
That Pontus large-rain'd horsemen stood:
In most of all the drier lands
The Kings and Tetrarchs Army stands;
And with them all the Princely swarms,
And Tyrants with their troops of Arms,
That to the Romans homage ought,
And now in Latiums quarrel fought.
There likewise the Numidians meet,
And those Cydonians sent from Creet;
The Archers from Iturea pressed,
There mingled stood amongst the rest.
And valiant Gauls were there to show
Their malice to their ancient foe.
The Spaniards with their narrow shields,
Did range their troops amidst those fields.
O Destiny now take away
These Nations from the victors pray;
And when great Pompey is laid low,
Consume all triumphs at that blow!
This day (as it fell out by chance)
Caesar his Ensigns did advance,
And left his station in the morn, Caesar sending his Troops in the morning
to gather corn, discouers Pompeys Army marching in battle.

Ranging the coast to gather corn
With all his troops; when suddenly
He saw the armed enemy
Marching along the Champian plain,
As he would battle entertain.
The time he now sees offered fair
For which he had made many a praire;
Whereby he might (at once for all)
Unto an end this quarrel call.
He mourned these long delays to bide
Ravished with love of Regal pride:
And civil wars began to hate,
As too slow drawing to their date;
Because he had this little time
Been held off from this bloody crime.
For now he plainly did descry
The hazards of them both drew nigh;
And saw the ruin of their states
Must be committed unto Fates.
His fury now did ready stand
His conquering Arms to take in hand;
He no whit faints, nor makes a doubt
Which way the world would turn about:
His daring mind told him no less,
But that he should have good success.
His Fate to dread affoords no scope,
Nor Pompeys nourisht any hope.
Fear laid aside, with manly words
He stirs his troops to trust their swords.
Caesar's oration to his Soldiers before the battle of Pharsalia.
Brave Soldiers that the world do tame,
The fortune of my rising fame,
Behold that long-desired sight
To yield you means to come to fight:
For that day need you wish no more,
With your own Arms your fates explore,
It now does rest upon your hands,
In what terms Caesar's fortune stands.
This is the day I call to mind
That you to me your faiths combined;
In trust whereof we Arms put on,
And marched over Rubicon:
In hope that by your martial might
We should obtain our Triumphs right,
Withheld from us with such despite.
This is that day whose ended broils
Shall fully recompense your toils;
And shall again your states restore,
And you establish as before
Free Citizens, by force of Mart
This day shall witness whether part
By Fates just doom, had best pretense
To take up Arms for rights defense.
This battle now will him conclude
As heinous most that is subdued.
If for my sake you did desire
To yield me right by sword and fire,
Now valiantly perform the same,
Let conquest free your Arms from blame.
No martial hand can guiltless go,
That shall be censured by the foe.
It Is not my Private that I seek,
But all your liberties a like;
And that you may dominion bear
Over all Nations far and near:
For I affect a private life,
Free from tempestious cares and strife.
And as a Burger of Romes Town,
Clad in a mean Plebeian gown;
I nothing will refuse to be
So your aduancements I may see,
Rule all and reign in scorn of me.
Much blood you shall not need to spend
For that great hope that ye attend:
The Grecian youths that us oppose,
Out of the Fencing-schooles they chose:
And many from their fields of games,
Slow wrastlers whom no Mart enflames;
But such as never yet bore Arms,
Mixed barbrously with diffring swarms;
Such as when troops to fighting falls,
And Trumpets sounds to battle calls,
Will be afraid of their own cry;
Few hands this civil war will try.
The world will soon be rid of most
Of all that rabble in their host:
They will but pester and encumber
Our Roman foes with ill-rang'd number.
Pierce through these men that are vntrain'd,
And kingdoms that such fame retained:
And when your swords shall first them greet,
Throw down their glory at your feet;
And by your valor make it plain,
That those that in his boasting vain,
Pompey before his Chariots lead,
(As mighty Nations vanquished)
So gloriously through streets of Rome,
Do not deserve one Triumphs doom.
Think you that any friendly love
To wars, did these Armenians move?
As though that they took any care
Of Romes estate, or her welfare;
Or any those Barbarian Kings
That to these wars their forces brings,
Would now for Pompeys Latium good
Be at the cost of too much blood?
Oh no, they hate us Romans all,
And chiefly those that made them thrall.
Fortune, that never me deceau'd,
To my friends hands has me bequeau'd,
To those with me that witness are
Of many fights in Gallicke war.
What Soldiers sword do I not know,
What trembling dart can any throw,
But whilst that through the air it flew,
I soon could tell whose arm it threw?
So as since that I you behold
Your Captain that led you of old,
And those brave Ensigns by you borne
That never yet received skorne,
Your manly looks with courage fraught,
Your threatening eyes that terror brought,
The day is yours, and now me seems
With bloody gore that rivers steemes;
Their Kings upon the earth are spurned,
The Senators lie tossed and turned:
The leaders and the Soldiers slain
In slaughtred troops upon the plain;
But now I do my Fates delay
Your armed hands with words to stay,
Give wars approach his own full sway.
My heart is ouer-ioy'd with hope,
Never saw I like Fortunes scope
So near my reach; never before
The Gods to me such bounties store
Did seem to give, Caesar does promise himself victory.
a little ground
Does us from our great wishes bound:
This battle fought I am the man
That only by my favor can
Freely bestow the treasured gold
That Kings and many people hold.
O heavens, what planets influence,
What star this motion did commence,
That now on this Pharsalian land
So great a question should be scand!
This day there is for me prepared
Either great pains, or great reward
Think but on Caesar's tortured state,
The chains that shall him captiuate,
His head upon the Rostrum placed,
His members racked, torn and defaced;
And you your selves will find like feasts,
In pinfolds pent, slaughtred as beasts,
Since he with whom we wars maintain,
A Captain is of Sylla's train:
Therefore regard your own estates,
For me I will prevent such Fates
By virtue of my dreadlesse hand,
That at their mercy skornes to stand: Caesar's resolution.

For he that this day shall not see
Us victors of our foes to be,
Shall see this sword of mine divorce
My breathing spirit from my Corse.
Ye Gods that from the heavens hye
Vouchsafe to bend your careful eye
Unto this base inferior soil, Caesar's pious request to the Gods.

To look upon the Roman toil.
Let him the victory obtain
That shall from cruelty refrain;
And will not deem it but offense,
Except in pity he dispense
To take away the lives of those
Whom he subdues, although his foes.
Though Pompey in his cruel mood
Did glut his sword with Roman blood,
When he our troops at vantage took,
Pent up within a narrow nooke,
Who out of valor chose to dye
Caesar's merciful charge to his soldiers going to the battle.
Rather then from their station fly.
But my brave youths I you entreat
Show no such rigor in your heat.
Kill not a man that shunnes your eyes,
Deem him a Citizen that flies;
But whilst their weapons they do use,
Let not fond pity you abuse:
Nor be then moved unto remorse,
But flat resist your parents force;
Yea on their faces turn your swords,
Whom reverent years gray hairs affoords:
If any should his kinsman find,
And in his breast his sword has shrin'd;
Or else so dear a friend shall wound,
To whom for favors he stands bound,
Whilst they against you show their might,
Account your self from guilt acquit,
As free as if he were a foe,
That you before did never know.
And now throw down your Trenches wall,
And fill the ditches therewithal,
Whereby imbattail'd as it stands,
The Army may march with full bands,
And run not out at little coopes,
Dispersed into petty troops:
Your own pauillions do not spare,
For to that Camp we marching are
From whence that Army does descend,
Whereof we soon shall make an end.
Scarcely had Caesar spoken all,
Caesar's troops sally disorderly out of their camp to the battle.
But each one to his charge did fall,
And suddenly they all did Arm
Throughout the camp, and took the larme.
Down went the Trench and Tents in haste,
The troops are not in order placed.
According to their Chiefetaines Art,
To Fates they do commit this Mart.
But if they all had Caesar's bin,
And such as did affect to win
The Roman Empire as their own,
By martial art and valor shown;
They would not then have headlong pressed
To fight a Battle for their rest.
When Pompey saw his foes draw out,
Bending to him with all their rout,
And that the war would no delay,
But that the Gods designed this day.
He stood amazed, his heart grew cold,
The which in Arms mishap foretold,
That fear should such a captain thrall;
Like dread did his whole host appall.
Then he a lofty horse bestrides,
And through his troops and cohorts rides, Pompeys oration to his soldiers
before the battle.

The day (quoth he) that your brave sprights
Pressed on to end all lingering fights,
Is now at hand, therefore expose
Your utmost force against your foes.
This is the vpshot now for all,
One hour will us together call.
He that his countries cause respects,
Or his dear household Gods affects;
He that his children and his wife,
And all dear pledges of his life,
Does seek to have and hold again,
Must with his sword the same obtain.
For all is now by God provided
In this one field to be decided.
And we must hope, that have the right,
The heavenly powers for us will fight;
They so will guide our weapons fierce,
That they shall Caesar's bowels pierce;
It is their wills that with his blood,
Romes sacred laws should be made good.
Had they designed to Caesar's fate
The world and all the Roman state,
By Destinies and their decree,
My elder years might shortened be.
But since the Gods by their high doom,
Both of the people and of Rome,
Have Pompey placed as leader chief,
It Is no sign of their wroth or grief.
All means that may bring victory,
We have provided seriously.
And many a Prince and noble Lord,
Our fortunes run with free accord.
The ancient bands of martial wights,
With grave advice on our part fights.
And if unto our later years,
Fate had reserved those worthy pears,
The Curij, and Camilli stout,
The Decij that did make no doubt
Freely to sacrifice their blood,
Thereby to gain their Country good,
All these on our side would have stood.
The nations that are farhest East
Unto this service now are pressed.
And many cities of account,
So as our forces do surmount
All other armed troops by far,
That ever yet attempted war:
The whole worlds strength at once we have
The soldiers and the leaders brave,
That both the Tropicks do contain
From Southern pole to Northern waine.
We able are (our wings stretched out)
To close our enemies about.
Few hands to conquer will suffice,
Our troops will dant them with their cries.
Caesar with his bare feeble host
To fight with us can be but lost.
Think that upon Romes walls there stands,
With dangling locks, and cast up hands,
The Roman Matrones in your sight,
Calling on you bravely to fight.
And think the Senate, those grave Peers
Unfit for Mart through aged years,
Following our Camp, do at your feet
Prostrate their silver hairs with greet*
And that Romes self you do encounter,
Fearing a Tyrant should surmount her.
Think that the Romans of these days,
And those that future times shall raise,
With one voice altogether praise,
In freedom to receive their birth,
And so return unto the earth.
And after these so dear respects,
If Pompey might moan your affects,
He and his children, and his spouse
Would at your feet cast self same vows*
If lawful twere reserved free,
The Empires sacred majesty.
And lest we conquer them in fight,
Pompey is but a banished wight.
And but his father-inlawes base scorn,
And to your shame a man forlorn.
My elder years I now should nate,
And longer loath to draw my date,
To bring hoare hairs to servile state.
The heavy words their captain used
Has all their minds with rage enfusde
The Roman valor it does move
Rather a present death to prove,
Then those suspects should true be found
That in his speech he did propound.
Then both the armies rusht together,
With equal fury showed by either.
Fear does one side to courage strain,
The others hope to rule and reign,
And now their hands do that destry
Which no age can again supply.
Nor ever any humane pain,
Will be of power to raise again.
Although from arms they still refrain. A compassionate speech.

For this one only battle day,
Will future Maurood much decay,
And will those peoples births destroy
That after worlds might else enjoy.
So as the noble Latin name
Will be a byword of defame,
The Albane and Laurentine bowres,
The Gabine, and the Veian towers,
And Coram rotted all with rust,
Will not be seen for ruins dust.
The Country void and desolate;
So as the Senatorian state,
Unwillingly will their remain,
Longer then night shall them constrain.
And that to do they often repine,
Though one of Numas laws divine,
But it is not age that this has done,
Nor putrefaction ouerrun
Such mighty frames, but civil broyle
Has laid such cities with the soil.
What is become of all the store
Of humane races but of yore,
That in the world were borne and bread?
The towns are vnreplenished?
The champian uninhabited?
One city now us all contains,
The fields manured by slaves in chains.
The moldy howses never airde
With their foundations vnrepaird,
Do every minute mouldring fall:
Whilst in them no man dwells at all.
The Roman walls do not embrace
The citizens of her own race.
The scum of every nation
There now takes up his station.
These slaughtring wars has this affected;
And now it needs not be suspected,
He deplores the miserable estate of the Roman Empire.
That Rome is able in long time,
To act again a civil crime.
For these harms thank Pharsalias field,
To it may bloody Cannas yield,
And Allias calamities,
Long kept in Latium memory.
Rome lesser harms in Annals sets
But willingly this day forgets.
O grief! the desolation,
That comes by aires infection,
That pestilent diseases breeds,
That from dire famines rage proceeds:
Or Towns with rapting fires burning
Or fearful earthquakes ouerturning
Whole cities, all such great decays
These men might well repair and raise.
Whom Fortune brought from every quarter,
In this fell war to slay and martyr.
And laid them prostate in this field
That many years did breed and yield,
Of soldiers and of captains brave,
That in these armies so did rave,
And by their wracks did show withal,
How great Rome was, when she did fall.
For by how much her power was spread
Over huge nations vanquished,
The faster her prosperity
Now ran unto calamity.
Her wars each year to her did give
Nations did that her store relieve.
Tytan as he his chariot roles,
Thy Empire sees in either Poles. The largenes of the Roman Empire.

And of the East small deal remained
That by thy conquest was not gained.
So as the circuit of thy might,
Was always under day and night
The wandering Planets in their rounds
Did never pass the Empires bounds.
But now Emathias dismal day,
Her glory did so prostrate lay,
As that on wrack to ruin brought
What many years had set aloft.
For by that day to pass it came
That Judea dreaded not our name,
Nor that the Dakes would give consents
To live in Towns and leave their tents.
Nor that our Consuls guirded round,
Should guide the plowshare on the ground
To cut Sarmatian cities bound.
Nor that we could due vengeance have
On Parthians as their scorns did crave.
And that our liberty in dread
Of civil Tyranny is fled
Beyond the Tygris and the Rheine,
Without hope to return again:
Although by us so often sought
With our lives blood to have bin bought:
A good denied us to gain
Which Scythes and Germans do retain,
But never more will turn her face
To look upon the Roman Race.
I would our state had never known
That Augurie by vultures shown,
When first with their sinister flight,
Our walls foundation deep was pight
By Romulus, that did surround
A dismal grove within their bound,
But that Romes fate had been held back,
Till after this Thessalian wrack.
O Fortune needs I must complain,
How Brutes their valors lost in vain!
Why with such reverence and such awe
Have we observed our ancient law?
And evermore, as new years came,
Did style them by the Consuls name?
Ye Meads, and Arabes are blessed,
With all the nations of the East,
That have been used perpetually
Unto the rule of Tyranny.
For now among those of any age,
That kings have held in vassalage,
Our destenie is to be last,
And servile shame our glory blast.
There are no Gods to be obaid;
The world is but by blind chance swaid:
It Is false that men of Jove have said.
Could he (from out the lofty sky)
These slaughters see of Thessaly,
And hold from them his thundering might,
When he Pholoen so will smite?
And Oeton scorch with lightning flame.
And Rhodops grove, so free from blame?
How does he blast the stately pine?
What must this work be brought to fine
By Cassius hand? and must he quell
The Tyrants head that so does swell?
The stars denide to lend their shine
Unto Thyestes odious line:
And Argos city rest of light,
Beclowding it with sudden night,
And will the heavens daylight afford
Unto Thessalias bloody sword?
Whereas so many brethren meet
With blood that do each other greet,
And children that their parents slay,
No mortal harms the Gods do way.
Yet of revenge, so much we hope,
As heaven can to the earth give scope.
These civil wars shall Deifie
New powers, like to the Gods on hie. This is spoken in derision of the Caesar's
that were so Deified and called Diui.

These Images shall be set out
With blazing stars, that beams do sprout
About their heads, and in their hands
Jove's thunderbolts and flaming brands.
And in the Temples Rome shall swear
By Caesar's ghost with sacred fear.
Now whilst both armies face to face
With speedy march shortened the space
That sundred them from fatal blows,
And were so near as each one knows
Which way his deadly pyle should strain,
And what hand threatened bane again,
They saw that then was come the time
That needs must act a monstrous crime.
The sons against their fathers stands,
Brothers confront with armed hands,
No man that time his place would change
And yet with all a faintness strange
Did them surprise; which pity made,
Crassine the first man that charged at this battle.
And cold blood did their hearts invade
So as the cohorts on both parts
Forbear to throw their ready darts.
Crassine the Gods on thee bestow
An end that may no ending know.
Not such a death as all men try
But death that living still shall die.
That with a lance from thy strayn'd arm
Did first begin this civil harm,
And with the blood of Roman wound,
Did first distaine Pharsalian ground.
O heady rage and murdrous mind,
Who would have thought a hand to find
So prone to blood, or else so bold
Whilst Caesar's self his hands did hold.
Now with shrill noise the air does ring,
The Cornet her strained notes did sing,
The Trumpets to the battle sounds,
The clamorous cries confusde rebounds
From earth unto the vaulted sky,
Whereas the clouds do never fly,
Nor where the thunders do engender;
And then these shouts themselves do render
Unto the vales nere Tempes groves,
And thence again it fleeting roues
With doubling echoes, that loud raues
From hollow vaults of Pelian caves,
So as therewith mount Pindus groans,
And trembling shook Pangean stones,
Oeteus hill does houle likewise
And so the fury of these cries
Does all about those quarters fly
That their own noise them terrify
A multitude of darts are cast,
And with them diverse wishes past,
Some hope that they their foes shall wound
Others wish they may fall to ground:
And that no blood should soil their hands
All now on hap and hazard stands.
Uncertain Fortune leads the dance,
The guilty now are made by chance.
Of those that fall, how great a part
Are slain with flying shafts and dart?
Now must the civil hate be shown,
But by the murdring sword alone.
The Roman blood is only shed,
With their own glayues embowelled.
Pompey now his battalions flanks
With thick and double filed ranks.
Poldron to poldron fast combined,
And Targateeres unto them joined.
So as they scarce had room the whiles
To use their hands or cast their piles.
They feared they were so nearely pressed,
That their own swords would them infest.
But Caesar's Veterans withal
Headlong on these thick troops do fall:
And through this press of armed foes,
They hew a passage with their blows.
Even where their habergions and maile,
Most safely did their bodies veil.
For (notwithstanding those strong coaces)
They pierced their bowels and their throats.
So as amongst these troops of arms,
Each one pertaker is of harms.
One army does sustain the fight:
The other does express his might.
The swords are cold on Pompeys part:
But Caesar's steeme in bloody mart.
Neither did Fortune long delay
The balance of these broiles to sway*
But like a torrent revel keeps,
And multitudes in moments sweepes.
But herewithall forth Pompey brings,
His troops of horse streatcht out in wings:
And placed them on his battle flanks,
And after them dispersed ranks
Of light-armed bands, to give supply,
Who on the foe with fury fly.
And all his nations pressing hither,
Their weapons mingled then together.
And now the Roman blood is sought
With fire, stones, darts, much scath is wrought,
And through the spacious air there flies
The bullets that with motion fries.
Then the Arabians, and the Meades,
And Ithyrans their stout troops leads
Unto the fight with bended bows,
That to their shafts no level shows:
But only shoot up to the skies,
Which then with deaded force down flies:
So as the head is seldom found
To do great harm or make deep wound.
Of pyles the deadly blows they feel,
The air is arched all with steel.
The darts and shafts so thick do hail,
That on the feeld they draw nights veil.
Then Caesar did begin to doubt
His vantguard might be put to rout.
Therefore to strength his front prouides
Some cohorts from those oblique sides
That were behind the ensigns placed,
And those he thither drew in have.
The Barbarians first put to flight by Caesar.
Where the Barbarian horsemen swayd,
Whom his unlooked for troops assayd,
His wings stood fast not disarayd,
These men he quickly put to flight,
Amazde they had forgot to fight.
And cowards shame they naught regarded.
No care was ever well awarded,
Nor charge in any civil harms
Unto Barbarian fearful swarms.
No sooner did their palfries feel,
Within their breasts the sticking steel,
But in a rage their riders flings,
And with their feet their brains out dings.
Then all the horse troops took their heels.
Squadrons of youths together wheels,
And from the foe they turn their heads,
And their own footmen ouertreads. The vantguard of the army in a rout.

The slaughter now exceeded measure,
Resistance was no more at leisure.
The war held now unequal lots,
One side was swords, the other throats.
But Caesar's host was much too slight
To slaughter all those troops outright,
That he subdude and put to flight.
O would this goare that in thee lies
( Pharsalia) might thy thirst suffice,
That these Barbarian breasts have shed,
And no more streams of blood be spread!
And that their bones (in heaps so stroad)
Might be enough thy fields to load.
Or if that thy desire be more
To glut thy self with Roman gore;
O then spare these Barbarians,
The Galates, and Syrians,
The Gauls, and Capadocians,
The Armenian, and Cicilian realms,
The Spaniards in the worlds extremes!
For when these civil wars are dated,
These shall be Romans then created.
So now this little fear begun
Does through all Pompeys army run.
And now the Fates a course provide,
That Caesar all may rule and guide.
For now the fight was come at length
To Pompeys greatest troop and strength,
Where his maine battle ranged stood.
The former ranks (with mazed mood)
About the fields were scattring scard, The maine battle resists awhile.

But here awhile the war went hard.
And Caesar's fortune stood debard.
The youths (that in this battle stands)
Were no auxiliary bands,
The kings to this assistance brought.
The Roman hands and swords then fought.
One finds his brother in this place,
Another sees his fathers face.
Here rage and fury now exceeds,
Here Caesar are thy heinous deeds.
O let this pageant of the war,
Be from my mind estranged far!
Let it to darkness be designed,
No age shall in my Poem find,
Discourses of so wicked kind,
To teach hereafter and to show
What civil war can overthrow.
And rather let all tears be lost,
And all complaints at so dear cost.
Therefore o Rome what did betide
In this last conflict, I will hide:
Caesar, that thunderbolt of rage,
That spur, that fury does engage,
Did hear about the cohorts ride,
Lest any mischief of his side
Should be to seek or left undone,
Incensing those headlong to run
To bold attempts, whose hot desiers
The rage of war already fires.
Their murdring fauchions then he eyde,
Which of them most in blood was did:
And which of them but slightly baynd,
Caesar whets on his soldiers.
And only at the point distaind.
What hand the sword did trembling try:
What darts or piles do faintly fly,
And what were thrown courageously:
Who only by compulsion fights:
And who in slaughtring wars delights:
Who did relent his bloody vain,
When he a Citizen saw slain.
Thus over all the field he flies,
Where slaughterd bodies heaped lies,
And many of his men he found,
Whose streaming blood gusht from the wound
When he himself would then assay
With his own hand the blood to stay.
Which way soever that he went,
He seemed the likeness to present
Of stern Bellona, that did shake
Her bloody whip, that makes men quake.
Or as if Mars were in the field,
Armed with the strong Palladian shield,
With boystrous batton in his hand,
Urging a fierce Bistonian band,
Whereas the whirling Charrets stand.
Here slaughters rise, and cruel fight,
That dimmes their eyes like misty night.
Here now are heard huge groans and cries,
With sounds from clashing Arms that flies,
As men fall on each others backs,
Whilst faulchions, faulchions hews, and hacks.
And Caesar's self with his own hands
Supplies with swords and darts their bands:
And bids them (as they deal their blows)
Strike at the faces of their foes.
He faster then drew on his troops,
And stirs them up that fainting droopes.
And those that dragge he makes advance,
Pushing them forward with his lance.
The common rout he biddes them spare, Why Caesar would have his Soldiers aim
at the Senate.

And shows them where the Senate are.
He knows the Empires chiefest blood,
And where her noblest members stood.
Who vanquished, Rome was then his own,
And her last freedom ouer-throwne.
Then second ranks of Peers he boords,
Piercing their reverent breasts with swords.
The Lepidi fall in this place,
And those of the Metellan race:
The Coruins likewise taste the same,
And the Torquati Kingly name.
The leaders and the chief are slain,
Whilst Pompey yet did safe remain.
O Brutus (that thy head did mask
But with a mean Plebeian caske, Alluding to the sword that after slew Caesar.

And so were to thy foes unknown)
With what sword was thy valor shown?
Thou glory of the Empires state,
Chief hope of Senatorian fate,
Last of that race that banished Kings,
Whose name throughout all ages rings;
O do not here (with too great spright)
Against thy foes express thy might*
Do not thereby thy end advance
Before the dire Philippian chance.
In thy Thessalia thou must fall;
Because that the fields of Philippi are in Thessaly.
Here can thou do no good at all,
Although thy sword for Caesar wait,
He is not yet come to his haight;
Nor to that supreme humane pride
That will all honor ouer-stride.
Then will his noble death beseem
The Fates, that him so worthy deem.
O let him live, and proudly reign,
And then by Brutus sword be slain.
Here now our Countries glory dies,
Here in a heap confused lies
The maine battle lost.
The old Patrician Roman gore,
Mixed with Plebeian bloody store;
And yet amidst this butcherie
Of Heroic Nobility,
Domitius stout that death of thine
Above the rest most clear did shine;
Whom fate did often oppress and toss:
For Fortune still did Pompey cross,
Where thou madst one, and still had loss.
So often were thou Caesar's pray;
But now have closed thy latest day
With liberty preserved free,
Which makes those many wounds to thee
Pleasing, whereof thou now must dye,
And no more Caesar's pardons try.
But Caesar chanced that way to pass,
Caesar insulteth over Domitius at the point of death.
Where he in gore blood wallowing was,
And tauntingly unto him spoke;
Domitius, thou that soughtst to take,
My charge from me, and govern Gaul,
Pompey thou can not serve at all,
Without thee this war we shall try.
No more he said; Then to reply,
His panting breast him life affoords,
And thus pronounced his dying words;
Caesar thou have not yet the meed Domitius last words to Caesar

Of thy accursed wicked deed.
Doubtful as yet does stand thy fate,
And less in show then Pompeys state.
I one of Pompeys train do go
Freely unto the shades below:
And safely thither do I wend;
And yet (by that these wars have end)
I well may hope, when I am dead,
Wrack shall befall thy wretched head;
And vengeance due shall on thee light,
And yield both me and Pompey right.
So having said, did life resign,
And deaths dark hand closed up his eyne.
In vain alas what should I shed
Tears here upon the thousands dead
Of those, that from the worlds each part
Did find their ends in this dire Mart?
Or why should I but single out
Some private fates in this huge rout,
Whose bowels pierced with deadly wounds
Their latest living days confounds?
Or who on earth dead bodies spurns?
Or who their bloody swords points turns
Upon their breast, that gasping lie
To free their souls that lingering dye?
Or who at one blow down is cast?
Or who with hewd limbs stands fast?
Or who with darts does bodies wound?
Or with his lance nails men to ground?
Or whose veins pierced whence blood flies out
Into the air, and does besprout
The Armor of his murdring foe?
Who slaies his brother at a blow,
And, as a stranger, does him spoil,
Cuts off his head, and in the soil
Does hide the same to hide his guilt;
Or who his fathers blood has spilt:
And mangled has his face the while,
The lookers on so to beguile:
And does it with such ragefull ire
As twere some foe, and not his sire.
No one man's death can claim lament;
To wail men now no time is lent.
The slaughters of Pharsalias field
Is nothing such as others yield.
There private Fates the wars attends:
Here Rome and all her people ends.
There war to death does soldiers call;
But here at once whole Nations fall.
The Grecian peoples blood here streams,
The Ponticke and Assirian realms:
And now the blood of Romans slain,
In torrents fleets on that again;
And with her ouer-flowing store
Sweepes from the fields Barbarian gore.
More people in this battle slain
Then our age can supply again.
It Is more then life and health that is lost;
It has the whole world ruin cost.
The sword upon those bodies rages,
That should have served future ages.
What have our children yet misdonne,
That they to servile state must run?
Or what fault in posterity,
Borne to be thralles to tyranny?
Have we so cowardly borne Arms,
And offered up our throats to harms?
The burden of another fear,
Upon our shoulders must we bear?
O Fortune! if thou needs would call
Our sons to be a tyrants thrall,
Thou should have given them wars withal,
Now does unhappy Pompey find
The Gods, and Roman Fates unkind:
And (ere the fight was thoroughly ended)
His cursed fortune he condemned.
Whilst in the field he stood on hye
Upon a hill, and thence did eye
The slaughters and the troops ramuerst
Throughout Pharsalias field dispersed.
The which the fight before did hide,
He multitudes sees on his side
Of weapons, and of bodies lost,
And his own wrack, at their bloods cost;
Yet did he not (as wretches will)
Desire the whole with him should spill.
Nor in his ruin wrap them all,
But on the heavenly powers did call,
That yet the greatest part might thrive
Of Latium blood, and him survive:
This is his comfort in annoy.
O Gods (quoth he) do not destroy
So many Nations at a clappe:
The world may stand free from mishappe, Pompeys prayer to the Gods.

And Rome may many ages flourish,
Although that Pompey sink and perish.
But if it so your likings please,
More woes on me to heap then these;
My wife and children yet subsist
For Fates to do with what they list.
Has not this civil war cost dear,
If I and mine must perish here?
May not such wounds be deemed wide,
Though all the world escape beside?
O Fortune! why do thou so rack
And labor to bring all to wrack?
Nothing is mine, I all things lack.
So having said, he rides about
The Ensigns, and the Arms in rout.
And in each part throughout the lands
Sees how his squadrons broken stands:
Whom he retraits, and does restrain
From running to their deaths amain.
He values not himself so much,
That for his sake harm should them touch.
And yet his courage did not fail
The swords and weapons to assail,
Or put his life to hazards chance,
Or unto death his breast advance.
He feared if Pompey there should dye,
The Soldiers would no dangers fly,
But on his body heaped lie.
Besides, he foully did despise
To lie a scorn to Caesar's eyes.
Yet if thy father-in-law affect
To cast his eyes on that prospect,
Thy head to him will be presented,
It cannot be by place prevented:
And thou his wife were partly cause
Why from this slaughter he with-drawes
To see thy face; for Fates ordain
That in thy sight he should be slain.
Pompeys flight.
Then he a Courser swift bestrides,
And posting from the battle rides.
Fear makes him not to turn his back,
His heart did never courage lack:
In most distress his mind was stout,
Nor plaints nor tears he powers out;
But such a reverent grief expressed
As with a Majesty fits best
For him, at that time to bestow
On Roman fortune brought so low:
And with like constancy beheld
The downe-falles of Emathia's field.
Nor prosperous wars could make thee proud
Nor ouer-throwes thy courage cloud,
That faithless Fortune (flattring thee
With glorious pomp in triumphs three)
Thou now do scorn with less account,
And makes thy mind her force surmount.
Securely thou from hence do part,
Freed from the cumbrous cares of Mart.
And now at large thou leisure have
To ruminate thy glories past.
Ambitious hopes (never suffis'd)
From thee are fled, and now despised.
Now may thou ken thy fortunes scope;
Fly wars, and in the Gods have hope.
None now (that Arms do undertake)
Will spend their lives for Pompeys sake.
Whether it be of Affricke soil
The lamentable bloody broyle,
Or Munda's battle stained with gore,
Or slaughters on Egyptian shore,
Yet after thee there will remain
A great part of Thessalian train.
And Pompey will not have his name
So popular with worldly fame,
As for thy sake like wars to wage.
But from hence forth (in every age)
The faction of the war will be
Twixt Caesar's state and liberty:
And though that thou the wars do flee,
The Senate to the death will fight
To hold their own and freedoms right.
Can thou in this find no relief,
That thus repulst thou shunst the grief
To see the slaughtred heaps that lie?
Look back again, and cast thine eye
Upon the rivers crimson stain,
Clotted with gore of bodies slain:
Be-pitty then proud Caesar's vain.
Think what remorse will strain his breast
When he shall enter Rome, oppressed
With grief, for her dear people lost,
Gained to Pharsalia at her cost:
When thou therefore thy self shall see
Banished in foreign Realms to be,
What ever fortunes thou shall find,
Endure it with a manly mind:
And whatsoever misery
(Under the Pharian tyranny)
Shall thee befall, with patience dure:
And in the Gods thy hopes assure.
They are more unhappy that offer an injury, albeit with success: then those
that repel an injury, although with loss of their blood.
And as the Fates afford their grace,
Bear with the changes of times space.
The conquest would have harmed the more:
Do not therefore thy hap deplore.
Forbid the people to lament;
All tears and lamentations stent.
The world will Pompey as much good
In his low ebb, as in his flood.
O do not now (with looks dejected)
Behold those Kings thou have subjected:
Survey the Cities won by thee,
And kingdoms that thou gave in fee.
Egypt and Lybia thou may try;
Choose out the land where thou would dye.
Larissas City was the place,
That first beheld thy noble face,
After this foil by Fortunes scorn:
Yet saw thee not as one forlorn;
The Larissans love to Pompey.
Her Citizens and chief estates
With all their force pass through their gates
To meet thee, as thy loyal friends,
And wayling many presents sends:
Their houses and their Temples vast
They did set open as he past:
And wished that they had partners been
With him, in all his bloody teene.
So as a great deal yet remained
Of that great name he erst retained.
Though less now then thy self alone,
Thy power may once again be shown:
And Nations with thee led from far,
So to restore thy state by war.
But oh! (quoth he) what should a man
Whom Fates from victory do ban,
The aid of men or Towns receive?
Unto the Conqueror bequeaue
Your faiths, and to his favors cleave.
But Caesar thou do ouer-stride,
And march as yet on every side
Upon the bowels and the breasts,
As they in heaped slaughters rests
Of thine own Countries woeful fall;
Thy son-in-law now quits thee all.
Away the Courser Pompey bears,
Followed with many sighs and tears;
And on the cruel Destinies
The people power out cursed cries.
Now Pompey do thou truly find
The faith that thy deserts did bind:
For now the fruits thereof they show,
Prosperity no love can know.
When Caesar saw of Latium gore
The fields did flote with ample store;
He bids them now forbear their swords,
And to poor souls he grace affoords:
For all was subject to their hands;
It Was vain to kill those hope-lost bands
That for their lives at mercy stands.
But lest the standing Camp might be
A safe retrait to those that flee;
And to enjoy the quiet night
Without alarmes, or new affright;
He meant to undertake the venture
On Pompeys Camp, Caesar enters Pompeys camp
and it to enter
Whilst fortune now was hot in blood,
And all in maze and terror stood;
Not doubting but his men were pressed,
Herein to yield unto his hest,
Although that they were all grown faint
With long fight, and with heat attaint.
But soldiers small persuasions need
To lead them to receive their meed:
Or to prepare them to a pray;
Yet Caesar thus to them did say:
Soldiers (quoth he) your valiant proes
Has won full conquest on your foes:
And for the blood drawn from your vains,
Rewards and Honors now remains.
Which to perform, I hold my part,
Yet that which due is to desert
I will not term a gift to be:
Each one shall give himself his fee.
Behold the Tents before your eyes,
Where gold and silver heaped lies;
Here is locked up (in many a Chest)
The treasure taken from the west;
The precious Eastern Implements
Does stuff and cloy their glorious Tents:
The Fortunes that are gotten hither
Of Pompey, and of Kings together,
Do but attend to be a pray
Unto the victor; haste your way
To come before them to the place,
Whom now you following have in chase.
He said no more, but their desire
Whom greedy gain had set on fire,
Did headlong drive them without fear,
Through the swords their way to tear;
And on their fathers bones to tread,
Spurning the Captains that lay dead.
What Ditch or Rampart could suffice
To hold them out whom such a prize
And booty of the war inuites?
They now would know to ease their sprights
The gains of all their bloody fights.
And here lay lodged (to maintain mart)
Many great treasures set a part,
Heap't up together in a whoord,
Spoils that the whole world did afford.
Yet for all this, they could not find
Sufficient to content their mind.
What gold is found in Ibers sands,
All the rich spoils that Caesar's Soldiers found in Pompeys camp could not
content their greedy minds.
Or Tagus casts upon her strands:
Or all those heaps of precious grains
Dig'd out of Arimaspus veins,
Is made their spoil, and yet they thought
It not enough, but dearly bought.
For now their conquering hopes deuoures
The spoil of the Tarpeian Towers,
And promise to themselves a day
That Rome and all shall be their pray.
But yet therein they are deceived,
The Tents are to their spoil bequeau'd.
The wicked soldiers, and base Slowches
Do sleep on the Patrician Couches.
The Kings pauillions, and their beds
Are rooms for slaves to lay their heads.
Their brothers Cabins some invested,
Some where their fathers lately rested
Their slaughtring bloody members nested
And those whom rauing slumbers haunts,
And frightfull dreams in sleeping daunts,
Do toss in their afflicted sprights
The cruel late Pharsalian fights:
Their bloody facts possess their eyes,
The rage of Arms their minds agrise:
And without swords about them goes
Their hands, as they were dealing blows.
A man would think the very fields
And balefull lands, those visions yields:
And that some apparitions strange
Of ghosts, that putred air did range:
And that by night the fearful shapes
Of Stygian sprights their senses rapes.
This victory with heavy strains
Requites the victors worthless pains. Terrible dreams affright Caesar's
soldiers in their sleep.

Hissing of Serpents in their dreams,
And fiery flames cast forth huge streams:
Slain Citizens to them appear,
And each one has his private fear.
One sees in sleep an old man's face,
And other lusty youths in place:
One does his brothers corpse behold
Pale and dis-figured on the mould;
Another in his dream discernes
His fathers wounds, whereat he yearnes.
And all these sprights, and hellish fears
Then Caesar's guilty conscience tears
No less then did those hagges of hell
Within Orestes spirits dwell,
That with affrights his visage urged,
Till Scythian Altars him had purged.
Nor yet Pentheius in his mind
More furious ghastly fits did find;
Nor mad Agaue in her kind.
Caesar's fearful apparitions in his dreams.
For all the swords that blood did stain,
Now shed on the Pharsalian plain;
And those revenging swords withal,
That should in future on him fall
By force of Senatorian spite,
In dreams oppressed him this night;
So do the furies him affright.
How lives this wretched man in fear
That does such guilt in conscience bear,
That in his dreams he seems to see
The Stygian ghosts about him flee,
With all the foul infernal trains
Whilst Pompey still alive remains?
Yet this no whit his conscience strains.
But when clear day (with shining beams)
Bewraid Pharsalia's bloody streams,
The horror of that ugly sight
Did not his gasping eyes affright,
Nor turn them from those loathsome lands,
But looks how thick the rivers stands
Clotted with gore, and how likewise
As high as hills the bodies rise,
That on the Champian heaped lies.
Of Pompeys men a tale he takes,
And in that place a feast he makes.
He pries amongst the bodies there,
What faces known unto him were;
And herein great contentment found.
He could not see Emathias ground,
Nor cast his eyes upon the plain,
Hid with the bodies that lay slain.
There saw he how his fortune stood,
And all his Gods clothed in blood. An inuectiue against Caesar for not
allowing Pompeys slain soldiers a funeral fire.

And for because he would not lose
This pleasing prospect on dead foes,
Still madding in his wicked ire,
He would not give them funeral fire.
But let them rotting there to rest,
Emathias air so to infest.
He might have learned by Hanniball, Hanniball buried Marcellus his enemy with
great magnificence.

That gave our Consul funeral:
And how he humane rites bestows,
(In Cannas fields) upon his foes.
With pyles of wood to burn the dead,
Which Lybicke torches kindled.
But that stern wroth that him enraged
The slaughter had not yet asswag'd.
For he remembered in his mind
The Romans were to him unkind,
But now we do not here desire
For every one a single fire:
Or any glorious funeral:
Bestow but one fire on them all.
We do not seek that they should burn
In parted flames and shared vrne.
Or if thou Pompey more would spite,
All Pindus woods then hew down quite,
And the Oetean oaks lay wast,
And make of all one pile so vast,
That he may from the seas descrie
Pharsalian flames stream in the sky.
This rage of thine avails naught,
By whatsoever means it is wrought,
That these dead bodies may consume:
For be it with a fiery fume,
Or else with time that they do rot,
And turn to dust it skilleth not.
For nature (in her loving womb)
Does freely mortals all intombe.
All bodies that do breath and live,
Their end to her as debt must give.
And though that Caesar, in disdain,
Their funeral fire from them detain;
Yet when the Earth and Ocean vast
Shall be consumed with flames at last,
One common fire the world shall have,
And stars with humane bones engraue.
And unto whatsoever place
Fortune thy flitting soul shall chase;
These souls the selfsame way shall wend:
No higher shall thy ghost ascend,
But lodge in Stygian shade below;
No better mansion shall thou know.
From Fortunes freakes death frees us all,
Lucans opinion of the last dissolution of the world.
What earth does yield, earth does recall;
And he that lies unburied,
With heavens high cope is covered.
And thou that do whole nations wrong
From burials, that to them belong;
Why do thou loath these slaughtred bands*
And shun these soild contagious lands?
Caesar do thou these waters drink,
In this air breath that so does stink.
But these corrupted bodies slain
Do take from thee Pharsalia plain:
And in despite do hold the place,
And thence the conquerours do chase.
But to this carnage for their food
Thither repaires with ravening mood
The Thracian wolves, that vent from far
The blood of this Aemonian war:
The Lions come from Pholoen,
And do forsake their haunted den
To quench in gore their thirsting jaws,
Whom sent of slaughter thither draws.
The grisly Bears do leave their caves,
And on these festred bodies raues:
The filthy dogs forsake their homes,
And all about these fat fields romes:
And whatsoever else by kind,
With senting nose can sauors wind,
When as the air is putrifide
With carcasses long mortifide.
And hither flocks of fowls do throng,
That both the camps had followed long.
And those same birds that change the air
Of Thracian cold, and do repair
Unto the gentle Southern blast,
Where they the streams of Nylus taste.
So many vultures thither fly,
As never erst did clowd the sky.
With other ravenous fowls of pray,
Which every wood sent day by day.
And to the branches, boughs, and leaves,
The clotterd gore and bowels cleaues
That these birds brings, and often withal,
Upon the victors heads does fall.
And on those wicked ensigns borne,
The flesh and guts that they had torn,
Which from their weary talents slip,
Having got more then they could grip.
Neither could they so sharke and share
The flesh, whereby the bones were bare.
All was not made a pray to beasts,
They were so glutted with these feasts,
As that they now began to loath
The inwards and the marrow both.
And only on choice morsels feed,
Most of the lims of Latium breed.
Unto long time to wet and heat
They left to rot and would not eat.
So as whole troops in heaped bands,
Lay festring there, and dung'd the lands.
O Most unhappy Thessaly!
How have thou wronged the Gods on hie,
That thou should be so pestered
With cruel slaughters and bloodshed?
What future age or tract of time,
May well repair this bloody crime,
Or lodge this in obliuous grave?
What corn bringst thou that shall not have
(Upon his blade) a bloody stain,
To show these slaughters in thy grain?
What plow-share can here furrows rend
But they will Roman ghosts offend?
And yet new armies here shall meet,
And with like rage each other greet:
Before that ever thou can dry
The blood, that in thee now does lie.
Should we our fires sepulchers rake.
And of their tombs a ruin make?
Searching the depth to find the chest,
And lay all open where they rest?
More cynders yet there would be found
Turned up in the Aemonian ground,
By force of crooked cultors share,
When as the plowman tilleth there,
And more bones spuing out their marrow,
Crushed with the iron-toothed harrow.
No mariner though tempest tossed
Would ever anchor on this coast.
No tilsman would plow up these fields,
That unto Romans burial yields.
Their ghosts would cause the peasants quake
The droues the pastures would fosake.
The shepherds durst not be so bold
Their fleecie flocks to feed and fold
That they their hunger might suffice
On grass, that from our bowels rise.
But thou Emathia as forlorn
Would humane races hold in scorn.
As if thou were that torrid soil.
That Phoebus beams does always broile.
Or else that frozen ycie land
That underneath the pole does stand.
Unknown so would thou lie vnman'd.
Had this been but thy first wars blame,
Not seconded with like defame:
O Gods if that we may detest
A land were wickedness does rest!
Why does this soil the world oppress,
And so bring mankind to distress?
The bloody battle fought in Spain,
The horrors on Pachinus maine,
Mutinas, and the Lucan fleetes
Do wipe away Philippos greetes.
Finis Libri Septimi.
Lucans Pharsalia. The eighth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
POmpey repulst and put to flight,
By secret ways in great affright,
Himself first at Larissa shows,
And then by seas to Lesbos goes.
Where all that people him bewailes,
Thence with his mournful wife he sails
Unto Caelicia, whither came
His son, and other Lords of name.
There they consult what land to seek,
Accused Egypt best they like.
Where he no sooner did arrive,
But king and Council did contriue
His present death; and to that end
They thaiterously Achilles send,
Who in the presence of his wife,
And of his son, bereft his life.
Codrus his servant with his hands
Scrapes him a grave amongst the sands.
NOw Pompey forward hasting posts
Over the Herculean coasts
Then through Tempes woody ways
Aemonian forests he displaies,
And desert passages assayes.
His steed, though stricken with the spur,
Would scarcely forward go or stir. Pompeys fears and suspicions in his
flights

So was he spent and over heat
With running long, and faint with sweat.
Besides amaze him so did fright,
That he stood doubtful in his flight,
What course to take, or where to rest,
But in and out his way does wrest.
The murmuring that the winds does make
Amongst the woods when leaus did shake
Causde him for very fear to quake.
His train that follow him behind
A terror are unto his mind.
And those that gallop by his sides, The iealously of fear.

Perplexe him also as he rides.
For though he were from that high place
Thrown down, and out of Fortunes grace
Yet therewithal he understood,
That no base prise was worth his blood.
But mindful of his former state,
He knew it was yet at so hie rate
That Caesar would give for head,
As much as he then valued
The price of Caesar to be slain,
And would bestow his head to gain.
But now he finds no secret place
Could serve to hide his honored face.
For many that do take his part,
Now coming to Pharsalias Mart
(The fame as yet not being blown,
That all was lost and overthrown)
Were much amazed in their mind,
Pompey in that same place to find.
And scarcely would believe the truth
That he himself relates with ruth.
But grievous was all company
To him in this calamity, Pompey affects a retired life hating all popularitie.

No peoples concurse he desired
But from the world to live retired.
In safety with obscured name:
But Fortune that unconstant Dame
On him poor man her frowns does cast
To blanch her many favors past,
So as the weight of his renown,
His happiness does more press down,
And with the more offensive hate,
His former bliss does exprobate.
The remembrance of former felicities is grievous in adversity.
For now he thinks his honors past,
Were heaped on him too too fast.
And does accurse those Syllan bays,
The glory of his youthful days.
It irkes him now, dejected wight,
To think upon his Nauall fight,
And those brave ensigns that he won,
In Pontycke kingdom ouerrunne.
Long life does manly courage bate,
And he that in empiring state
No man happy but in his end.
Has always lived, except withal
In bliss he close his funeral.
And does with speedy death prevent,
The change that fortune would present.
He has but lived to see his shame,
And has outliu'd his honors name.
For who would fortunes favors try
Except he can resolve to die.
Now has he to the shore attained
Whereas Poeneius stream distained
Peneius river that runs between Olympus and Ossa.
With blood of the Pharsalian fields,
Her Tribute to the Ocean yields.
There fearfully he takes a boat
Unfit in winds and waves to floate.
Which scarcely safe did him convey,
Upon the river, to the bay.
For yet she coasted with her oars,
Corcyras and Leucades shoares,
This Cylicke, and Lyburnicke Lord,
In those lands erst so much adored,
Embarks him here with mickle fear,
Into a little Passenger.
And with a mind fraught full of cares, Pompey embarks himself for the Isle of
Lesbos.

His course for Lesbos he prepares.
Where thou Cornelia did reside
And there more heavy days had tried,
Then if thou had encamped lain,
With Pompey in Pharsalias plain.
Presages great of future ill,
Her vexed thoughts do fright and fill.
And in in her sleepings heaviness:
Often trembling fits did her oppress
She sees Thessalia field by night.
And when that Phoebus spreads his light.
Unto the lofty Cliffes she hies, Cornelias care of Pompeys

And to the shore that utmost lies
Where on the maine she casts her eyes,
And if she will first of all discover:
If any sails do that way houer.
And yet to ask she is a dread,
How Pompey in the war has sped.
But now behold his ship does stand
Full with the haven of this land,
And with all sails does hither press,
Though with what news thou can not guess.
Till at the length grief to revive,
Thy conquered husband does arrive.
The heavy messenger of wars,
The Harrold of hearts-wounding scarres.
Why do thou now lose time to wayle,
When thou may weep, fear does prevail
But as the ship drew near at hand,
In have she runs unto the strand.
And there she quickly did descrie,
The cruel blame of Destiny. Pompey after the overthrow arriues at Lesbos
where Cornelia was.

Her Lords discolloured deadly face,
Whose hoarie hairs about it trace,
Rough and vnkombt; and his attire
Dashed and besprent with dust and mire.
Wherewith this poor astonished wight,
Was overcome with deaths dark night,
That from her eyes deprived the light.
Faint sorrow did her sprites inuest,
Down right she sinkes life leaves her breast.
Cornelia falls into a swoone with sorrow.
Her lims were stark, her heart grew cold,
A deadly trance her hope does hold.
By this their Anchors being cast,
Were with their cables mored fast.
Pompey beholds the vacant sand,
Where as his faithful servants stand.
Who secretly their griefs do show,
Amongst themselves with inward woe,
And mournful sighs which they bestow,
Such as well sorted with his fate.
And therewithal they eleuate
In vain their mistress from the ground,
That there half dead lay in a sound.
Whom Pompey colleth in his arms,
And her lims with embracements warmes.
Then as the blood returned again,
And did begin to strength each vain:
Her husbands hand she felt withal,
And to her mind his face did call.
Pompey comforts Cornelia with a brave speech.
He wills her not to stoop to fate,
Nor yet her griefs to aggrauate.
O why should thou a woman borne
Of so great blood, like one forlorn?
Thy noble heart and comfort break,
With the first blow of Fortunes freake,
A mean is offered now to raise,
Thy glory to all future days.
The praise wherein thy sex has part,
Is not for letters, nor for Mart.
Thy honor is thy constancy,
Unto thy spouse in misery.
Lift up thy sprites with pious thought,
Set all the scorns of fate at naught.
Me (though subdude) love as before,
Thy glory shall be so much more.
Now that my honors all are fled,
And that I am abandoned.
Of all the Senates sacred troop,
And of great kings that late did stoop
Unto my hest; Now be thou known
Pompeys dear constant friend alone.
Too much thou greeuest with Pallid face,
Since that thy husband is in place.
Thy sorrow now is at that height
As greater cannot vex thy spright,
But to bewail thy Pompey so,
Should be the last love thou should show
Unto him dead; as yet no harms,
Accrewes to thee by civil arms.
Pompey in health does live as yet,
Though fortunes favors from him flit. Meaning for the loss of his glory.

To that therefore thy love was bent,
For which thou make so great lament.
When these words in her ears did sound
Her faint lims scarce she lifts from ground.
When as her voice at last she strains,
And in this sort her state complains.
Would God I had been destined
To Caesar's wrack; in marriage bed. Cornelia replies to Po^pey

Then had not both my nuptial joys,
Twice wronged the world with these annoies
Erynnis first in wedlock state,
To Crassus did me consecrate:
And so devoted to his hands,
I brought the wracks of Parthian lands, This was Crassus son, a brave young
nobleman slain in the Parthian wars with his father the rich Crassus a Roman
Senator.

Amongst the Roman martial bands.
Now civil harms do follow me,
And thy just cause; the Gods do flee
By my default; O worthy Pheere,
My hapless match thou boughtst too dear.
Had Fortune power to show such spite
Upon so great and brave a knight.
Accursed wretch, why did I match
My self to thee, these harms to hatch,
Now let me thereof bide the pain,
Which I will take without disdain,
And that the seas may be more mild,
And faith of kings rest vndefilde.
And all the world to thee stand fast,
Into these deepes my body cast.
For would my head were damned to die,
So thou might conquest gain thereby
Now Pompey make thy losses known,
Iulia the daughter of Caesar, Pompeys late wife.
And Iulia let thy spite be shown.
Where so in civil camps thou haunt,
And on my bed thy vengeance vaunt.
Be present here me to torment,
Let thy wroth on me wretch be spent.
Thy Pompey spare: so having said,
Her grieved head again she laid
Upon her husbands woeful breast,
And in his arms awhile did rest.
These words causd many a waterie eye,
Amongst the troops of standers by.
And Pompeys heart even duld with cares,
For second sorrow now prepares.
Thus Lesbos from his eyes did strain,
Tears, that Pharsalia could not gain.
The oration of the citizens of Mitilen to Pompey.
By this from Mitilen great store
Of people came, that filled the shore.
And said to Pompey in this wise,
Great honor must to us arise
For evermore, and to our state,
So to be trusted with the Mate
Of noble Pompey, as whose thrals
We now deuote our eitty walls
With sacred vows; and do thee pray
That thou one night with us would stay,
And us vouchsafe thy hosts to be,
Our household Gods shall welcome thee.
O Pompey by this grace of thine,
Make us to future ages shine.
That Roman guests that seek this shore,
May for thy sake love us the more.
No city in this conquered state,
Now better sorteth with thy fate.
All places now in hope may stand,
For favor at the victors hand.
Already we have run the race The Mitelens hopeless of Caesar's favor.

That us has brought in his disgrace.
What though our Isle lie in the maine;
Can Caesar's Navy us constrain?
Of Senators the greatest part
Some certain place will hold for Mart.
Thou may again repair thy fame
In some one coast of noted name:
The treasures of our Temples hold,
Our Gods to thee shall give their gold.
Our men and ships as thou shall please, Mitelen wholly deuotes it self to
Pompey.

Shall be employed by land or seas.
And Lesbos worth what it can make,
Use as thy own and freely take.
And lest that Caesar it possess,
Take it to thee in thy distress.
And this suspect take from our land,
That have desired it at thy hand.
That as when thy estate was hye,
Thou in our faith did trust affye.
So now in thy adversity
Seem not to doubt our loyalty.
This dear devotion of their part,
Did greatly comfort Pompeys heart*
And unto him no little joy,
To find such faith in most annoy.
No land that is under heaven (quoth he)
Has deerer been then yours to me. Pompeys answer to the Mitelens.

And such my trust I did approve
With this great pledge of my hearts-loue,
For I to Lesbos trusty state
Committed my dear spoused mate:
Here was my sacred mansion, The confidence that Pompey had in the Mitelens.

And Gods of my devotion.
Another Rome to me this was;
And when my ship to seas did pass,
To this place first I took my flight,
And on no other shore would light.
Now since I know that Caesar has
Against this state conceived wrath,
Because that during this our strife,
You safely guarded Pompeys wife.
Think you that I would now refrain
To put my trust in you again,
As though that now you stood in awe,
Pompey acknowledges the Mittilens to be in Caesar's disgrace for his sake.
Caesar's dislikes on you to draw?
When as I know that for our sakes,
Already he as foes you takes.
No, now about the world must I
New forces seek, and fortunes try.
Lesbos famous for faith to Pompey.
Alas! how happy Lesbos name,
Will through all Ages fly with fame?
Whether by thy example led,
I shall by Kings be succored:
Or else that Lesbos has alone
To Pompey so great kindness shown.
For now I have resolved my mind
To try where I may comfort find,
And who to me will be unkind:
And if that any Gods there be,
That the protection takes of me:
Pompeys request to the Gods.
To them my last petitions are,
That they the peoples hearts prepare,
As faithfully to me to stand,
As do the people of this land.
That though I now be put to flight,
Yet for all that in Caesar's spite,
Their gates may be reserved still
For me to come and go at will.
So having said, even with that word,
His woeful wife he takes aboard:
The grief of the Mittilens for Cornelias departure.
The Mitelens such moan then make
That one would think they did forsake
Their native soyles; for on the strands
They cry and wail, and wring their hands.
But Pompeys fortune less they mournd,
Then hers that with them had soiourn'd
So long in all this civil broyle,
So as the people of this soil
Lamented, as if they had lost
A Citizen they loved most.
The Matrons all held her so dear,
That had she gone unto her Pheere
In happy state, with conquest gained,
Yet had they not from tears refrained.
So had she with her kind respects
Obliged to her their dear affects,
Her virtue and her modest grace,
Her mild aspect and lovely face
In all their hearts had taken such place.
For she was of such humble cheer,
Though wife to such a mighty Peer, The love and honor that the Mitelens bare
to Cornelia for her sweet behavior.

That she to them gave no dislike,
But lived as a guest full meek;
As though that she for succor came,
And not as noble Pompeys Dame
Left there when he his fortunes joyed,
But as the wife of one destroyed.
Tytan began now to decline,
So as one half of his bright shine
Was hid from us within the seas;
The other half the Antipodes
Did then behold; so as nor we
Nor they, could then his full eye see.
But Pompey now could take no rest, Cares impediments to quiet sleep.

So many cares torment his breast.
Sometimes he calls unto his mind,
How many Cities were combined
By league unto the Roman state,
How many Kings confederate
Of diverse humors, took their part,
Whom he might draw again to Mart.
Sometimes he thinks upon the South,
Whose lands the Sun has parch't with drouth.
And thus a world of cares and toil
In his perplexed breast do broyle.
Sometimes in hope to leuy Arms:
Sometimes in dread of future harms. Pompey conferres with his Pilot about his
course.

Then with the Master he confarres
About the motions of the stars;
And how the Coasts and lands do lie,
The signs of weather in the sky,
And when it is fit to hull or try:
Or else with sails to cut the deepes,
What star the Syrian quarters keeps;
Or what star in the waine best stands,
To guide a course for Lybian lands.
This skillful Pilot that had often
And long, these Nauall Courses sought,
And secret mysteries of the skies,
In this sort unto him replies:
The Pilots answer to Pompey.
We never (wretched Mariners)
Do make our recknings by those stars
That wandering still roll to and froe,
We might be much deceived so.
But such as do not range nor role,
But are still fixed near the pole,
And never in Neptunus deepes
His fiery twinkling torchet steepes:
But always shines in one set place,
By it we do direct our race:
And when this star aloft does tend,
And that the lesser Bear is kend,
Just poynting on my maine yards end.
The Bospheros maine we do explore,
And Seas that Circle Scythias shore.
But if Arctophilax descend,
The least point from our Top-masts end,
The Pilots observations.
And that the little Bear appear
Unto the seas somewhat more near,
For Syrias ports our course we steer.
But with Canopas, South we run,
For he the Northern clime does shun.
Or if he keep our Larbord side,
And so our helm for Pharos guide:
Then in the middle of that maine,
Our ships upon the Syrts might strain.
But now I would be glad to know
Your will, and whither you would go:
And what coast fits best your avail,
Accordingly to set our sail.
Pompey to this inconstantly
With doubtful humor does reply.
Always (quoth he) for our behoof,
See in those seas you keep aloof Prmpey directs his Pilot what coasts to shun

That are from Thessaly remote,
And near Hesperia do not flote.
Shun you those seas or shores to find,
Commit the rest unto the wind.
My wife aboard with me shall stay,
From Lesbos I took her away;
Thither I did a due course bend,
But Fortune now a port must lend.
Thus having said, the Pilot hailes,
The Mariners do cut their sails.
The sheats that equally inclined,
But spooned just before the wind.
He veares now to the larboord side,
One tacke unto the prow he tide,
The other on the sturne belayes,
And to Assinas coast assaies;
And where the surging billow shockes
Along the Isle of Chyos rocks.
Now angry Neptune frothing chides,
Whilst that the ship thus stemmes the tides;
And all the while she holds her course, Upon the construction of this Simile
all the Commentators do vary and are doubtful.

He roaring fometh worse and worse.
With no such ease and speedy change
The Coachman can his Charret range
From right hand to the left hand side,
When he his trampling steeds would guide;
And circling wheels about does trend,
First to attain his races end.
Phoebus unto the world gives light,
And dimmes the stars that shines by night*
When those that now did scattring fly
From this late storm in Thessaly;
With all speed after Pompey run,
And on the seas he meets his son;
Yet scarce clear of the Lesbian coast,
And then more Princes of his host,
That erst to him had faithful bin,
And in this state he now was in;
A fugitive and ouer-throwne,
Did still to him their love make known.
The Eastern Princes stand firm to Pompey in his distress.
And many Kings with martial trains,
That in the Eastern clymats reigns,
And other Lords of powerful states,
For all his wracked exiled fates,
Stood firm his faithful constant mates.
King Deiotarus, one of those
That escaped away with Caesar's foes,
Did follow Pompey in his flight,
And was employed to raise new might.
To him his charge in these words gives;
Pompeys words to king Deiotarus.
Thou faithfulst king to me that lives,
Since that the Roman power and host
In the Aemathian fight is lost;
Go try the favor of the East,
As those that need fear Caesar least:
The Nations that the waters drinks
Of Euphrates and Tygris brinkes.
To Pompey it shall be no grief
In this distress to crave relief
Of Medes, whereby to wage new war,
And Scythians, though remote so far;
But utterly to change our clyme,
And use requests in this hard time
To proud Arsaces for his aid,
And if old leagues be not decayed,
But still in memory are borne:
Then by that God that I have sworn,
The thundering Jove of Latium land,
And by that holy reverent band
Of Magi, that your oaths did bind,
Prepare your selves in warlike kind:
Your quiuers fill with shaft and dart,
And your Armenian bows for Mart,
Bended with strings of Getan Art:
And if (o Parthians) heretore
To war on you I have forbore:
When I did range the Caspian maine,
And with my Army did constrain
The fierce Alani to my yoke,
And never did the Parthes provoke.
None did destroy, or seek their soil,
Nor did enforce them to entoyle Pompeys favor to the Parthians.

Themselves, their children, and their wives,
For safe-gard of their goods and lives,
Within the Babylonian walls,
Nor ever sought to make them thralles.
But when I conquered Persean Realms,
And the Caldean utmost streams.
Swift Ganges and Hydaspis fierce,
That through the Eastern lands does pierce,
Wasting Nyseas ancient walls,
And so into the Ocean falls;
Where Phoebus lifts his shining face,
I nearer Parthes then Persia was.
Yet when I had subdued all these,
My Arms in naught did them disease.
Nor yet were they, among all the rest,
For honor of my triumphs pressed.
They only were exempt by me
Of all the Eastern Kings as free:
With such desert I did them bind,
And shall I Parthes ungrateful find?
Nay more then this Arsaces race
At Pompeys hand has found like grace.
For after that same bloody strife,
Where Crassus lost his host and life,
What Romans could their hands contain
From Parthes, that all our host had slain?
Obliged to me by such deserts,
Let them the like show on their parts. Pompey for revenge would join with the
Parthes the most inueterate enemies of the Romans state.

Now let the Parthes with Trumpets sounds
Break out in force beyond their bounds:
And Zeugma that same Palean Town,
Let them surprise, or batter down.
Ye Parthes for Pompey conquest gain,
To conquer Rome is worth your pain.
The King did no refusal make
This hard request to undertake;
But presently aside did lay
His Royal Robe and rich array:
And in the habit him attires
Of one of his inferior Squires.
It Is safe for Kings in ieopardie
To counterfeit base poverty.
How much therefore does lowly need
For safety greatest Kings exceed,
Freer from dangers and from dreed?
The King in this sort set on shore,
Pompey then plies both sail and oar,
Till he the Icarian cliffe had past,
Pompeys navigations, his wife being with him.
From Ephesus he bends his mast;
And Colophonas pleasant waves,
And Samos rocks that foaming raues.
And then a gentle puffing gale
His sails from Coo^s coasts did hale.
Gnydon he leaves, and Rhodes does shun,
That voue their Altars to the Sun.
Then that great bay Telmesydos
Aloof he flies, and ouer-goes:
And from the middle of the maine
Pamphilias coast appeared plain.
But yet he would not make aduenter
Within a walled town to enter.
Phaselis, a little Island in the Mediterane.
Little Phaselis was the coast
That Pompey first did make his oast.
The slender habitation there
Made him the less the place to fear:
The empty houses people needed,
His ship their troop by far exceeded.
From hence again his course he bends,
And sees how Taurus mountain trends,
Whence Dypsas to the seas discends.
Would Pompey ever this suspected
When he the Pirates force subjected,
Or ever in his mind have thought
That to this stresse he should be brought
For safety so to range the maine,
In one poor ship with so small train.
But now the Senates greatest part
Escaped from Pharsalias Mart,
Together met, though put in rout,
And at the length found Pompey out;
At anchor in the little port
Calendrys hight, The Senators escaped from the battle, come to Pompey.
where great resort
Of shipping passes to and froe,
As Selyns stream does ebb or flow.
Pompey at length with heavy cheer,
Desired them these words to hear;
Companions dear in war and flight,
The model of our Countries right: Pompeys oration to the Roman Lords that
escaped from the battle.

Although that now to this bare coast
By wretched Fortune we be tossed,
Consulting on Cylicias strands,
Not guarded with our armed bands:
Yet now we must begin again
New proiects, wars to entertain.
To your brave minds good comfort yield,
All fell not in Pharsalias field:
Nor am I so with fate oppressed,
But that I can raise up my crest,
And scorn the blow that us distressed.
Could Marius in the Lybicke soil
Repair again his bitter foil,
And win to him a Consuls state,
And fix his fame in Roman date?
And think you I through Fortunes spite
Will be suppressed with lesser might?
In Grecian seas for my avail
I do retain a thousand sail,
And have as many Captains more
That will attend me on the shore.
Our force this battle rather parted
Then any way the same subverted.
My fame that is of such account,
Can easily this loss surmount.
The whole worlds force I soon will move,
My only name so much they love.
Do you consider and advise
What Realms or States most fittest lies
Pompey desires them to give their opinions for aids to be sought.
To serve us now for our avail,
Whose force and faith will not us fail:
Whether that Lybia be the place,
Or Egypt now as stands the case,
Or Parthians friendship we embrace.
Which of all these you estimate
Worthiest to aid the Roman state.
For me, my Lords, I will disclose
In my conceit what I suppose:
And all my reasons lay down flat
Pompey sets down his conceit for succors.
That leads my mind to this or that.
The Nylus King is but a youth,
And that makes me to doubt his truth;
For constant faith more sure does rest
Within a grave and manly breast.
The Moore I do no whit applaud,
We all do know them full of fraud.
And how that wicked Carthage race
Has always practiced Romes disgrace
We right well know; and that there rests
More Hanniballes yet in their breasts.
And as for the Numidian Kings,
That now from bastards races springs,
Whose murdrous hands the blood distaines
Of their true lawful sovereigns;
And did of late with so great pride
Varus that led our force, deride;
Meaning king Iuba.
Who sought his aid, and with disgrace
Allotted Rome a second place.
This makes me think it is best we prove
Our friends by East, and trust their love.
Great Euphrates with his vaste streams
Diuides and boundeth many Realms.
The Caspian sea has limits large,
And harbors safe within his varge.
In other sort the heavens aspects,
The Assirian days and nights directs.
That sea is of another stain,
And flat secluded from our maine:
Their people conquering humors bear,
And for the wars large Coursers rear.
With stronger bows they battle wage,
The young and old, and every age
Affects his vigrous draught to show,
Each arrow gives a deadly blow.
The Parthes were first that brake the ranks
Of Alexanders piked slanks. Crassus extols the Parthian forces.

And Bactra that same City great
VVonne from the Medes, their Regal seat,
And Babylon with walls so hye,
That does Assiria dignifie.
Our Piles the Parthians holds slight,
And in the field with us dare fight:
And with what force Scythes arrows fly,
Crassus defeat too well did try:
They have not only heads of steel,
Whose piercing force their foes do feel;
But poison on those heads they fix,
So as if any place it pricks,
The smallest wound death with it brings,
And all the blood with venomemings.
Would God no cause did me incline
To trust to proud Arsaces line. The Parths enemies to the Romans

These Parthes with their subsisting fate
Our Empire still did emulate:
And all the heavenly powers with grace
Have looked upon the Parthian race.
But I would also send for bands,
And valiant troops from other lands,
The furthest East I would incite
To send to us their Martial might.
But if the Eastern faith refuse,
So as their aid we cannot use,
And the Barbarian leagues do fail,
Let Fortune strike my ship-wracke sail,
And me convey to unknown coasts,
Never subdued by Roman hoasts.
Pompey scorns to seek to those Nations that he has triumphed over.
I never basely mean to pray
Their aid, that erst did me obey.
Twill comfort me when as I dye,
That in strange climes my limbs shall lie,
Whereby proud Caesar shall not have
The power to grace or wrong my grave.
And I will only meditate
The glory past of my lives fate,
Which that worlds part did celebrate.
What was beyond Meotis lake,
And what scope Tannais did take
With her streams trending in the East,
Pompey famous in the East parts of the world.
So far has my renown encreast.
To what lands has my name more run
For famous conquests by me won?
Or else from whence has my deserts
More triumphs gaind then from those parts?
O Rome! my enterprise now guide,
What greater boon can heavens betide
To thee, then in this civil Mart
To see the Parthians bear a part;
So to consume them with our Arms,
And mix their wrackes amongst our harms.
A reason why to take aid of the Parthes.
For when that Caesar's forces stands
Encountering with the Parthian bands,
Fortune must me the victor make,
Or else for Crassus vengeance take.
Thus said, he saw the Senates mind
Stood not to his advice inclined.
But Lentulus amonst the rest
Whom virtues courage forwards pressed,
And noble grief for Roman fate
He holding then the Consuls state,
A brave oration of the Consul Lentulus in answer of Pompey.
His worthy voice did eleuate.
Has so this late Thessalian blow
Thy mind dejected and brought low?
Has one days fate the world oppressed?
Must we amongst our selves contest?
Now after this Aemathian wound,
Does that all hope of help confound?
Has Fortune Pompey all bereft,
That he in Parthians hands is left?
Why should thou as a runnagate,
So range the world to mend thy fate?
In foreign climes, and in such lands
As to our state malignant stands?
And stars that us no good luck bods
Will thou adore Chaldean Gods?
And with Barbarian rites polluted, Lentulus reprooues Pompeys humor to the
Parths.

Be now the Parthians thrall reputed?
Why did we first to arms descend,
Our liberty but to defend?
O wretch thou did the world delude
If thou can live in servitude.
Shall Parth that thee beheld with hate,
A ruler in the Roman state?
That saw thee from Hyrcania lead
Great kings thy captives; and with dread
Beheld the Indians conquered.
See thee dejected and cast down,
And basely yield to fortunes frown.
Whilst they puffed up in mind with pride,
Do but the Latium name deride.
And value Rome less then their state,
To see thee so degenerate.
O Pompey in thy speech we find,
Naught suting with thy worth or mind,
The Parth that does not understand
The language of the Latium land,
When thou of him do aid request, Abase reproach to Pompey.

By tears thy mind must be expressed.
Shall we this wounding scorn endure,
That Parths shall our revenge procure?
Rather then Rome with her own arms
Shall remedy Hesperias harms.
Did she for this thee chieftaine make,
That thou no more regard should take,
But spread abroad with such disgrace,
Her maymes unto the Scythian race,
And secret scarres; her to deface.
What will thou teach the Parthian swarms,
The way to vex us with their arms?
Has Rome the hoped comfort lost,
Of such a war and such an host?
Because no kings she would obey,
But that her Citizens should sway?
And will thou now the wide world range,
To bring whole nations fierce and strange
To ransacke Rome? that will display
Those ensigns that they won away
From Crassus, when they vanquished,
And must from Euphrates be led,
And here to our disgrace be spread?
That king that us his aid denide,
When as our Fortune was untried,
The unlikelihood of Parthian aides.
And came not to Emathia field,
To us will he now comfort yield,
And so provoke the victors spite,
Whom he does hear to be of might.
And now will Pompeys fortunes run;
Such trust with them did never won.
The nations of the Northern climes,
Where falls the dewes and foggie rimes,
Are stout in war and fear not death,
But those that in the East take breath,
And lead their lives in warmer soyles,
Luld in sweet air, hate martial broils.
You see what loose attires and vailes
Their men do wear that flit like sails,
The Parth upon the Median fields
And Sarmates downs that large scope yields
And on those plains by Tygris banks,
The nature and manner of Parthias fight.
When they in length may streach their ranks
And at their pleasure come and go,
Cannot be vanquished by a foe,
But where the soil is full of hills
These horsemen come not by their wills,
Their roaming bow can make no fight,
In bushie straights, or in the night
When need requires they never guides
Their horse to swim from sides to sides,
Nor with their arms stem streaming tides.
Nor yet will they their fight make good,
When as their bodies bathe in blood:
Nor yet endure the parching heat,
Nor in the dust to toil and sweat.
They have no engines for the war,
For rams they know not what they are,
They want the art a trench to fill,
And he the Parth repulseth still;
And as a wall does him oppose,
That can keep out weak arrows blows.
His battle weak, his war is flight,
His troops still ranging and but slight,
A soldier fit to quit a place,
But not to put his foe to chase.
His arms defilde with poisons art, The Parths no soldiers disciplined.

He dares not come to handy Mart,
A far off he his shafts does dart.
With every blast of wind they flit
And as it blows they miss or hit.
The sword is of more great import,
And best with valiant men does sort,
The Fauchion sharp; but the first fight
Disarmes the Parths of all their might,
For when their quiuers emptied are,
They do retire and end their war,
They never trust unto their hands,
In poysned shafts their fury stands.
O Pompey in the chance of war,
Think thou it does nor make nor mar, The sword the chief weapon of all
arms.

Whether the soldier do provide
A trusty sword girt to his side?
And does thy case thee so constrain,
That thou would worthless aid retain?
And nations so remote would try,
And out of thine own country die?
Is some Barbarian land designed,
The place where thou thy grave must find?
There some base shrine thy lims shall have,
Since they would not vouchsafe a grave,
To Crassus that his fate complains,
But better hap for thee remains.
For our last pain with death is fled,
Which manly hearts do never dread.
For death Cornelia needs not care
That wicked King her life will spare.
We well do know the barbarous rites*
That they do use in loves delights,
And how like to the brutish beasts,
All humane laws their lusts detests.
With wives they never contracts hold,
The luxury and impudent venery of the Parths.
But like to swine they do unfold
The secrets of the nuptial bed,
And that same Tyrants court is sped
With thousands for his concubines,
After his feasts and change of wines.
One man provoke his delight
With sundry women every night,
The brothers with the sisters weds,
The sons defile their mothers beds,
That wicked rumor that does run
Of Oedepus that Theban son,
How does the world condemn and loath,
Although unwitting to them both,
How often has Arsaces race,
That holds in Parth the regal place,
By this incestious savage mood
Commixed been with slavish blood.
He speaks of Cornelias danger and dishonor to live amongst the Parthes
concubines.
So as great Scipios noble child,
Shall not all only be defilde,
But with a thousand more be wed,
As wives to this Barbarians bed.
Although his kingly lust and flame,
Stird up with beauty of the dame.
And glory of her husbands name
Will make him more to her incline,
Then any other Concubine.
For how much more the Parth delights,
In humane wrackes and foul despights,
He will know her for Crassus mate,
As destined to the Parthian fate,
And deem that she her self must owe
A captive for that ouer-throw.
O let that miserable foil
Of Eastern wounds, in thy breast boil*
And be not only thou ashamed
That to a base King thou have framed
Petitions, for to lend thee aid;
Bu^ be thou all as much dismayed,
That first thou civil arms displaid:
For no fault more the people loath
Acted by thee and Caesar both, This civil wars did hinder the revenge of
Crassus and his army lost.

Then that you two by civil war
Revenge for Crassus do debar.
Our Captains all should then have tryde
Their force against their Parthian pride,
And rather then have Armies wanted,
The Northern climes should have displanted A brave speech.

And from the Dakes and from the Rhene
The Roman Legions withdrawn clean,
And so strong forces to provide,
Have barred the Empire on that side.
Until perfidious Susis town,
And Babylon they had thrown down.
To serve the Crassi for their tomb,
As monuments to honor Rome.
To fortune we our prayers send,
That with the Parths our peace may end.
And if Thessalias battle past,
Has given this civil war his last,
Let him that conquest does enjoy,
Against the Parths his force employ. Lentulus respects the honor of Rome more
then his malice to Caesar.

That nation of the world alone
I could be glad were overthrown
By Caesar's arms, and that for it,
He might in triumphs charret sit,
Think that ere thou with sucst an host
Could pass Araxes frozen cost.
Old Crassus shade with heavy cheer,
A supposition of that Crassus ghost should say to Caesar.
Stitcht full of darts would first appear
Before thy face; and thus would speak
O thou that should due vengeance wreake,
For this huge slaughter on us made,
Thou whom we did our hopes persuade,
Would give our naked bones a grave,
That now in mould no rest can have,
Camst thou a league and peace to crave:
Then will those slaughters memories,
Present themselves before thine eyes,
When on the walls with stakes yborne,
Those heads thou see set up in scorn,
And Euphrates that did confound
So many Lords in her streams drowned,
And Tygris that our bodies slain,
Did under earth a time retain,
And then disgorged them again.
If with thy mind thou can dispense,
To pass by these without offense,
A tant to Pompey.
As well may thou o Pompey yield
Thy self unto Pharsalias field,
Where Caesar sitting Conqueror.
Thou mercy may of him emplore.
But better weigh our Roman cause,
If thou do fear those Tyrants paws,
That in the South have residence,
And Iubas faithless insolence.
Lentulus allows that succors may be sought of Ptolomey.
Let Pharus King of us be prayed,
And Lagus Realm to yield us aid,
The Lybicke Syrts do safely bound
Upon this side Egyptian ground.
And Nylus from all foreign foes,
With his seven heads does it enclose
On the other side; and it is a land
That of it self can live and stand
Contentedly; and needs not crave
Her neighbors help; nor showers to have
Nylus does so her pastures laue.
Whose scepter Ptolemie a boy
And regal crown does now enjoy. Ptolomey a ward to Pompey.

Besides to Pompey he does rest
Obliged, and by his sires bequest
Thy pupil is, then who would fear
A name that does b^^ shadow bears.
His age as yet from guile is free,
Such faith you could not look to see,
Such laws or such integrities,
Nor service to the Deities.
In that kings court that reigned last, He means that the old king was fuller
of wiles and impieties.

Long rule all right does ouercast.
Under a king that newly reigns,
All things are mild, noe force constraines.
No more he said, this swaid their mind,
What liberty last hopes do find?
To Pompeys censure none enclinde.
Then they Cilician coasts forsake,
And sail for Cyprus Isle do make,
Where Venus mindful of that place, Ciprus, Venus Island.

In Paphos for the Islands grace
Her Altars keeps whence spring her race.
If we may think that on the earth,
The heavenly powers may take their birth.
Or that the Gods (as some do rave)
Like humane wights beginnings have.
When Pompey from this harbor wends,
About the Cyprian cliffes he trends,
And Southward does his way direct,
But with contrary tides was checked
That do along those channels sweep, Pharos a tower where a great lantern
was set to direct ships by night on those costs.

Neither does he a straight course keep
Toward mount Cassium, by the light
That Pharus tower sets out at night.
But fell with Aegypts lowest shore,
Scarce stemming tides with sail and oar.
And hardly thither got withal
Where Nylus parted greatest fall
With her seventh stream and mighty sway,
Does fall into Pelusium bay.
It was the season and the time
When Libra being in her prime,
Indifferently the balance swayes,
With equal lengths of nights and days.
And Autums solstice now requits,
By lengthning her ensuing nights,
The hours that were taken away
By springs solstice increasing day.
Now when that Pompey had descride
That Egypts king did then reside
Near Cassius mount he tacks about,
Seeking a way to find him out,
For yet did neither daylight fail,
Nor had the ship yet stricken sail.
The scouts on the coast discover Pompeys ships.
Forthwith the horse scouts that did stand
For Sentinels along the land,
Alarums gave to all the shores
And sild the court with great vprores.
The sudden coming of this man,
For Counsel small time gave them than.
Yet all the vipers of that Court
The Egyptians go to counsel.
To consultation did resort
Amongst the rest of all which Peers,
One Achoreus full of years,
A reverent sire, whom schooling age
More modest made, and free from rage.
He was a native of that soil
That flowing Nylus does entoyle.
In Memphis he received his lore,
That does vain Rites so much adore,
Where he had long time exercised
(As Priest) the laws they had devised,
Apis was a Bull that the Memphites honored as a God, who^ they suffered to
live but some few years, and then took another in his place. Some name him
Osyris.
In honor of that horned beast
Which they with deity inuest:
To whom for name they Apis give,
Many of which he did out-liue.
This Achoreus counsel gave,
That faith and merit ought to have
A great respect unto it borne,
And that they ought not hold in scorn
The plighted league and vows of love
That this Kings father did approve.
And unto Pompey still professed, Here it seems the Author was defective by
injury of time and Achoreus speech lost, which the translator supplied, as
pertinent.

By whom his kingdom he possessed,
For what quoth he can mortals bind
To friendship in a higher kind,
If kings and states no faith maintain,
How shall the vulgar truth retain?
When they by higher powers are taught
All loyal trust to set at naught.
Why do all kings their subjects swear
Fidelity to them to bear,
If that the kings own actions teach?
Of vows and leagues to make a breach?
When due respects fails in the head,
How will the members be misled,
We see that all the world is bent
To seek the way that Princes went.
All kings by Ceremonies stand,
By laws they rule with powerful hand.
But if those laws they vioalate,
They weaken then their own estate. Order and justice the support of regal
power.

For where we settled order swayes
Who there can rule, or who obayes?
Where Justice force does strike no stroke,
It there dissolues subiections yoke.
When kings themselves lawless grow,
They hazard then to overthrow
Their own estate; and teach that mind
That is ambitiously enclind,
How to aspire by fraud or might,
To reaue away their sovereigns right.
He that no good deserts observes,
The like at others hands deserves.
Thy father did by Pompeys grace
Of Sovereignty obtain this place, Pompey established Ptolomeys father in the
kingdom.

And so thy self enioyes this land,
Which he received at Pompeys hand.
For it he died in Pompeys debt,
Which favor thou may not forget.
For thereby shall the Roman state,
Esteem thee but a Prince ingrate.
And Caesar's self condemn thy mind
As most disloyal and unkind.
And think how much thou would him scorn,
Ptolomy would have done as much by Caesar if he had been in his mercy.
If he in like state were forlorn;
And forced thy royal aid to crave,
Of whom a friend no help could have.
In his brave mind he will thee deem,
A Prince of worth and more esteem
For favoring Pompey in distress,
That at thy hands deserves no less,
Then now to use him with disdain,
In hope thereby Caesar to gain.
A foe that man will dignifie,
That helps his friend in misery:
Though treasons act secure his state,
Yet Caesar will the traitor hate,
Ptolomey at the first aided Pompey against Caesar.
And think that thou to none do bear
Good will, but such as grows by fear,
And therefore will the Roman state
Deem that thou did both parties hate.
But do not enuy'd courses prove,
Thy greatness rather ground on love.
With kings the noble Lions port,
Then Foxes wiles, does better sort.
Pompey again his head may raise,
Marius banished recovered his honor again in the Roman state.
As Marius did in former days:
Or if not so, yet are we sure,
The Roman Empire will endure,
For her foundation does not stand,
By Caesar's or by Pompeys hand.
Her Peers, her people, and her power,
One battle cannot so devour;
That we should think we may disdain
Her Empire that does still remain.
The bloody field at Cannas fought,
More slaughter then Pharsalia wrought.
And though that the Trebeian fight,
And Tracimene did give them flight,
Yet Romes estate subsisted still,
And did revenge her self at will.
For Hannibal was vanquished,
And Carthage Empire ruined.
Though thou no aid to Pompey give,
Yet like a king his wants releive,
And give him safety in thy lands,
That custom with all Nations stands.
For Caesar's self has tried like grace
When he did fly from Syllas face,
And for the safety of his head,
Unto king Nichomedes fled,
And therefore does by practice know,
That kings in honor ought to show
Remorse on him that comes a guest: Kings in honor ought to relieve distressed
Princes for that it may be their own ease.

For kings themselves may be distressed.
And Ptolomie thy father late,
Oppressed by his fathers hate,
Was aided by the Roman state.
Though Caesar for a time may reign, Rome ever an enemy to Monarchy.

Yet Rome does Monarchy disdain.
And her brave spirits that still lived free,
To vassallage will not agree.
Mean while defile not thou thy youth,
Ungratefully unto that truth Ingratitude reproved.

That heretofore has shewde such grace
To thee, and to thy kingly race.
Thy dying father did commend
The care of thee as to a friend,
To Pompeys trust, which in just sort
He did discharge and thee support.
If this may not oblige thy mind,
Who right of thee can hope to find.,
Be well aduisd and stand in awe,
The worlds defame on thee to draw
In thy young years, for such a stain
Will all thy life on thee remain.
The vessel always holds fast
The sent whereof it first did taste. Young years are apt to be distalned with
ill manners and ever to retain the taste thereof

But if thou will nor Pompey lend
Thy aides; that Caesar may offend;
Nor in thy kingdom let him rest
For safeguard of his life distressed,
Nor with thy bounty him relieve
That to thy sire this Crown did give.
Yet him dismiss in courteous sort,
When he sets sail to leave this port.
Harm not his life, he was thy friend,
For that would men and Gods offend
He disswades the king from using any violence to Pompey by the example of
Busuris king of Egypt.
All those that such vile acts have done,
Into the like mishaps have run.
Busyris that with bloody vain
All strangers so did entertain:
Was used at last with like despite
Revenged by the Herculean might.
He that with blood vpholds his state
The most do fear, and all do hate:
And he that hated is of all
Is sure into mischance to fall.
That Counselor that would thee good,
Will thee dehort from Roman blood.
For though the Romans now do jar,
And entertain a civil war.
Long will they not be so beguilde.
That malice will be reconcilde.
Mean while this war unto them shows
Both fained friends and secret foes.
And mischief then will sure betide
To those that played on either side,
For when this civil strife is dated,
And foreign wrongs shall be debated,
O then will they reuengement have
Of all that in their blood did rave.
Therefore it thee concerns o king,
To look what future change may bring.
And not alone to meditate
That it behooues Princes to love and eye to the future as well as to the
present.
The present ordring of thy state.
The skillful Pilot will not trust
The glaring Sun, but doubts a gust,
And does accordingly prepare
To have his sails and tackling yare.
O Ptolomey then govern so,
To give no vantage to the foe. Give no advantage to a foe, nor offense to a
true friend

Nor yet to serve thy present ends,
Too careless be of tried friends.
To this Photinus, prone to ill,
(Who better knew with flattring skill
To draw a Prince to tyrannize)
In hate of Pompey thus replies.
Rightful respects (o Ptolomey)
Brings many Princes to decay. Photinus wicked oration.

Observed faith so much commended,
Has with repentance often ended,
When men will strive to eleuate
That Fortune means to ruinate. Machiauels Master.

The Fates and Gods observe aright
Thy wretches damned by their despite;
Combine thou with the happy wight.
As far as is this earthly scope,
Distant from high heavens vaulted cope,
And fire and waves repugnant are:
So truth and profit ever jar.
The power of Scepters then decays,
When truths regards their actions swayes. Truth and profit repugnant.

It Is truly said that foolish pity
Has often confounded many a City.
Sly policy with searching ends,
Envied Kingdoms states defends.
Except the sword thou often draw
Thou can not make thy will a law: A persuasion to cruelty.

Do that and hold them all in awe.
O let him from a court depart,
That has a pious tender heart.
Mild modesty and mighty power
Cannot reside in one self bower.
Fear still accosts Regality
That is ashamd of cruelty.
Not without ill intention borne,
Pompey thy young years so does scorn;
To think that thy unconquered might
From these shores cannot him affright.
Such guests may not deprive thy throne,
Heirs thou have nearer of thine own.
If Aegypts Scepter thou abhor,
Meaning Cleopatra, then in disgrace with her brother.
Thy banished sister then restorre.
We will defend the kingdoms right
Against the proud Italian might.
What Pompey heretofore had not,
Shall never be the victors lot.
But now that Pompey is forlorn
Of all the world, and Fortunes scorn;
And no where intrest has at all,
He seeks with what land he may fall,
His sense these civil broiles do stall.
Caesar alone does not him fright,
But he does shun the Senates sight;
Of whom the greatest part and power
Thessalian vultures now devour.
And all those Nations he does dread
Whose bloods together for him shed,
He basely has abandoned.
And shames of those Kings to be known,
He inuighes against Pompey.
Whose Fortunes he has ouer-throwne.
Thessaly has him guilty tried,
Not knowing where his head to hide.
He now accosteth Aegypts soil,
Which yet he has not brought to spoil.
And gives us by this vile pretense,
Just cause against him of offense.
For why should he engage us so
That now rest free from war or foe;
And seek to bring our land and state,
So deeply into Caesar's hate?
Is ours the Realm on which in spleen
Thou feign would lay Pharsalias teene,
That with thy wrackes we ruined been?
Just cause does us good leave afford
To free this peril by the sword.
But where it is urged at thy request,
The Senate did our King inuest
With this Crown; we for that again,
With aids, thy quarrel did maintain.
But now this sword worn by my side,
Which fate now bids me to provide,
O Pompey must not thee offend, He speaks as indifferent, not caring if both
parties were ruined.

But through the bowels shall transcend
Of him that conquered was of late,
I wish it rather Caesar's fate.
We driven are to go that way
That Fortune goes, who all does sway.
Doubtst thou (O Pompey) if it be
A course most needful now for me
To violate thy wretched life,
When lawful it is to free all strife?
With what hope did thou (haples wight)
Desire upon our coast to light?
When we are not prepared for war?
Our people scarcely able are
With spades to delue those clayie lands
That Nylus softens to our hands.
It Is fit to measure our own force,
And of our selves to take remorce. An argument against the aiding of Pompey,
and wisely to consider their own estate.

Thou Ptolomey may (if thou will)
Mend Pompeys wrack that lies now spilt,
When Rome it self dures for his guilt.
Dare thou Thessalias ashes rear
And call in wars thy realm to tear?
Before these late Pharsalian broils
We kept our selves from martial toils.
Would Pompey new wars undertake
With our hands, since all him forsake?
Would he provoke the victors might
Again, that has put him to flight?
And pity tells us (as you say)
We should help wretches in decay. The humor of true worldlings.

But wisdom says, we should affect
To like those Fortune does respect.
What foolish trust would leagues combine
With friends, in poverty that pine?
This wicked counsel all allowd, Evil counsel soon followed

The boyish King was likewise proud
To have the honor him decreed
As lawful to act such a deed,
By Sycophants that sooth his mind,
Whereto Achillas was designed.
And to the seas side they repair,
A wicked shore for this affair.
O this was that same traiterous land,
That borders on the Cassian sand,
Whereas on Aegypts coasts a shelfe
Near to the Syrts does stretch it self.
There they a little frigget mand
With armed monsters in a band.
O heavens! how could the river Nyle
And barbarous Memphis so defile
Themselves; and that same tender breed,
That the Canopian I Will does feed,
The people about Nylus tender and not martial.
Have hearts to act so vile a deed?
Does civil fate the whole world stain?
Must Roman Rulers thus be slain?
Does Egypt slaughters new afford?
Must Pharus on us use the sword?
O civil wars, to your own Arms
Reserve our proper Countries harms:
And do revenge your own blood spilt,
Chase from you odious foreign guilt.
If noble Pompey were designed
How disgraceful it was to Rome to have her Peers slain by her tributary
princes.
By Caesar's sword his date to find.
Durst Ptolomy so traitorously
Doom one of so great name to dye?
And thou Achillas half a man,
Thou Eunuch whom the world does ban,
How durst thou so with hands profane
(Whilst heaven did thunder) work his bane?
He that the world by Arms has tamed,
Him that three Triumphs so had famed,
The Champion of the Senates state,
The victors sonne-in-law but late.
This might alone for reason stand
To stay the Pharian Tyrants hand.
He was a noble Roman borne,
With thy sword must our breasts be torn?
Little know thou (unhappy boy) He reproues young Ptolomy for this treachery.

Little know thou thine own annoy;
How ficklely thy fortune stands,
That by no right now holdst thy lands;
Since him thy wicked sword has slain
By whose grace thou did rule and rain.
Now Pompey strooken had his sail,
And in his ship, for more avail,
His Mariners fell to the Ore,
So to convey him to the shore.
Thus passing on with his small fleet,
A little Gally did him meet, Pompey prepares to go a land in Egypt

That was with wicked villains mand,
With show to bring him to the land.
Then Aegypts kingdom they professed
Was to his love and service pressed.
And therewithal they offer make The pretended show of love from the Egyptian
king to Pompey.

That he the benefit would take
Of their small skiffe to come a shore
From his tall ship that could not more,
Nor on those channels safely ride
And very hardly stem the tide;
By reason that the checking wave
Did with contrary currents rave: A slight used to draw Pompey into their
skiffe.

And to all shipping perilous
That on those costs were venterous.
But had not destiny ordained
And that which could not be refrained,
The doom of the aeterne decree,
To which his fate must needs agree; Destiny inevitable.

That Pompey to this shore must wend
There to receive his woeful end.
He wanted not advice of those
That were his friends, to doubt these foes.
For that if they good faith had meant,
And that the King with true intent
Would welcome him unto that land, Pompeys friends aledged a reason of
suspicion.

Given to his sire by Pompeys hand.
The Tyrant then with all his fleet
In state with honor would him meet.
But he to destiny gives way,
And as they wild he did obey.
Leaving his ship he their skiffe enters,
And scorning fear he death aduenters:
Wherewith Cornelia headlong flies
Into the hostile skiffe likewise,
Seeing her husband so gone out
Cornelia distasteth Pompeys adventure.
Transported with the careful doubt
That they did plot some villainy,
And therefore kept him company.
Rash woman stay behind (he said)
And so to do his son he praid;
Pompeys persuasion to his wife and son.
And bids them there aloof expect
Of this adventure the effect:
And well observe with what faith led
They now will entertain his head.
But all in vain he charms deaf ears,
For now Cornelia, mad with fears,
Her hands lifts up with frighted brow;
Cruel, without me, whither now
Cornelias words of impatience to Pompey.
Meanst thou to go? must I again
In solitary sort remain,
And rest the company of thee
Now from Thessalian dangers free?
We wretches never sundred are
But there ensues some heavy care.
Why did thou not thy sails diuart,
And fly into some other part,
And leave me (wretch) in Lesbos placed
If from all lands I must be chac't.
Thy company I cannot please,
But only on the raging seas.
When she in vain had thus complained,
In doubt her own ship-side she strained.
With dread amazed her eyes she rold,
And did not Pompey then behold.
These in the ships did doubtful stand
The counsel of Pompeys friends for his landing.
Of Pompeys fortune on the land;
Not fearing fear or treachery,
But doubting that too humbly
He would that King for aid entreat
To whom he gave that Regal seat.
But as he meant a shore to pass,
He suddenly saluted was
By one, a Roman soldier,
That in a Pharian boat drew near, Septimius, a Roman soldier, that served
Ptolomy, described.

Septimius hight (o heavenly shame)
That he his Country should defame
One of the guard to Ptolomey
As his base weapon did display.
His Roman pile was set aside,
Fierce, violent, enraged with pride:
No savage beast could him exceed
For slaughter, or for bloody deed.
A man would think that Fortune meant
That so much blood should not be spent,
Nor yet so many people wrack't,
Because the war his right hand lack't.
And that his murdrous sword so far
Was banished the Pharsalian war.
But Fortune such thou spread'st abroad,
That civil slaughters might be stroad
In every coast, to bring defame
Unto the victors cruel name.
And that thy stories just complaint
Should all the Gods with shame attaint.
So did this Roman sword obey
The King, and Pompey thou may say,
This Palean Princox did not dread
With thine own sword to reaue thy head.
And future times shall still record
Septimius name to be abhord.
But with what terms to be expressed,
If Brutus fact the world detest?
Now his last hour approached on,
For he with Pharian barge is gone,
And of himself the power had lost,
The Tyrants monsters him accost
With naked swords upon him bent,
And when he saw their vile intent,
Pompey couers his face with his cloak when he saw the traitors press upon
him.
With weapons pressed to give the stroke,
Upon his face he throws his cloak.
Disdaining that his bared head
To fortune should be offered.
And therwithall he closd his eyes,
His spirit he suppressed likewise,
Pompeys resolution.
Because he would no moanes express,
Nor tears to make his virtues less.
But when Achillas (damned wretch)
With murdrous glaiue he made a breach
Achillas and Septimius do murder Pompey.
Into his side, with gaping wound:
Nor sigh nor groan yet did he sound.
But manfully the stroke did bide,
And only turned his face aside.
And from his place he never moves,
But dying so himself approues.
And thus resolves within his thought,
Who then this villainy had wrought.
All after times that us succeedes,
And do record the Romans deeds,
This wicked act will not obscure,
But whilst the heaven and earth endure
To all parts of the world will fly
This sippe and Pharian perfidie.
But Pompey now thy fame intend,
Fate long thee happy life did lend:
And did thou not, by dying, try
The valor that in thee does lie?
How should men know that as thou list
Adversity thou could resist?
Give then no way to others shame,
Nor yet this actor only blame.
Though others hand thy life has wrack't,
Believe it to be Caesar's fact.
The Authors bitterness in taxing Caesar.
Let them my carcass rent at will,
O Gods I shall be famous still!
No power this happiness can rend,
Though Fortune be no more my friend,
I am not wretched in my end.
My dear Cornelia and my son
Do see this slaughter on me done,
And therefore Sorrow I thee pray,
Shut up my woes, and all dismay.
But if my wife and son see this
With grief, their love the greater is.
Such was the fortress of his mind
Thus stout in death he life resigned.
But now Cornelias patience
Could not so easily dispense
To see this deed on Pompey done,
As if her self that hap had run.
So as with wretched sighs and cries,
She dimmes the air, and filles the skies.
O my dear husband I am she
That thus has bred the wrack of thee,
When Lesbos Isle with fatal stay
Drew thee so far out of the way.
Then Caesar's plots arrived before
Thy self, on damned Nylus shore.
For who else durst take liberty
On thee to show such cruelty?
But whosoever that thou be
Ordained thereto by heavens decree;
Or else by Caesar's hest designed:
Or from thine own corrupted mind,
Upon his head such rage to show;
O cruel! thou do little know
Where noble Pompeys heart does rest, Cornelias complaint for the murdering of
Pompey.

Come with thy sword and pierce this breast
That unto him is vowed and bent
That more then death would him torment
Show, my head ere his life be spent.
I am not guiltless of this war,
As other Roman matrons are;
For neither I upon the maine,
Nor in the Camp did him refrain.
I stuck to him in misery,
When Kings did shun his company.
Have I (O husband) this deeseru'd,
In thy safe ship to be preserved?
A bitter interrogation.
Ungrateful man, thou spard'st thy wife!
Was I then worthy of my life
When death on thee his force would try?
No, I in spite of Kings will dye.
O Mariners stay not my veaze,
Headlong to plunge into the seas.
Or with your hands prepare a twine,
That strangle may this throat of mine:
Or some one that was Pompeys friend,
Cornelia desires to dye.
Come with thy sword and my life end.
Thou shall do that for Pompeys sake,
Which Caesar's fury else will take.
O cruel wights! why should you give
Me longer life, that loath to live?
But husband mine, thou art not dead,
Of my self yet I am not head.
Of these, my death I cannot crave,
The victor must that honor have.
So having said, amidst them all
Rapt with a trance, she down did fall,
And thence was borne in mazed plight
In her own ship, that then took flight.
But though their swords from side to side
Had pierced him through with gashes wide;
He still retained within his face
A sweet aspect and reverent grace:
Pompeys sweet aspect after he was slain, and lay dead.
His brows against the Gods he bent,
And when his life was gone and spent,
Yet in his looks, or in his cheer,
No change at all there did appear,
As they themselves did make report
That saw him murdered in that sort,
For cruel he Septimius,
To make his act more odious,
His sacred face laid open bare,
Septimius vncouers Pompeys face after he was slain, and hackes off his head.
The covering veil he rent and tare,
And whilst the head yet breathes with sweat
He takes it up, and thwart a seat
The lithy hanging neck he puts,
And so the veins and sinews cuts.
Then long he hackes the knotty bone,
To cut it clean he Art had none.
But with his hewing that he makes,
From off the corpse the head he takes. Achillas uses Septimius basely, and
takes the head from him.

The which Achillas from him tears,
And in his hand it proudly bears.
O Roman Soldier, slavish base,
That woulds thy self so much disgrace
To be an underling to such.
For since thy hand had done so much
Upon that head of so great fame,
Thou should thy self have borne the same.
O shameful Fates! this boyish King,
When they to him the head did bring,
That he might know his manly look
The same in his right hand he took,
And by the hair he did it hold,
Those reverent locks now hoary old, Ptolomy viewes Pompeys head, holding it
by the hair.

That had so many Kings controld,
And shadowed his comely brow,
This noble head he pitcheth now
Upon a Pharian sharpened stake, Pompeys head borne on a stake by the Egyptians.

Whilst yet with life the cheeks did quake.
And whilst with throbs the spirits beat,
And ere the eyes were thoroughly set.
So was this honored head abusd,
That never peace for war refusd.
The Countries laws, the armed field,
And Rostrum did him reverence yield.
That noble face, that brave aspect
The Roman fortune did affect.
But yet this wicked Tyrants heart
Was not suffisd with this vile part, Pompeys head embalmed, and preserved to
be presented Caesar.

For he desires his villainy
Might go beyond his perfidy:
And when they cleansd his head and brain,
So as no humors should remain
To putrify, then Art they use
To keep the face, and balm enfuse.
Thou offspring last degenerate
Of Lagus line, art near thy date:
Meaning Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, after Ptolomy her brother.
For thy incestious sisters hand
Shall reaue thy scepter and thy land.
Must Pompeys corpse with so great scorn
Lie on the sands mangled and torn;
And thence be cast from side to side
Against the rocks with every tide?
Whilst that thy Macedonian race
He inueighs against Ptolomy for not bringing Pompeys body.
In sacred sepulchers have place:
And that their ashes quiet rest,
With Graves and Monuments possessed;
And damned ghosts of wicked mood
Come from the Ptolmean brood,
Be closd in Pyramids of fame,
And with Mausolas worthy frame.
Was it a work of so great pain
To let the corpse entire remain,
That Caesar might behold it plain?
Has Fortune, after all her smiles,
Thus Pompey foiled with her last guiles?
Are all those glories him assignd,
Shut up with death of such a kind?
O cruel dame! must all thy threapes
Fall all on him at once in heaps,
That never erst did feel mis-happe,
Pompey never unfortunate but now at his last, after the battle of Pharsalia.
But always dandled in thy lap?
Pompey is he that this can say
He never yet saw lucky day,
Mingled with any cross dismay.
His happy fate without stop goes,
None of the Gods did it oppose.
But when his ruin was decreed,
They laid on load, and made quick speed.
Fortune sometimes did him advance,
And by the hand leads him in dance.
But now on sands he lies ore-flowne,
And on the rocks with billows thrown.
And as a scorn in seas is drowned,
Where waves make gutters through each wound:
No form in him is to be found.
Pompey has no mark to be known, A strange mark to be known by.

But that his corpse a head has none.
And yet before the Conqueror
Arrived on the Pharian shore,
Fortune for Pompey took some care
And did in have his tomb prepare,
Whereby he should not want a grave,
Although no fitting burial have.
For Codrus that there hidden lay,
Came fearfully down to the bay.
This man that crept so from his den,
Was one of Pompeys hapless men,
And lately made his Treasurer,
When they put from the Cyprus shore.
He durst come out in dark of night,
And love unto his fear gave might.
To seek the body in the maine,
To bring it to the land again, Codrus Pompeys servant entends a funeral sire
for his masters body when he had found it.

And to the shore his Pompey train.
The Moon a little glimmering lent,
Which through the duskie clouds she sent
Whereby the body he discouerd,
That with a differing color houered
Upon the waves, that struggling make,
When in his arms he did him take,
And being tired with the freight,
He hoped the wane would lift the weight.
The which it did, and with that aid
The corpse he to the shore conuaide.
And on the land where it lay dry
Upon the body he did lie,
And wailing there twixt grief and fears,
He every wound did fill with tears,
And to the Gods and stars in skies,
He thus poures out his woeful cries.
Thy Pompey does not of thee crave
O Fortune, any glorious grave, Codius complaint against Fortune,

Nor yet that gums of pleasant sent
Upon his funeral be sprent,
Nor that the fat his members yields,
Mixed with the drugs of Eastern fields
With orders should perfume that air,
Which smoking to the skies repair.
Nor that with love the Romans led,
To their dear parent being dead.
Should him upon their shoulders place,
His day of funeral to grace.
Nor that the pomp of his last date
Should all exceed in glorious state.
Nor that the court with heavy notes,
Should singing strain their wailing throtes.
Nor that the army in a file
Should march about the flaming pile,
And throw their weapons down the while.
Give Pompey but a common chest,
Wherein his bones may safely rest,
And that his rent torn lims may burn
Together, and to ashes turn.
And that I miserable wight,
This to perform may want no might,
A worthless man his fire to light.
It is enough o Gods divine,
That there is wanting at his shrine
Cornelia with disheueled tresse,
And that she cannot here express
Poor soul, to him her latest vows,
With dear embracements of her spouse.
And on his face her tears deplore,
Though far she be not from this shore.
As soon as he these words had spoke
Far off he spide a fire and smoke,
Where some base body was a burning,
Without attendance, or friends mourning.
From thence some fire he takes away,
And brands that with the body lay.
Who so thou art (quoth he) that here
Neglected burnst, to no man dear,
Then Pompey yet thou happier art
Be not displeased for thy part,
That my last hands do thus beguile,
Some portion of thy funeral pile.
And if that any sense remain Codrus makes hard shift for fuel and fire to
bury Pompeys body.

In mortals that deaths dart has slain.
Then give me leave I thee desire,
To take this pittance from thy fire.
I shame to see thy Cinders burn,
Whilst fire shall want for Pompeys vrne.
So said the kindled brands he takes,
And for the corpse a fire he makes,
Which then the tide had well near reached
But some part on the strand lay streacht.
From it the sands he wipes away,
And then together he does lay
The broken fragments of a boat,
(With fearful hand) which there did float
In a foul ditch somewhat remote.
No heaped stacke of oaken piles,
These noble lims did press the whiles,
Under the corpse no wood was laid,
But to this slender flame conuaid
A loft the body burning staid.
He sitting down hard by the flame
Thus said, O Captain great of name,
Chief majesty of Roman fame.
If that the tossing of the seas, Codrus speech to Pompeys ghost whilst the
body was burning.

And no grave would thee better please
Then this poor obsequie of mine,
Let thy brave spright and soul divine,
These my endeauours naught esteem,
But injury of Fate it deem.
That I have thought this lawful done,
Thereby thy bodies spoils to shun.
From monsters of the raging waves.
And from those beasts on flesh that raues,
And from the vultures greedy mawes,
And from the wrath of Caesar's paws,
Therefore in worth accept of me
This last fire that I offer thee,
If so it with thy honor stand,
Now kindled with a Roman hand,
But if that Fortune do recoyle,
And bring thy friends to Latium soil,
Thy sacred Cyndars may find grace
To be lodged in a worthier place,
So as Cornelia, Pompeys spouse
May yield to thee more glorious vows.
And with my help that now thee burn,
May put thy cinders in an vrne.
Mean while to show where is thy grave,
Some litte stone a mark shall have;
Upon this shore, that if some friend
Thy greater honor do intend,
And would thy death more eternize,
He may know where thy body lies.
And to great Pompey here laid dead,
He may again restore the head.
Thus having said, does fuel add
To this small fire that burns so sad.
And then the fat that in it fries,
Does cause the flame aloft to rise,
And to the fire give fresh supplies.
By this Auroras blushing face,
Codrus having performed his last office to his master, hides himself again
The glittring stars away did chase.
And he poor soul with maze afright,
Disorderly breaks of this right,
And in a corner shuns the light.
Vain man what fear does thee distract
For thy performance of this act,
Whereby unto all future days,
Thy fame with honor thou do raise,
Since wicked Caesar will commend
These bones so buried by a friend?
Go safely and desire to have
The head likewise to lay in grave.
For piety bids thee not shun,
To end this duttie well begun.
Then does he take these bones half burnd
And members not to ashes turned,
Which he together does dispose,
And in a little pit enclose.
Then lest the wind the sand should raise
Upon the grave a stone he lays.
And that no Mariners should bind Codrus buryes the cinders and lays a stone
with an inscription on it.

Their Cable where this stone they find
About the same, and it displace,
Upon the top he did inchace
The sacred name with a burnt brand,
Pompey lies buried in this sand.
Where Caesar rather would he lay,
Then want his grave or funeral day.
But o rash hand that do suppose,
In such a sepulcher to close
Great Pompey and his wandering ghost,
That rangeth over every coast,
As far as any land extends,
And to the utmost Oceans ends.
The Empire large and name of Rome,
The true tipe is of Pompeys tomb.
Remove this stone for very shame,
Which to the Gods imputes blame.
If Hercules must needs have all, Hercules and Bacchus tomb

Mount Oete for his funeral,
And Bacchus must with like account
Take all Parnassus sacred mount.
Why then should one Egyptian stone
Suffice for Pompeys tomb alone.
All Egypt should stand for his grave,
If no stone his inscription have,
We Romans shall be still in dread,
Lest we on Pompeys ashes tread,
When we do range about those lands,
And doubt to march on Nylus sands.
But if so reverent a name
Thou will inscribe upon the same,
His noble acts therewith consort,
His great atchieuements of imports.
And there to that rebellious jar,
That he suppressed in the Alpyn war
When as proud Lepidus conspirde
And how a Consul he retirde, A brief recital of Po^peys noble acts.

Called back when he had put to foil,
Setorrius in his Spanish broyle.
When for it he in Triumphs pride,
Through Rome with great applause did ride.
And how he gave the world commerce,
When he the pirates did disperse.
Add thereunto the nations won,
And the Barbarians ouerrunne.
With whatsoever in the East,
Or in the Northern parts did rest,
Show that he ever arms laid down
His conquest done; and took the gown,
That thrice he had in Triumphs sat,
And gave great spoils unto the state.
What grave can this man's worth contain
His tomb lies level with the plain.
His wretched hearse thou do not raise
With titles equal to his praise,
Nor yet those holy orders write,
That Roman Callenders recite.
Which on the stately pillars stand,
Of Gods the Patrons of our land.
Nor with those glorious trophies graced,
That are on temples arches placed.
Alas our Pompeys sepulcher,
The baseness of Pompeys Tomb.
Leuels the Egypt sands so near,
And lies so flat upon the shore,
To read it men must stooping pore.
Which any Roman that goes by,
But being told will hardly spy.
We were not cautious as we ought
Of that Cumana Sybill wrote,
Sybilla Cumana her prophets.
Who warned us in all civil broyle,
To shun the harms of Egypts soil,
And that no Roman chieftaine should
Come near to Nyles Pelusian mould,
But shun that summer swelling shore.
What dismal fate may I implore,
Against that cruel land that durst
Attempt and act this deed accursed.
Let Nylus bacward bend his head
And stay whereas his spring is bred A curse against Egypt

And let this parched soil remain
Without all help of winters rain,
And let such burning heates it roast,
As fries the Ethiopian coast,
Thy Isis Egypt, for thy sake,
We did into Romes temple take;
And currish Demigods withal,
On whom with Cymbals you do call, Isis the wife of Osiris one of the Egyptian
Gods.

And thou Osyris whom with plaint,
As but a man your selves depaint.
But Egypt thou in scorn do hold
Our spirits in base dustie mould,
And thy self Rome that with such state
Did those brave Temples dedicate Meaning Caesar, whom they accounted a
tyrant for taking such power to him over the Empire.

Unto the wicked Tyrants name,
Have not yet ask't, for fear of blame,
The ashes of thy Pompey slain,
Whose ghost does banished still remain.
And though at first that fearful age
Were ouer-awd by Caesar's rage,
Yet now take unto thee at last
Thy Pompeys bones, since fear is past.
Except that the encroaching maine,
Do them and all that shore detain.
Else who needs doubt his grave to turn,
With sacred rites to grace his vrne.
O would that deed were made my task,
And Rome at my hands would it ask*
O happy I and too much blessed, The Authors love to Pompeys merit.

Might I remove that sacred chest
And bring the same to rest in Rome,
If lawful it is to force his tomb!
But yet o Pompey it may chance,
That if ill seasons dearth advance,
Or that contagious plagues oppress,
Or fearful fires should Rome distress,
Or earthquakes put us in a fright,
These miseries to banish quite;
Unto the Gods we make request,
And thereupon by their behest,
Thou may again to Rome return
To expiate these with thy vrne.
And that the chief Priest we shall call
To bear thee to thy funeral,
But now what passenger goes by
Syenen that the heates do fry,
Of Cancers parched torryd zoane;
Or unto whom is Nylus known,
That costs her Thaebas burning sands,
Which under showring Plyades stands:
Or who the red Seas gulffe does trade,
Or trafficks using to be made,
About the rich Arabian ports,
Po^peys grave stands in the high way of those that trade from many nations.
Or else for merchandise consorts.
With those that come from Eastern shore,
But Pompeys grave he will explore.
And seek to see that reverent stone
That lies his low lodged tomb upon.
And turn a side out of the way,
To see thy cynders if he may,
That on the sands perhaps do stray,
And therewithal will take delight
To sacrifice unto thy spright,
And will thy worthy name prefer
Before the Cassian Jupiter.
So as this little paltery shrine,
Will more advance that fame of thine,
Then if thou had a Tomb of gold,
Such as our Temples use to hold,
For here interred lies with thee
Romes liberty buried with Pompey.
The Fortune of Romes liberty.
So as a far more happy stone,
The Lybicke waves shall beat upon,
Then are those Altars to be prisde,
Whereon the victor sacrifisde.
For those that often are so bold,
Their incense offerings to withhold,
From the Tarpeian Deities
Will show their loves and charities.
Unto the shrine of thy sweet soul,
Here raked up in this duske hole.
Hereof the fame of future days,
More glory unto thee will raise, The author means here that if Pompy had no
to^be at all, and the place of his sepulcher forgotten, that then future ages
would (by considering his acts) think he were deified.

Then if thy monument were built
With stately marbles carved and guilt.
And that the measure of thy grave,
A huger height and scope might have.
For now a little time will chase
Thy heaped cinders from this place,
When as these sands away shall fall,
That cover now thy burial.
And so the knowledge will decay,
How thou camst to thy fatal day.
Then ages happier will live,
Which will no trust nor credit give
To any, that this stone shall show,
Which yet the world so well does know. The Aegyptia^s will obscure this vile
treachery from their successors, and report so of Pompey as the Cretans did of
Jupiter.

But Egypt will disprove this reed,
Unto her children that succeed,
And make the Death and Tomb likewise,
Of Pompey but such tales and lies,
As were those of the Cretan I Will,
Whence thundering Jove does take his style.
Finis libri octaui.
Lucans Pharsalia. The ninth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
FRom Earth great Pompeys blessed spright,
Unto the heavens does take his flight.
Cato the remnants of the host
Transports unto the Lybian cost.
Cornelia wailing, grieves and mournes,
And Pompeys robes to ashes burns.
Cnaeus his son revenge intends:
Cato his noble mind commends.
The sailors fall to mutiny,
Whom Catos speech does qualify.
About the Syrtes his navy trades:
And Lybia then his host inuades.
Thence through the wilderness he trends:
And unto Hamons Temple wends.
Caesar Pharsalia now forsakes,
And toward Nyle his journey takes.
Where Pompeys head they him present:
The which with tears he does lament.
But yet the soul aloft aspires,
Pompeys soul received into the lower spheres.
And staid not in the Pharian fires.
Such flames could not his blessed spright
Restrain from their high mounting flight.
But from the funeral it flits,
And those half burned members quits;
That base unworthy tomb it leaves,
The thundering vault the same receaues.
Whereas the duskie air confines
Next to the orbs that lowest shines;
And where the distance spacious
Is spread between the Moon and us.
Where souls and demigods do dwell,
Whose shining virtues did excel:
And upright lives did them prepare,
In this low element to share.
Whereas his blessed ghost it reares
To rest in the eternal spheres.
Those come not thither that are placed
In perfumed tombs beguilt and chac't.
And when he was in this fair seat
With joyous perfect light repleat;
He viewes the wandering stars in skies,
And fixed planets Marks likewise:
And sees (in value of that light)
Our brightest days are but as night. Pompeys soul contemplates the earthly
passages.

And of those scorns he makes but mirth,
That they do to his Trunk on earth.
From hence Emathias field he eyes,
And Caesar's bloody Ensigns spies.
Then flittes he over all the maine,
Where flotes the sparsed Nauies train:
Then sits in Brutus sacred breast,
Where for this guilt revenge does rest.
And thence he flittes a place to find,
In worthy Catos dreadlesse mind.
He (whilst the strife in doubt depended,
And that the question was not ended,
Whom this stern civil war would call
To be the supreme Lord of all)
Did Pompey hate; Cato disliked Pompey.
although his part
He took, as fellow in this Mart;
Led thereto for his Countries cause,
And to observe the Senates Laws.
But when Pharsalias field was fought,
Then Pompeys course did rule his thought:
And into his protection takes
His country, that a guider lacks:
Cato takes on him the protection of his comely.
And to their fearful hands affords
Weapons again, that left their swords.
But neither seeking sovereignty,
Nor that he feared seruilitie,
Did he new civil wars erect,
It was not for his own respect,
But (after Pompey lost his life)
For liberty was all their strife.
And (lest that Caesar might inuest
Himself, of all the troops distressed
By his surprises suddenly,
After his gained victory.
They being so dispersed in rout
Through all the country round about)
He to Corcyra did resort,
And thither to a secret port,
He all the scattered fragments led,
That from Emathias slaughter fled.
A thousand ships he filled with these,
And thence he put unto the seas.
Who would have thought the scattred trains
That of Pharsalias wrack remains,
Suffisd so many ships to fill?
Or that the Seas were stuffed still
Cato assembles all the scattred Romans of Pharsalia.
With such a fleet, prepared for Mart,
Belonging to the conquered part,
Hence he to Malean Doris goes,
And unto Tenerus, that shows
The way to hell, and therewithal,
On the Cytherean cost does fall.
And so along he leaves Creete,
Catoes Navy and his navigations.
The Northwind driving on his fleet.
And (urged by the shrinking tides)
Dictaean shores he over slides.
Thence to Phycunta he resorts,
That held his navy from their ports.
But puts that Town to great distress,
And sackes it, that deserved no less.
Thence did a fitting wind procure
Him to thy shore, O Palinure;
For thou do not alone retain
Thy monuments on Latium maine:
But Lybia's quiet ports do tell,
They pleased the Trojan Pilot well. Palinurus, Aeneas Pilot.

Then they aloof a fleet descride,
Which did with doubts their minds divide;
Whether it did consist of foes,
Or of the fellows of their woes.
The victors great celerity
Still held them in perplexity:
And what ships on the seas they see,
They still thought Caesar there to be.
But those poor hulles alas did bear
Nothing, but woeful plaints and fear:
Yea such as mournful sobbes might wrest
From Stoicke Cato's hardened breast.
For after that (with vain request)
Cornelia had her Pilots pressed, Cornelia desires to stay on the Egyptian coast.

And son-in-law (that would away)
A longer time near Nyle to stay;
Because her husbands Corpse she thought
Might to the weltring waves be brought
By surges of the raging maine,
That on the Pharean shore did strain.
For proof whereof she said withal,
His corpse had no right burial.
Of Fortune then (quoth she) was I
So worthless that thou should deny
Me means, and leave for to attend
My husband at his funeral end?
And on the cold limbs of my spouse
To stretch my arms with latest vows?
And my torn locks with him to burn,
And place those ashes in an vrne
That now the waves do toss and turn.
And that I might power floods of tears
Into those wounds his body bears?
And on my garments cast at once
The hot burnt cinders of his bones?
And whatsoever lawful were
From out his funeral to bear,
With my hands might be gathered,
In Temples of the Gods to spread?
But out alas his funeral
No flaming honor had at all;
Perhaps some hand of Pharos cost
Performed that act, grief to his ghost.
O Crassian cinders ye were blessed,
That still uncovered do rest!
For seeing Pompey had that flame,
The Gods repute it greater blame.
To be buried in that treacherous land was a dishonor to Pompey.
Shall my hard destiny still find
Such dismal woes to vex my mind?
Shall never I the fortune have
To lay my husbands in a grave?
Nor present be when as they dye,
To fill their vrnes with flowing eye?
But what need I seek them a grave,
Or instruments (O grief) to crave?
Vain woman, does not Pompey rest
Intombed in thy faithful breast?
Does not his image fixed remain
In thy grieved soul, and every vain?
Let after ages then (for me)
Seek where his cinders scattred be.
Yet now me seems I see his fire
With a malignant flame aspire.
And something dazles in mine eyes,
That from the Pharian shore does rise,
That to thee ( Pompey) does pertain,
And now that flame is out again;
And yields a smoke that Pompey bears
The land where Pompey is interred, deerer to Cornelia then any other land.
In vapors to the Eastern spheres.
Whilst spiteful winds do me betray,
And bears our sails another way.
No lands by Pompey conquered,
Nor where his triumphs Carres were led
Along the streets (with glorious bays)
To the high Capitolean ways,
More dear to me (since reft my breast)
Then Pharian sands where he does rest.
It Is Pompey I would have so feign,
Whom Nylus does from me detain.
And that makes me not loath to stay
Longer, within this wicked bay.
The heinous fact that I deplore*
Is that, that now adornes this shore.
If ever I did Pompey love,
I would not from this coast remove.
Do thou (O Sextus) wars pursue, Cornelia persuades Sextus to Arms.

And over all the world renew
The Ensigns of thy famous sire:
Such was his will and his desire,
That he in charge to me did give;
Which words within my soul still live,
Pronounced with his latest breath,
The hour that queld me with his death.
My sons, see that you undergo
This civil war against our foe, Cornelia delivers Pompeys words and charge
to his sons.

Whilst any of our name or birth
Remains alive upon the earth,
Admit not Caesar's tyranny,
Move states that stand for liberty,
And mighty Towns that do the same,
And him resist with glorious fame.
These parts to you I recommend:
These Arms I would you should entend.
Which of my sons the seas likes best,
Shall find a Navy ready pressed.
My heir likewise (in following Mart)
Shall Nations find to take his part.
Only remember that you bear
True noble minds deuoyd of fear.
And know it is fit that you obey
Only to Cato, if he sway
For liberty, and hold that way.
O Pompey! thus do I discarge
Thy trust, and tell thy will at large.
But thy deceits have done me wrong,
Forsaken thus, I live too long:
And yet will not with perfidy
Forbear thy words to testify.
But now dear spouse, where so thou be,
Here he speaks according to the opinion of Seneca, with whom he was brought
up.
I am resolved to follow thee
To Chaos vast, and unto hell
(If such there be, as old sawes tell)
But yet to me it is unsure
How long this life of mine shall dure.
And therefore anguish shall prevent
My living soul, from my soul sent.
And since to death it could not fly,
When ( Pompey) it thy wounds did eye,
With grief and wailings she shall dye.
In bitter tears she shall be drowned,
The sword shall not our days confound,
No strangling halter will I try,
Nor headlong breake-necke from an hye:
For me twere base to want the might
By sorrows strain to leave this light.
So having said, her noble head
With a black veil she ouer-spred:
Cornelias solitary griefs.
And then retires her to the dark
In hollow cauernes of the bark.
And there unto her self enioyes
Her restless tears, and griefs annoyes;
And only (in her husbands place)
Does woes and woeful plaints embrace.
She scorns the raging seas and clouds,
And Eurus whistling in the shrowds,
And cries that Mariners do make,
When they with dreadful dangers quake.
To theirs she makes contrary vows:
Resolved to dye, she storms allows.
Her ship first seized the Cyprus shores,
Whereas the thundering billows rores.
And then to sea they put anew,
With Eastern wind that calmer blew.
And lighted on the Lybicke Land,
Where that time Cato's Camp did stand. Cornelias fleet arriues on Lybia,
where Cato was encamped

Then woeful Cnaeus did espy
His country fellows, proaching nigh
The Affricke coast, and as those minds
That dread afflicts, presages finds;
When he his brother Sextus saw,
Near to the seas strand he does draw,
And headlong wades into the maine. Cnaeus Pompeius words to his brother Sextus

Dear brother now to me explain
Where is our Sire, and in what plight
Stands our affairs? are we of might
As yet, or else abandoned quite?
Has Pompey Romes last fortune tried?
So said, his brother thus replide.
O happy thou whom Fortune guided Sextus answer to his brother.

To other coasts, from us divided!
Thou only miseries shall hear,
Whereof mine eyes the witness were
When on the sword our father did,
Though Caesar's hand he has not tried.
The Author of his funeral
Deserves by mines rage to fall.
With that vile King, that in his hands
Does hold the fruitful Nylus lands.
He hoped some due respects to find
Of Hospitatious friendly kind;
For many favors of his love
That this Kings ancestors did prove.
But (for requital of that Realm)
As sacrifice his blood they stream.
Whilst I alas beheld (with pain)
Our noble Father by them slain.
Whereas I thought that Pharian King
Durst not attempt so foul a thing.
But did presume that Nylus land
Would loyally unto him stand.
But neither me, the old man's wounds,
Nor his shed blood so much confounds,
As when we saw his head forlorn,
Throughout the traitors City borne,
Fixed on a lofty pole in scorn.
And now it is kept (by fames report)
The wicked victors eyes to sport.
And so the tyrant feeds his mind
For this foul fact high grace to find.
But whether that the Pharian dogs,
The ravenous fowls, or filthy hogs,
Have with the body filled their maw?
Or whether that the fire we saw
To cinders did the same conuart,
I do not know? but for my part
I say, what ever fatal scorn
Those worthy limbs away have borne;
The blame unto the Gods I give,
But his kept head me most does grieve.
When Cnaeus heard this heavy news,
He did not then his griefs infuse
With childish tears, nor idle plaint,
But with just piety attaint
Enraged, thus speaks with words not faint.
Ye mariners, with haste lay hands
Cnaeus reply, and speeches of revenge for his father so murdered.
To draw your ships from these dry sands,
And with your oars, (without a sail)
Against the adverse winds prevail.
Brave leaders now come follow me,
No civil war can iuster be;
Not so great praise as to interre
Their naked ghosts, that wandering err.
This tyrant boys blood must suffice
Great Pompeys ghost for sacrifice.
Shall I his Pelean Towers not drown,
And all those monuments throw down,
That over Alexander stands
In Mareotis foggy sands?
And raze to ground the Pyramid,
Their monument of Amasis?
And make all those their buried Kings
To swim in midst of Nylus springs?
They all shall want and naked lie,
( Pompey) thy Tomb to edify.
Isis shall now be raped with fire,
Whose Godhead Nations do admire.
And their Osyris (clad in veil
Of linen) common slaves shall traile.
And Apis, their Bull-god, I Will burn
A sacrifice to Pompeys vrne.
Under his head these Gods shall lie
Wherewith the funeral shall frye.
These wrackes that wretched land shall taste:
Their fruitful fields I will lay waste,
None left to plow, to dig or plant,
For Nylus to relieve their want.
None shall subsist, nor her gifts take,
Depopulate I will her make.
Thou only Pompey, and thy grave,
That Kingdom to thy self shall have,
When all their Gods away are chac't.
Thus said, the Navy then in have
Prepares it self unto the seas;
But Cato did the wrath appease
Of this brave youth; Cato appeaseth the wrath of young Cnaeus.
yet in the end
His noble spirit did commend.
Mean while through all the cost is spread
The bruit of Pompey murdered.
And therewithal a grievous shout
Of cries, did fly the air about.
No grief did like example show: The great lamentations of the people for
Pompey.

For never any age did know
The people to such plaints to fall,
For any great man's death at all.
But more, for as Cornelia, went
Out of her ship to make descent
Her visage worn, and wast with tears,
And dangling tresse about her ears,
A doubled shout the people reares.
No sooner was she set a land,
Whereas the shore was next at hand:
But Pompeys robes she gets together,
His Ensigns, and else whatsoever
Cornelias great piety toward Pompey
Of Arms, or like abiliments,
And all such glorious ornaments
(Richly imbrodered all with gold)
As he was wont to wear of old.
Then (three times casting up her eyes
Unto the heavens, and starry skies)
All this together she did cast
Into a funeral fire at last.
These cinders she (poor soul) did make
The which she kept for Pompeys sake,
Whereby the rest example take.
For presently, throughout the shore,
Of sacred fires were made huge store:
Which they unto those ghosts did yield
Late slain in the Pharsalian field.
Such flames do the Apulians raise
When as the frosty winter days
Their fields of green grass has deprived;
The custom of some countries in burning their lands to make them fruitful
And with such heat is new revived.
So the Gargarians use their grounds.
So Vulturs vales with corn abounds.
And lukewarm Matyns use like slight,
With boxen bushes flaming bright.
Nothing was done in all the host
More grateful unto Pompeys ghost,
(Although for him the heavens they blame,
And to the Gods vpbraid his name)
Then were the words Cato expressed,
Proceeding from a spotless breast.
Catos Oration in the praise of Pompey.
A Citizen (quoth he) is queld,
That others heretofore excelled
For skill in scanning of the laws;
But in this age for Justice cause
He profited the Roman state:
His reverence chased dire debate.
Freedom he awed not with his might,
But evermore subscribed to right.
In private sort he actions swayd,
Although the people him obay'd.
And though the Senate he directed,
Yet to their power himself subjected:
By armed force he naught effected.
What to obtain his heart was bent,
To be denied he was content.
Great wealth and honors he possessed;
But did the state with more invest.
Though to his sword they gave renown,
Yet knew he when to lay it down.
He Arms beyond the Gown approved,
Yet na'thlesse Armed peace he loved.
He Armies willingly receaues,
And all as willingly them leaves.
A civil house from riot free,
No fortunes gained by briberie.
With foreign Nations he had fame,
Who reu'renced his noble name.
And in like grace at home he stood,
For service to his Countries good.
The constant course of liberty
Was subject to seruility,
When they received in Rome again
The Marian and the Syllan train.
So, seeing Pompey is bereft
No show of freedom now is left.
Men do not blush at tyranny:
No color now of Empery:
None weigh the Senates Majesty.
O happy Pompey to be dead
As soon as thou were conquered!
And that the Pharian guilt thee brought
That sword, which else thou must have sought!
If not thou might have lived perchance
Under proud Caesar's governance.
To dare to dye is high grace gained,
And next to that, to be constrained.
But if that Fortune so betide,
We must be thralles to tyrants pride.
Then Fortune grant, that Iuba be
Another Ptolomey to me.
What need I fear my foe to serve,
When death can me from that preserve?
These words did greater glory raise
In all men's ears to Pompeys praise,
Then if the Theaters had sounded
With plaudits, ecchos that rebounded:
Whereby the honor of his end
Did to his gentle soul ascend.
But now the people mutter rumors,
And fall into discordant humors.
For wars and Arms they do detest:
Since Pompey in his grave did rest,
And Tarchon then did undertake
Catos new Ensigns to forsake.
He with the shipping suddenly
That utmost rode, away did fly:
Whom Cato thus did vilefie.
Catos words to Tarchon a Seaman.
O greedy Cilix most untrue,
Will thou the seas go scour anew,
Now Pompey is by fortune slain?
Must thou turn Pirate once again?
Then of them all he takes a view,
That mutin'd in this rogish crew:
Among whom one lad did courage take,
And to the chiefetaine boldly spoke.
The oration of one of the seamen to Cato.
Cato (quoth he) discharge us now,
Our faith to Pompey we did vow:
For his sake we did take up Arms,
And not for love of civil harms.
In his behalf we did our parts;
But he is dead that held our hearts.
He whom the world loved more then peace,
With whom our cause of war does cease.
Permit us now to leave to roame
To see our household Gods at home,
That we so long time have forborne,
And our sweet children thus forlorn.
For what date shall this war us yield,
If that Pharsalias bloody field,
Nor Pompes death can give it end,
Our lives in endless toil we spend.
Let us go quiet to our grave:
Let age his fitting funeral have.
For civil wars can scarce afford
A Sepulcher to any Lord.
We conquered men are not to fight
Against the great Barbarian might.
Fortune does not our state provoke
With Scithian or Armenian yoke.
I serve a gowned Citizen,
Under his law free Denizen.
Who Pompey living seconded,
To me is first, now Pompeys dead. Meaning Caesar.

To Pompeys sacred worthy spright
I will perform all reverend right;
But to his sovereign power I yield,
That conquered at Pharsalias field.
Thou Pompey, my sole Captain were,
I followed only thee in Mart.
Now will I follow Destiny:
And yet, to find prosperity,
I neither may, nor will I hope:
Since Caesar's fortune swayes the scope.
His conquest quaild Aemathian swords,
Who to us captives help affoords.
He only in the world subsists,
That will and may (even as he lists.)
Rue on poor vanquished men in grief,
And unto wretches yield relief.
All hope in ciuiil war is vain,
Since Aegypts sword has Pompey slain.
Who living, carried us with love;
But if the public cause do move
Thee Cato, and thy Countries stay; Caesar was then Consul.

Let us these ensigns then obey,
That Roman Consul does display.
So said, his ship he does ascend,
And swarms of youths do him attend.
Thus Romes affairs did seem to end.
For all, that loved servile bands
Did mutine there upon the sands.
When Cato (from his sacred breast)
In these words his free mind expressed.
Catos answer to the mutinous mariners
It seems you then indiffrent were,
On whether side you Arms did bear.
You were at first for Pompeys part,
For Rome you did not wage your mart.
And so you do desire it still,
To have one Lord to rule at will.
You did not tyranny oppose:
You cared not your free state to lose.
The Senate you refuse to serve;
Neither recke you well to deserve
Of any side to end this strife,
But would in Idle spend your life.
Meaning that Pompey being dead, if they were victors, there remained none to
tyranize.
Now safer it is our cause to gain,
You basely would the wars refrain.
And now (devoyd of true respect)
Your own free necks to yokes subject)
And cannot live without a King
Not now, when as a worthier thing
Calls men to hazard of the war;
Your swords and persons you debar
For Roman freedom to be vsd,
Which Pompey might perchance refusd,
And for himself your bloods abusd.
Fortune almost has tyrants reft,
Meaning Crassus, Pompey and Caesar.
Of three Lords now but one is left.
The Parthian bow, and Nylus shore
For our free laws have done the more.
Go you degenerate, exceed
The Ptolemeian gift and deed.
Who else will think that ever you
In these wars did your hands embrue?
But rather prone to turn your backs,
And first that fled Emathias wrackes.
Go safe, for you do well deserve
That Caesar should your lives preserve.
He needs must take of you remorse,
Subdued nor by siege nor force.
O sercile race unworthy most!
Now (that you have one Tirant lost) A disdainful manner of speech that Cato
used to the reuolting Seamen.

His successor you will accost.
You should no greater grace aspire,
Then life and pardon for your hire.
And Pompeys woeful wife convey
Into your ships, bear her away.
( Metellus child) a noble pray.
And living sons of Pompey breed.
Strive Egypts present to exceed,
Then take my head with you likewise,
So odious to the tyrants eyes.
He shall no mean reward receive,
That Catos head will so bequeaue.
And know you all it is worth your pain,
To follow me my head to gain.
Proceed you therefore and be bold,
To purchase grace let blood be sold.
Barely to run away were base.
So said, his words then took such place,
That all the Pirates (in such sort)
Brought back the ships into the port,
From out the Seas, as Bees do use,
When they the waxen hiue refuse. An apt comparison of Bees.

Where they have made their honny combs,
And ranging leave their little homes.
Not mind full now in swarms to fly:
But each one his own way does hie.
Not settled yet to suck and smell
The bitter Thyme, they love so well.
When suddenly the tingling sounds
Of Phrygian kettles them confounds
With maze, they stop their sudden flight:
And back returning, all do light
Upon their hiues, where with their skill
Their flowring labors they distill,
And combs with blessed honny fill.
At whose return the clownish royle
Is glad to see them in his soil:
And on Hyblean grass to swarm;
The treasure of his little farm.
Even so did Catos powerful words,
Unto just war draw on their swords.
And their loose minds, whom pleasure feeds,
He then recals to martial deeds,
And patiently wars brunt to bear
With industry and free from fear.
And first of all upon the sands,
He trains and draws them out in bands.
Then next to that they do inuest
Cyrenas walls and it possessed.
And though that town had him refusde:
Yet he on them no rigor vsd.
For Cato no revenge would take,
To conquer did his anger slake.
Thence he his speedy march designs
To Iubas kingdom, whose confines
Confront the Mauritanian lands.
But that the Syrts his course withstands
Amidst his way; although he thought
All difficulties might be brought
A digression from the matter to the nature of the Syrtes.
To pass, by virtues dantlesse prowes.
When nature did at first dispose
These Syrts, and shapt their figure out;
She left it to the world in doubt,
Whether it should be land or seas,
For utterly it does not please,
To sink it self beneath the maine:
Nor yet the land can so restrain
The waves; but they will have a share,
And such a dangerous place prepare;
That there to travel none shall dare.
For here the Sea does channels strain,
And there the lands do rise again.
Here is a long stretched tracke of shore,
And there the swallowing whirlepooles rore.
So nature wretchedly designde
This portion of her proper kind,
Unto no use, or else of old
Those Syrts more waves in them did hold
And with the Seas were over rowld.
But that atractiue Titans beams
(Feeding upon the ocean streams,
That to the torrid zone were nie)
Some of the weltring waves did dry.
And yet the Ocean in despite
Resists Phoebus parching might.
But yet his beams (as they draw near)
And wearing time those seas will clear,
And make the Syrts firm land appear.
For scarcely now a little boat
Can on the superficies flote,
Of those drowned sands where water stays,
And more and more that sea decays.
As soon as by the help of oars,
The fleet was gotten from the shores
Into the deepes, with all their freight,
The black Southwind blowing a haight
Out of his region stormy gales,
Far from her course the navy hales. The description of a cruel tempest on
the Seas.

And with huge tempests that he sends,
Those seas attempted now defends.
Far from the Syrts the waves he beats,
Against the cliffes the billow freates.
And all the ships that sails did bear,
The tempest from the yards did tear.
In vain the tackling and the shrouds,
Their sails denied to those fierce clouds.
But over board away are borne,
Fluttering at large their ships they scorn.
And if that any sayler stout
Unto the yards do go about
To fix the sails with cordage fast,
He Is borne away with whirlwind blast,
And from the naked yard is cast.
But all those ships found better chance,
That in the lofty billows dance.
And still aloof their course did keep
Amidst the channels in the deep.
And by the board did cut their masts,
Less subject thereby to the blasts.
So as the tides had power on them,
And in despite with force did stem
The puffing winds full in the mouth,
And bare those vessels to the South.
The other ships the water sails,
Their Keeles upon those hye sands trayles,
That lifts it self above the flood,
So as in doubtful state they stood.
The shelfe the one part does detain,
The other part hangs in the maine.
And as the billows comes more thick,
The faster in the sholes they stick.
For though the forcing Southern rack
Rowles one wave on another back:
Yet all those waves could not suffice
To drench the shelfe where it did rise.
This hugy heap of cluttered sand
Uncovered now lay far from land,
And higher unto sight was reared
Then Neptunes rugged back appeared.
The wretched Sailors there are grounded:
The ships upon the shelfe confounded
So far, that they no shore can spy,
And in the seas thus beating lie.
Yet of this fleet the greater part
(With bitter stirrage) got the start
Of these, and safely escaped away,
Taking their best course as it lay,
With skillful Pilots that did know
The coasts, and where the channels go.
And so at length by chance they light
A River in Affricke.
On that slow stream that's Tryton hight.
That God (as old reports do tell)
Which with his ringing Trumpe of shell
Makes all the maine his sound to hear
With windy notes so shrill and clear,
Tryton, Neptunes Trumperer.
Of rivers all loves this most dear.
And Pallas like esteem did make
That of Jove's brain her birth did take.
For that same Lybian Region
Was first land that she trod upon.
And is unto the heavens most near:
As by his heates it does appear.
In whose smooth waters crystal shine
She then did see her face divine.
And there her plants she did dispose,
And to her self the name she chose
Of Trytonesse, where this stream flows.
Near which (as fame reports) likewise,
The silent Laethe does arise:
That with infernal veins is fed: The river Laethe.

By which forgetfulness is bred.
Here also was conioyn'd to these,
The garden of Hesperides:
Despoiled of her leaves so bright,
Kept by the waking Dragons might.
That man is spiteful of condition,
That will detract from old tradition.
Or call the Poets to account
For ought which may the truth surmount.
This golden grove of treasures store,
(Whose boughs such shining apples bore)
A troop of virgins guarded still,
Whose glistring streams the air did fill.
And that soul Serpents charge to keep, The fable of Hercules that took away
the golden Apples from the garden Hesperides

Whose eyes are aye debard of sleep.
And with his tail the trunks infold,
That stoop with ouerwaight of gold.
But great Alcydes took away
From these rich trees the precious pray.
And did those shining apples bring
To Euristaeus Argiues king.
The navy (so cast on this caost,
And from the Syrts so clearly tossed)
Past not as yet beyond the shore
Of Gaeramants, where as they more.
But Sextus with his troops staid there,
Where Affricks climes more pleasant were.
Though Catos valor brooks no stay:
But with his cohorts takes his way,
Through coasts unknown where dangers lay.
His confidence in arms did stand,
And circuits all the Syrts by land.
And this the winters wroth persuades,
That then did bar those seas of trades.
Besides, the fires of Phoebus rays
The falling showers then much allayes.
So as his journey he might hold,
Neither oppressed with heat nor cold.
For where the flaming heat did rage,
The dewy season does assuage.
So through the barren sands he venters,
And vsd this speech before he enters.
O ye that with one common will,
Catos oration to his soldiers before he takes his journey into the deserts
of Lybia.
(Dauntlesse to hold your fre edome still)
Do follow me with such content,
Let now your minds be wholly bent
To undergo this valors task,
That toil and constancy does ask.
We go into the barren fields,
Of clymats scorcht, that nothing yields.
Where Tytan parcheth all the ground,
And fountains rarely to be found.
Whereas the lands in plenty brings
Forth serpents with their poysnous stings.
A journey that with horror rings.
Let therefore those (whom dear love draws
To freedom, and his Countries cause)
March on through Lybia with me,
And search out ways that waylesse be.
If so be they have no desire
To leave our Ensigns, and retire;
But are resolved for virtues hire.
For it is no part of my mind
Men's eyes with fallacies to blind:
Nor yet the Soldiers hearts to cheer,
By cloking dangers that draw near.
For I of such mates must be sped,
That freely are by dangers led,
By such as Roman worth esteem,
And hardest haps, the brauest deem,
That can endure the toils of Mart,
Whilst I a witness share my part.
But for that soldier that shall need
One to assure him happy speed,
And holds his life at so dear rate,
That he will every doubt debate;
Let him another leader seek,
And find a way he more may leeke;
Before that I do take in hand
This journey through this parched sand,
And march upon this dustie land.
And let these parching heates first light
On me, withal their fiery might.
And let the Serpents me assail
With poysned teeth, and venomed tail.
Let all those perils (that you dread)
Be tried first upon my head.
Let him, that sees that I am dry,
Refresh himself as well as I.
Or that the woody shades I seek:
Let him (then panting) do the like.
Or sees that I a horseback ride,
And so my troops of footmen guide:
Let him likewise for ease provide.
Or if (as chiefetaine) I do crave
Any prerogative to have
Before the soldier under me,
But cheek by cheek his mate will be:
These drouths, these thirsts, these snakes, these sands
Chiefly with valors liking stands.
Patience takes joy in bitter bands.
A worthy act holds greatest state,
When it is bought at dearest rate.
And Lybias clime such store does yield
Of miseries in every field,
As that it may (without defame)
Become brave men to shun the same,
So he these soldiers fearful sprites
To valarous attempts encites.
And to the love of Martial broiles
In desert paths he wandering toiles.
Through endless ways a passage made,
He does the Lybian coast invade.
So dreadlesse Cato (in short date)
Cato enters the deserts of Lybia.
Lights on a place to close his fate.
Whereas a slender tomb shall shrine
(Within her womb) his name divine.
The third part of this massy round
(If we believe what fame does sound)
Is Africa; but if we take
The same, as heaven and winds do make,
Of Europe then it is a share.
For Nylus shores no further are
From Gades (as first it was a land)
Then Scythian Tanais does stand.
And whereas Europe is descyded
From Lybs, it was by sea deuided^
But Asia did Europa pass,
And in his circuit greater was.
So whilst these two do jointly send
South-westerne blasts, that Noth-east tend,
Asia alone (on lefter hand)
Coniynd to Boreas chilly land:
And on the right to that South stream,
The confines of Egyptian realm;
From these two limits is possessed
Of all the title of the East,
The parts of Lybia chief and best,
Enclining is unto the West.
And yet no fountains there are found,
And seldom showers to moist the ground,
That from the Artick clime proceeds.
Yet our dry winds their moisture breeds.
That mould in it no wealth does hold,
Either of brass, or yet of gold.
No wicked mines therein have birth:
But all the soil is sollid earth.
In Mauritania trees do grow,
Whose worth the people did not know.
But to themselves contentment give,
Under the Cytrons shade to live.
Our axes since these woods have feld, Mauritania and the manner of that nation.

That merely were unknown to eld.
And from the worlds remotest side,
We brought our luxury and pride.
But all the coasts both near and far,
(That with the Syrts inuiron'd are)
With too much heat are ouer-run,
And parched with the neighbor Sun.
As that their grain it does destroy,
And all their Vines the dust does cloy.
No moistened root the same does feed,
Nor vital temper it will breed.
The Gods that soil do not respect,
And nature (stupid with neglect)
That land of comfort does deprive.
Those dead sands no spring can revive.
And yet in this dull barren ground
Rare herbs and plants are often found,
The which the Nasamons find out, The Nasmons that live upon sea wracks.

And gather up; a people stout
That naked are, and those coasts keeps,
Which frontiers all along the deepes;
And with the wrack themselves do nourish,
Of ships, that on the Syrts do perish:
For always they in wait do stand
For pillage on the Ocean sand,
When as the ships cannot attain
The port, their wealth, and spoil they gain.
So as these Nasmons hold commerce,
And trade with all the Universe.
(In manner of Barbarian kind)
By wracks that on their shore they find.
This wretched way Cato seeks out,
There to lead on with courage stout,
And there his soldiers to inure,
More storms then on the seas endure.
For that the Syrts southwinds do cause
Upon those sands most harmefull flawes.
For there no Lybian mounts suffice
To stay the fury that does rise.
Nor yet the rocks their force assuage,
But in the air those whirlewinds rage.
Amongst the woods they do not fall,
Rooting up hugie trees withal:
But fly along the parched plain,
(Without resist) with might and maine,
And on the sands their rage bestows,
The which it violently blows.
And never is alaid again
With any clouds of showring rain.
But sweeps in heaps the sands on hie,
Which hang and do not scattring fly.
The wretched Nasmons thus behold
Their kingdom still with tempests rowld,
Their houses to the earth down thrown,
Their roofs (with whirlewinds fury blown
From off their Garamantine frames)
Towering as high as hugest flames.
And as the smokes ascension
Unto the middle region,
Which darkness to the day procures,
So clouds of dust the air obscures,
The Roman troops began to find
The outrage of this whirling wind,
More furiously them to assail:
The furious effects of the Lybian winds.
So as their footing did them fail.
For even the very sands did fleet,
And slip from underneath their feet.
The earths foundation it had rac't,
And from his proper seat displac't.
If that these winds had made their birth
Within the Cauerns of the Earth,
And crept into the hollow docks,
That are surcharged with Lybias rocks,
But for because the flitting sand,
Does not the forcing wind withstand,
Nor make resistance with firm ground,
The soyles foundation did stand sound.
And that which fled before the wind,
Were upper sands, loose, vncombinde.
But there withal so forciblie,
The violent blasts amongst them fly,
As that from them it takes and tears
Their swords, their casks, their shields, and spears,
And through the vacant air them bears.
The which to other coasts might seem
A prodigy of streaming esteem.
As though those arms from heaven did fall,
To terrify the world withal.
And that which from men's hands was hent,
The Gods down to the earth had sent.
Surely those arms fell in such wise,
Whilst Numa was in sacrifise,
The which (in a religious fear)
The chief Patrician youths did wear.
So now their arms our soldiers lost,
By South or Northern tempest tossed.
In this sort all our Roman troops
(Scared with these winds) down prostrate droops:
Fearing the rapture of each blast,
Their garments they gird to them fast. The perils of the Lybian sands.

And thrust their hands into the mould.
Their own weight served not them to hold.
But they were forced all helps to prove:
And yet the winds would them remove.
And therewithal orewhelm'd be they,
With heaps of sands whereas they lay.
Which dust on them so heavy lies,
That they scarce able were to rise,
But stick fast in the heaped sand.
And when they get upright to stand,
The same so thick about them flotes,
That they stand buried to the throats.
Stones from the walls are taken out,
And through the air are borne about,
And cast far off (most strange to see)
Whose falls to many harmfull be.
And where no houses can be found,
Huge ruins lie upon the ground.
Men travel on land by the help of the stars as on the Seas.
There did appear no way nor path,
The soil at all no difference has.
But as upon the seas you sail,
So must the stars your course avail,
And by them seek to find your way.
And yet stars do not still display
In circuit of the Lybian skies:
For many shine not to their eyes,
But under their horizon lies.
Now when the heates had nere appeasd
The winds, whose rage the air had ceasd:
And that the days more fervent grew,
And did more scorching beams renew;
Through such a country then they pass,
As by the Gods designed was
Of mortal wights to be unknown:
Placed underneath the torrid zoane.
Where noght is found but parching drouth,
All moisture tending to the South.
Their lims and joints in sweat do melt,
Their mouths and jaws with thirst do swelt.
Yet hear a little vain they spy,
Of putred water running by.
The which the soldiers scarce could get,
So did the sands the current let.
But yet out of the pudled spring
A soldier brings Cato water in his helmet.
One fills his Caske, and does it bring
To Cato (Chieftaine of the host)
When all with drought were then embost.
Who first a little say did take,
And then in anger thus bespake.
Thou soldier base, what do thou see,
That is of so small worth in me?
That I alone (of of all this troop)
For want of continence should droope?
Have I of nycenesse showed such sign,
That I should first at thirst repine?
Nay thou that blame do more deserve,
That drinkst whilst all for thirst do sterue.
Therewith he ouer-turn'd the Caske: Catos continency. So did Alexander.

All were suffisd, none water ask.
Then they unto that Temple came,
That serves for all the Libian name:
And where rude Garamants do dwell,
They have no other sacred Cell.
And here (as old report does run)
The horned Jupiter does won.
But thunderbolts he none does bear:
Nor is like Latiums Jupiter.
With wretched horns his head is dight;
And Ammon Jupiter he hight.
The Lybians this Temple hold,
Endowed not with gifts nor gold;
Nor Jewels of the Eastern morn
(with glistering) did this place adorn.
And yet the Aethiopians,
And all the rich Arabians,
With those in India that live,
To Ammon only Godhead give.
Yet for a God he is but bare,
In no age he for wealth had care.
His Temple he from that restraines,
Vnviolate with greedy gains.
And (as it was the ancient guise)
That Godhead did the gold despise
That in the Roman Temples lies.
And that same place does witness well,
That there some heavenly powers do dwell.
For only there is to be seen,
That Lybian soil does bring forth green.
For all the rest of parched sands,
Divided from the temperate lands
Of Berenice, and Leptis ground, Berennicis and Leptis two Cities.

Nor grass nor leaf is to be found.
Ammon alone green groves retains,
And those are causd by springing veins,
Which in that place the earth refines,
And with those springs the sands combines.
Here nothing does withstand the Sun
When he his highest pitch does run,
In equalling their nights and days:
A relation how the signs and poles do lie to those parts of Lybia.
For then the boughs scarce shade displayes
Upon the body of the tree,
The sunny beams so shortened be;
By reason that they downright strike,
And therefore cause no shade oblike.
And this is thought to be the place
Whereas the Suns high circling race
Does cut the line that bears the Signs,
In middle where the Solstice shines.
For then they go no whit a scance,
Nor Taurus righter does advance,
Then Scorpio, in his sphericke dance:
Nor Aries does prescribe the times
To Libra, when his height he climes.
Nor yet Astraea does require
Slow Pisces downe-ward to retire.
Chyron the Centaure equally
Is opposite to Gemini:
And moistie Capricorn the same
In distance, as is Cancers flame.
Nor Leo (with his fiery eyes)
Does higher then Aquarius rise.
But unto thee, who so thou art
Of any Nation, that apart
Is sequestered from Lybian beams,
The shadow ever Southward streams;
But contrary with Northern Realms.
Thy sight the North-starre undergoes,
And Vrsa Mayor to thee shows;
As if that all his vnwet waine
Were ouer-whelmed in the maine.
And each star, that is most of light,
Seems (by the sea) hid from thy sight:
And either Pole this Region
Makes equal with thy Horizon;
Where all the Signs (in their swift force)
In midst of heaven do run their course.
Before this Temple gate did stand
The people of the Eastern land,
Attending there to know their fates,
Which Ammons Oracle relates.
But yet to Cato all gave way;
And his own Captains do him pray,
That of this God he would explore
(Whom Lybia did so much adore)
His doom, what fortunes and what chance
The future Ages should advance.
And he that Cato most importunes,
To search the knowledge of their fortunes,
And counsel of this God to take,
Was Labienus, that thus spoke: Labienus speech to Cato.

The hap and fortune of our way
Has offered us this lucky day,
To learn from this high power divine,
Of our success the fatal fine.
For by so great a guide as he,
We may a right directed be
Through Syrts, in wandering near and far:
And know the chances of this war.
For unto whom should I believe
The heavenly powers would sooner give
True knowledge of their secret hest,
Then unto Cato's holy breast?
For thy just life God has respected,
And been by laws divine directed;
And unto thee it is granted still
With Jove himself to speak at will.
Enquire of wicked Caesar's fate,
And what shall be our Countries state.
Whether the people shall retain
Their laws, and liberties again;
Or civil war shall us still strain?
Fill now thy breast with sacred voice,
Thou that in virtue do rejoice;
Learn what our valor may atchiue,
And how our honest course may thrive.
He (always filled with grace divine,
That in his secret soul did shrine)
These worthy speeches from his heart
(Like Oracles) does now impart.
O Labienus to me show,
What thou woldst I should seek to know.
Where I in Arms had rather dye,
Or live a slave to tyranny.
Whether we may a life it call,
That is not dated long withal?
Where diffring age do often avail,
Where rigor can true goodness quail?
Where fortune do her threats but loose,
When she does virtues might oppose?
Whether that it may us suffice
Praiseworthy deeds to enterprise?
And whether that it be success
Makes honest actions more or less?
This we already know as well
Catos divine conceits.
As Ammon can the same us tell.
Upon the Gods we all depend;
And though this Temple had an end,
Yet otherwise naught can succeed,
But by Gods ordinance decreed.
His mighty power no voice does need.
The Author of all mortal kind,
Has once for all declared his mind,
Our knowledge is by him confined.
These barren sands are not his choice,
Where he will utter forth his voice.
Nor in this dust does he conceal
Those truths, that he means to reveal.
The sacred seats of God are these,
The Heavens, the Air, the Earth, the Seas,
And virtues self; why should we prove
To search beyond the Gods above?
What so thou see, where so thou art
Of Jupiter himself is part.
Let faithless minds these witch-crafts need,
And such as dread what shall succeed.
No Oracles can me secure,
But death it self that is most sure.
The Coward, and the valiant Knight
Must fall at last, and leave this light.
And now for all may us suffice,
That Jove himself speaks in this wise.
So having said, with faiths repose,
The Temples Altars he forgoes;
And Ammons counsel does disdain,
Leaving it to those people vain.
Then in his hand he takes his pile,
And marched a foot himself the while
Before his troops, that panting went;
He shows them how to be content
To suffer toil, without constraint;
Since labor could not make him faint.
He is not on their shoulders borne,
A Charret he did hold in scorn.
Small rest and sleep he vsd to take,
And last of all his thirst would slake.
For when by chance a spring they met,
The thirsty Soldier (dry with heat)
Constrained was to drink, then he
The last of all the troop would be
That took his share, Catos temperance.
and did forbear
Until the Scullions served were.
If great renown be deemed due
To goodness, that is merely true;
Or if that naked virtues praise
(That wants success) men rightly waighes;
What ever was so much renowned,
That in our ancestors was found
Were fortunes gifts, that did abound?
For which of them (for happy Mart)
Could challenge that as their desert?
Or who could claim (as his own good)
The fame, they wanne with others blood?
But this man's triumph I would more
Desire to follow on this shore
Whereas the Syrts do dangers threat,
And thorough Lybias parching heat;
Then thrice in Pompeys Carre to wend,
And to the Capitol ascend:
Or gIuurths war to bring to end.
Behold him that true father is
Unto his Countries cause and bliss.
When Rome may think fit to aspire
Unto her Altars sacred fire.
To honor whom she needs not shame
To swear and vow by his dear name.
And whom (if ever Rome should see
Her state restored from dangers free)
Hereafter him to glorify
His name she well may deifie.
Now march they through a wretched soil,
That fervent heates do parch and broyle.
A clymate near the torrid zone,
Which heavens would have to men unknown:
Here water rare was to be found,
And yet (amidst this dusty ground)
One fountain large the Soldiers spide,
Where many Serpents did reside,
So thick that they the waters hide.
Two sorts of venomous serpents.
Upon the brinkes the Aspickes sit,
And in the midst the Dipsa's flit.
When Cato saw his men oppressed.
With heates, and thirst, this fount detest,
He said, O Soldier (whom vain fear
Of death, makes thee this spring forbear)
Thou needst not doubt thy thirst to slake,
These waters safely thou may take.
The Serpents pest no dangers brings,
Except when as with blood it mings.
His sting from it does poison send,
And with his bite does life offend.
The fountain wholesome is and pure.
Cato drinks first of suspected water.
So said, he drinks, them to assure
The water that they poysnous think.
But still (before) he vsd to drink
The last of all, during the time
That they had spent in Lybias clime.
Our care and labor cannot find
The cause, why Lybia is inclined
To air of such contagious kind:
Where many plagues abounding swarms,
Fruitful in naught but deadly harms.
Nor yet what secret nature did,
When in that soil such faults she hid; Meaning the fable that follows.

Except it be that fabling lie
That over all the world does fly:
The which does every age deceive,
When for a truth they it receive.
In the extremes of Lybias soil,
Whereas the ground with heat does broyle;
And where the Ocean it confines,
Warmed with the Sun when he declines.
Those fields and Countries all abroad
With foul Medusas filth was strode.
No greene-leau'd woods did yield a shade,
Nor Coulters there had furrows made.
But (with their Mistress balesull eyes) The fable of Medusa.

There only stones and rocks did rise.
Hence hurtful nature first drew seeds,
That mortal plagues in bodies breeds.
About her ears there dangling hung
The hissing snakes, with stinging tongue;
Which (like a tresse) her back behind
Did spread, as hair of women kind.
And, whilst about her neck they crawle,
The fell Medusa joyed withal.
Then all their heads, vp-right in rank,
Her brow did like a frontlet pranke;
But when she combed her crawling crown,
The viprous venom trailed down. These twelve translated verses are so
ambigious in the Latin, as that it rests to the best and most probable
construction that can be made thereof.

"Cursed Medusa taxlesse pries
"On whom she list, with fatal eyes:
"For who can fear this monsters face,
"When to dread death they have no space?
"For where her ghastly look she bends,
"They are trans-form'd before their ends.
"And raped away from doubtful fate,
"Preventing fear before their date.
"The bodies metamorphosed
"Retain the spirits captiued,
"And (buried so within the bones)
"Turn stupid, like to senseless stones.
The Furies (with their ghastly hairs)
Did only stir up frantic fears:
And Cerberus (that hellish hound)
Orphaeus calmed with music sound.
And Hydra, Hercules beheld,
When he that ugly Serpent queld;
But this vile monster did affright
Phorcus her father with her sight.
Phorcus that next does rule and reign
To Neptune on the raging maine.
Ceto her mother, with her look,
They were two other Gorgons her sisters
She scarres; her sisters cannot brook
Her ugly sight: the seas and skies
She can make stone with her stern eyes.
She vttterly can raze from earth
The worlds whole race of humane birth.
Amidst the air (from lofty flight)
The winged fowls do fall downright.
The wild beasts, and the horned Hearts,
She into craggie rocks conuarts.
And all the people in the scope
That bounds next unto Aethiope,
She has transformed (from flesh and bones)
Into hard rugged Marble stones.
No creatures can her sight abide,
Her hairy snakes behind her hide,
And will not of her eyes be spied.
The mighty Atlas (Tytans son)
That by Hesperian straights did won,
Atlas metamorphosed by Medusa.
She turned into a hugie rock.
The Giants of Phlaegraean flock,
(That with their Serpents feet sometime,
Did strive into the heavens to clime)
She lofty mountains of them framed;
Whereby that Giants war was tamed,
When Pallas in her shield did place
This grisly Gorgons hideous face.
Now after that Mercurius wings Mercury the founder of the Arcadian harp, and
of wrestling.

(The first concorder of those strings,
That on the Arcadian harp do sound,
And first likewise that wrestling found)
Had Perseus borne unto this place,
(That took from Danae his race
When Jove, trans-form'd to golden shower,
Into her lap himself did power;)
He took unto him speedily
The trenchant glaine of Mercury:
That glaine embrued with the stain Perseus borne of Danae, and the golden
shower.

Of hundred-eyed Argus slain,
The watchman of that haifer white,
That did Jove's fancy so delight.
Then Pallas (that same martial maid)
Did give her winged brother aid,
Whereby this Gorgons head to gain;
And charged him his flight to strain
Toward Lybissas utmost land:
But that his look should Eastward stand.
And, flying, hold a westward race,
When he through Gorgons realm did trace.
Then on his left arm she did bind
Her brazen Targe, that brightly shined: Pallas Target.

And bids him so the same direct,
That upon it there might reflect
Medusas stone-creating eyes:
Which heavy sleep should so surprise,
And raped her senses chiefest strength,
To bring dire death on her at length.
But yet part of her snakie tresse
This slumber could not so oppress;
But that some serpents stood an end,
And did her dulled head defend,
Whilst some her face did ouer-spred,
And veiled her eyes in darkness bed.
Then Pallas lent her powerful charm
To fearful Perseus trembling arm:
And did his fauchion Harp guide,
Perseus with harp, the fauchion of Mercury, cuts off Medusas head.
That ready was to turn aside;
Wherewith he straight in sunder smoat
Her spacious snake-bearing throat.
What face had Gorgon then I wonder,
When that her neck was cut a sunder
With that same crooked wounding blade?
What poison did her gorge unlade?
How many deaths from her eyes streams?
Pallas could not endure those gleames:
Nor Perseus (though he turned aside)
Had escaped from being stonifi'd,
If Pallas had not (with her Targe)
Her feltred locks dispersed at large,
And so be-clouded all her face
With Snakes, that over it did trace.
The winged Perseus (being sped
With this fell Gorgons ugly head)
Did mind to heaven to make repair,
And cuts the region of the air:
But (lest through Europes Clyme he might,
With damage to those coasts, take flight)
Pallas enioyn'd him, with her hest,
That fruitful soil not to infest;
Nor yet that people to molest.
For who would not admire the skies,
When through them such a wonder flies?
From Zephyrus he turns his wings,
And over Lybia's coasts he flings:
Where was nor grain nor tillage vsd,
But all with Phoebus flames enfusd.
For there the Heavens and Tytans steedes
Burnt all, so that no green it breeds.
And no land in the earth does rise
(With mighty shade) more near the skies
Nor Cinthia's light does more surprise:
If that (forgetful of her way)
From the right signs she trend astray.
For that high land casts never shade
Unto the South, or Northern glade;
And yet it is a barren ground,
Wherein no goodness can be found.
But now it was with poisons fed,
That dropped down from Medusa's head.
And those vilde dewes corrupt the fields,
That her envenomed sanguine yields.
The which the heates more noisome makes,
When in the putred sands it bakes.
The first corruption that arose,
And in the dust his head out-showes,
The Aspicke was; that brings dead sleep,
And with a swelling neck does creep. The diverse kinds of serpe^ts that were
engendered in Lybia by the drops of blood that fell from the neck of Medusa,
according to fabulous antiquity

With Gorgons blood he was repleate,
The clottred poisons in him fret.
No serpent is more poisonous,
Nor in extreme more frigidous;
Who (wanting warmth) does always shun
The Clymes remoter from the Sun.
And all along the banks of Nyle
Those sands he likewise does defile.
But how great shame to us acrues
(Whom couetise does so abuse)
That we from Affricke do not spare
To merchandise that noisome ware?
Here also does that hugie beast
( Haemorrhois) raise up his crest.
And whom he stings, from out the veins
All the life-feeding blood he draines.
Then the Chersydros double kind,
That in the sholes of Syrts are shrin'd.
And the Chelydri in their dens
Amongst the muddy steaming fennes.
And Cenchris always when he slides,
(Not wriggling) straight his passage guides.
Whose speckled body (full of stains)
More diverse colors still retains,
Then are the Theban marble veins.
And the Ammodites, whose hue
From parched sands men hardly knew.
And the Ceraste roming wide,
Whose winding back each way can glide.
And Scytale, that winter-worme,
That in cold dewes does make his furme:
And in that season casts his coat.
Then Dipsas, that is all as hot.
Amphisibena, harmfull fiend,
That has a head at either end.
The Water-snake, that felly stings,
And Darting Serpents, that have wings.
And Pharias, that does not traile,
But ever goes upon his tail.
And greedy Praester, that all rapes,
Whose frothy Jaws such wideness gapes.
With Seps, that in contagion swelts,
And very bones with bodies melts.
Then that same Basiliske, whose hiss
Unto all Serpents fearful is:
So as from him they fly or hide,
And come not where he does reside.
He lethall is before he sting,
His hissing deadly harm does bring:
Therefore called Basiliscus of the greek word (...)
Sole in the sands he reigns as King.
And torrid Affricke likewise breeds
Those plaguie Dragons, that exceedes
For mischief, in most cruel kind,
Which other nations never find.
Whose scaly backs do shine like gold;
And when aloft their flight they hold,
(Amidst the air with stretched wings)
The herds of cattle clustring thrings.
For mighty Bulls become their pray,
That in their tails they sweep away.
Huge Elephants escape not their paws:
All things to death their fury draws:
So as no poysnous humor needs
To act the mischief of their deeds.
Cato (with his stout martial bands)
Does march along these parched sands
That do such mortal poisons yield;
And there with grief he often beheld
The uncouth deaths, that so abounds,
Amongst his troops of little wounds.
The Serpent Dipsas turns his head
On Aulus, that on him did tread,
And bites this youth of Tyrrhen race, The poison of Dipsaes.

That held an Ensigne-bearers place.
He scarcely any whit was paind,
Nor any sign of bite remaind.
Within his looks no death appeard,
Nor threatening danger to be feared.
But yet the secret poison works:
The fire within the marrow lurkes:
And suddenly the venom heates,
Whilst burning gripes his bowels freats.
This pestilence dispersed sinks,
And all the vital humors drinks.
His pallat and his iaws grow dry;
His tongue with scorching drought did fry:
His weary lims (with laboring heat)
Did not as erst yield moistie sweat.
No tears at all fall from his eyes.
All moisture from the poison flies.
No reu'rence of the Empires awe,
Nor Stoicke Catos martial law,
Could this incensed man affray:
But he his Ensigns would display,
And all about the fields did rave,
Seeking where he might water have,
The which his thirsty heart did crave.
Had he been into Tanais cast,
Or Rhodanus that runs so fast,
Or into Poe that spreads so vast,
Or into Nylus, that does range
Along so many countries strange;
And of all these had soakt his fill:
Yet would his lights have burned still.
The fury of the parched ground
Did make his deadly drought abound,
And add more deaths to Lybias blame,
But does detract from Dipsas fame,
As not from her that all this came.
He now at last the sands does try,
Where any filthy puddles lie.
And then unto the Syrtes returns,
And bathes in floods his mouth that burns.
The stoare of waves did him delight:
Yet naught asswag'd his thirsty plight.
His kind of grief he nothing knows,
Nor that his bale from poison flows.
He thinks thirst only his disease,
The which the better to appease,
With his own sword he cuts his veins,
And with the blood his mouth he baines.
Cato forthwith commanded than
To take the ensign from this man.
And so it was handled that none durst
To say this sickness came of thurst,
But straight again another dies
More grievously before their eyes.
For lo a little Seps their lights
On poor Sabellus thigh and bites:
Who with his hand away did pluck
This worm, that by the teeth then stuck.
And with his pyle, that he did bear,
The poison of the Seps
Unto the ground he naild it there.
A little Serpent it is God knows,
But whence most cruel poison flows,
And none does bring more deadly throes.
For all about (where he had bit)
The skin and flesh away did flit:
So as the bone all bared lay,
The carcass likewise melts away.
One naked wound all did display.
His members all with venom swell:
His brawnie calves then from him fell:
The synews of his hams Were reft:
No skin or flesh about them left:
The very muskles of his thighs
Did rotting drop away likewise:
His flancks to black corruption turned:
The midriffe shriueled up and burnd:
So as his bowels burst withal,
And yet the body did not fall
Together, to the ground at once:
But by peace-meale dropped from the bones.
Thus (with a little poysned bite)
Death suddenly all parts did smite.
The venom had such ample scope,
That nerves and sinews it lays open.
The ribs it did uncover quite:
The hollow breast it rots outright.
The vital veins that feed the heart,
And what else was of this man's part,
That Nature gave, when he took breath,
Abandond lay to this strange death.
His shoulders drop, and his strong arms,
His neck and head receive like harms.
The thawing snow melts not more fast,
That feels the warmth of Southern blast:
Nor yet the wax against the Sun
Does to more liquid humors run.
But this is nothing that I say
That poisons heat melts flesh away:
The fire can show the self same power,
But what flame so can bones devour?
For hear even as the marrow melts,
The bones likewise consuming swelts.
It suffers no signs to remain.
A rapting fate so all does strain.
Of all the plagues (that Affricke tries)
Thy self alone shall have the prize.
The rest do bring but life to end:
But thou both life and bones do spend.
And now behold another kind
Of swelling death, they likewise find.
The fiery Prester (with his sting)
Nasidius to his end does bring.
Nasidius that (with his plough shares)
The Marsian fields for grains prepares. The poison of the Prester.

His face is colored fury red:
His puffed swollen skin at large is spread.
All form and shape his looks has lost
The tumor so his corpse imbost.
And so his veins the poison feeds,
That human measure he exceeds.
One lump does all his parts confound,
Within a formelesse body dround.
His habbergon was not of space,
His swollen carcass to embrace.
The boiling caudrons frothy scum,
Does not in bubbles rise so plum;
Nor yet the sail does swell so vast,
When it is puffed with windy blast.
The mishapt corpse could scarce contain
The lims, that so with swelling strain.
And that same trunks confused heft,
They durst not to the funeral weft,
But to the fowls untouched it left,
And for a pray unto wild beasts,
If thereon they durst make their feasts.
For now the swelling corpse they leave,
Before the fullness it receive.
But spectacles of more dismay
The Lybian poisons yet display.
The sharp Hemorrhois has impressed
His venomed teeth, that did infest
The poison of the Hemorrhois.
Tullus, that noble hopeful youth,
A follower of Catos truth.
And as we seethe Saffron stain
The cloth, through which the same we strain
So did this poisons ruddy taint
(Like blood)) his body all depaint.
The tears (that from his eyes then fell)
Were drops of blood, wherewith they swell.
And all the passages besides,
Through which the bodies humor slides,
Huge streams of blood by those vents flows,
So from his mouth, and from his nose,
He liquid blood does likewise sweat,
Wherewith his members were repleate,
That through the swelling veins did freate.
And so his bleeding did abound,
That all his body was one wound.
But on thee ( Leua) wretched wight
The Nylus serpents rage did light. The nature of the Aspicks poison.

Whose poison fixed remediless,
The heart root strings did so oppesse,
That of his bite no pain was felt,
Yet suddenly in death did swelt,
And in a slumber tookst thy end,
And so to Stygian shades descend.
The poison gathered unawares,
(That fatal Sabeas so prepares,
When they a harmefull twig do choose
For francumcense, which they would use)
Does not with that strong potion
Have death with so swift motion.
But now behold from far does flee
(Out of a hollow withered tree)
A cruel serpent, like a flight, The nature of the serpent called a Iaculum.

That deeply wounds where it does light.
And (whirling with a courage fierce)
Through Paulus temples it did pierce.
A Iaculum they do it call,
It poisons not the part withal;
But whomsoever that it wounds,
There present death the life confounds.
By this experience we may know,
That unto this a sling is slow,
And (in compare how this does pierce)
The Scythian shaft flies not so fierce.
What help at all does it advance,
That Murrus has (with his sharp lance)
The Basiliske pierced through quite;
When as the deadly venoms might
Along the lance so fast does creep,
That it within his hands does steep?
Which he lifts up finding the harm, The nature of the Basilisks poison.

And instantly cuts off his arm
With his own sword, which fell to ground.
And he by this experience found
(The hand cut off that he endures)
His life thereby to him assures.
But who would think the Scorpions sting
Had such like force in poisoning,
And present death with it could bring?
He cruel is in deadly bites,
And mortally his tail he smites.
The which the heavens themselves explain,
In honor of Orion slain.
Salpuga a kind of poysnous Ants.
Or who would doubt that earth to tread,
Where thou Salpuga make thy bed?
And yet the fatal sisters three
No little power have given to thee,
Our vital twists to shred in twain,
By force of thy strange poysnous vain.
Thus neither by the days fair light,
Could they find rest, nor in dark night.
These wretched men were still in dread,
Upon what ground to rest or tread.
For neither heaps of leaves they take,
Nor bundled reeds their beds to make:
But even as men, to fates exposd,
Upon the bared ground reposd:
And to the vapors, that do rise
Where their warm bodies heaped lies,
The chilly serpents do repair
(Offended with the nights cold air.)
Amongst their lims their skins they warm
And all that while they do no harm.
The cold dew does their venom charm.
Mean while the soldiers do not know
What ways to seek, or where to go.
But are directed by the skies,
The murmuring and repining of the soldiers against their miserable journey.
And in this maze power out their cries.
O Gods (say they) let us be led
Unto the field, from which we fled.
Bring us again to Thessalie:
Our hands to arms we destiny.
The Serpents of Lybia.
Why languish we in misery?
The Dipsaes here for Caesar fight,
And the Caerastes plead his right.
Along the torrid zoane we run,
And clymates burned with the Sun.
We are well pleased (in our despair)
To lay the blame upon the air.
And then against the heavens to cry,
As destined in this soil to die.
But, Affricke, we accuse thee not,
Nor nature with this fault do blot.
Thou have this hateful soil designd
To serpents of a monstrous kind. This part of Lybia not ordained for man to
live in.

And therefore hence it first did chase
All means to nourish humane race.
This earth thou barren did ordain,
Unfit for tillage or for grain.
And in this sort thou did decree
That men from poisons should be free.
But we take up the Serpents rooms,
For which we have these heavy doomes.
And thou o God who so thou art,
That do dislike of this our mart,
(Thereby to make our error known)
On this side setst the torrid zoane:
And on the other side do place
The marine Syrts, with doubtful race:
And in the midst this noisome coast,
Where we by sundry deaths are lost.
The civil war his arms displaies
Along these desert uncouth ways;
And now the soldiers well are taught,
What miseries the heavens have wrought.
The worlds deep secrets they have sought
But now, perhaps, some things more strange
They yet may meet where they will range. In this part of the world both the
Poles do seem to be as low as the horyson.

For there the Sun falls in the Seas,
And, hissing, does his flames appease:
And there the nature of the Poles
(Oppressed to seeming) downward rolls.
But no land further does extend
Unto the West where this does end.
But Iubas realm, whose fatal name
To us is only known by fame.
There we shall seek and chance to find
Lands, breeding serpents of this kind.
This comforts yet the heavens do give,
That in this soil some of us live.
We do not wish nor yet desire
To our own country to retire.
Europe nor Asia we affect,
Where other stars lend their aspect.
But Affricke where have we thee lost!
Under what sky or in what cost!
Art thou obscured from our host?
For but even now the winters cold
We found upon Cyrenis mold.
Is so much the years season changed
In this small way, that we have ranged?
We cross this Axle of the world,
And with the sphere about are whorld:
And now again we turn our back
Once more unto the Southern rack.
There opinion then of the Antipodes.
So as, perhaps, the Roman land
Just underneath our feet does does stand.
This only comfort fate us grant,
That our foes seek us where we hant,
That Caesar (ere this war be done)
May follow on where we have run.
Such woeful plaints remediless
Their suffering patience did express.
But that their captains noble heart
Made them all pains take in good part.
The bared sands was still his bower;
He tempted Fortune every hour.
Catos prsise.
In all assayes he still made one,
And runs when he is called upon.
His worthy carriage comfort gave,
To soldiers, ready for their grave.
And more then health did them revive,
For they in greatest pangs would strive
To hide their plaints and death defy,
As long as he was present by.
What power on him had any grief,
That so to others gave relief?
Whilst he looked on his men he taught
The greatest woes to set at naught.
Fortune (that weary was almost
With plaguing of this wretched host)
A little taste of comfort gives
And them at last (though late) releeues.
A people in the world there be,
That are from serpents poison free.
Marmarida that land is named:
Psilli the people, that have framed
Their tongues all venoms rage to dead,
As well as herbs, that earth has bred.
No poisons force can be enfusd
Into their blood, though no charms vsd.
The place (by nature) does provide,
That safe among serpents they recide. The nature of a people in Lybia called
the Psilli that cure the bites of Serpents.

It profits them to lead their life
In soyles, where serpents are so rife.
With them death seldom is at strife.
Their blood so poison houlds in scorn,
That when a child is newly borne,
They use this means wherewith to try
If it be free from Bastardie.
By proving of the Aspicks byte,
To know where it be false or right.
And as Jove's Eagle scans the doubt
Of those warm eggs the dam brings out
By taking his vnplumed race,
And them against the Sun does place,
And those that can (with constant eye)
Behold the beams assuredly,
And will not twinckle at the light,
When Tytan shows his face most bright, How the Psilli try their wives
chastity.

As his own breed those he affects:
But every wincking squall reiects.
Such trial does the Psiilli make
If their small babes dare touch a snake,
Or if the infant do but play
With serpents, laid in his way.
These people do not only care
How to preserve their own welfare:
But strangers likewise they intend,
And from those monsters them defend,
And to our soldiers help did lend.
One of the Psilli did accost
An Ensign, of the Roman host,
And with our camp along he went,
And when the Chieftaine pitched his Tent,
He all the host did circuit round,
Entrenched on this sandy ground.
That done his muttring charms he spoke,
And all without great fires did make.
A medcine venoms force to slake.
Medicines against the serpents poison.
In it the Dane-wort hissing heates:
And Galbana there frying sweates:
The Thamarix, of sullen plight:
And Costrum, that hearbe-Mary hight:
With Panacea, most of might:
Then the Thessalian Centorie:
And Maid-wort, that does crackling fry:
Long-wort, and Larix therewithal,
And that, which Southernwood we call,
Whose smoke the serpents so distaste;
And then an old Harts-horne at last,
So all the night they safely past.
For poisons, that do daily hant
That people magic wonders chant.
Great struggling strife these Psillans make,
When they would taken-venom slake.
For first of all the stinged joint
With spittle they do round anoint,
Which does the spreading venom draine,
And in the wound the same contain.
Then many charms by them are sung,
Still muttring with a froathie tongue.
And from their mumbling if they cease,
The venoms rage will then increase.
No minute may they hold their peace.
Thus often do they with these charms,
Dissolve and quench those poysnous harms,
That in the marrow festring lies.
But if this course do not suffice,
But that the lingering poison stay,
And to their charm will not obey;
Upon the cure he flat does fall,
And licks the pallid wound withal.
The venom with his mouth he draws,
And soakes the artires with his jaws.
So from the chilly corpse he fets
The deadly dram, and out it spets.
And having overcome the might
Of this vile serpents mortal bite,
The Psilli by the taste do find
The poisons force, and of what kind.
And by this means the Roman troop
Are freed from that, which made them droop
And now about these dismal lands
They dare disperse their scattring bands.
Belphoebe twice was in the wane,
And twice her full light she had taken,
Whilst Cato wandering in this coast
Her nightly sheene had found and lost.
Now more and more the mouldring sand
Grew firm, and changed to solid land,
And then a far the soldier sees
The lofty woods and greene-leau'd trees,
And little cotes with loame vp-patcht,
The roofs whereof with reeds were thatcht.
O what a comfort this poor host
Conceived, to find a better coast!
When first they one another show
Fierce Lions ranging to and fro.
Then unto Leptis next they came, Leptis a good city on the frontiers of Lybia.

He now returns to speak of Caesar.



Where they their winter stations frame.
A quiet place and fruitful mould,
Neither oppressed with heat nor cold,
Caesar now (having coold his ire
In Pharsale blood) does thence retire.
And all the weight of his affairs
Against his son-inlaw-prepares,
And him pursues (although in vain)
Whose troops were sperst on land and maine.
But Pompeys fame the seas had spread
Thither his army Caesar led.
And goes unto the straights of Thrace,
Whose waves Leanders love did grace.
Where stands that fatal wailing tower
Of Hero, his dear Paramour.
That Hellespontus has to name,
From Hell drowned in the same.
A shorter cut cannot be found
Twixt Europe, and the Asian ground.
Although the maine, that does divide
Bizantium, from Calcedons side,
Do run but with a narrow tide.
And so Propontis (that does take
His current from the Euxine lake)
Does but a slender channel make.
Here he the fame does now explore,
That runs of this Sigaean shore.
And Simois, that noble fount;
Here was Achilles his Tomb.
And that brave Greek of such account,
That buried lies in Rhaetus mount.
And many other worthy sprites,
Obliged unto the Poets writes.
He circuits then that worthy name
Of Troy, destroyed by Grecian flame.
And those old ruins he seeks out
Of Phoebus walls so large about.
But rotten trees and barren land
Now hides the place where they did stand.
And with their burden do press down
The buildings of Assarac's town,
And all their Temples so divine
The spreading roots do undermine.
All Troy is thus with brambles cloyd,
Yea even her ruins are destroyed.
Hesions rocks he likewise viewes, Hesione, Laomedons daughter.

And where Anchises erst did use
(In woody shades) his sports to prove,
Coying that powerful Queen of Love:
And whereas Paris being judge,
Did on him draw great Juno's grudge:
And where that Boy was rapted up,
That now for Jove does bear the cup; Ganimed.

And where the Trojan youth did rest,
When he was Nymph Oenone's guest. Paris.

Each place is with some fame possessed.
Now unawares does Caesar pass
That twining stream, that dried was,
Which Zanthus he did call of yore,
And careless treades that grassie shore.
When as a Peasant of that Coast
Bids him not tread on Hectors ghost: The words of a Peasant to Caesar.

There all abroad lay scattred stones
Of that brave Tomb, that held his bones,
Whereof no form did now remain.
And then this Peasant said again,
What do thou Hectors Tomb disdain?
O great and sacred Poets toil,
That do preserve what death would foil! The praise of of Poesy.

And to the world this boon do give,
That mortal men shall ever live.
O Caesar! do not thou repine,
To see the power of fame divine.
For if that we may promise ought
That may by Latium Muse be wrought;
As long as Smyrna's Poet lasts,
And on deserts due honors casts: Homer.

So long shall after ages fame
Record my verse, and read thy name.
And our Pharsalia shall subsist
In spite of dark obliuions mist.
When Caesar feasted had his eyes
With ruins that there heaped lies
Of reverent monuments of fame, Caesar's sacrifice at Troy, and his vows.

There he of turfe in haste did frame
A sacred Altar, where did flame
The precious gummes, that smoke did raise,
And not in vain in this sort prays.
Ye ghosts divine, whose ashes cold
The Trojan ruins do infold,
Whence my Aeneas took his race,
That in Lauinia now has place,
And in the Alban bower soiournes,
Where Phrygian fires still shining burns:
And where that famous pledge does lie
(Concealed still from mortal eye)
Of Trojan Pallas which we have
Caesar does challenge his descent from the Trojans.
Shrin'd in a Temples secret cave.
Behold before your Altars here
A glorious Offspring does appear,
Descended from the Julian line,
Who offers up his vows divine:
And yields your Rites in this self place,
That whilome you were wont to grace;
Grant my designs a happy fate,
I will again restore your state:
And Italy, the walls of Troy
Shall gratefully raise up with joy.
So Roman Pergamus shall rise
With lofty Turrets to the skies.
Thus said, unto his Fleet he goes,
And all his sails a fair wind blows.
For he desired to make amends
For that time, which on Troy he spends.
Then mighty Asia's coasts he cleeres,
And past Rhodes foamy waves he steeres.
So as (within seven nights at most)
He did arrive on Aegypts coast,
Caesar sails toward Affricke.
With such a friendly Eastern gale,
That they nor tacke aboard did hale,
Nor ever did a sheet let fly,
Till Pharos Lantern they espy.
And yet the day was new begun,
And that night lamp dyn'd with the Sun:
Before he did approach the Port
Where flocking people did resort
With muttring dinne, and strange report.
And therefore now (for his behoof)
Forbeares to land, and keeps aloof;
Doubting (at first) himself to trust
With such a Nation, most unjust.
But now dire presents from that King,
The Captain of his guard did bring,
And comes aboard the Roman fleet,
And on the seas does Caesar greet:
With him he carries Pompeys head,
With Pharian veil all ouer-spred.
And first of all he laud affoords
To his foul fact, in these vile words.
Great Conqueror of all the earth,
Chief ornament of Roman birth, Pompeys head brought to Caesar, with an
Oration.

That which as yet thou do not know
The Egypt King does here bestow
Security upon thy state,
By cutting off great Pompeys date:
Whereby thy labors and thy war
By land and sea, now ended are.
And that which only wanting was
At Pharsals field, is brought to pass.
The civil war thou did entend,
Is in thy absence brought to end.
The ruins of Pharsalias fight,
(That Pompey sought again to right)
Is by our sword extinguished quite.
Thy favor, Caesar, that we sought,
With this great trial we have bought.
And with this blood confirmd we have
The league, that we of thee do crave.
Receive this kingdom as thine own,
For which thou have no dangers known.
Receive the right of all this Realm,
The fruitful soil of Nylus stream.
Receive all that which thou would give
For Pompeys head, whilst he did live:
And in thy Camp now let us be
As faithful followers to thee;
Since by the Fates it was decreed,
That we should act so great a deeed.
And do not think this merit vile,
That we our hands should so defile
With slaughter of so dear a guest,
By whom this kingdom we possessed:
When our Kings Father was put down,
Pompey restored him to his Crown.
What is there more for me to say?
What name can such a work display?
Search all the world records that are,
They all come short of this by far.
Thy debt is more, if this be blame,
That for thy sake did act the same:
From thee we taken have the shame.
So said, the head he did display,
And from it takes the veil away:
But deaths pale hue his looks estranged,
The features of his face were changed.
Caesar at first did not despise
This gift, but turned aside his eyes;
And musing staid, the truth to sound
Caesar's behavior at the sight of Pompys head
Of this foul fact, which when he found,
It Was fit he thought, that they all saw
He was a pious Father-in-law:
Wherewith he fained tears did shed,
And sighs for that, his comfort bred.
Hoping this way to be the best
To cloak those joys that in him rest,
And did the Tyrants fault detest.
And would the Treason rather blame,
Then seem indebted for the same.
He that before with scorn did tread
Upon the Senators laid dead:
And that with dried eyes beheld
The slaughter of Pharsalias field;
Now dares not, Pompey, thee deny
A deepe-fetcht sigh, and weeping eye.
O cursed lot of dismal fate!
Have thou pursued this dire debate,
(O Caesar) and in that prevailed,
That now deserves to be bewailed?
The contracts of thy son-in-law,
To no compassion does thee draw:
Nor yet thy daughter makes this mood,
Nor little Nephews of their blood:
But thou do hope thy tears will move
The people (that did Pompey love)
Thy Arms the rather to approve.
Or else perchance thou do envy
This traitor tyrants destiny:
That any hand such power has shown
On Pompeys bowels, but thine own:
And grieu'st such means to others left,
Whereby revenge from thee is reft:
And that the end of Pompeys bane
From the proud victors sword is taken.
But whatsoever humor twere.
That made thee sigh, or shed a tear,
It did no pious meaning bear.
Did thou (with such an eager vain)
Expose thy force by land and maine?
And did not mean withal, that he
In any place should ruined be?
O well did death this act fulfill,
That left it not unto thy will!
What shame and blame has heavy fate
Removed from the Roman state?
That would not suffer Pompey live,
That thou (wretch) sholdst him pardon give?
And yet thou dare (with outward shows)
To blind the world in that it knows:
And fained sorrows face do frame,
To gain to thee a loyal name.
Soldier, that unto me do bring
This direful present from thy King,
Depart my sight, bear it away: Caesar's words to him that presented Pompeys
head.

For thou do Caesar more betray,
And worse of him it merited,
Then of great Pompey murdered.
For this proud fact does us bebarre
The greatest glory of our war;
Which is, that mercy might be shown
By us, unto our vanquished fone.
And did not this vile tyrant hate
His sister, partner of his state?
I quickly could thy King requite
With equal scorn, and like despite.
And, Cleopatra, send thy head
Unto thy brother for bloodshed.
What moved him thus with secret might
Caesar reproues Ptolemey.
So to entrude his swords despite
In actions, longing to our right?
Have we to this end conquest sought
At the Pharsalian battle fought;
That we should lawless power afford
(In this kind) unto Aegypts sword?
Must we our state and safety gain
By favors, that your kingdoms daine?
Shall I (that would not brook for Mate
Great Pompey, in the Roman state)
Endure thee, Ptolemey, my Peer?
Then, what are we a whit the near,
So many Nations to have led
Under our Roman Ensigns spread,
If in this world there should be known
Any, but Caesar's power alone?
Or if the earth could parted be
Twixt any other man and me?
We should now turn our Latium Ores
Aloof from these Egyptian shores;
But that our honors are denayd:
For then perhaps it would be said,
That we for fear did Pharus shun,
And not as loathing this deed done.
But do not you persuade your mind,
That you the victors eyes can blind;
But that he knows (had heavens hest
So driven him to be your guest)
He should have tasted the like feast.
And that my head is not so vsd,
Pharsalia's fortune has excusd.
I see that we have waged war
More perilous to us by far,
Then ever yet our mind did fear:
To banishment we subject were.
Then Pompey us pursued with hate,
And threatenings from the Roman state:
So as if we had been distressed,
Then Ptolemey had us oppressed.
But with his youth we do dispense;
And pardon him for his offense.
But to the Pharian King make known,
A greater grace cannot be shown.
See therefore you entombe the head
Of such a worthy Captain dead. Caesar gives commandment for Pompeys funeral.

But fashion not his funeral
As though his acts were criminal,
Deserving to be hid from sight:
But Incense give him flaming bright.
Of his wronged ghost appease the mones,
And gather up his burned bones,
That on your shores lie all defaced,
And in an vrne let them be placed.
So let him thereby understand
His father-in-law came to this land:
And let his soul hear, therewithal,
My feeling sorrow for his fall.
Although before our vowed love
He did all other things approve:
And rather chose his Pharian ward,
Then our due grace his life to guard.
Whereby the people reaued been
That happy day, they might have seen.
And that same concord was suppressed, Caesar pretends a meaning to have been
reconciled to Pompey.

That had restored the world to rest.
But so the heavens did now ordain
That my desires should be but vain;
Who meaning hear to lay aside
Those conquering Arms, that I have tried
With friendly hands, and enterview,
We might our ancient leagues renew;
And (free from grudge and civil strife)
In those true terms have wished thy life.
Thinking my pains at full rewarded,
To be thy equal peer regarded
Then had I (with this loyal peace)
Brought it to pass that thou should cease
To blame the Gods for wars disgrace,
And thou have made Rome me embrace.
But all these words no passion bred
Amongst his mates, nor one tear shed:
Neither did they at all believe,
That he spoke as his mind did give.
All sighs and sorrows they suppressed,
Their faces showed joy in their breast.
O precious liberty, the while
That they with merry looks durst smile,
When Caesar's self did wail and rue
That bloody spectacle to view!
Finis libri noni.
Lucans Pharsalia. The tenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
CAesar arriues at Pharos Bay,
And does with dreadlesse face suruay
Their Temples and their Monuments:
The King with him in league assents.
There Cleopatra pleades her right,
And favor finds in Caesar's sight.
Then feasts and banquetings ensue,
And Aegypts treasure set to view.
Whilst Achoreus does discourse
Of Nylus springs and flowing sourse.
Photinus does with force employ
Achillas, Caesar to destroy.
Against the Court their Arms they bend,
Which Caesar bravely does defend;
And in the secret of the night,
By ship to Pharos takes his flight.
Where being straighted by his foes,
From thence by swimming safely goes.
AS soon as Caesar (being led
By him that offered Pompeys head)
Had brought his Navy to the land,
And trod on Pharos wretched sand;
The Fortune of this conquering guest
Did with false Aegypts fate contest:
Whether that now the Lagian state
The Roman Arms should captiuate;
Or that the Memphit murdering gleaue
Should traitorously the world bereave
As well of him that conquered,
The Co^mentators do vary in opinion upon the construction of these 4. verses,
wherein I do follow the exposition of Hortensius, as most probable.
As of the other vanquished.
"Thy death (O Pompey) did much good
"To Caesar, and preserved his blood
"By loss of thine, whereby the Nyle
"Should not the Romans trust beguile.
Hence he to Alexandria Town
Goes safely, and (for more renown)
His Ensigns are before him borne,
And that dire pledge their wicked scorn.
Meaning Pompeys head.
But he perceiues that in their breasts
A secret spleen, repining refts
Amongst that people, that did hate
And murmr so to see their state
Subjected to the Roman guise
With fagots borne, which they despise,
He sees their minds, and thereby tried
It Was not for his sake Pompey died.
Yet in his looks no dread appears,
But passes on (deuoyd of fears)
Unto their Temples, and suruayes
The Monuments that they did raise
Of old, unto Macedons praise.
But with no pleasure sees those sights,
Caesar visits the Egyptian monuments.
Nor in those golden shows delights.
Their garnisht Gods feast not his eyes,
Nor their huge walls that stately rise.
He willingly discends to see
The vault, where their Kings tombed be.
There he beholds the body laid
Of that same Fury, that dismayed
Meaning Alexander the Great
The worlds Comerce, whereon he praid
With happy mart so ouer-run,
That Pollean Spring old Philips son.
Whose twist of life revenging Fate
Has shortened with untimely date. He enuies bitterly against Alexander the
Great.

And now his bones interred are
Within an holy Sepulcher;
Whose ashes rather should be strode
Throughout the air, the world abroad.
But Fortune so his ghost did friend,
That there a Tomb she did him lend,
Until this kingdoms state did end.
For if the world should once retain
Her ancient liberty again,
His memory would be a scorn,
As fruitless to all Nations borne.
That possibly so many lands
Should subject be to one man's hands.
Macedons soil he did forsake,
The seat where he his birth did take;
And conquered Athens he despisd,
Whose state his father had surprisd:
And carried on by fatal rage,
With bloody slaughters war did wage,
And Asias people did engage.
His sword each where is exercisd,
And over all he tyrannisd.
Strange Rivers he with blood engraines,
The Persian Euphrates he stains,
And Ganges, that does India trend:
On earth he was a raging fiend;
A lightning, that such flames did cast,
As did all lands and people blast.
A star malignant unto Realms;
With fleetes he cuts the Ocean streams:
And then he Nauies did prepare
To search the seas that utmost are:
Neither the waves, nor scorching gleed,
Nor barren Lybs, where Serpents breed;
Nor Ammons Syrts could him withstand,
He pierced them all with powerful hand.
Nay he was wending to the west,
Whereas the Sun declines to rest.
To either Poles his heart was led,
And would have drunk at Nylus head;
Death preue^ts Alexanders designs.
But that his latest day him met,
And Nature only bounds could set
To the ambitious haught desire,
That this fierce Prince had set on fire.
And with like envy works his bane,
As he unto himself had taken
The whole worlds Empire for his own,
Leaving behind him no heir known;
Whereby great Cities, and rich soyles
Abandoned were to wrackes and spoils.
In his own Babylon he died,
A terror to the Parthian pride.
O shame! these Eastern nations all
Macedon Pykes did more appall,
Then now those people stand in fear
Of Roman Piles, that we do bear.
And though the North we ouer-awe,
And Western clymes to tribute draw,
And to the South prescribe their law;
The Parths always infestious to the Romans.
Yet from the East we have disgrace
Affronted by Arsaces race.
Crassus (with all his Roman host)
Was hapless on the Parthian coast:
Whilst Macedon, that little state,
Securely did suppress their hate.
Now was this boy (the King) come down
From that side of Pelusium Town,
Where Nylus fall does make a Bay:
Then he the mutiny did stay,
That this unwarlike people make,
And he himself does undertake
To be the hostage, and procure
All peace and quiet, to secure
Ptolemy comes to see Caesar.
Caesar himself, and all his train,
Whilst in his Court they did remain.
Then Cleopatra gives in charge,
To fit for her a gally barge,
Wherein she does her self imbarke
And finds means, that in the dark
The chain, that does the haven bar, Cleopatra comes to Caesar by stealth.

The Pharus keeper should vnsparre;
Whom she corrupts, and so she past
To Caesar's lodgings in great have.
Who thereof never thought nor knew
Before her presence he did view.
O Egypts impudence and shame!
Erynnis fierce to Latium name!
A strumpet to the Roman state,
Unchaste, our fuel of debate!
Look how much woe and wretched toil
Fell out upon the Grecian soil,
And with what wracks and ruin wrought
That Spartan face, the Trojans bought;
In no less fury, and mishap
Did Cleopatra Latium wrap.
She frighted (if I so might say)
The Capitol with Systrons bray. The Systron was an instrument of war used
by the Egyptians in stead of a Trumpet. Meaning the battle betwin Augustus and
Anthony.

And would our Roman spoils have bore
Unto Canopo's coward shore.
And Caesar then have captiued,
And him in Pharian triumphs led.
For doubtful it was, at Actium fight,
What hand should sway the Empires right,
And whether that our Matron Rome
Should rule the world with her sole doom.
These humors that night brought to pass
When first this Ptolomean less,
Did with incestious arms embrace
The chieftains of our Roman race.
O Anthony who will disprove
Thee, for thy lawless filthy love.
Since Caesar's haughty heart so fries, Anthony loved Cleopatta and forsook
Octauia.

With this bewitcing harlots eyes;
As that amidst the rage of arms,
Amongst these broiles and civil harms,
And in this court, where Pompeys ghost
Did cry for vengeance on this coast,
And whilst as yet thou were bespred
With blood, at thy Pharsalia shed,
Thou would admit unto thy bed
This foul adulterous venerie,
And mix thy arms with bauderie;
And so did seek to raise thy line
Upon a strumpet concubine.
O shame! to Iulia this is scorn,
That though her Pompey be forlorn,
Thou her of brothers would provide,
Begotten of a Bastard side.
Thou do constrain those Roman troops,
That under Pharsals ruins droops,
Caesar had issue by Cleopatra and a son called Caesareon.
To roame about the Lybian coast,
Who still from place to place are tossed;
Whilst thou thy time do so mispend,
And Egypts filthy Just entend,
And rather pardon'st Pharos spite,
Then subject her to Roman might.
To Caesar, Cleopatra goes,
And in her beauty trust repose,
Her looks demure and sad withal:
Cleopatras manner and speech to Caesar.
But yet no tears she did let fall.
A fained sorrow in her face,
Which unto her gave greater grace.
Her curled locks, in careless wise,
Dangling about her shoulders flies,
She thus her speech begins to frame.
Most mighty Caesar, great of fame,
If noble birth may purchase gace,
Behold one of the royal race
Of Egypts blood, king Lagus child,
That am distressed and live exilde.
From my paternall lawful right,
I am withheld by maistring might;
And if thou will vouchsafe therefore
With powrefull hand me to restore
Unto my former state and place,
I will a Queen thy feet embrace
That art a plannet sent by fate
To render justice to our state.
Why should not I a woman reign The crown of Egypt as capable of a Queen as a
King.

On those chief Cities, that pertain
To me by right in Nylus land?
No sex our custom does withstand,
But that it has been often seen
This kingdom has obeyed a queen.
Read but my fathers last bequeast,
And that will show he did inuest
Me with his kingdom equally,
And me espousd to Ptolomey.
But let him as a boy approve
Me as his sister in his love,
And in his wedlocks choice rest free; Cleopatra affects not to mary her
brother as her father appointed

But his affects must ruled be
According to Photinns word:
For in his hand he holds the sword,
I nothing do desire to have,
But what my Father to me gave:
And that our family be freed
From any foul incestuous deed,
And that thou would the power abate
Of Photyne, that does wrong our state
And do appoint (by thy behest)
The king to rule as fits him best.
But his base servant is with pride
So puffed up and magnifide,
Because that he the plot did lay, She inueies against Photinus.

That Pompeys head has reft away.
And now the like (but Gods defend)
Against thy self he does entend
That heinous deed, that all does loath
Has wrong the world, and Caesar both:
Whilst Photyne prowdly does exact
To merit glory for the fact.
And now lest that her words might fail
With Caesar's hard ears to prevail;
Her gesture does her speeches grace:
She supplicates with flattring face,
And with her chambring by night
She charms her judge to rue her plight.
So as when they had peace obtaind
At Caesar's hand, with great gifts gaind;
They feasted then the Roman Lord
In show of joy for this accord.
Then Cleopatra shows her port
With luxury and great resort,
And there such sumptuous pride was shown
As erst in Rome was never known.
The place a royal fabricate
Was as a temples type in state;
Whose match for beauty future date
Will hardly raise; the fretted ruff,
Composed was of richest stuff.
As for the beams and timber frames,
Were covered thick with golden lames.
The parget of the walls did shine
With snow white marble polisht fine.
The Agat stood inlayed there,
Commixt with purple stones each where.
And every floor they troad upon
The sumptuous entertainment the Egyptians gave unto Caesar.
Was paued with the Onyx stone.
The Mareoticke heben wood,
No where for outward building stood,
But as huge posts to a bear weight
Under those frames, that did them freight.
It was not used the house to grace:
That timber they accounted base:
The Yuory the frounts did face.
Upon the doors enlaid with art
The shining shells of Indias mart,
Were fixed upon the backer part.
The bedsteads were with gems set out,
Spotted with Emrald round about.
The implements were all bedight
With yeallow Jasper glistring bright.
The couerlets and carpets spread
Colored like Tyrian scarlet red:
Whose die was long to take the stain,
And more then once boyld in the grain.
One part did shine like glittring gold,
The Other a purple hue did hold:
As do the Pharean weauers use,
That mingled changes can enfuse
In wouen silks of sundry hues.
Then numbers of attendant maids
And pages, that the service aides,
Discolourd blood distinct appears
In some, and some by diffring years.
A part of them have Lybian hair:
And other yeallow tresses fair.
So as that Caesar's self could say, Some of the Egyptians have fair colored
hair.

In all those soyles where Rhene does stray,
He had not seen, amongst the flocks
Of German lasses, fairer locks.
Some of their heads were frisled black,
And from their foreheads turned back*
There were withal another sort
Of hopeless youths for Venus sport,
Whose manly parts the knife had hent:
But others, of a stronger bent,
Stood their in place; yet scarce begins
A sign of down on all their chins.
Then did the King and Princes all,
Upon their beds to feasting fall.
But Caesar (as the chiefest guest)
Had highest place amongst the rest.
There Cleopatra sets to view
Immodestly her painted hew:
So to enchant the gazers eyes.
Her scepter does not her suffice:
Nor yet to be her brothers wife.
About her neck there hangs rife Cleopatras attires.

The red seas spoils, and in her heir
Those precious jewels glistring were.
Her rifing breasts, that snow white been,
Through the Sydonian lawns are seen:
Whilst it a veil does ouershade,
That with the Nylan neelde was made,
Most curiously with threads compact:
Yet with the comb so nycely slackt,
As that some places being thin,
It did bewray her lilly skin.
Before them all round tables stood,
(Framed of the rare Atlanticke wood)
On tresles made of Iuorie,
Such as again of Caesar's eye
Were never seen, though Iubas soil
Soon afterward fell to his spoil.
O blind and mazde ambitious rage,
The Egiptians folly so to discover their abundant treasures to Caesar
That sets thy treasures on a stage
To him, that civil war did wage;
So to Provoke with riches charms
A guest, so powrefull great in arms!
For though he were not then in case,
With wicked war to run the race,
That might with wrack the world constrain,
For riches sake and greedy gain;
Yet were those captains, that of old
In poorer times great names did hold,
Subsisting now in woonted mood,
Fabritians, and the Curian brood,
And that brave Consul, that was taken
(In have for need to save Romes bane)
From plowing the Hetrurian lands,
Where he was toyling with his hands;
Those would have gladly given their doom
To bring such triumph spoils to Rome.
Their costly cates were served in gold,
The excess of a feast.
What ever might be bought or sold,
That earth, or air, or Ocean yields,
Or Nylus flood, and fruitful fields,
Or whatsoever could be found
To make this luxury abound,
Ambitious pride made it be sought,
That in the world was to be bought:
Not only hunger to suffice,
Alluding to the Idolatrous Egyptians that worshipped beasts and bird^.
But for to feast their wanton eyes
With beasts, and birds of sundry store,
Which (by their sacred rites of yore)
The Egyptians did as Gods adore.
The water, for to wash their hands,
In clearest cristall basins stands:
The bowls, wherein they drink their wine, Mareotis a little Province in
Egypt that yields the best wines.

Were made of precious stones that shine:
But Mareotis grape pleased not:
A nobler wine then it they got,
That had been kept for certain years,
And with the age the strength appears. A place where the pleasant Muscadine
grapes do grow.

Falermums fragrant wine it was,
That froths and spurtles in the glass.
Then Garlands must their heads enclose
Of pleasant Nard, that green still groes,
And never sheeds his flowring rose.
When on their balmed hair they throw
Those precious powders that do grow
In Eastern Inde, The Egyptian Ladies did use to powder their hairs as now a
days is used.
that had not lost
The sent and savor of that cost,
Mixed with Amomum gatherd new,
Brought from the countries where it grew.
Here Caesar learnes to take the spoils
Of all the whole worlds richest soyles,
And now the wars he does detest,
That his poor son-inlaw oppressed,
Wishing withal that some debate
Might turn his Mart on Egypts state.
When now at length they all were filled
With pleasant wines, that they had swild,
And dainty meats of sundry taste,
With banqueting closd up at last;
Caesar begins (for more delight)
With talk to entertain the night,
And with sweet words and pleasant grace
To Achoreus (of the race
Of Egypts breed, who in that place
Did sit upon a bench of state)
In this sort did his mind relate. Caesar's word to Achoreus The Egyptian priest.

O reverend sire, that for thy part
To sacred rites devoted art,
That with the Gods have such esteem,
As by thy aged years may seem;
To me the first beginning show,
From whence the Egyptian race did grow,
The climate of this fruitful land,
And how the peoples customs stand,
And of your Gods the forms and rites,
The which your old records recites:
And what engraven is in stone,
Upon your Pyramides make known:
Reveal your Gods, that would be shown
If your forefathers did their art
And sacred mysteries impart
To Plato, of a Grecian name;
Then may you well reveal the same
To Caesar's self; for where can rest
In all the world a worthier guest
To whom your skill may be expressed?
I must confess that Pompeys name
Was some cause, that did make me frame
My journey to the Pharian coast:
And yet when all my wars were most,
I evermore did give my mind,
The motions of the stars to find:
My thoughts were to the heavens enclind.
Caesar reduced the year to a iuster account then Eudoxus did.
So as Eudoxus Calender
Shall not surpass my framed year.
And therefore, as within my breast
A great and true desire does rest
Of knowlegde, and of virtues lore:
So nothing do I covet more,
Then to find out the secret course
From whence this river takes his source:
And where his fountains head appears,
Caesar's desire to find out the springs of Nylus head.
That lies unknown so many years.
O I will hope at last to see
Where Nylus springs for certain be,
And so from civil war rest free.
So Caesar makes an end to speak,
And this grave sire did silence break.
Caesar I think that well I may
These mysteries to thee bewray,
That our great Fathers hidden kept,
And in their thoughts obscured slept, Achoreus answer to Caesar's demands.

Reserved from the vulgar ways
From age to age to these our days.
Let others think it piety
To silence any mystery:
But I do deem the Gods above
The work as grateful will approve,
That their great wonders should be shown,
And sacred rules to all made known.
When first an order was ordaind,
Whereby the world should be maintaind,
A diverse motion to the stars
Was given to hold concordant iarres,
That they the orbs might only sway
And temper in their whirling way,
Contrary to that rapide Pole,
That first of all does moving roll.
The Sun does still divide and steare
The times and seasons of the year,
And so the days to nights does change,
And does restrain the stars to range
About their orbs with powrefull rays.
His station stays those wandering ways.
The Moon her alteration breeds
Upon the seas, and earthly seeds.
Old Saturn his empiring holds
On freezing zoanes and ycie colds.
And Mars with wrathful look abashes
The boisterous winds and lightning flashes.
Great Jove no tempests does procure,
But keeps all in mild temperature.
And fruitful Venus of her grace
Does cherrish seeds in every place.
Whilst Mercury with charming vain
Does moderate the wild vast maine.
Now when Cyllenius does appear
In that part of the wheeling sphere,
Where Leos sparkling torchets are
In enterchange with Cancers star,
Where Syrius with his scorching ray,
Contagiously enflames the day,
And where the circle that does change
The yearly season; just does range
Betwixt the Tropicks equally,
Under whose covert Nyle does lie.
Which when this power (I say that keeps
An order in the raging deepes)
Does touch with his stars influence;
Nylus as having thereof sense,
His channel lifts with swelling crest,
Scorning within his banks to rest.
Just as Neptunus Empire flows,
When Phoebes horned visage grows.
Nor does he call his streams again
In their old harbor to remain,
Until the Sun by his decline
Do unto the night those hours resign,
(That half the year he kept away)
To make her equal with the day.
The old conceit is but a dream
Of this increase of Nylus stream,
That Aethiopias molten snowes
Is cause of her great ouerflowes.
For in those mounts the Northern stowre,
Nor Boreas blasts have any power.
And to assure thee that is true,
Mark but the peoples Sunburned hue.
And those warm vapors that they find
Perpetually from Austers wind.
He refels their opinions that do think the falls of the molten snow to be the
cause of Nylus increase
Then for more proof add this likewise,
That every river that does rise
By falling of the molten yse,
Does then begin to be embost
When summers spring first melts the frost.
But Nylus never waxes hire,
Before the Dog-starre breaths his fire.
Nor ever does her waves restrain,
To keep within her banks again:
But when as Libra with just paise.
Does equallize the nights and days.
Again those rules do bear no sway
With Nyle, that other streams obey.
For winter gives to him no pride.
His fountains then their forces hide.
But when the temper of the skies
Most fervently with burning fries,
Amidst those heates then out he flies.
And cooles those lands that fire would wast,
Which underneath the line are plast.
So Nylus helps the world to swage
The scorching flames of Leos rage
And being called does give redress
To his Syene in distress:
When Cancers heates do it oppress. Syene a city upon Nylus.

And from these fields draws not his streams
Until the force of Phoebus beams
In Autumns season do decline,
And Neroe do shade the shine.
Now who can hereof tell the cause?
But so great Nature gives her laws,
That Nylus thus should range his flood, Diverse opinions for the flowing of
Nylus.

And needful it is for humane good.
But former times have vainly guest
This cause; of winds blown from the west,
Who with great force the air does chase
With long continuance in one place.
And that this occidentall blast
Does drive the watrie clouds so fast
A thwart the South: and their in showers
Down right upon the Nylus powers.
Or that the seas, so often tossed,
And beating on the Zoylan coast,
The very fury of the maine
Repels the river back again.
So as (restrained of his way
By the vast Oceans powrefull sway)
Aloft beyond his bounds does stray.
There are again that do suppose
That his great inundation grows
Of moisture, breathing from the earth,
Whose steaming vapors have their birth
Within the concaues of the ground,
And belcht out where great rifts are found.
And that these moistures merely are
By secret courses drawn from far,
Out of the Northern Region,
By the attracting middle zoane:
When Titans arrows (shot down right)
On Meroe do parching light;
And to the burned land it brings
The waters from far rising springs.
Ganges and Padus send their streams
In secret through many realms.
Then Nylus powers out by one vain
All rivers that he does retain.
But many outlets makes of these,
When he conuaies them to the seas.
Another fancy many holds
That the vast Ocean, which enfolds
The circuit of the earth about,
Flowing from far at last breaks out,
With violence, where Nyle does range,
And (with long tracke) at length does change
The salt sea streams to waters sweet,
Whilst through earths bowels they do fleet.
Some think again that these maine waves
Rapt by the Sun when Cancer raues
Into the middle regions height,
Which cannot well retain their weight,
The nights do them again distill
On Nylus flood, and his banks fill.
But I (o Caesar) do believe
(If I may be so bold to give
My censure in so great a doubt)
When many ages were run out;
After the worlds first fabricate;
Some wattery waves but new create
Within the earth; by fatal stroke
Brake out, which God did not provoke:
And some again there being had,
When this great All at first was made:
Which the Creator high does ho^^d
Under a constant law controld.
But that desire that leads thee so
(Great Roman Lord) the cause to know
Why Nylus does thus strangely flow,
The Pharian Tyrants heretofore,
And Greeks, and Persians did explore, How many great Kings searched to know
the secrets of Nylus and his fountains.

And every age desired the praise
Of leaving unto future days
The knowledge of this mystery:
But Nature still with secrecy
Conceales it from discovery.
That great Macedon, King of Kings,
(Whose high renown our Memphis rings)
Did Ethiopian men select,
To search the cause of this effect.
In scorn of Nylus those he sends
To survey Affrickes utmost ends.
But lo! the Torrid Zone with heates,
Held them from doing of those feats,
To see what springs warm Nyle repleates.
Then to the Western furthest land
Sesostris goes, and takes in hand
This busy task, and with great pride
To draw his Charrets, Kings he tide.
But Rhodonus and fertile Poe
Your Rivers he might sooner know,
Then ever he could come to drink
At Nyles concealed fountains brinke,
Then fierce Cambyses Eastern throng,
Comes where the people live so long:
But his huge train was starved for meat;
So as at last themselves they eat:
And then returned with nothing gained,
Nyles springs to him unknown remained,
No fables ever yet did dare
The head of thy springs to declare.
But whosoever thee has seen,
Yet are to seek where thy heads been.
No nation has attained the fame
To know from whence thy rising came.
But yet o Nyle I will relate
So much of thy discovered state,
As that great God shall give me leave,
From whom thou do thy course receive.
Thou risest from the Southern Pole,
And with thy swelling streams do role
Against hot Cancers fiery face,
And forth-right North do run thy race,
Amidst Boots wheeling chase.
Sometimes thy streams does westward trend:
And sometimes to the East does bend.
Sometimes thou see Arabia's lands,
And sometimes shar'st with Lybias sands.
What these Seres are, all the Commentators are doubtful, and do think the
word to be mistake^. But such there are toward the North Pole.
The Seres first of all thee see:
Yet whence thou art uncertain be.
Through Aethyopia thou do stray;
But from what fount they cannot say.
No land that to the world is known,
Can claim thy birth to be her own.
Nature has not discovered
To any wight thy secret head:
Nor ever, in a slender stream,
Were thou seen run through any Realm.
For Nature, that thy fountain hides
Within her bosoms, so prouides,
Men rather should admire thy course,
Then know from whence thou take thy source.
Thy waves permitted are to clime,
The Solstice being in his prime.
A winter strange makes thy increase:
Then thou beginst when others cease:
Only to thee is granted grace
From Pole to Pole to run thy race.
Toward the South thy head does rise,
Neroe the greatest Island that is in Nylus.
And in the North thy current dies.
Neroe (that black people breeds)
Thy river there divided feeds.
And does that Isle inuiron round,
Where pleasant Heben does abound;
Which trees, altough still full of green,
Yet shelters not with shade the sheene:
For on it with a downright line
The Lion bands his fiery eyne.
Thou shewst thy face to Phoebus rage:
And yet thy streams do not assuage.
The barren sands thou meetst in length;
Sometimes collecting all thy strength,
And branches into one self stream:
And then again through Aegypts Realm
Thou do disperse them all abroad:
Thy banks with ease are ouerflowd.
Then thy slow channel calls amain
His ranging riuelets back again,
Where Phile, Phile, a City near Nylus.
that does frontring stand
On borders of Egyptian land,
Does from Arabia divide
That kingdom, through which thou do glide.
Then through those deserts thou do cut,
That all that great comerce does shut
Betwixt that sea of scarlet stain,
And the earth middle cutting maine,
Running but with a gentle train.
But who (O Nylus) now would wot
That thou, which here do mildly flote
Should suddenly enraged fret,
With such a violent outlet?
For when the rugged broken ways
Thy falling watercourse stays,
And steepy Cataracts from hye
A gentle passage does deny The Cataracts of Nylus.

Thy waves, that no resistance find,
Scorning that rocks their race should bind,
Do spit their foame into the wind,
And with the brushing that they make,
The very air and shores do quake.
With murmuring rut the mountains sound,
And this streams froth does so abound,
As that (with strained resistlesse might)
His boisterous billows all turn white.
Here is that I Will of Abatos,
Abatos, an Island by Memphis, not to be approached for quicksands, as some
write.
As reverent ancients did suppose,
A mighty land, and whereas first
Those thundering roarings out do burst.
And where the rocks (as they have said)
With springing vain this stream does aid.
For proof whereof this sign is plain,
That here he swells anew again:
Here Nature does with hills enclose
These stickle streams, that wandering goes,
Which does thee Nyle from Lybia hold,
And thy huge heaped waves enfold
Within a spacious valley deep,
Through which thy swelling channels sweep.
Then Memphis to thee freedom yields,
By lending thee her open fields,
And does forbid within her land
That any bound should thee withstand.
Thus they the time securely spent,
Till midnight veiled the Element,
And as in peace took their delight;
But yet Photinus traiterous spright,
Since he that sacred blood had spilt,
Prepared was for any guilt:
And thought that no fact was vn-milde
Now Pompeys death had him defilde:
Whose ghost did broyle within his breast,
And him with murdrous mood possessed.
The Gods likewise (with vengeance due)
Stird up in him presumptions new:
For he his abject hands reputed
Worthy with blood to be poluted
Photinus conceiues a practice of treason upon Caesar.
Of Caesar's self, that was the man
By Fortunes hest designed than
The powerful Roman reverent state
To ouer-awe, and captiuate.
The scourge that civil war should have,
And vengeance, that the Senate crave,
Was almost left unto a slave.
But O the ruling Fates we pray,
To turn from us that fault away,
That Caesar may not have his meed,
If Brutus hand do not the deed.
For else the Roman Tyrants blame
Shall chastisd be, unto our shame,
By Aegypts sword, and thereby shall
Justice example quail withal.
But still this viper Fates provoke
To give this tyrants neck the stroke;
And yet he does not now prepare
With secret plots his life to snare:
But openly means to assail
The Captain, whom no Mart could quail.
Such hope his wickedness has bred
To triumph over Caesar's head;
And will (O Pompey) do his best
That Caesar's fate with thine may rest:
And by a secret servant sends
These lines, to show what he entends,
And to Achillas them commends,
That was his partner in the deed
When Pompeys murder was decreed.
This man the boyish King did call Achillas the General of Ptolemeys forces.

To be Lieuetenant General
Of all his force, and in his hand
He puts the sword, and all command;
Exempting nothing from his might,
No not himself by Kingly right.
Rest quietly on thy soft bed, Photinus letter to Achillas.

And with sweet sleep be thou fat fed.
Yet now (quoth he) be well aduisd,
For Cleopatra has surprisd
The Palace, and is there obay'd;
The Realm not only is betrayed,
But given to her, as proper right,
By Caesar, and his Roman might.
Will thou forbear, thus hard bested,
To violate thy Mistress bed?
The wicked Sisters nuptial vowes^
Established her, her brothers spouse:
And now this Lord of Roman race
Does her his Concubine embrace.
So as between her husbands twain,
On Egypt she will rule and reign,
And well deserves Rome to gain.
With charming poisons she knew how
To her to make the old man bow.
And if thou (wretch) do trust the boy,
Whom if one night she do enjoy,
And once with her bewitching face
Within her Arms do him embrace;
So that if he once draw the fires
Of her incestious hot desires:
For every kiss she will entice
That our two heads shall pay the price.
And if his sister him delight,
Those loves will turn to our despite.
Cleopatras hate to Photinus and Achillas.
The King her husband will obey,
Adulterous Caesar she can sway.
So both of us (I must confess)
Shall stand condemned remediless.
If she should be our cruel judge,
That long has borne us mortal grudge.
Whom does not Cleopatra hate
Of us, as heinous to her state?
From whom has she her love restrained
And held her chastity unstained?
And for thine own sake I require,
And by that deed we did conspire,
Whereby our selves we did engage
(With mutual league) to Roman rage,
For Pompeys blood, which we have shed.
Pluck up thy spirits, and cast off dread:
Raise sudden war and tumults broyle:
Break in with force, and put to spoil
Their chambring sports, and nuptial flame,
And murder that incestious Dame
Even in her bed, where she does rest,
And whosoever is her guest.
And let it not our courage bate,
The Fortune of this Roman mate.
For she has raised his renown,
And made him tread the whole world down.
That glory we will share alone,
When he by us is ouer-throwne.
And we already are renowned
For Pompey, whom we did confound.
Behold with hope the Pharian shore,
As witness of that bloody gore:
Consider by those waves distained,
What liberty to us remained.
See there a slender heap of sands,
That for a Tomb to Pompey stands.
So as the same does scarce suffice
To heal his body where it lies;
And yet this man so scorned here,
To him thou fearst was equal Peer. In scorn he terms Pompey Caesar's
equal.

What though no Royal blood we have?
The subjects wealth we do not crave;
Nor after Kingdoms do we rave.
This only fact our state will raise:
Fortune to us these men betrays.
And so then in the neck of this
There is prepared a greater bliss.
The second slaughter will us make
Beloved of Rome for freedoms sake.
And this advantage we shall gain,
If Caesar by our hands be slain:
Those we for Pompey did offend, Photinus hopes to gratify the Roman state by
murdering Caesar, as he hoped to please Caesar by killing Pompey.

Will love us for this Tyrants end.
Why should his name give us affright?
What need we fear his martial might?
For if his troops do from him fall,
Him but a soldier we may call.
This night shall end these civil wars,
And expiate Pharsalias skarres:
And send unto the shades below
His head, which he the world does owe.
Then to this work with courage fall,
And so cut Caesar's throat withal.
Let Lagean youths perform this thing,
As due, for safety of their King,
And liberty to Rome to bring.
In any wise use no delay:
For thou shall take them at a bay,
Feasting themselves with dainty meat,
Quaffing sweet wines in Bowls repleate,
And so prepared for Venus heat.
Do thou but dare, and make no doubt,
The Gods will bring it so about,
That Brutus vows, and Catos will
Shall rest in thy hand to fulfill.
Achillas was not slowly bent
To this bold fact to yield consent.
No public Ensigns he displayes,
As was the use his force to raise;
Achillas prepares forces to surprise Caesar.
Neither did he his troops draw out
With Trumpets sounds, or Soldiers shout;
But suddenly his martial bands
Do take their weapons in their hands:
Whose greatest part, that Arms did bear,
The trained Latium Soldiers were,
Who had their duties much forgot,
That such corruption so should blot
Their honor, and their Countries fame,
To follow one of servile name.
And as their Captain to obey
A man, in mercenary pay:
When Aegypts King was not of worth
Himself in wars to lead them forth.
No faith nor piety remains
In those that follow camps for gains,
For hired hands pays hope retains.
And commonly they will accost
The leader, that does give them most.
The slender pay they had before
No trust in mercenary Soldiers.
To arms prouokes them now the more.
And not that Caesar's head they sought,
But great rewards their aid had bought.
O Liberty grown too too base!
Such is the woeful Empires case,
That every where her cankred minds,
For civil strife ocasion finds.
This Army (from Pharsalia led)
On Nylus shore new rage has spread.
Like civil strife in Latium bred.
What more durst Aegypts force have done
If after Pompey they had run? The Romans apt to civil dissension

For all their hands they do combine
To act what higher powers design:
No rest remains for Roman line.
So has it pleased the Gods of late
To rent the limbs of Latium state:
Nor Pompeys, nor yet Caesar's cause
These people now to fury draws.
A Pharian Captains larger pays
This civil strife anew does raise.
And here his force Achillas bends,
Who Roman liberty pretends.
And had not destiny ordained,
That their hands should not be distaind
With Caesar's blood (by Fates protected)
Their purpose then had been effected.
Photinus and Achillas both
Were pressed to scour this Court of sloth, Caesar his carelessness whilst he
was in Cleopatras company.

That so with feasting was possessed:
Where all sorts did so careless rest:
Treason might choose what time was best.
The Bowls, that on the Cup-boords stood
Might have been filled with Caesar's blood.
And to the Table of the King
His head they easily might bring.
But that these Captains then did doubt
The hazard of a nightly rout;
Lest that confusions murdrous might
Should wrong the work that they would right*
For if this rage to chance were left,
Thy life (O King) might so be reft.
It is ill trusting to the moderation of the sword in the fury of fight.
So hard it is to rule the sword,
When fury freedom does afford.
Thus they refusd to take that time,
For to effect their bloody crime:
And do the best occasion lose
To act the work they did propose.
But these fresh-souldier-seruile lowts,
Of fitter seasons make no doubts:
And therefore did that hour delay.
By night they would not Caesar slay;
His date was kept to see day light,
And by that means gave him this night.
Opportunity in martial affairs once lost is hardly recovered.
Thus by Photinus only grace,
Caesar did run a longer race,
Whilst Phoebus showed again his face.
By this the messenger of day
Bright Lucifer did then display
His glittring face, from Cassium hill,
And Phoebus first began to distill
His warmth upon the Pharian coast,
When from the walls they saw the host
A far off marching on the sands,
Not ranged abroad in single bands,
Their foolish discipline in seeking to surprise Caesar.
Nor yet in several cohorts spread;
But in one squared front were led,
As if they should now charge their foes
In armed bulk with present blows.
But Caesar puts no trust at all
Of safety in the Cities wall.
The Palace his defense he makes,
And base by-ways he undertakes.
For all the Court (in this hot Mart)
Did not to him their aid impart.
Caesar dangerously engaged.
Therefore a little place he guards,
And thither all his force awards.
Then fear and fury him possessed,
Doubting the place might be oppressed.
And yet to dread he did detest.
So does the noble Lion rage,
When he is pend within his cage.
And with his tearing teeth he tries
To force the prison where he lies.
And so, O Mulciber, like vent
Would thy flames seek for their assent, Apt comparisons.

That in Scycillias cauernes blast,
If Aetnas top were closed fast.
He that of late by Aemus mount,
At Pharsals field, made slight acccount
Of all Hesperias noble train,
And did the Senates force constrain,
(Though Pompey did their Army guide,
And small hope in his right affide)
All fear at that time did disdain,
And hoped a wrongful cause to gain;
Yet this man so a captive slave
(With hazard of his life) did brave, Small things do oftentimes more annoy men
then greater.

And in the Court where he did rest,
With darts and weapons him oppressed.
He whom the fierce Alani's might,
Nor Scythians rage could ought affright,
Nor yet the Moore, that killes in jest
With wounding darts, his friendly guest:
Yea he that could not be content
When all Romes Empire he had hent.
But thought all those dominions small
From Inde, to Tytans western fall;
Now like a boy, in wars vntrain'd,
Or woman-like, with walls restraind,
Within a house for succor flies,
And so (to rescue life) relies
Upon the hope of shut up ways,
And in and out uncertain straies.
But with him does the King retain, Caesar holds Ptolemey with him for his
security.

To be partaker of the pain,
And as a sacrifice be slain,
If Caesar must his life resign.
For ( Ptolemey) that head of thine
Shall pay the price, if sword or fire
Cannot suppress thy servants ire.
So did that savage Colchis Queen
(With murdrous sword) express her spleen
Upon her brothers members shred,
Fearing revenge, because she fled,
When as her father and the state
Pursued her with deadly hate.
But Caesar's last hope that remained,
Was that a peace might be obtained;
And sends one of the Tyrants guard
To check those men that thus had dared,
And from the King, and in his name
To disallow this heinous blame,
And learn the Authors of the same.
But laws of Nations were rejected:
And he that was for peace directed
(As legate from the Tyrant sent)
Thought that those vipers never meant
The holy laws of leagues to hold,
Nor that those monsters uncontrolled,
Which thy soil (wicked Egypt) breeds,
Would Justice keep in their false deeds.
But neither the Thessalian war,
Nor Iubas kingdom stretching far,
Nor yet the force of Pontus Realm,
Nor those dire Ensigns, that did stream
Amidst Pharnaces armed host,
Nor toils of the Iberean coast,
Luxury and pleasure dangerous to great men.
Inuiron'd with the circling maine,
Nor Syrts with their Barbarian train,
Could Caesar's fate so much distress,
As banqueting and wantonness.
With force on all sides he is pressed,
And showers of darts the house molest,
The buildings shake, and yet no stroke
Of battring Ram did them provoke:
The walls they would have ouer-throwne,
But Engines for the war had none:
Nor fireworks, that should make the way.
The giddy rout do gadding stray,
And round about the Palace run:
All is without direction done.
And no one place for all their rage
With one maine strength they do engage.
The fates forbid, and fortunes hand
Does as a wall for Caesar stand.
The court likewise on all that side
Whereas the seas with swelling tide
Up to the bank does bring his waves,
And that lascivious structure lanes,
The armed ships assalting braues.
But Caesar at defense does stand,
In every place with valiant hand.
Some with the sword he does affray,
And some with fire does chase away. Caesar's valor.

During this siege, in all affrunts,
Himself sustaines the chiefest brunts.
His resolution never quaild:
Such courage in his mind preuaild.
Then he commands his men to greet
With wildfire bals the neighbor fleet,
And flaming darts amongst them throws,
Which they of pitch and tar compose,
And such like stuff, that soon would take,
And where it lights quick riddance make.
The sails and ropes are all on flame,
The decks and ore-lops do the same.
Each where the pitch and tar that melts
Amongst the timbers burning swelts.
And in a trice the fire does flit
Unto the Benches, where do sit
The Gally slaves, and then likewise
Unto the yards and masts it flies.
So as the ships, burnt past the brinke,
Amidst the seas down right do sink. The ships fired in the haven.

And now the foes, and all their arms
Upon the waves do flote in swarms.
Neither the ships alone do fry,
But all the houses (standing nie
The shore) are with these flames oppressed,
Ann with the wind the rage encreast.
Whose blasts disperse the sparks aloof,
And so do creep from roof to roofe^
Which through the air casts blazing beams
Like to a fiery Meteors streams,
Whose substance being spent and gone,
Yet flashes in the air alone.
This raging wrack and burning rut
The city of Alexandria fired, at which time the famous library was burnt.
Out of the Court (still being shut)
Does peoples aid from thence desire,
To free the city from this fire.
And Caesar now the means does take,
And of this fright advantage make,
The time he does not sleep away,
But safely does himself convey
Into a ship, by dark of night,
Using therein a happy slight.
His wont was such in all his mart
To use dispatch, and take the start
When as occasion was presented.
Whereby the foe he still prevented.
And Pharos now he does surprise,
Which bar before the haven lies.
Whilom an Island, but it stood
In midst of that same Pharion flood,
When Proteus their Prophet was.
But now this Islands heaped mass,
(With trackt of time and sands that fall)
Stands nearer to the cities wall.
Caesar, when he the place did take,
A double use thereof did make,
It stops the pursuit of his foes,
Caesar for safety takes Pharos Photinus put to death. Here it seems that in
the former parts some thing is wanting for no relation is ever made how
Photinus came within Caesar's power.
And can the havens mouth dispose.
Now when at first he had suruaide
The sea, made free to bring him aid;
He then resolved, without delay,
Photinus head the price should pay,
But therein Caesar naught observed
The rigor that the wretch deserved.
Unto no torment was he put,
Nor yet amongst wild lions shut,
Nor living was with fire blasted:
He died, but never torture tasted,
They him to good a death afford:
His neck but sundred with the sword.
A wretched work it was, God wot,
That Pompeys death should be his lot. Arsinoe the sister of Cleopatra.

Now had Arsinoe obtaind
Her liberty, that was restraind,
By secret slights along time sought,
Which Ganimed her servant wrought.
And then with Caesar's foes takes part.
Who wanting one to rule their mart;
She (as the daughter of their king)
Assumes thereof the managing.
And to that Tyrants murdrous slave, Achillas slain

Achillas she due justice gave:
And from his corpse his head did shave.
So now another sacrifice
To thee (o Pompey) bleeding lies, Revenge observed for Po^peys murder.

For expiation to thy ghost:
But fortune will bestow more cost.
And heavens forbid this should be all
The offerings for thy funeral.
The tyrants self of worth is not,
Nor all his Realm to clear that blot.
And till the Senatorean state
On Caesar's bowels venge their hate
Pompeys revenge will be in date.
But yet this broile and martial rage
These leaders deaths could not assuage
For now again fresh stirs arise
From Ganimed, with more supplies,
Which fiercely does on Caesar press,
And give a charge with shrewd success.
This one days danger was so great,
That Caesar's fortune it did threat
And so might Ganemedes name
Throughout the world have flown with fame
For whilst that Caesar does provide Caesar in great danger.

(In empty ships from the other side)
Some armed troop and old cohort
Unto this I Will for his support;
Upon a sudden many foes
With armed force do him enclose.
On this side hostil ships do keep
The shoares, and bar him from the deep.
Behind his back the traitors bands
(In filed ranks) with weapons stands.
No hope of safety does remain:
No place for flight, all valor vain.
And (that which did him most offend)
Scarce means to find a glorious end.
No force he had whereby he might
In martial sort frame any fight.
Now Caesar's fortune must be lost:
And yet nor fight, nor slaughter cost:
Coopt up, whereas the place affords
No trial there for bloody swords.
Thus doubtful musing whether tweare
Fitter to die or basely fear;
He sternely casts his eyes behind,
And sees his foes in troops combind.
Wherewith he calls unto his mind
The force of brave examples in extremity.
Scaeua his soldier, that with fame
Had purchased such a glorious name.
For that brave end and dantlesse spright
Which he showed at Dyrachium fight.
Where he alone the Rampart kept,
And never once retiring stepped,
When Pompey had the walls beat down,
Yet from them all did win renown.
In the Lattin copy these verses, to the end were supplied by Sulpitius and so
translated.
This memory of Scaeuas Mart
Puts courage into Caesar's heart,
And nobly he resolves to dye
With fame, that through the world should fly
But his design the Fates gainsay,
Fortune shows him a safer way.
For, as he casts his eye aside,
Upon his left hand he espide
Ships of his friends, that there did ride.
To swim to them he does entend,
And therewith said, what shall we end
Our Fortunes here by villains slain?
Or rather sink amidst the maine?
Then shall this Eunuch Ganimede
No conquest gain on Caesar's head. Caesar saues himself by swimming.

So having said; he bravely leapt
Into the sea, but safe he kept
His books within his left hand dry,
And with his right the waves does try.
So through the deeps he safely swamme
Until amongst his friends he came*
Who him receive with joyful cries,
That to the Heavens with Ecchos files.
Finis libri decimi.

