CERTAIN SELECT DIALOGVES OF LVCIAN: TOGETHER WJTH HISTRVE HISTORY,
Translated from the Greek into English

By Mr FRANCIS HICKES.

Whereunto is added the life of LUCIAN gathered out of his own Writings, with
brief Notes and Illustrations upon each Dialogue and Book, by T. H. Mr of
Arts of Christ-Church in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TURNER. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Dr DUPPA, DEANE of Christ-Church, and Vice Chancellor
of the famous Universitie of Oxford.
SIR,
PArdon, I beseech You, this bold presumption, which proceed I confess from
somewhat more than that common duty wherewith all of Us gladly reverence and
respect You: not that I arrogate unto my self any interest before others, but
confess my self so far indebted to your favors, that my thankfulness
cannot willingly omit the occasion of expressing it self, although but in a
mean and homely manner, unto one, to whom I not only acknowledge, but glory
that I owe my self. This has emboldned me to the dedication of these few
Dialogues, which will I hope, at some of your times of recreation, obtain a
favorable admittance, partly for the general esteem of the Author; with whom
I know, your younger studies have been conversant, and somewhat for the
Translators sake, one not altogether unknown unto you, that to my knowledge
truly honored you, and whom you may better know in this, than many that were
well acquainted with him in his life time, in both which respects these
Dialogues humbly implore your patronage, as one most able both to judge and
defend them, which if you will vouchsafe, and suffer this poor orphane to
pass under the shadow of Your favorable protection, I shall account that
small pains I have taken in publishing it hapily employed, the ashes of my
dear deceased father highly honored, and my self (if it be possible) more
obliged to a perpetual acknowledgement of Your favors, and profession of my
self for ever to remain

Yours in all dutiful observance TH. HICKES.

TO THE HONEST AND JUDICIOUS READER.
FOr unto any prejudice I scorn either Epistle or Apology. yet such men will
be meddling, and though they disdain perhaps to read, will notwithstanding be
sure to judge, and let them: it is a fair way of proceeding, as they think, but
brings with it the comfort of being common, nor may I expect to escape their
good word, though I direct nothing to them, but unto you I stand bound to give
an account of what I have done, and of the reason that incited me unto it. In
brief then, that principal motive that caused me to publish this Translation,
was, to perform herein the pious duty of a surviving son unto the dear
memory of a deceased father: who as he was a true lover of Scholars, and
Learning, (especially of this kind) will I doubt not find favorable
entertainment amongst those that are conversant in these studies, and bear
affection to the Greek tongue. He was indeed no professed scholar nor took
any more than one degree in this famous University, having been sometimes of
Oriell College: but yet although he were taken off by a country retirement,
he never lost the true taste and relish that distinguishes men of this
education, but rather made continual improvement of that nutriment which he
had received in his younger days, from the breasts of this his honored mother.
His study or rather his recreation, was chiefly in the Greek tongue, and of
his knowledge herein he has left unto the world sufficient testimonies, of
which these present Dialogues are a part, and these with diverse other things of
his performance, being at this time in my custody, I supposed I could not do
him more right, nor his friends and mine better satisfaction (whose desires
herein challenge a second motive) than to give them free liberty, and suffer
him by this means to propagate his own memory, which may chance to last
longer in this small monument of his own raising (or in some larger hereafter)
than in the hardest marble posterity can erect him. What I have added here, is
not worth speaking of, much less the censuring: Only let me say thus much,
to defend my own innocence from the black mouthed obloquie of such as can
speak no other color, that in the Authors life I have not gone about (far
be your charities from such a thought) to acquit him from any of those
villainies and blasphemous impieties wherewith he has been truly charged; but
so far to vindicate these innoxious works of his, as reason and your own
selves must needs (I know) allow of in the rest, I have only endeavored to
make the Translator understood, as he the author, wherein I have not thought
it much, though perhaps some may, to descend to the satisfaction even of the
meanest capacities (for to this end was it translated that all might understand
it) otherwise, the English, would be to many, almost as much Greek as the
Original: and herein if I have done ought amiss, when I know it, I shall both
acknowledge it and desire your pardon hoping in the mean space that your
ingenuous candor will lay the fault where it is due, that is on me, not the
Translator, nor cause the work to suffer, if I have any where failed. This I
hope will be sufficient to satisfy you to whom I write, unto whom I submit
both my self and this, and so rest, a true lover of yous persons and honourer
of your virtues.

T.H.

(...). (...) (...). Homer. Odyss. lib. 7. v. 165.
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
LUCIAN upon his book.

Lucian well skilled in old toys this has writ:
For all is but folly that men think is wit:
No settled judgment does in men appear;
But thou admirest that which others jeere.
T. H. THE LIFE OF LVCIAN THE SAMOSATENIAN. WHEREIN, He is in some sort
vindicated from certain gross Aspersions, heretofore cast upon him.
THere is a twofold end of studying men. One to attain the knowledge of our
selves: for as the eye ( (...). Plat. in 1. Alcibiad.
says the Divine Plato) cannot behold it self in any other part of the body
but the eye: so the soul, if it will see it self, must look into the soul.
The other, to gain such a competent knowledge and understanding in other men,
as to be able, not only to make their lives and actions our examples, but to
leave them as rules and patterns to them that shall come after us. They
therefore that profess the latter, had need to be well verst, and skillful in
the former: for he that is too short in the knowledge of himself, may be soon
over-shot in his opinion of another. And therefore I have always thought it a
bold adventure of those that take upon them to become answerable to posterity
for other men's lives, seeing there are few or none that have observed such an
orderly method of living, as to be able to give any just account of their
own: and can therefore be hardly thought fit, and competent judges of another
man's. Written lives, being nothing else but the lineaments of the mind: as the
plain draught, and extremities of a picture are of the body: colors may give
it ornament and beauty, but adds but little to the true resemblance: as he
then that undertakes to copy out the one, had need to be well skilled in the
composure and difference of faces; so he that adventures to draw the other
ought to be as clear sighted in discerning manners and actions. For the least
mistake but of the smallest touch or shadow in a face, alters the shape, and
posture of the countenance: and in matter either of life or government, the
insertion or omission of the meanest circumstance may give an alteration, and
difference to an action.

As for our author now in hand, there is but little trust to be given to the
tracke of former times: for some that have heretofore undertaken to record his
life, having drawn three or four several persons of that name, some
Sophisters, some Rhetoricians, and living at several times into one Lucian,
have not so much wrote his life as made it. In a matter therefore so full of
uncertaintie, to avoyde the like error, in following the doubtful and various
relations of such Writers as give no other reasons for their opinions then
their own authority: I have thought best, to gather him out of himself, and
so, as near as I can, make the author his own Biographer. Joannes de Ravenna
in rationar. vit. M. S. in Biblioth Coll. Balliol.
nemo enim quam se quemquam melius novit, vitae nemo verior testis, etc. First
then, for the place that brought him forth, he was borne in In lib. quomodo
scribend. Histor. and in Piscator.
Samosata, the Metropolis, and prime City of Comagenia, Plin. lib. 2. cap. 104
and l. 5. cap. 24.
seated not far from the river Euphrates, in the Country Strabo l. 16.
of Syria, which is Plin. lib. 5. c. 20. Pomp. Mel. lib. 1. cap. 11. Volaterr.
l. 11. cap. 8. Herodot. l. 2. etc.
a region of the greater Asia, berdering upon Palestine and Arabia, so called,
says cap. 57.58. and Diod. Sic. l. 4.
Solinus, from Syrus, the son of Apollo, and Synope: and oftentimes in his
writings, he calls himself In Piscat. in Scyth. and in lib. advers. indoct. etc
Syrian, In Dea Syria.
Assyrian, In bis accusato.
and the Syrian Rhetorician: In Dea Syria.
having, when he was yet but a youth, consecrated in the City of Hierapolis
(according to the custom of that Country) the first cutting of his hair to
the Syrian Goddess. Howbeit In Asino, and in Pseudolog.
at other times he derives himself from Patras Herodot. l. 1. and Plin. lib.
4. cap. 5.
a City of Achaia, as if In comment. in octavum lib. metamorph. Apuleii.
says Beroaldus, he would hereby intimate the one to be the place of his
nativity, the other of his descent, according to that of Livie, nati
Carthagine, oriundi Syracusis. Secondly for his kindred; In Asino.
His Fathers name was Lucius, his brothers Caius, who as he says, was an
Elegiack Poet, and a Sooth-sayer. That he was borne but of mean parentage, we
may well conjecture, In Somnio.
his friends not being able to breed him up a Scholar, or to afford him
education correspondent to so hopeful a genius, and therefore placed him with
an Uncle of his by the mothers side, who was an excellent cutter in stone,
that he might learn a trade, whereby to get his living: but there he stayed
not long, for either led by his good fortune, or driven by his hard usage, he
soon gave his Uncle the slip, and became his own carver, applying himself
afterward wholly to his book. At the length, both friends and means failing
him at home, he left Samosata and went to Antioch: where having bestowed some
time in the study and practice of the Law, that profession and condition of
life either thwarting his disposition, or not answering his expectation, being
besides an excellent Rhetorician, he left his Law and betook, himself, and
traveling into In Hercule Gallico, and in pro mercede conduct.
France, became there a public professor in that Art: Departing thence he
went into Macedonia, where he gave a full and open testimony of his worth and
learning, In Herodoto.
before a general assembly of the most able and sufficient persons of the
whole country. Having thus after many and sundry perigrinations made himself
known and famous in diverse regions, he now began to draw nearer home, and to
travel farther into himself, for perceiving the Rhetoricians of those times
to direct the whole bent and scope of their studies toward their own ends,
endeavoring more the enriching and preferment of themselves then the
advancement of virtue and goodness: and finding the profession likewise In
Reviviscentib.
full of many disturbances, deceptions, oppositions, impudences, lies, clamours
and infinite other inconveniences, he forsook this also, In Hermotim.
and about the 40th year of his age betook himself to Philosophy: In
Icaromen. and in Hermot.
When having by great industry and study, acquainted himself with the
several tenants and doctrines almost of every sect, and finding that they not
only crossed and contradicted each other in the very grounds and principles of
all Arts and Sciences, and chiefly in matter of Religion, and in their conceits
and opinions of the Gods; but also, that their lives and practices were nothing
at all agreeable to their rules and precepts: he grew at length into such an
utter dislike of them, being himself a man that always professed an
uprightness of carriage, and freedom of speech ( In Piscator.
as may appear by those arts which he acknowledges himself to be skilled in,
and that borrowed name of Parrhisiades) that he bent his style almost wholly
against them, and became a sharp and earnest opposer of the titular and
mock-Philosophers of that age: laying open to the world in his writings, by way
of Dialogue, after a most pleasant and comicall manner, their avarice,
intemperance, ambition, and hypocrisy: and so far deriding the senseless
superstition, and feigned deities of the heathen, that he thereby got the
surname of Suidas.
Atheos, or Blasphemus, and was commonly reputed a mocker and derider both of
Gods and men. They that report him to have been sometimes a Christian, and
that afterward falling into apostasy he should scoffingly say, that he got
nothing by that Religion, but only the corruption of his name, which was
changed at his baptizing, from Lucius to Lucianus, have not only wrote more
then they could justify, but what is easy enough to be disproved: for
whosoever shall read his book de morte Peregrini, where he lays both the
profession of the same Religion, and the falling from it in another dish, may
soon perceive that he was never a Christian, and for that speech of his, it
must be found in some work that these times are not acquainted with, for in
all those pieces that are as yet published, I am sure there is no such thing to
be found. These men therefore are as much mistaken in his life as in his death,
reporting that he was torn in pieces by dogs, and producing for both no
other authority then themselves. That he was a most impious blasphemer of our
Savior Christ, and of his sacred doctrine I will not deny: but that his whole
works so much admired and approved of by the most learned in all ages, both
for wit and language should be therefore utterly banished from the world, and
condemned to a perpetual obscurity, or those parts of him denied the the light
in which there is no such impiety found, but on the contrary, many rules and
documents both of virtue and good learning, more then the writings of
Suetonius, Tacitus, and other famous authors, who were likewise enemies to the
Christian Religion, seems unto men most unjust, and partial censure. Let us
rather account him worthy of equal privileges at the least with others, who
so well deserved both of the nation, and age wherein he lived: for if we peruse
the writings of Philostratus, Laertius, and others who have commended to
posterity the names and memories of such as have bin famous in precedent ages
both for arts and arms, we shall scarce find any one of this Country, since
those ancients, Pherecydes was a Syrian, the son of Badys and master to
Pythagoras, he lived about the 59th Olympiade. Diog. Laert. lib. 1. in the
reign of Servius Tullius the 6. Roman King.

Pherecydes Syrus, primum dixit animos hominum esse sempiternos: antiquus sane,
fuit enim in eo regnante Gentili. Hanc opinionem, discipulus ejus Pythagoras
maxim auxit. Cic. Tusc. l. 5. Ne Pherecydes quidam ille Pythagorae magister,
etc. Cic. de Divinat. l. 1.


Pherecydes and Philostratus de vitis Sophistarum lib. 1.
Isaeus, unto this our Lucian, amongst so many writers and Philosophers of that
age, that was of any note for learning, and good letters: But from his time,
and after the publishing of his notable works, we may read of diverse
Syrians, as Iamblichus, Epiphanius, Libanius, and innumerable others, famous
and eminent in all kind of literature: let no man therefore envy him that
honor which his memory deserves, but afford him the due and rightful
acknowledgment of being so happy an example to posterity, and that in so
eminent a manner, Chrysostom in 80. Hom. in Joann.
that the most learned, and judicious of all the Greek Fathers has thought it
no dishonor to imitate him: Who (if that be true which In Elogio Luciani.
Gilbertus Cognatus observes) has taken a good part of one of his Homilies
upon S. John's Gospel out of Lucians Cynicus, but this I leave to those that
shall have a desire to examine it, all which considerately wey'd, may be
sufficient, I am persuaded, to satisfy any indifferent understanding, that is
not already prepossess't with a resolution of obstinacy, that it is no such
impious thing, as some of the rigid censures of these times would persuade us,
to make a good use even of the worst Writers, yea and that if occasion serve,
in matter of divinity. Which although I could by many undeniable examples
prove, yet I conclude with this one testimony of a S Ambrose.
learned Father, Veritas a quocunque dicatur, a Spiritu Sancto est.

He began to flourish, as is commonly received, toward the later end of the
reign of Trajan, but compiled most of his works in the Emperor Adrians time
who begun his reign about the year of our Lord 120 In pro mercede conduct.
and by whom he was made Procurator Caesaris, vel Principis, est procurator
fisci, and rationalis etc Ille autem jurisdictione^ habet inter fiscum and
privatos, non inter privatos. Cujas. in tit. Dig. de appellation.. Si quis 3
(nisi forte vice^ Praesidis gerat) Which honor it seems Lucian oftentimes
had, as may appear in his Apology pro mercede conduct. Tacitus in his life of
Agricola, styles this office equestrem nobilitatem. Dio in his Romans Hist. lib.
55. brings the first institution of it, from Augustus.
Procurator Principis, the Princes Procurator in Egypt, this honor being
conferred upon him, In pro mercede.
as he says of himself, (...). When he was grown so far in years, that
he had (to render the Greek proverb by an English one) One foot in the
grave. It seems by that which he wrote of the In Tragopod.
gout* that he had some feeling of that infirmity, which (according to the
manner of the Heathen, among whom vices as well as virtues, diseases as
ability, went always under the patronage of some Deity) he makes no less
then a goddess, and which seeing he was so much troubled with it, we may by
probable conjectures conclude to be

The end of LUCIANS life.
LVCIAN HIS LIFE, OR OF HIS DREAM.
AFter I had given over going to school, and was grown to be a stripling of
some good stature, my father advised with his friends, what it were best for
him to breed me to: and the opinion of most was, that to make me a scholar,
the labor would be long, the charge great, and would require a plentiful
purse: whereas our means were poor, and would soon stand in need of speedy
supply: but if he would set me to learn some manual art or other, I should
quickly get by my trade enough to serve my own turn, and never be troublesome
for my diet at home, if I were placed abroad, neither would it be long before I
should make my father a glad man, to see me daily bring home with me what I
had got by my labors. This being concluded upon we begun to consult again
what trade was best, soonest learned, and most befitting a freeman, that would
be set up with an easy charge, and bring in a profitable return. With that,
some began to commend one trade, some another, as every man's fancy or
experience led him. but my father casting his eyes upon mine uncle (for my
uncle by the mothers side was there present, an excellent workman in stone, and
held to be one of the best statuaries in all the country) by no means, (said
he) can I endure that any other art should take place, as long as you are in
presence: take him therefore to you (showing him me) and teach him to be a
skillful workman in stone, how to joint them together neatly, and to fashion
his statues cunningly: he is able enough for it, and his nature inclinable
enough to it: this he conjectured, because he had seen some toies of mine made
out of wax; for I could no sooner come home from schole, but I should be
tempering wax together, and out of it counterfeit the shapes both of oxen,
horses, and men, and (as my father thought) hansomely enough, which my masters
were wont to whip me for, though now it turned to my commendation: but those
kind of figments put me in good hopes that I should learn my trade the
sooner; and that very day was thought luckie for me to be initiated into the
art, whereupon I was committed to my uncle, and to confess the truth, not much
against my will: for I thought it would prove but a kind of sport, and that I
should be thought a brave fellow among my companions, if I could carve out
gods, and pretty puppets, both for my self, and those lads I best liked of.
But it fell out with me, as with other young beginners: for my uncle putting a
carving tool into my hand, bad me therewith to strike a table that lay before
me, softly and gently, adding withal this old proverb Hesiod. in his works
and days (...). lib. 1.
What Is well begun is half done: but my ignorance was such, that I smote too
hard, and the table burst in pieces: which put him so far out of patience,
that he gave me hansell in a harsh measure, as I thought, and exceeding the
bounds of due correction, insomuch that tears were the proeme of my
occupation, and I ran away as fast as I could, crying out with full eyes,
telling how I had been lasht, and showing the prints which the strokes had
made upon me, exclaiming upon such cruelty, and adding this of mine own,
that it was only for envy, left in the end I should prove a better workman
then himself: this greeved my mothers heart, and she railed bitterly against
her brother for using me with such extremity: but when night came I went to
bed, though swollen with tears, and all the night long it would not out of my
mind: what I have hitherto delivered, is merely ridiculous and childish: but
now, Gentlemen, you shall hear matter not to be discommended, but what
deserves attentive auscultation: for to say with Homer, Iliad. C. v. 56. It is
the beginning of Agame^nons oration to the Greeks, after that Jupiter had sent
him the dream.
A heavenly dream seized upon me, as I slept in the dead time of the night,
so directly, that it failed nothing of truth it self; for even to this day,
after so long a distance, the figures of the apparition stick still in mine
eyes, and the voice of that I heard still sounds in mine ears, every thing
was delivered so plainly and apparently. This seems to be an imitation of that
of Xenophon in his 2. book of the memorable things of Socrates, where Prodicus
the Caean brings in a story of Hercules, how that being as yet but a youth vice
and virtue appeared to him inform of two women each of them endeavoring to
draw him to herself.

The like relation we may find in Dio Chrysostom. in his 1. oration de Regno,
where Hercules is brought by Mercury to the top of an high mountain where he
showed him sitting in all their majesty, two women, Regalatie and Tyranie etc.
and not unlike to this is that of Nazianzen, in carmin de animae suae
calamitatibus, and of Philostratus in his 6 book of the life of Apollonius and
6. chap. the like we may see in Galen in Oratione qua homines ad bonas arts
perdiscendas cohortatur: where he speaks of the followers of Mercury and
Fortune, and in diverse others.


Me thought two women laid fast hold on my hands, and either of them drew me
to her self with all the strength she had, and contended so earnestly for
me, that I was almost torn in pieces between them: sometimes the one would
have the better hand, and get me almost wholly into her clutches: within a
while after the other would seize upon me as surely, still scolding and
brawling one against another, the one saying I was hers, and she would keep
possession of me, the other answering, it was a folly for her to lay claim
to that she had nothing to do withal. Now indeed, the one of them was a homely
sturdie dame, with her hair ill-favourdly dressed up, and her hands overgrowne
with a hard skin, her garment was tuckt up about her, all full of lime and
mortar, for all the world such another as mine uncle when he was about his
work: the other was a well faced wench of comely proportion and handsomely
attired: in the end they referred the matter to me, which of them I would
betake my self unto: and first that sturdy manly drudge begun with me in
this manner. I, sweet boy, am that art of carving, to which you professed your
self an apprentise yesterday, a trade familiar to you, and tied to your house
by succession: for your grandfather (delivering the name of my mothers father)
was a carver and so were both your uncles, and by that means came to be men of
note and reputation: if thou will therefore renounce the fopperies and idle
vanities that this female would lead thee into (pointing to the other) and
follow me as one of my family, first thou shall be maintained in a plentiful
fashion, thou shall continue good strength of body, keep thy self evermore free
from envy, and never be forced to forsake thy friends and country, and betake
thy self to a foreign soil, nor be commended by all men for words only:
disdain not then the meannesse of my person, nor the baseness of my apparel,
for such beginnings had Phidias, that carved Jupiter, and The names of certain
carvers.
Polycletus who made the Image of Juno, and the renowned Myron, and the admired
Praxitiles, who now are honored as if they were gods: and if it be thy fortune
to become such another, thou must needs be famous among men of all degrees, thy
father shall be held for a happy man, and thou shall add a great deal of
glory to thy country. This and much more was babled and blundred out by that
art, and hudled one in the neck of another (because she would feign have
wrought upon me,) which I cannot now call to mind, for the most is quite out
of my remembrance: But as soon as she had given over, the other begun in
this sort. And I, svveete child, am Learning, which thou have long been
acquainted withal, and well known unto thee, though thou never came to
attain the full end and perfection of me: what thou shall get by the art of
carving, she has told thee already her self: but take this from me, thou
shall never be any better then a peasant, and a bodily labourer, and therein
must thou repose the whole hope of thy life, which can be but obscure, thy
gettings small and simple, thy mind dejected, thy commings in poor, and thou
neither able to patronage a friend, nor cry quittance with a foe, nor worthy
to be emulated by other citizens, only a mere drudge, one of the common
rascalitie, ready to give way to thy better, and wait upon him that can speak
in thy behalf, living the life of a hare: and great luck if ever thou light
upon a better: for, say thou come to be as cunning as Phidias, or Polycletus,
and work many wondrous pieces, thy Art will certainly be commended by all
men, but not one that looks on them, if he love himself, will wish to be
such an other as thou: for be what thou can be, thou shall be but a
mechanical fellow, one of a manual Trade, that has no means to live, but by
his handy-labour. But if thou will be ruled by me, I will acquaint thee with
all the famous Acts, and memorable exploits of men of former time: I will make
thee know all that has been spoken or delivered by them, so that thou shall
have a perfect insight into all things: thy mind, which is the lordly part
within thee, I will beautify and garnish with many excellent ornaments, as
temperance, justice, piety, clemency, wisdom, patience, the love of good
things, and desire to attain to matters of worth: for these indeed are the
ornature of the mind that shall never decay: nothing whatsoever it be ancient
or modern shall escape thy knowledge: and by my assistance, thou shall also
foresee what is yet to come: and to conclude, I will in a short space make thee
learned in all things divine and humane: so thou that art now so poor and
simple, the son of a mean person, that lately was like to be put to a base
and ignoble Art, within a while shall be emulated and envied by all men,
reverenced, commended and celebrated for thy good parts, and respected by those
that are of an high rank, both for nobility and riches: then shall thou be
clad in such a garment as this is (showing me the mantle she wore herself,
which was very gorgeous to the eye) and thought worthy of all honor and
pre-eminence: if it shall be thy fortune to travel into any foreign place,
thou shall never arrive there as a person unknown and obscure: for I will set
such marks and tokens upon thee, that every one that sees thee shall jogge
the next stander by on the elbow, Pulchrum est digito monstrari and dicier hic
est. Persius sat.
and point out his finger toward thee saying. This is the man: If any occasion
of urgencie betide thy friends, or the whole City, they all shall cast their
eyes upon thee: when thou art to make a speech in any place, the whole
multitude shall stand gaping to hear thee, admiring and wondering at thee,
blessing the powerfulness of thy deliverance, and thy fathers happiness to
beget such a son: And as it is said of some men, that they shall continue
immortal, the same will I effect in thee: for when thou shall depart this
life, thou shall perpetually converse with learned men, and keep company with
the best: have thou not heard of Plutarch in the life of Demosthenes.
Demosthenes, what a poor man's son he was, and what a fellow I brought him
to be? remembrest thou not Aeschines, the son of a Taberer? yet how did King
Philip observe him for my sake? yea Socrates was the son of Sophroniscus a
Carver, and as some say, exerces'd that Art himself: the clothed Graces in
the tower of Athens, were thought to have bin of his workmanship: he also
exercised painting, and made the pictures of Aesculapius and his five
daughters. Plin. not. hist. lib. 35. cap. 11.
Socrates himself, though he were bred up in this art of carving, yet as soon
as he made a better choice, and gave that trade the bag, to be intertain'd as
a fugitive by me, you know how much he was magnified by all men: and will thou
forsake men of such excellent worth, such glorious exploits, such powerful
speeches, such decent attire, honor, glory, praise, precedencie, power,
authority, commendation for good words, admiration for wisdom, and in leiw of
all this, cover thy skin with a base garment, cast a threadbare cloak upon
thy back, have thy hands full of carving tools, fit for thy trade, thy face
ever more bent downwards toward thy work, so continuing a sordide, slavish,
and abject life, never able to lift up thy head, or to entertain any manly or
free thoughts, but all thy care must be to have thy work handsome and
proportionable, respecting not a rush thine own good, but making thy self of
less value then a stone? Whilst she was yet speaking, I could hold no longer
for my life, but rising up, declared my self for her, and abandoning that ugly
drudge, betook me to learning with a glad heart, especially when I bethought
my self of the lash, and the many stripes I received for my welcome the day
before: she that was forsaken, took it haynously, clapped her hands at me,
gnasht her teeth together against me, and in the end, like a second Niobe was
the daughter of Tantalus, and wife to Amphion King of Thebes, who having borne
unto her husband six sons and six daughters, became thereupon so proud that
she preferred her self before Latona: Whereat the Goddess being moved with
anger, caused all her children to be shot to death by her son and daughter,
Apollo and Diana: and Niobe her self to be carried with a whirle wind near
unto Sipylus a City of Maeonia (which was her native Country) and there turned
into a rock of marble. Vid. Ovids Metamorph. the 6. book.
Niobe, A fit metamorphosis for her profession.
was wholly congealed and turned into a stone: you may think it strange, but
distrust not the truth; for dreams can produce as unlikely matters as this.
But the other, casting her eye upon me, What recompense shall I make thee
(says she) for passing thy censure with such discretion? come hither and
mount this chariot, (showing me a chariot drawn with certain horses, winged
and shaped like Pegasus was a winged horse sprung from Medusas blood, when her
head was strooken off by Perseus.
Pegasus) that thou may see how many rare wonders thou should have been
ignorant of, if thou had not followed me: When I was got up, she drove away,
and supplied the place of a Coachman, and being raised to a full height, I
looked every way round about me, beginning at the East, and so to the West,
beholding Cities, and Nations, and people: and like Celeus King of the Elusines
having entertained the Goddess Ceres when she travailed in the search of her
lost daughter Proserpine, she in recompense of his liberal hospitality, not
only taught him the art of husbandry, but also nursed his young son
Triptolemus with her own milk: and afterward placing him in a chariot drawn
with winged serpents, sent him abroad into the world, to teach men the use of
corn and seed, which as he rode along, he dropped down and strewed upon the
earth. Vid. Virgil. in Culic.
Triptolemus, sowed somewhat down upon the the earth; yet can I not remember my
self what seed it should be: only this, that men from below looked up toward
me, applauded me, and with acclamations brought me onward to those whom I was
to visit in my flight: and when she had showed these things to me, and me to
them that praised and commended me, she brought me back again, not clad in
the same garment I wore in my voyage, yet I thought my self apparrelled
handsomely enough: and at my coming home, I found my father standing and
attending for me, to whom I showed my apparel and my self, and what a brave
fellow I was returned, giving him a little item withal, how he had been like
to have bestowed me the day before. This I remember I saw, when I was little
bigger then a boy, and, as I think, terrified in my sleep with the blows I
had before received. But whilst I am telling this unto you, good god, (may
some man say) this was a long dream indeed, and stuffed with judicious matter.
Some winters dream I warrant you (says another) when the nights are at the
longest: or it may be the length of three nights, He calls Hercules (...), (i.)
one of 3. nights, because when Jupiter begot him of Alemena, he made that
night as long as three, it is a known fable in Plautus and others.
the time of Hercules begetting: what comes in his head to trouble us with
these fooleries, and tell us his ancient apish dreams, that are now grown old
with age? this dull narration is stale and out of date: does he take us for
some kind of dream readers? Nothing so good sir: for Xenophon relates this
dream of his, at the beginning of his third book of Cyrus his ascent or
expedition, that he thought in his sleep, that he beheld his fathers house
set on fire by lightning, and suddenly all of a bright flame: and another in
the fourth book, when he was enclosed by the enemy.
Xenophon, when he reported a dream that appeared unto him, as he thought,
in his fathers house, and other visions else, you know, the apparition was
held for no fiction, nor he condemned for a trifler in repeating it, though it
were in the time of war, when his case was desperate, and he round beset
with enemies: but the relating of it wanted not his fruit. So I, for my part,
have repeated this dream unto you, because I would have young men take the
better way, and stick to learning: especially he, whom poverty enforces to
a vvilfull neglect of himself, and to incline to worse courses, so depraving
the good condition of his nature: for I know the hearing of this tale will
encourage him much, and that he will propose me, as a sufficient pattern
for him to imitate, when he shall consider how poor a snake I was, and yet
affected the highest fortunes, and fixed my desire upon learning, and would
not be discouraged with the poverty I was then oppressed withal. And in what
condition I am now returned amongst you, though it be not all of the best, yet
I hope I am no worse a man then a Carver.

ICAROMENIPPVS, OR THE LOFTY TRAVELLER.
Menippus BY this account, from the Earth to the Moon can be no less than
three thousand furlongs, The occasion of the Dialogue.
where we took up our first lodging: from thence upwards to the Sun, are
about five hundred leagues: and from the Sun to the height of Heaven, and the
sublime seat of Jupiter himself, is as far as a swift Eagle is able to reach
in a whole days flight.


Friend. How now Menippus? Menippus was a cynick, in whose person our Author
oftentimes inveighs against the Philosophers of his time.
are you trading in Astronomy, and practicing Arithmeticall conclusions so
closely by your self? For as I followed after you, me thought I heard you
talk strangely of Suns and Moons, and leagues, and lodgings, and I cannot
tell what.


Menip. Marvel not good friend, though I talk transcendently, and above the
pitch of our common region, for I am making a summarie computation to my self
of my late peregrination.


Friend. Why, good Sir, did you travel like The Phoenicians were very skillful
in Navigation and Astronomy: Plin. not. hist. lib. 5. cap. 12.
a Phenician, and score out your way by the course of the Stars?


Menippus. I tell you no: for my journey lay among the very Stars themselves.


Friend. O Hercules, what a horrible long dream were you taken withal, that
could forget your self to be asleep the traveling of so many leagues:


Menippus. Why, friend, do you think I tell you a dream, and came from Jupiter
but just now?


Friend. Say you so? is Menippus also fallen down from Jupiter amongst us?


Menippus. I speak it seriously: I came but this day from that very Jupiter
himself, where I both heard and saw matters exceeding all imagination: if you
believe me not, I am the gladder of it, that my felicity is not limited within
the compass of credit.


Friend. O divine and Olympicall Menippus, how should I, an earthly and mortal
creature, distrust a man surmounting the clouds; Iliad lib. 5. v. 373.
and, as Homer says, one of the celestial society? yet I pray thee tell me,
by what means thou got'st up so high, and how thou comm'st by a ladder of such
a length: for I see no such beauty in thy face, that like a second Ganymede
was the Son of King Troos, whom, for his excellent beauty, Jupiter,
transforming himself into an Eagle, took up into heaven, and made him his cup
bearer, displacing Hebe the daughter of Juno, because that she, by reason of a
fall as she was attending, had disgraced her self before all the Gods.
Ganymede, thou should be rapt up into heaven by an Eagle, to fill out wine
to Jupiter.


Menippus. I have found you flouting all this while: and I hold it no wonder
though my strange reports be esteemed fabulous: But to accomplish my journey, I
neither needed a ladder, nor to be beloved of an Eagle, for I had wings of mine
own to do it.


Friend. In this thou have put down Ovid. Metam. lib. 8. Daedalus to escape
the tyranne of Minos, made artificial wings for himself and his Son Icarus,
and so flew out of Crete into Sicilie; but Icarus flying too high, the wax
wherewith his wings were ioynted was melted by the Sun, and so he fell down
into the Sea, which afterward bare his name: Icarus Icariis nomina fecit aquis
Ovid.
Daedalus himself, and deceived us extremely: for we took thee for a man all
this while, and now it seems, thou art either some Kite or Crow.


Menippus. Believe me, friend, you are somewhat near the mark: for that
Daedalian invention of wings, was also put in practice by me.


Friend. And how durst thou put thy self upon such an adventure, for fear of
falling into the Sea, which after thy name might be called the Menippian Sea,
as the other was called the Icarian.


Menippus. I was secure of that: for Icaru's wings were cemented with wax,
which dissolving with the Sun, he cast his feathers and could not choose but
fall: but my feathers were joynted with no such matter.


Friend. How then? for by little and little thou have screwed me up, I cannot
tell how, to imagine there may be some truth in thy narration.


Menippus. Thus I did, I took a good big Eagle, and a strong Vulture, and
cut off their wings at the first joint: but it would do better to tell you my
whole conceit, from the first occasion, if your leisure will serve to hear it.


Friend. Exceeding well: for I am wholly intent to listen to your story, and in
a longing to hear it all to the end: wherefore of all loves, deny me not; for
I even hang as it were by the ears, to harken to your discourse.


Menip. Hear it then: for I should show my self uncivil to leave a longing
friend in such a plight: especially hanging by the ears, as you say, to hear
it: and therefore thus it was. Pondering seriously with my self upon matters
pertaining to this life, I found all things affected by man, to be foolish,
idle, and transitory: I mean, riches honor, powerablenes, and the like:
wherefore contemning them all, and all care to attain them, and proposing to
my self the study of things that were truly good, I endeavored to lift up my
head, and to consider of the whole universe in general, which yielded matter
of much difficulty to my apprehension: First, that thing which wise men called
the world: for I could never find how it was made, nor who was the maker of
it; nor what beginning it had, nor what end it should have. Next, I descended
to particulars, which brought me into far greater doubts then I was before: I
saw the stars scattered up and down the heaven carelessly, I know not how;
and I much desired to learn what matter the Sun was made of: But the
greatest cause of marvel to me was the Moon, whose course seemed contrary to
all reason: and the often alteration of her shape I thought must needs proceed
from some unknown and secret cause: moreover, the sudden flashes of
lightning, the breaking out of the thunder, the rain, the snow, the falling
down of the hail, were utterly unexpressible to me, and I knew not what to
think of them: being in this perplexity, I thought I could not do better,
then to repair to some of these Philosophers for my instruction, who I thought
were not to seek in the true knowledge of any thing: The Philosophers desires.
whereupon I made my choice of the best among them, as well as I could guess
at them, by the grimnesse of their countenances, the palenes of their
complexion, and the profunditie of their beards: for such men, I was persuaded
could best speak deep points of learning, and were best seen in celestial
matters: to them I committed my self, and gave them a good round sum of money
in hand, and more I promised to pay unto them, when I should attain to be my
Arts master in these points: for I had an incredible desire to talk like a
learned man, and to have an insight into the order and course of all things:
But I was so far from being freed by their means out of my former ignorance,
The distraction they put him in.
that they brought me worse out of tune then I was before, every day filling my
head with Beginnings, and Endings, and Atoms, and Vacuities, and Matters, and
Forms, and I know not what. But that which most of all put me out of heart,
was to hear how much they differed in opinions amongst themselves, thwarting,
and overthwarting one another in every thing they spoke: yet every man would
have me to be a follower of his, and seek to draw me to the bent of his own
bow.


Friend. Strange it is, that wise men should be at such odds among
themselves, as not to have the same opinion of the same things.


Menip. Believe me, friend, I know you could not choose but laugh to hear their
arrogant and prodigious speeches: that men confined to the earth, of no higher
pitch then we that are with them, Their presumption.
no sharper sighted then their neighbors dwelling nigh them, nay some of them,
either through age or idleness, able to see nothing at all, should yet
profess themselves to know the uttermost ends of heaven, to measure the
compass of the Sun, to understand what is done above the Moon, and as if
they had fallen from the Stars; describe the quantity and fashion of every
of them: and that they which oftentimes cannot truly tell you how far it is
between A City of Attica little more then 20. Italian miles distant from
Athens, so named in the reign of Caros the son of Phoroneus from the temples
of Ceres which were there, built and so called Pausan. in Attic.

Their contradictions.


Megara and Athens, should yet take upon them to tell how many cubits space it
is between the Moon and the Sun, and to measure out the height of the sky,
the depth of the sea, and the compass of the earth: and by making circles and
circumferences, triangular, and quadrant dimensions, and by certain round
orbs, conclude upon the quantity of heaven it self: but nothing does more
detect their ignorance and arrogancy, then their own peremptory speeches
about matters, which all men know are to them unknown: for they will affirm
nothing upon likeliehood or possibility, but contend with all vehemence,
(leaving no place for any other to outspeake them) and will almost take their
oaths upon it, Anaxagoras. Diog. Laert. l. 1.
that the Sun is a lump of some kind of matter, made red hot with fire:
Xenophanes.
that the Moon is a region inhabitable, Heraclitus.
and that the Stars drink water by the help of the ^unne, drawing vapors
out of the Sea, as with a bucket, and bestowing it upon them all to drink
amongst them: but the contradiction of their opinions may easily be descried by
any man, which I would have you take good notice of. and how little
reconciliation is to be expected in such contrarieties. First, they vary in
their opinions touching the world: Melissus, and diverse others. He may seem
here to incline more to Atheism then any sect of Philosophy, but this is
spoken in the person of Menippus, and not from his own opinion.
for some hold, it had no beginning, nor ever shall come to have an end: others
as confidently affirm it had a maker, and describe the manner of the making
thereof. And these be the men I most admire, that make some god to be the
vvorkeman of all things, and yet tell us not from whence he came, or where he
stood when he was about his work: whereas, before the creation of the
universe, it is impossible to imagine either time or place.


Friend. These are bold fellows indeed, Menippus, and talk of strange matters.


Menippus. What if you should hear them speak, sweet friend, of their Ideas
and Incorporalities, Their terms.
and how they argue about finite and infinite, a quarrel that can never be
composed: for some confine the world to an end, others will have it without
end: Xenophanes, vid. Laett. in ejus vit.
some give out that there are many worlds, and reprove them that talk as if
there were but one: Heraclytus and Empedocles.
another (some quarrelsome companion I warrant him) affirms war and falling
out to be the original of things: what should I trouble you to tell you of
their gods? for to some The Pythagoreans.
a certain Arithmeticall number stands in steed of a god: Socrates.
others swear by dogs, geese, and plane trees: The Platonickes,
Peripateticks etc. Themistius the Philosopher, as it is recorded by Socrates in
his Ecclesiastical History, affirms that there were above three hundred
several opinions concerning God and Religion among the Heathen Philosophers.
Soc. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. c. 27.
some would make a riddance of other gods, and ascribe the government of all
things to one alone which drew me into a great deal of distraction, to hear
men hold such uncertainties of the gods: The Poets.
others again as liberally will allow us gods enough, but they divide them
into several degrees, calling one the chief god, and allotting the second
place to others, and a third to the last: moreover, some hold opinion, that the
godhead has neither body, nor shape: and some are conceited of it as of a
body: again, all do not attribute to god, the provident disposing of our
a^ires: The Epicureans.
for there are some which exempt them from all care, as we do old men from
bearing office, bringing them in, for all the world, like attendants in a stage
play: Atheists
others again, go beyond all these, and will not believe there are any gods at
all, but leave the world at random to be carried about without governor or
guide: when I heard all this, I could not but believe men that spoke so big
words and wore so big beards, yet knew not to what opinion to incline, where
I might find such certainty as could not be confuted by others: and I was
directly brought into such a case as Homer speaks of: The motives that caused
him to undertak^ this journey.
for when I found my self many times apt enough to be led by some of them,
suddenly a contrary conceit would draw me another way. This brought me into
such a quandarie, that I despaired to have any true intelligence in these
matters upon earth, and thought there could be no better course to clear my
self from these uncertainties, then to get me wings and make a journey into
heaven, which I was brought in hope to effect, principally for the vehemency
of my desire, and next by the encouragement of (...), he is so termed by
Plutarch, in his Solon. but here by Lucian merely in mockery.
Aesope the fable-maker; who made heaven pervious to eagles, nay sometimes to
beetles and camels: but to make feathers spring out of my flesh I thought it
impossible by any devise I could imagine: yet if I could provide my self of
wings either of a vulture or of an eagle (for they only would be able to bear
the weight of a man's body) then perhaps my project might proceed to some
purpose: whereupon I got me those birds, How he furnished himself for it.
and cut off the right wing of the one, and the left wing of the other which
was the vulture, as handsomely as I could, and buckling them about me, fastened
them to my shoulders with thongs of strong leather, and at the ends of the
uttermost feathers made me loopes to put my hands through, and then began to
try what I could do, leaping upwards at the first to begin withal, and
sailing with my arms, lifted my body a little from the ground, no higher then
geese use to do, when they begin their flight, and keeping my self low, He
practices to fly.
often touched the earth with the top of my toes: but when I found by this,
that my device was answerable to my hopes, I grew every day to be more bold
than other, and getting up to the top of the Castle, stew from thence, and
alighted at the Theater. After so great a flight taken without any danger, my
mind carried me to matters of more eminency: and beginning my course,
sometimes at the Hill A hill in Artica.
Parnes, sometimes at Mount A Mountain in Artica very fruitful for Bees, where
was a statua of Jupiter, thence called Jupiter Hymettius. Pausan. in Artic.
Hym^, would fly as far as to A hill in Megaris Thucyd. lib. 1.
Garanea, and from thence up to The top of the Mountain hanging over the City
Corinth.
Acr^corinthus: then over A Hill in Arcadia.
Pholoe, and A Mountain in Arcadia.
Eryma^bus, and so to A Mountain in Laconia. Pausan. in Lacon.
Taygetus. When I had thus well practiced my self in my new profession, and
grown so perfect, that I could mount at pleasure, I thought my self a chicken
no longer, but got me up to the top of A high Mountain in Greece, bordering on
the one side on Thessalie, on the other on Macedonia. Paus. used by the Poets
for Heaven.
Olympus, and there furnishing my self with victuales as expeditely as I
could, from thence took my He begins his journey.
way directly toward Heaven: and at the first, the distance made me somewhat
dizzie for a time, but afterward I endured it well enough: when I was got up
as high as the Moon, by making way thorough so many clouds, I found my self
weary, especially upon the left wing, which was of the Vulture: I therefore
sat me down upon it to rest my self, from thence looking toward the Earth
that was beneath me, Iliad 8. v. 51.
and like Homers Jupiter, sometime beheld the horsemen of Thrace, and sometimes
the Mysians: then if I pleased me, would cast mine eye upon Greece, or upon
Persia, or India, out of all which countries I was filled with variety of rare
delights.


Friend. Tell me that too, good Menippus: let no one particular of your travels
be left out, but whatsoever came to your view, though it were no appurtenance
to your journey, yet let me hear it: for I look for no ordinary matter from
you, but to be informed what fashion the Earth was of, and all that was in it,
as you beheld it from above.


Menip. Your expectation shall not fail you, my good friend: for, placing my
self upon the Moon as well as I could, she traveled with me in her usual
course, and holp me to survey the order of all earthly things: and at the
first, me thought I saw a very little kind of Earth, far less than the Moon:
and thereupon stooping down, could not yet find where such Mountains were,
or such a Sea, nor see The Rhodian Colossus was a statua of brass 70. cubits
high, so that the ships might sail betwixt his legs: it was the workmanship of
Chares the Lyndian, and when it had stood about 56. years, was thrown down
by an Earthquake: this and the Tower of Pharos in Egypt, built by Sostratus
the Gnidian, at the appointment of King Ptolome, which cost 800. Talents, were
reckoned among the wonders of the world. Plin. not. hist. lib. 34. cap. 7. and
lib. 36. cap. 12.
the Rhodian Colossus, or the Tower of Pharos (for you must know, the Earth was
altogether hid from me) though now they are eminent, and put up their heads
above all other things: At the last, the glittering of the Ocean by the Sun
beams shining upon it, made me conjecture it was the Earth I saw, and fixing
mine eyes more steadfastly on it, the whole life of man was made apparent to
me, not by Nations and Cities, but all particular sort of persons, Mariners,
Soldiers, plough-men, Lawyers, Women, Beasts, Hom. Odys. lib. 11. v. 309.
and whatsoever feeds upon the face of the Earth.


Friend. Nay now, Menippus, you have overshot your self exceedingly, and
contradicted what you said before: even now you were feign to look narrowly to
find out the Earth, and when the Colossus appeared unto you, you thought it
might perhaps be some other thing: how came you then upon a sudden to be such a
Lynceus was one of the Argonauts that went with Jason for the golden Fleece:
he was said to be so sharp of sight, that he could look through a wall, or
into the earth, and discover the veins of mineralls: Pliny says that he
could see the new Moon in the sign Aries, the 1. day of her chang, and that
the name grew thence into a proverb. Plin. not. hist. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Lynceus, as to discern all that was upon the earth; men, beasts, yea almost
the very nests of gnats?


Menippus. I thank you for your good remembering of me, for what did most
concern me to tell you, I know not how, was by me utterly omitted: for when
mine eye hadled me to the knowledge of the earth, and yet not able to see any
things else by reason of the distance which my sight could not attain unto, it
grieved me much, and I was in great anguish of mind: and being grown utterly
disconsolate, and ready to shed tears for sorrow, suddenly behind my back
there stood the wise Empedocles the Philosopher flourished betwixt the 80. and
90. Olympiads.
Empedacles, as black as a coal to look to, and covered clean over with
ashes, as if he had been broyled in the embers. and to tell you plain, at the
first, the sight made me aghast, and I thought some lunarie spirit had appeared
unto me: but he said, be of good cheer, Menippus, Homer. Odyss. lib. 16. v.
187. thus begins Ulisses discovering him self to his son Telemachus.
Diogenes Laert. in vit. Emped.
I am no god: take me not for one of the immortal: I am the Physical:
Empedocles, that tumbled my self headlong into the tunnells of mount Aetna,
This Lucian adds to the story, we read indeed of one of his slippers that was
blown back again, and by that means it was guest what became of him
and was thence cast out again by the strength of the smoke, and tossed up
hither, and now dwell in the Moon; and am carried about in the air as she
is, feeding only upon the dew: the purpose of my coming is to free thee from
thy present anxietie, for I know it does afflict thee much, that thou can not
clearly discern what is done upon the earth. Kindly done of you, honest
Empedocles, said I; and as soon as my wings have brought me down into Greece,
I will remember to sacrifice unto you upon the tunnell of my chimney; and at
every change, will there make my prayers in public to the Moon: I swear,
said he, by Endymion, as some have thought, was a great Astronomer, and
therefore feigned by the Poets to be beloved of the Moon who was so taken with
his beauty as he lay sleeping on mount Latmos, that to enjoy his company she
left her chariot to be guided by her brother
Endymion, I come in no such respect; A very fit altar for such a smoakie
Deity.
only, it grieved me at the heart to see thee in so great sorrow: but know
thou any means how to amend thy sight and make it better; believe me no, said
I, unless you, have somewhat that can wipe the weft of mine eyes, for I find
my self very dim sighted: you have no need of any farther help, said he,
for you have brought that from the earth with you, that can make you see well
enough; and what may that be, said I? Know you not, said he, that you have
the right wing of an Eagle about you? yes said I, but what is the wing to the
eye? the Eagle, said he, by far is the sharpest sighted of all creatures, and
only able to look against the Sun, and she is thought the royallest, and
truest begotten Eagle, that can behold t^ bright Sun without winking. So I
have heard indeed, said I; and it much repents me, that when I undertook a
journey hither, I had not plucked out mine own eyes, and put the eyes of an
Eagle into my head: for I am now come unperfect, and not royally prepared, but
rather as a mis-begotten mungrell, cast off, and forsaken by my friends. It is
in your power, said he, presently to make one of your eyes royal: How his
sight was cleared.
for if you will but arise alittle, and lay aside the wing of the Vulture, and
only keep the other wing on, according to the situation of your wings your
right eye shall be sensible of any thing: the other must continue dark do
what you can, because that side is defective: I care not, said I, if my right
eye only be as apprehensive as an Eagle, it will serve my turn well enough:
for I have noted, that Carpenters, when they would lay their line alight indeed
to square out their timber, use to look but with one eye: And with that word,
I did as Empedocles had advised me who by little and little vanished away, and
was dissolved into smoke. When I was vving'd as I ought to be, upon a
sudden a great light did shine round about me, and all things that before
were hidden from me, were now perspicuous and easy to be discerned,
wherefore, stouping downwards toward the earth, I perfectly descried both
Cities and men, and every thing that was done; not only under the open
prospect of heaven, but what was acted in private houses, which men thought
could never come to light. There saw I Ptolomie, The abominable acts, and
tragical ends of deverse wicked Princes and Tyrants.
committing incest with his sister; Lysimachus, betraying by his son;
Antiochus, the son of Seleucus, falling in love with Stratonice, his mother
in law: Alexander the Thessalian, slain by his wife: Antigonus adulterating
his sons wife, and Attalus poisoned by his son: on the other side, I saw
Arsaces killing his wife, and the Eunuch Arbaces drawing his sword against
Arsaces: Spartinus the Median by his Guard dragged out from a banquet by the
heels, and his head wounded with a standing cup of gold: the like was to be
seen done in Lysia, and among the Scythians and Thracians, in the Courts of
their Kings, adulteries, murders, treacheries, rapines, perjuries, fears, and
false-heartednesse toward their friends: thus was I occupied in beholding the
affairs of Kings. But the acts of private persons were far more ridiculous,
for I beheld them also, The base conditions of sundry Philosophers.
and saw Hermodorus the Epicure, forswearing himself for a thousand Dragmes;
Agathocles the Stoike, going to law with his Scholar for the hire of his
teaching; Clinias the Rhetorician stealing a piece of Plate out of the Temple
of Aesculapius, and Herophilus the Cynick asleep in a bawdy house: what should
I tell you of other men, of whom some were breakers up of houses, some
wranglers in lawsuits, some usurers, some exactors: indeed the sight was most
variable and full of diversity.


Friend. You have done friendly, Menippus, in imparting this unto me, and I
know it could not choose but give you extraordinary content.


Menippus, To deliver every thing in order, good friend, is altogether
impossible, it was work enough for me to see it: but the total of what was
done, made such a show as Iliad. 18. a v. 480. ad v. 608.
Homer described upon Achilles shield: in one place were merry meetings and
marriages: in another trialls of suits and courts of justice: here was one
sacrificing for joy of his good fortune; and his next neighbor in heaviness
and mourning: He speaks here according to the customs, conditions, and
employments of these several Nations.
when I looked toward the Getes I saw the^ fighting, and turning my sight to
the Scythians I saw them wandering about in wagons: then casting mine eyes on
the other side, I beheld the Egyptians tilling their land; the Phoenician
trading in merchandise, and the Cilician practicing pyracie, the Laconian was
lasht with whips, and the Athenian was going to law: all these being in action
at one instant, you may imagine what a confused apparition was presented to my
view: as if many singing men should be brought into a room together, or rather
many quiers of singing men, and every man commanded to sing a several tune,
and strive to make his own song good, and with the strength of his voice to
drown the notes of the other. I beseech you what is your conceit of such a
noise?


Friend. O Menippus, it must needs be both foolish and offensive to the ear.


Menippus, Believe me, friend, such singers as these, are all they that dwell
upon the earth: and of such unmusicall discords, is the whole life of man
composed: and not only of untunable notes, but of disproportionable motions,
and no man takes notice of it, until the master of the quier drive them every
man off the stage, and tell them he has no more cause to use them: then all
at once are stricken silent, and cease from that confused and disorderly song:
but in this variable and disparible Theater of the world, though all things
appeared most absurd and peevish, yet I thought I had most cause to deride
them, that contend about the limits of their lands, and take much upon them
because they have corn growing in Sicyon was a city of Peloponnesus, between
Corinth and Achaia. Pausan. in Attic.
Sicyonia, or lands lying in that part of A town in Attica. Thucy. l. 2.
Marathen which borders upon A town on the borders of Attica.
Oenoe, or are Lords of a thousand acres among the Acharnae is a town of
Attica distant some 63 furlongs from Athens. Thuc. lib. 2.
Acharnens: for all Greece in my eye exceeded not the breadth of four fingers,
of which the country of Attica was the least part: and I therefore could but
conceive how little was left for our rich men to be proud of, when the greatest
landed man amongst them seemed to possess scarcely the quantity of an The
least quantity that can be imagined.
Epicurean Atome: then casting mine eye upon Peloponnesus, and in it beholding
the country of A territory between Argia and Laconia, toward the sea side,
about which there was a battle fought betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Argives,
wherein both sides thought they had the victory. Thucyd. lib. 5.
Cynuria, I remembered how many Lacedaemonians and Argives lost their lives in
one day for a plott of ground hardly so big as an Egyptian bean: again,
when I saw men think well of themselves because they were so well stored with
gold in rings and cupboords of plate, I could not possibly contain my
laughter, when whole A mountain in Thrace above the Pierian bay. Thucyd. l. 2.
Pangaeum and all the mettalls in it, were no bigger in quantity then the
smallest seed.


Friend. O happy Menippus, for enjoying so rare a spectacle! but I beseech you
let me hear somewhat of men and cities, what show thy made when you were so
high.


Menippus. I am sure you have often seen a swarm of emets: how some of them
trot up and down: some issue out, some return again into their hold: one
carries out filth: another snatcheth up a piece of a bean bull, or part of a
wheat corn, and runs away with it as fast as he can: to these the life of
man has most resemblance: some build houses, some affect popularity, some
authority, some will be Musicians, some Philosophers: and their cities not
far unlike the houses of emets: if you think it a poor comparison to liken
men to such small creatures, peruse the ancient Most of the ancient fables of
the Greeks had their beginning in Thessalie, and the countries therabouts.
Plin. Not. Hist. l 4. in prooem.
Thessalian fables, and you shall find that the Jupiter at the prayer of his
son Aeacus King of Aegin^, an Island of Greece, transformed a great multitude of
Ants, which he saw in a hollow oak into men, and gave them unto him, Juno
having before by a fearful pestilence depopulated his whole country. They were
called Myrmidons from (...), which signifies in Greek an Ant. Ovid Metam.
Myrmidons, a warlike nation had their first original from emets. When I had
thus seen enough to serve my turn, and satisfied myself with laughter at it,
I set my wings together again, to take my flight to the habitation of heavenly
Jove: and had not mounted a full furlong up, but the Moon with a feminine
voice, spoke to me in this manner, Menippus, well may you speed: let me
entreat you to carry a thing from me to Jupiter: what may it be said I, for I
will not refuse you, unless it be heavy: only a message, quoth she, not
offensive, but a petition, which I would have you prefer in my name to
Jupiter: for I am weary of my life, Menippus, to hear so many monstrous
speeches pass out of the mouths of Philosophers concerning me, who it seems
have nothing else to do, but busy themselves about me, enquiring what I am
made of, and of what quantity I am, and for what cause I appear sometimes
half, sometimes three quarters: some say I am a region inhabitable, some that
I hang over the sea like a looking glass, and every man puts upon me
whatsoever comes in his own conceit, nay, they will not allow the very light
I have to be mine own, but say I stole it from another, and had it from the
Sun above, and never will let me alone, but seek to make debate and
variance betwixt me and him that is my brother, not satisfying themselves with
the opprobrious speeches they have given out against him, whom they make no
better then a stone, or some kind of metal made red-hot with fire: yet have
I seen some villainies abominable and beastly committed in the night time by
these men that look so severely by daylight, and carry so settled a
countenance, that are so grave in their habit, and so much respected by simple
men, which I forbear to speak of, because I thought it unmannerly to publish
and reveal their nocturnall conversation, or bring their lives as it were upon
the stage: for when I found any of the^, either playing the whoremaster, or the
thief, or occupied in any such work of darkness, I would pluck in my head
under a cloud, and cover my face, that every man should not see what was acted
by old me^, adorned with such abunda^t beards and carrying such an opinion of
virtue and honesty: yet will they never give over to lacerate me with ill
language, and abuse me in the highest degree: insomuch, that (I swear unto
thee, by the night) I have often been in hand to remove my seat further, to
avoyde the being subject to their clamorous and chattering tongues: remember to
acquaint Jupiter with this, and tell him farther, that it is impossible for me
to remain in my region, unless he utterly confound these natural
Philosophers, and stop the mouths of the Logicians, Three principal Schools
for Philosophers, from whence as many sorts derive their names.
blow up the Stoa, set fire on the Academie, and suffer no more disputations to
be held in Peripatus: so may I hap to live in peace, that am now daily
dilaniated and quarterd out amongst them. It shall be done, said I, and so
struck up directly toward Heaven, Odys. lib. 10. v. 98.
and had soon lost sight of all that was done either by men or beasts, and
within a while, the Moon it self began to be lessened, and the Earth was
utterly hid from me: His arrival at Heaven.
then I left the Sun upon my right hand, and taking my flight through the
Stars, the third day I arrived at Heaven. And at the first, thought it my
best course, attired as I was, to press in suddenly amongst them, supposing I
should easily rest undiscovered, because on the one half I was an Eagle, a
foul, which I knew of old, was very familiar with Jove: but afterward I
bethought my self, that my Vultures wing could not possibly be concealed;
wherefore I held it best not to be too bold, but approaching more near,
knocked at the door: Mercury heard me by and by, and asked my name: The
Messenger of the Gods.
which, when I had delivered, he went back again as fast as he could, to tell
it to Jupiter: within a while after I was called in, terribly trembling with
fear, and found them all sitting together in the same taking, extremely vex't
with care and anxietie; for my strange adventure put them all into no small
perplexity, deeming all men would dare to wing themselves in the same manner,
and do as I had done. Jupiter then with a fierce and truculent aspect, fixing
his eye upon me, said: Odys. 1. v. 107.
What art thou for a man? from what City come thou? and who are thy
parents? At the sound of his voice, I was stricken almost dead with fear, and
stood like a dumb man, astonished with the thunder of his words: but in a
while, recovering my self, I delivered the whole matter to him from the
beginning; My desire to be taught in high points, my repair to Philosophers
for that purpose, the contradiction I found amongst them, my distraction by
that means, my device thereupon, my wings, and every thing else till my
arrival at Heaven, ultimating my speech with the message from the Moon:
whereat he smiling and clearing his countenance a little, what should we
talk of Two Giants the Sons of Aloeus, that tore up Mount Ossa by the
roots, and set it on Olympus, and Pelion on that again, that they might by
that means reach to heaven and fight against the Gods, being but nine years
old a piece.
Otus and Ephialtes, said he, when Menippus dare put such an adventure in
practice? but for the present you shall be my guest: to morrow we will sit in
counsel upon the business you come for, and then you shall have your
dispatch: with that, rising up, he went toward that part of heaven, where
all things might best be heard, for it was time of day to attend to prayers:
and by the way as he was going, questioned me upon earthly matters, what price
wheat was in Greece, whether the last hard winter did not pinch us shrewdly,
and whether grass wanted not more rain: then he asked me whether any of
Odys. 11. v. 311. A rare Athenian Carver, and chiefly famed for the Image of
Jupiter Olympius, which was wrought by him in Ivory, and accounted one of the
seven wonders of the world. Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 38. and lib. 34.
cap. 8.
Phidias works were now to be had; why the Athenians had given over the A
yearly feast kept by the Athenians heretofore in the honor of Jupiter.
Diasia feast so many years, whether they intended to solemnise the Games and
maisteries, as running wrestling, etc. Solemnized every fifth year on mount
Olympus, in honor of Jupiter, by which solemnity the Grecians reckoned their
years, as the 1, 2, or 3. year of such an Olympiade.
Olympian games, and whether the thieves were taken that robbed his temple at
In this place there is a cold spring, into which, if a burning torch be dipp't,
it will put it out, but being out before, it will set it on fire. Plin. not.
hist. lib. 2. cap. 103.
Dodane. When I had answered him to these questions as I could, but tell me
Menippus, I pray thee, said he, what do men think of me? that thou art a
Lord of sovereign majesty, said I, and king of all the Gods: O thou do but
jest, said he, for I know their froward dispositions well enough though thou
never tell it. Indeed the time has been, when I was the only Prophet, the
only Physician, and all in all amongst them: every street, every assembly
was filled with the fame of Jupiter: my temples of Dodone and A City in
Achaia. Plin. not. hist. lib. 4. cap. 5. He brings in Jupiter asking these idle
questions, and making this complaint, to show the vanity of the Poets and
others, who impose such weaknesses and trivial cares upon the Gods.
Pisa carried away the credit from them all; the smoke of sacrifices ascended
up so thick, that I was scarcely able to open mine eyes for it: but since
Apollo erected his oracle in Delphus, and The god of Physic.
Aesculapius set up shop in Pergamus, The name of Diaana amongst the Thracians,
(...) Hesych.
Berdis had her temple in Thrace, Anubis in Egypt, and Diana in Ephesus; all
the world goes a gadding after them, there they keep their solemn meetings,
and consent to offer their A sacrifice of a hundred Oxen, or other Cattle.
Hecatombes: but I am so far out of date with them, that they think it honor
enough for me, if I be sacrificed unto every fifth year in Olympus: therefore
you may find mine altars more cold, then either Which were only written,
never practiced.
Plat^s laws, or An old Logician and quite out of use.
Chrysippus syllogismes: with such talk as this we past away the time, till we
came to the place where he was to sit down and hearken to men's prayers: There
were certain holes in heaven, with little covers, set upon them in order one
by another, like the liddes of wells: and by every one of them stood a chair
of gold: Jupiter therefore, senting himself in the first, and taking off the
cover, gave care to those that made their prayers to him; The vain prayers and
petitions of men.
and certainly there was great variety and repugnancie in their petitions: for
I also stooping my self downwards, was made partaker of them, which were to
this purpose. O Jupiter, that I might be a king: O Jupiter, send mine onions
and garlike to grow well this year: O Jupiter, that my father would die
shortly: another prayed, O that I might survive my wife, O that my plot
against my my brother may be concealed, O that I might prevail in my suite at
law, O that I might get the garland at Olympus: the Mariners prayed, some for
a North wind, some for a South: The husbandman prayed for rain, and the
fuller for Sunshine: Jupiter heard them all, and seriously examined every man's
prayers: yet, would not give way to every thing was asked, Iliad. lib. 16. v.
250. He derides in this the opinion of men in those times, who thought the gods
had respect more to the value of the sacrifice, then the will of the offerer.
but some he granted like a gracious father, and some he denied: the righteous
prayers he admitted to come up to him through the hole, and laid them on his
right hand: the unjust he sent back again without their errand, and blew
them down, that they might never come nigh to heaven: yet, at one prayer I
perceived he was put hard to it: for two men had made their petitions
contrary, and promised equal sacrifices upon performance; so that he knew not
which way to incline, but was driven to an Academicall suspense, not able to
pronounce certainly of any thing, but like scepticall Who of a Painter became a
Philosopher, and father of the Sceptick sect who professed no determination, or
settled opinion, but a continual doubting in all things.
Pyrrhe, referred it to further knowledge: When he had done his part at hearing
prayers, he removed to the next chair, and taking off the next cover,
downwards to oaths and protestations, and when he had enough of them, A
perjured Philosopher, see before.
and crushed in pieces Hermodorus the Epicure, he went to the next seat, and
listened to oracles, answers, and auguries, and from thence shifted to the door
of sacrifices, through which the smoke ascended, and brought with it to
Jupiter the name of every one that offered. Jupiter disposes of the weather.
When he had done with these, he was to take order with the winds, and the
vveather what they should do: to day let there be rain in Scythia, lightning
and thunder in Lybia, and snow in Greece: let the North wind blow in Lydia,
and the South wind be still: let the West wind make tempestuous the
Adriaticke sea, and let some thousand bushels of hail be scattered in
Cappadocia. When he had made a dispatch of all, we went to supper, for it
was high time to eat: so Mercury took me, and placed me with Inferior gods
and of the lowest rank.
Pan, and the Corybantes, and Attis, and Sabazius: those inquiline and
uncompleat Gods, where Ceres served us with bread, Bacchus with wine, Hercules
with flesh, Venus with The Myrtle tree is consecrated to Venus. There was in
Rome an ancient altar dedicated Veneri Myrteae. Plin. lib. 15. cap. 29.
myrtle berries, and Neptune with fish. I had a taste also by chance of the
Nectar and Ambrosia: for honest Ganymed, out of his love to mankind, no sooner
could see Jupiter look another way, but he would be sure to fit me with a
cup or two of it presently. Yet, the prime gods (as Iliad. 5. v 341. He
scoffs at Homers bold determination.
Homer says in a certain place, who I think had seen them as well as I)
neither eat meat, nor drink wine, but feed upon Ambrosia, and tipple one to
another in Nectar: for their most pleasing diet, is the savor of the
sacrifices carried up with the smoke, and the blood of the oblations which
sacrificers power upon their altars: But whilst we were at supper, Apollo
played upon his harp, and Foster father, and tutor to Bacchus.
Silenus daunced, the Muses stood up, and sung unto us Hesiodus his Theogonia,
and the first Ode of Pindarus sonets, Iliad. 2. v. 1.
and when we were all well satisfied, every man went to his rest, Apollo is
always pictured like a young man without a beard.
to my thinking, reasonable well whittled: but, though men and gods slept all
night long, yet I could take no rest, for many thoughts ran in my head, which
kept me waking, especially, how Apollo could live to that age, and never have
any beard: or how there should be night in heaven, and the Sun still resident
among them, and feast together with them. At the last I began to nodde a
little: Jupiter calls the gods together.
But Jupiter getting up betimes in the morning caused an assembly to be
proclaimed, and when they were all come together, began with them in this
manner. The cause of my conventing you at this time, is the stranger that
arrived here yesterday: I had formerly intended to tell you my mind touching
these Philosophers, His speech against the Philosophers.
chiefly incited there to by the Moon, and the abuses she charge them
withal, and therefore purpose not to trouble you with any further matter, for
there is a kind of men lately spread in the world that are slothful,
contentious, vain glorious, envious, gluttonous, foolish, arrogant, injurious,
Iliad. lib. 18. v. 104. in the speech of Achilles to his mother Thetis.
and as Homer says * an unprofitable burden of the earth: these have cut
themselves into sects, and devised many different and inextricable Labyrinthes
of argumentation, some naming themselves Stoics, some Academickes, some
Epicures, and some Peripatetickes, with many other more foolish titles then
these: and involving themselves within the venerable name of virtue, carry
their countenance aloft, and stroke out their beards at length, and traversing
the world, under a counterfeit habit, cover most abominable conditions, like
our ordinary actors in Tragedies, from whom if you detract their vizards and
brave apparel, the remainder will be apish and discover a poor fellow, hired
to play his part for a few pieces of silver: they being no better then these,
yet live in contempt of all men and publish monstrous opinions of the gods: if
they can draw in a simple young man, they make virtue the common place of their
discourse, and teach them to make intricate and indissoluble arguments,
speaking to their scholar continually in praise of patience and temperance,
and in detestation of riches and pleasure: but when they are alone by
themselves, no such gluttons as they, no such lechers, yea, they will lick up
the very dross of silver: and which is most intolerable, they will be men of
no function neither in public not private, but a superfluous kind of people,
Iliad. lib. 2. v. 202. The words of Ulysses to the common soldiers.
without employment either in war or peace: and yet condemn all others,
making it their only practice, with multitude of bitter speeches and reviling
terms to abuse other men: He is thought the bravest fellow amongst them that
can brawle loudest, and has the most audacious and temerarious tongue to
deliver lewd reports. If a man should ask one of these fellows, that enforce
and strain themselves so far to exclaim and cry out against others, I
beseech you Sir, what are you good for your self, and what place in the common
weal do you supply? he must needs say, if he will say justly, and according
to truth, that, to be a seaman, or a husbandman, or a soldier, or a
tradesman, I hold it base: I roar, and go in rags, I wash in cold water,
and wear no shoes in winter, yet, like a Momus, I can carpe at other men: if a
rich man make a feast, or keep his whore, I will be sure to have about with
him, and hit him in the teeth with it: but if any dear friend of mine lie
sick and diseased, and like to perish for food or physic, I will not own
him: These be the cattle I complain of, O ye gods, and the worst among them
all, are they that are called Epicures: for they be the men that do most abuse
us, and go nearest to the quick, affirming that the gods are neither careful
of men's affairs, nor respectfull of any thing that is done it is therefore
high time to look about you; for if this doctrine should once be put into men's
heads, you are like enough to starve for hunger: for who will offer you any
sacrifice, and look to be never the better for its ye likewise all heard by
the stranger that came yesterday, what complaint the Moon has made against
them, which I beseech you consider well of, and take such order, as may best
tend to the benefit of mankind, and the safety of your selves: when Jupiter
had said thus much, the whole assembly was moved, and cried out suddenly all at
once, destroy them with thunder, burn them up with lightning, cast them
headlong into hell, into Tartarus, as were the giants: but Jupiter again
commanding silence, said, your will shall be performed, and they all with all
their Logic shall be confounded utterly: but at this present, I can by no
means take punishment of any man: for you know we are to keep holiday these
four next months, during which time, I have taken truce with all the world:
but the beginning of the next spring those accursed caitiffes shall cursedly
perish, Iliad 1. v. 528.
by the dismal dint of my terrible thunder dart, (which he confirmed with his
royal assent) as for Menippus, said he, this doom shall pass upon him, his
wings shall be taken from him, lest he should return a second voyage, and
Mercury shall take him this day to set him again upon the earth: and when he
had so said, he dismissed the assembly: and Mercury taking hold of my right
care, so carried me dangling down, and on the morrow toward evening, set me
in A street in Athens, so called from Ceramus the son of Bacchus and Ariadne.
Paus. in At.
Ceramicus: You have heard all, my good friend, all the news I can tell you
out of heaven, and am now going to relate the same to the Philosophers that
walk A porch or walk in Athens, so called for the variety of pictures
wherewith it was adorned (for (...) in Greek signifies variously colored) In
this porch were to be seen these pieces, First the Athenians set in battle
array against the Lacedaemonians in Oenoe a town of the Argives. In the middle
wall, Theseus leading the Athenians in fight against the Amazons. In the third
place the battle of Marathon, in which the Persians were overthrown by the
Athenians, all pictured to the l^fe, and amongst the rest Miltiades, Echetlus,
and Callimachus. Pausan. in Attic.
in Poecile.


MENIPPVS, OR THE NECROMANTIE.
Menippus. HAi^ dwelling house, I joy to come in sight
Of thee again, being now returned to light. Eurip. in Herc. fur.


Philonides. Is not this Menippus the Cynick? certainly it must needs be he,
or I never saw Menippus, but what mean these strange acontrements? a hat, a
harp, and a Lions skin: I will be so bold as salute him: Menippus, well met:
out of what climate are you arrived, for you have not been seen in the city
this many a day:


Menippus. Eurip. Hecub. v. 1.
From dead men's cells, and gates of death I come,

Where hell is seated far from sight of Sun.


Philonides. Good god, and has Menippus been dead, and revived again, and no
body aware of it?


Menipp. Euripid.
Not so, Hell gave me entrance though a living man.


Philonides. What moved thee to take such an uncouth journey in hand?


Menipp. Euripid.
Youth set me on, and boldness more then youth.


Philonides. I pray thee no more of this Tragic stuff, but speak thy mind
plainly to me without any Iambickes: what means this habit? and what
necessity enforced thee to travel those low countries? I am sure the way
could give thee no great content.


Menippus. O my friend, Odyss. 11. v. 163. Ulysses to his mothers ghost.
The occasion of my journey thither was
To consult with the soul of wise Tirefias.



Philonides: Is the man well in his wits? me thinks thou should not rappe
out verses so roundly to them that come to salute thee in love:


Menippus. Pardon me for it, honest friend, I pray you: I have been lately so
conversant with Euripides, and Homer, that my belly is ready to burst with
verses: they tumble out of my mouth whether I will or no: but first let me
hear from you how the world goes upon earth, and what men do in the city.


Philonides. Faith, follow the old fashion: they are no changelings: for still
they extort with all extremity, forswear themselves abominablie, oppress one
another most unconscionably, and get all they can, be it never so basely.


Menippus. O miserable men, and most unhappy: little know they what laws have
past below, and what decrees are there established against rich men: which by A
three headed dog that keeps hell gates.
Cerberus I swear, they shall never be able to avoid.


Philonides. Is it true indeed? are there any new edicts put out in those
parts, touching matters done here above?


Menippus. Many I assure you, which I may not reveal, nor disclose the secrets
of the kingdom, lest a bill of impiety should be preferred against me, to
Rhadamanthus. One of the Judges of hell.



Philonides. Nay, good Menippus, for gods sake, let me entreat you: envy not
your friends the benefit of your relation: you shall utter it to him that
knows how to keep counsel, and already initiated in those kind of mysteries.


Menippus. You enjoyne me a hard task, which cannot be undertaken with any
great security: yet for your sake, I will make bold a little; for it is
decreed there, that these rich and well monyed men, that keep their gold as
fast locked as ever was The daughter of Acrisius kept close by her father in a
brazen tower, but Jupiter coming to her in a shower of gold, lay with her, and
begot Perseus. Ovid. Metam. lib. 6. The occasion of the journey.
Danae, --


Philonides. Nay, good sir, forbear the decree, till you have told me that
first, which I am first desirous to hear; namely, the cause of your journey,
what guide you had to conduct you, and then in order, what you saw or heard
there: for I know you a man so observant of rarities, that nothing worth the
sight or hearing could escape you.


Menippus. I will humor you in this also: for what will not a man do,
importuned by his friend? and first open mine own conceit unto you, and the
occasion that drew me to this descent: for when I was a young boy, and heard
what Homer and Hesiodus had written of vvarres and hurliburlies that were, not
only among the demigods, but even the great gods themselves, their
adulteries, their oppressions, their rapines, their dissentions, Too much
liberty used by the Poets in their reports of the gods.
their expulsions of parents, and their marriages of brothers. I thought all
this to be very well done, and grew into a good liking of it: But coming to
man's estate, I heard that the laws gave precepts contrary to the Poets,
forbidding all adultery, dissension, and oppression: which brought me into
such a distemper, that I knew not what to do with my self: Menippus for
satisfaction rep^ (...) the Philosophers.
for I imagined the gods would never have been lecherous, or contentious, if
they had not thought well of it, nor the lawmakers have enjoined the contrary,
if it had not been for our good. Being driven into this kind of difficulty,
I thought I could not do better, then betake my self to those kind of men
whom we call Philosophers, and become a disciple of theirs, beseeching them
to do what they would with me, so that they would settle me in some direct
and constant course of life: Their difference in opinion.
With this intention, I committed my self to them, and unwittingly, as the
proverb says, to shun the smoke, cast my self into the fire: for among
them, I found more ignorance and ambiguitie, then ever I was in before:
insomuch, that they made me think it a golden life, to be an ignorant man
still: for some exhorted wholly to pleasure, and only to prosecute that by all
means, as wherein felicity chiefly consisted: another would have us labor
continually, and toil, and afflict our bodies, In his works and days, the
first book. v. 287.
live beggarly and basely, grumbling at every thing, and railing at every man,
and perpetually to have in our mouths, the old saying of Hesiodus, concerning
virtue, and sweat, and the ascent of the height: some would have us despise
money, and hold the possession thereof to be a thing indifferent: others
again, affirm riches to be good: What should I stand now to speak of the
world, that daily heard so many contrarieties come from them in arguing about
Ideas, The strangenes of their terms.
and Incorporalities, and their Atoms, and Vacuities? and a multitude of such
like terms as cannot be imagined: And, which was most strange, every of them
holding opinions as opposite as could be one to another, would produce
arguments most strong and invincible to make his party good: Their obstinacy
in arguing.
so that if a man should affirm any thing to be hot, and the same to be cold,
yet could not for his life hold disputations with them, though he knew well
enough, that nothing could be both hot and cold together at the same instant:
and I found my self for all the world like a man in a slumber, sometimes
nodding one way, sometimes another: but the worst was, to see the men that
taught those lessons, practice the contrary in their actions: Their lives
contrary to their rules.
they that persuade others to despise money, were most earnest to get it
themselves; fall out for money, teach young men for money, and undertake any
thing for money: They that speak most against honor, wrought all the means
they could to attain it: and though most of them cried out against pleasure,
yet in private they applied nothing else. Seeing my self utterly deprived of
this hope, I fell into a greater agony then before; yet, it was some comfort to
me, (though I were an ignorant, and far out of the way of truth) that I had
wise men, and of deep understanding to bear me company. But as I lay waking
one night in my bed with thought hereof, musing with my self what to do. His
second resolution.
I could hit upon no better devise, then to take a journey to Babylon, to some
of the Magicians there, that had been Scholars and successors to Who was
thought to be the first inventer of Magic amongst the Persians, and was, as
Pliny cites it from Eudorus, six thousand years before the death of Plato:
it is said that he lived in the wilderness only upon cheese for twenty
years together. Plin. not. hist. l. 30. cap. 1. and l. 11. cap. 42. He is
taken by some to have bin Cham that accursed son of Noah.
Zoroastres, to see what they could do for me: for I had heard they were able
with charms and incantations, to break open the gates of Hell, and bring any
man safely thither, and send him as safely back again: I therefore thought it
best to purchase my passage thither at the hands of some of these men, and when
I was got in, to seek out A Prophet of Thebes, who having been both man and
woman, and so had experience of both sexes, was made judge in a controversy
betwixt Jupiter and Juno, whether in the act of love received most delight, and
judging it against Juno on the woman's side, was by her struck blind: but
recompensed by Jupiter with the gift of prophecy. Ovid. Metam. 3. Homer
affirms him to be the only wise man among the dead. Odyss. 10. v. 494.
Tiresias the Boeotian, and learn from him, (who was both a Prophet and a
wise man) what life it were best for me to make choice of. With these
cogitations, I start up with all speed to prepare for Babylon: when I was
come thither, I soon fell in league with one of these Chaldaeans, a man of
profound wisdom, and rare experience in the Art; for his head was all gray,
and his beard of the largest size, demonstrating a great deal of gravitie: his
name was Mithrobarzanes, and after many prayers and entreaties, had much ado
upon any terms to work him to be my guide* but when the man and I were
agreed, he first brought me down to Euphrates, and there for nine and twenty
days together, beginning with the Moon, from change to change, he vvasht me
over: and every morning at the Sun rising, muttered out many mumbling words,
which I understood not: for they came from him, as from a stammering crier,
that wants utterance to deliver his proclamations, After what manner the
Magician prepared him for the journey.

Their meat.


and therefore huddles them up so thick, that they cannot be conceived: when
the charm was ended, he spet thrice in my face, and so returned, not once
looking upon any that met him: our food was nuts, our drink milk, and honey
mixed with wine, and the water of the river A river running by Susa, of which
water only the Kings of Persia did drink Herod. lib. 1.
Choaspis, and our lodging, the green grass under the open sky: when I was
sufficiently dieted for the purpose, he brought me about midnight to the river
A river of Armenia running into Araxes. Plut.

After what sort he charmed him.

Pythagoras was of opinion that sea onions being hung over a door would stop
the entrance of all not some things.

Their attire.


Tygris: there he purged me and wiped me clean again, and hallowed me with
a torch, with sea onions, and many other drugges, still mumbling the same
charm, as he was about it, and when he had sufficiently enchanted me, he
went round about me, that no apparition might affright me, and then returned
to his house, bringing me back in such case as I was, and afterward prepared
for our passage by water: then did he attire himself in a Magical vestment,
not much unlike to a Median roabe, and brought these things to me, and set
this A Lions skin for Hercules, a harp for Orpheus, and a hat for Ulysses,
according to the several habits of these three persons. The two former are
commonly known, the reason of the latter is this, Ulysses being sent fer by
the rest of the Princes of Greece to join with them in the Trojan war, loath
to leave his wife and young children counterfeited himself mad, and making as
if he would go to plough, yoaked an ox and a horse together and put upon his
head a ploughmans hat, in which habit been ever since pictured.
hat upon my head, put a lions skin upon my body, and delivered this harp
into my hand, injoyning me, that if any man asked my name, I should not say I
was Menippus, but either Hercules, or Ulysses, or Orpheus.


Philonides. And why so, Menippus, I understand not the mystery either of thy
habit, or of thy names?


Menippus. That may easily be conceived by any man, neither is there any great
danger in uttering it, for these persons living before our time, had all
likewise descended into hell: and he thought that if he could make me carry
any resemblance of any of them, I might the better escape the guard of Aeacus,
and pass without control: for they having seen the like before, might let
me slip by them in this Tragic habit unsuspected. As soon as the day
appeared, we made to the river to set forwards on our journey where his boat
was ready for him, and the sacrifices, and the wine mixed with honey, and other
matter fit for ceremony: all which we laded, Homer. Odyss. 11^. v. 5.
Speaking of Ulysses journey to hell.
and then entered ourselves with sad cheer, shedding plenty of tears from our
eyes, and so were carried a long the river, till we came to the marish or
lake, into which Euphrates emptieth it self: and passing over it, came to a
certain desert country, so thick of woods He means the same perhaps with
Homers Cimmerians. Odys. 11.

The Magicians coniuration..


that a man could see no sun, there we arrived, Mithrobarzanes leading the
way: then first we dug a pit, and killed our sheep, sprinkling the blood
about the pits brimme: after that, the Magician taking a burning torch in his
hand, muttered no more with a submisse voice, but roaring it out as loud as he
could, called upon all the spirits and devils in hell, the direful furies, The
moon as governesse of such works of darkness.
Nocturnall Hecate, and infernal The Queen of hell daughter to Ceres.
Proserpine, adding sundry barbarous and unknown names of many syllables in
length: presently, the whole place wherein we stood began to stir, and the
force of the charm made the earth cleave in sunder, so that we might hear
Cerberus bark a far off, and the business went on with a great deal of
sadness and sorrow: the Prince of the dead below was terrified and astonished,
for the greatest part of his kingdom was laid open to our view, the lake, the
A fiery river in hell.
Pyriphlegethon, and the palace of Pluto himself. But for all that, we were
so bold as to venture in through the hole, and found Rhadamanthus almost dead
with fear: Cerberus barkt apace, and began to stir: but I had no sooner
touched the strings of my harp, but the music brought him a sleep
immediately: when we were come to the lake, we had like to have bin
disappointed of our passage: for the barge had her full fraught before, of such
as did nothing but houle and cry all the way they went: for they were all
wounded men, some in the leg, some in the head, and some in other parts: I
verily believe they came lately out of some skirmish: but honest Pluto's
ferriman.
Charon, as soon as he saw the Lions skin, took me for Hercules, and
received me into his barge, transporting me very friendly, and when we got to
shore, directed us which way to go: Being now in the dark Mithrobarzanes,
went before, and I followed him at the heels, till we came into a spacious
meadow, set all over with There are diverse kinds of Asphodill, the white, the
yellow, the bulbouse etc. Hesiod. in his works the 1. book, commends it for a
wholesome herb to eat.

(...).

Fools, that half's more then all they cannot tell. Nor the benefit of Malues
and Asphodell: and hence it seems the Poets faigne that the souls of the dead
do feed upon it.


Aphodelus, where the ghosts of the dead, with a chirping voice, hovered and
flickered about us, and going a little further, we came to the judgment place
of One of the three judges of hell.

Who are our accusers after death.


Minos, who sat upon an high throne, and by him on the one side stood the
tormenting spirits, the evil angels, and the furies: on the other side were
brought in a great company tied in a long chain one after another, which they
said were adulterers, whoremongers, extortioners, flatterers, sycophants, and a
whole rabble of such rascals as in their life time did they cared not what: in
another place by themselves were brought in the rich men, and the usurers, with
pale countenances, side bellied, and gowtie limbs, every one in a collar and
chain that weighed two talents at the least: we also were got into the room
amongst them, and saw all that was done, and heard what answer every man made
for himself, for there were strange, and new found Rhetoricians ready to
accuse them.


Philonides. Who might they be? let me hear that also.


Menippus. Do thou remember the shadows, that men's bodies do yield by light
of the Sun?


Philonides. Very well.


Menippus. The same are our accusers when we are dead, and bear witness
against us, laying to our charge those things that were done by us in our life
time, and their testimony is taken to be very authentical, because they are
always present with us, and never relinquish us: But after that Minos had
strictly examined the^ all, he sent them every one to the region of the
unrighteous there to be punished according to the quality of their offense,
especially taxing them that were so proud upon their riches and dignites, that
they thought themselves worthy of adoration, much condemning their moment any
stateliness and contempt of others not remembering themselves to be mortal,
and that all their happiness was but caduke, and unlasting: And they, when they
were stripped of all their bravery, I mean riches, gentilitie, and authority,
stood naked hanging down their heads, which I was very glad to see: and him
that I knew, I would closely creep unto, and put him in remembrance what a
jolly fellow he was in his life time, and how much he took upon him then,
when many would be waiting every morning at his gates, attending his coming
abroad, crowding, and pressing one upon another, when they were locked out by
his servants, and hardly at all procure to have a sight of him who never showed
himself, but glittering and shining, in purple and gold, and changeable
colors; thinking he made him a fortunate man, to whom he would vouchsafe to
give his hand to kiss, and this would vex them to the very heart: yet Minos,
me thought showed himself partial in one sentence that past from him: for
Dionysius the Sicilian was by A noble man of Sicilie, familiar with Plato: he
was brother in law to Dionysius the elder, and drove Dionysius the younger out
of Syracusa. Plutarch.
Dion accused of many heinous and abbominable crimes, which were justified
against him, by the testimony of the The school of the Stoics.
Stoa: but Aristippus, was a Philosopher, and a courtier, very great with
Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilie, and is therefore brought here by Lucian,
speaking in his behalf.
Aristippus the Cyrenian stood forth to speak for him, (who is of great note
among them, and may do much in hell) and when he was even at the point to be
cast to the A mountain in Lycia, whose upper part was full of Lions, and burnt
heretofore like Aetna, the middle was fair pasture ground, and the bottom
full of snakes and serpents: it was first made inhabitable by Bellerophon, and
hence arose that fable of the Poets, how he overcame the Chimaera, a wonderful
strange beast, which Homer in the 6. of his Iliads v. 81. describes thus.
(...). A Lions front, Goats middle, Dragons tail, which does strange force of
burning flames exhale.
Chimaera, got the judgment reverst, alleging how liberal he had been of
his purse to many learned men: then leaving the court of judgment, we came to
the place of torment, where we heard and saw many things, my good friend,
which moved me to great commiseration: the lashing of them that were whipped,
the roaring of them that were broyled upon the coals, the rackes, the
stocks, the wheels, Chimara dilaniating, and Cerberus devouring; all were
tormented and punished together: the king and the slave, the prince and the
poor, the rich and the beggar, and every man bewailed the wickedness of his
life: some I saw whom I knew that had been dead but of late, which shrunk
out of sight, and turned away from me for shame: if any chanced to cast their
eye upon me, it was with a base and servile aspect: and who would think it,
that were so majesticall and scornful in their life time; but to the poorer
sort, the one moitie of their penance was remitted: for they had liberty to
rest themselves sometimes, and then were called to it again. There saw I all
the fabulous stories acted before mine eyes, Turned upon a whele.
Ixion, and Rouling a great stone.
Sisyphus, and the Phrygian Hungring and thirsting in the sight of meat and
drink.
Tantalus in a pitiful taking, and the And begotten by Jupiter, but
attempting to ravish Latona, was shot to death by Apollo, and lies in hell with
a vulture continually tyring upon his entrails.
earth-born Tityus: good god, what a huge creature he was? As Homer says 9.
acres. Odys. 11. v. 577
he took up a whole plot of ground himself: passing over these we came to
the Fields upon the banks of Acheron, a river in hell.
Acherusian fields, where we found the semi-gods and goddesses, and many other
dead persons conversing together by tribes and companies: of which some were so
ancient, that they were rotten; and as Homer says, had no strength in them:
others were fresh and well compact especially, the It was the common manner of
the Egyptians to powder their dead bodies with salt 70. days before they
buried them. Herod. lib. 2. Herodotus also in his 3. book, speaks of a
strange thing whereof himself was an eye witness, that perusing the bones of
the dead in a place where the battle had been fought between the Persians and
Egyptians, he could easily know one nation from another by their sculls, the
Persians being so rotten and brittle, that he could crack them almost with a
fillip, but the Egyptians so strong, that they were hardly to be broken with a
stone; which he attributes to the shaving of their heads in their youth.
Egyptians; because they had been so well powdered: but the greatest
difficulty was to know which was which, being all in a manner alike; and
nothing but bare bones: much ado I had with long looking to discern one from
another, for they all lay obscurely on heaps, and without any note of
difference; reserving nothing of the beauty they had amongst us: for I seeing
so many withered carkases lying in a place together, and all of one likeness,
looking fearfully and ghastly with their bare teeth to be seen, made a
question to my self, how I should know The most deformed of all the Greeks
that came to Troy. Hom. describes him in the 2. of his Iliad. v. 216.
Thersites from the beautiful The most beautiful except Achilles only of all
the Greeks that came to Troy. Homer. Iliad. 2. v. 674. Homer. Odyss. 18. v. 1.
Nireus, or Irus the beggar from Alcinous, who furnished Ulisses with a ship and
men, to transport him into his own country, and bestowed upon him great store
of treasure. Odyll. 13.
the king of the Phaeakes, or Pyrrhias the cook from Agamemnon, for no ancient
token was remaining upon them, but their bodies were all alike without mark or
inscription, not to be distinguished by any man. Which when I beheld, I thought
I might compare the life of man to nothing so well, as to a long show or
pageant, in which fortune was the setter out, and disposed every thing as
pleased her self; and fitted every person with sundry and different habites:
some she adornes in Princely roabes, garnisheth with attirings, appoints a
guard to attend them, and crowns their heads with a diadem; others she
sheltereth in the vveedes of a servant some she makes fair and beautiful,
others misshapen and deformed, to make the more variety in the show: sometimes
in the midst of the triumph, she changes the state of some of them, and will
not suffer them to march in the same rank to the end, as they were first
placed in, but alters their habit, constraining him that at the first was
King of Lydia and wonderful rich.
Croesus, to put on the garments of a servant or a captive: and poor
Secretary to Polycrates, King of the Samians, and after his death succeeded
him in the Kingdom. Herodot lib. 3.
Maandrius, who before was an ordinary serving man, she attireth in the
tyrannical habit of Polycrates, and permits him to make use of that personage
for a while: but when the time comes that the triumph must have an end, King of
Mycena, and General of all the Greeks
then every man unclothes himself, and puts off his proportion together with
his body, and becomes as he was before, no better then another man, yet some
are so insensible, that when fortune comes to require her furniture again,
they grieve and grudge at it, as if they had bin stripped of their own, loath to
redeliver what they made so short use of. I suppose also, you have often seen
these Tragical Actors, that are used in setting forth plays: that sometimes
they present A Tyrant of Thebes, slain by Theseus.
Creon, or King of Troy.
Priamus, or Agamemnon: and the same man that a little before was so lusty as
to counterfeit the countenance of The first founder and builder of Athens.
Cecrops, or The same that Ericthonius a king of Athens. Hom. Iliad. l. 2. v.
47.
Erechtheus, within a while after, if the Poet will have it so, must come forth
in the shape of a poor servant, and when the play is ended, every man must be
disrobed of his gorgeous garments, lay aside his vizard, step out of his
buskins, and walk aloof of like a forlorn fellow, no more Agamemnon the
son of Atreus, or Creon the son of Menoeceus, but called by his own name,
The names of common stage players.
Polus, the son of Charicles, the Sunium is a town and promontory of Attica.
Strab. l. 10.
Sunian, or Satyrus the son of Theogiton the Marathonian: such is the life of
man as it appeared then to my view.


Philonides. But tell me Menippus, they that have so costly and stately tombs
here upon earth: that have their pillars, their statues, their epitaphs, are
they in no more respect then ordinary men that are dead?


Menippus. What a question is that? I tell you, if you did but see Mausolus, I
mean the Carian, that is so famed for his sumptuous A most magnificent
sepulcher built by Attemisia for her husband Mausolus king of Caria: for the
largeness and rare workmanship ranked amongst the wonders of the world. Plin.
lib. 36. c. 5. one of the judges of hell.

The condition of the greatest Princes in death.


sepulcher, I think you would never give over laughing whilst you lived, he
is cast out so contemptibly in a dark corner, that he lies among the common
sort of dead men, not to be seen, and I think all that he got by his
sepulcher is, that he carries the greater burden upon his back; for the truth
is, my honest friend, when Aeacus appoints every man his place, the greatest
scope he allows, is but the breadth of a foot, which upon necessity he must
be content withal, and contract himself within that compass: but I think it
would move you to laugh much, if you saw those that were Kings and Princes
amongst us, beg their bread there, sell salt fish, and teach the A. B. C. for
sustenance, and how they are scorned and boxed about the ears as the basest
slaves in the world. It was my fortune to have a sight of The father of
Alexander the great.
Philip King of Macedon, and I thought I should have burst my heart with
laughing: he was showed me sitting in a little corner, cobling old shoes to
get somewhat toward his living: many other were to be seen there also,
begging by the high ways side, such as Two great kings of the Persians.
Xerxes, Two great kings of the Persians.
Darius, and Polycrates.


Philonides. The tale you have told of Kings, I assure you, is strange indeed,
and almost incredible: but what did Socrates there, and Diogenes, and others
that were wise men?


Menippus. Three wise Princes of the Grecians with whom Socrates that great
Philosopher keeps company. Palamedes is said in the time of the Trojan war,
to have added those four letters to the greek Alphabet, (...). Plin. lib. 7.
c. 56.
Socrates went up and down confuting every man he met withal: and in his
company Palamedes, Ulysses, Nestor, and other dead men that were the greatest
talkers, but his legs were still swollen and puffed up with the He was put to
death in this manner by the Athenians, being accused by Anytus and Melitus for
a corrupter of youth, and bringer in of new gods.
poison he drunk at his death: as for honest Diogenes the Cynicke is brought
in gearing Sardanapalus that most voluptuous king of Assyria, and Mydas the
rich king of Phrygia with all their now lost delicates and tr^sure.
Diogones, he would ever get him to Sardanapalus the Assyrian, or Midas the
Phrygian or some rich man or other: and when he heard them lament, and recount
their former fortunes, he would laugh and rejoice at it, and many times lie
along upon his back, and sing as loud as he could to drown the notes of
their complaints, whereat the men took such offense, that they were minded to
remove their lodging to be rid of Diogenes.


Philonides. Enough of this, now let me hear the decree, which you said before
was confirmed against rich men.


Menippus. In good time you have put me in mind of it: for being the maine
subject of my narration, I have digressed in my speech I know not how far:
for during the time of my abode amongst them, the Magistrates called a council
to consult about state business: and I seeing many throng in together, thrust
my self also among the dead for company and past for one of them. Many matters
were there decided: and lastly that concerning rich men: against whom sundry
grievances were objected, as violence, arrogancy, scornfulnesse, and
injustice, at the last a certain Orator started up, and uttered this decree
against them: The Decree:
FOr as much as rich men are daily found guilty of many misdemeanors committed
in their life time, extorting oppressing and afflicting the poor by all the
means they can imagine, be it therefore enacted by the council and the people
that whenever they dye, their bodies shall be punished like other wicked
persons, but their souls shall be sent up to the life again, and there
dissolved into asses, so to continue from asses to asses, until in that life
they shall accomplish the five and twenty That is, 25. times 10. thousand
years.
Myriades of years, compelled to bear burdens, and be driven and beaten up
and down by poor men, and at the end of those years they shall have liberty
to die.



This decree being made amongst the dead he derives these names from things
belonging to them, wittily playing in the Greek upon these words (...) a
skull, (...) a dry carcass, (...) a deed man, or a heap of dead men, (...)
dead: as if we should say in English Scullman, the son of Dribone, of the
tribe of the dead.
Cranion, the son of Sceleton, the Necusian, of the tribe of Alibantias,
published this decree, and upon the reading of it, the magistrates concluded
it, and the people confirmed it, Hecate howled, Cerberus barked, and so it was
perfected and past for current: thus much for the assembly:

Then went I about my own business, to seek out Tiresias, and when I had
found him, I told him the whole truth of the matter, and besought him to tell
me what kind of life he thought to be the best: whereat he laughed (for he is
a little old man, and blind, of a pale complexion and low voice) O my son,
said he, I know the cause of thy grief well enough, and that it is long of
these Philosophers that cannot agree in opinion among themselves: but help you
I cannot, for I may tell you nothing: Rhadamanthus himself has so commanded:
I hope not so, good father, said I, tell me I beseech you, and suffer me not
to wander in the world in a blinder case then your self; with that he drew
me aside, and when he had got me a good way from company, laid his mouth
close to my ear, saying, the simple man's life is the best and the honestest,
for he is free from affecting knowledge in matters above his reach, and from
searching after endings and beginnings, rejecting these profound sophistical
syllogismes, and holding them all to be idle, and endeavoring nothing in the
world, but how to spend the present time well, run over every thing with
laughter, and addict himself too much to nothing: when he had thus said, he
lightly skipt again into the fields of Asphodelus, and I seeing it grow
somewhat late, come on, Mithrobarzanes, said I, why make we stay here, and not
again have home to the earth? take you no care for that, Menippus, said he,
for I will direct you a short cut, and a plain path to lead you, without any
trouble: so he brought me to another place darker then the former, and with
his finger pointed to a little dim glimmering a far off, like the light that
shines through a bic hole: that, said he, is the Temple of This Temple was in
Lebadia, a town in Boeotia nere to Coronia, between Helicon, and Cheronea.
Strab. l. 9. They that would know any thing from the Oracle Trophonius went
down through a narrow hole that was there under ground, and staying some
certain days returned back with their answer.
Trophonius, and there do they descend that come out of Boeotia: make upwards
that way, and thou shall find thy self in Greece before thou be aware: I was
glad to hear of that, and taking my leave of the Magician, with much a do
crept up through that hole, and suddenly, I know not how, found my self to be
in Lebadia.


THE DREAM, OR THE COCK.
Micyllus. NOw Jupiter himself confound thee, The Cobbler exclaimes against the
Cock.
thou filthy, despitefull, and clamorous Cock, that with thy hideous and
piercing cries have wakened me, sweetly dreaming that I had great riches in my
possession, and that I abounded with all kind of happiness: so that by thy
means I cannot enjoy so much as the night time free from the remembrance of my
poverty: a thing far more hateful unto me then thou art. And yet as far
as I can conjecture by the stillness of the night, and coldness of the air,
which does not so pinch me as it is wont toward morning (for this is an
infallible token to me that the day is at hand) it is yet scarcely midtime of
the night: nevertheless this sleeplesse creature, as though he were to watch
The golden fleece that Jaso^ and the Argonauts went to fetch, was kept by a
monstrous dragon that never slept. Ovid. Met.
the golden fleece, begins to fall a crowing, almost as soon as the day is
shut in: but be sure I will make thee have small comfort of it: for I will
cudgel thee welfavouredly for this gear, as soon, as daylight will give me
leave: for it would be a trouble to me to find the out in the dark.


Cock. Master Micyllus, I thought I had rather deserved thanks at your hands
for my early crowing, because being wakened thou might go about thy work
the sooner: for if thou can but get so much time in the morning, as to cobble
one shoe before sun rising, it will be a good furtherance toward thy days
work: notwithstanding if it be so that thou take more pleasure to sleep in
thy bed, I will be well content to let thee take thy rest, and thou shall find
me as mute as Aristotle in his 2. book de anima cap. 9. speaks of vocal
fishes in the river Achelous, Plutarch, and Athenaeus suppose that the
Pythagoreans abstained from eating fish because of their silence, thinking it
irrelegious to eat of them that observe the same precepts with themselves.
any fish, The like advise is given by a fisherman in Theocritus Eidyl. 22. to
his fellow that dreamed he had taken a golden fish. (...). A fish indeed,
friend, is your sleeps best theme, Lest you be starved, though in a golden
dream.
but take heed, I say, least thy dreaming of riches do not make thee hunger
when thou awakest.


Micyllus. O miraculous Jupiter, and mighty Hercules, what evil does this
portend, that my Cock speaks with a man's voice?


Cock. Does this seem so great a wonder unto thee that I should speak with
the voice of a man?


Micyllus. How can I choose but think it strange, and monstrous? god send me
good fortune after it.


Cock. O Micyllus, thou now show thy self a very illiterate fellow, and
never to have been conversant in Homers verses: for in them thou may read
how d Xanthus, Achilles his horse, forgetting his neighing, stood talking in
the midst of the battle, uttering many whole verses together, and spoke not
in prose as I do now: yea, he prophesied, and foretold things to come, yet
was it thought no wonder, neither did he which heard it, cry out upon the
gods, as if he had heard a prodigy: but what if the The first ship that ever
was built, in which Jason with 54. other Heroes of Thessalia sailed to Colchos
for the golden fleece: the keele of this ship was made of the trees of Dodone,
a wood in Epirus, sacred to Jupipiter; which trees the Poets say did speak.
keele of the ship Argo should speak unto thee, as in times past the beech
tree of Dodone did utter prophecies with a man's voice: or if thou should see
the the Oxen of the sun, which Ulisses companions killed and roasted. Odyss. l.
12. v. 395. All this is spoken in derision of Homers poetical fictions.
skins of Oxen creeping about, and hear the flesh lowing when it was half
sodde or roasted, and thrust through with a spit, how would thou then
vvonder? But I am much conversant with The Cock is therefore said to be
conversant with Mercury, because that learning and skill both under Mercuries
protection, require watchfulnes.
Mercury, Mercury is the god of Eloquence among the Heathen. Homer. Odyss. 8.
v. 267. Ovid. Met. lib. 4. and lib. 2. de art amandi.
the most talkative of all the gods, and besides, brought up and nourished
amongst you men, and therefore it can be accounted no hard matter for me to have
the speech and voice of a man. Notwithstanding, if thou vvilt promise me to
keep my counsel, I will not stick to tell thee the very true cause indeed
of this my speech, and by what means I came by it.


Micyllus. But do I not dream that my Cock speaks thus unto me? if not,
then tell me, good Cock, what other cause there is of thy speech? and as for
silence thou needst not doubt that I will reveal it to any man: for if I
should, who would believe me?


Cock. Give ear unto me then: and I know Micyllus, I shall tell thee a
strange tale: for I whom thou now see to be a cock, was of late a man as
thou art.


Micyllus. I have heard of such a matter as that, concerning you Cocks long
ago: how that a certain young man, called Alector, was very familiar with
Mars, and accustomed to banquet and make merry with the god, and him he made
privy to all his love: so that whenever Mars went to lie with Venus, he
took this Alector along with him, and for that he was greatly in fear lest
the Sun should epsy him, and discover him to Vulcan, he always left this
young man without at the door, to bring him word when the Sun approached:
but as it chanced on a time, Alector fell asleep, and unwillingly betrayed the
charge committed to him, and the Sun entered in secretly and stood by Venus
and Mars, who took their rest without care, because they thought Alector
would give them warning if any were coming. Then Vulcan, having notice given
him by the Sun, took them napping together, and wrapped them both within a net
he had before provided for that purpose 1.533se:] Alector turned into a cock.
but Mars, as soon as he was set loose, in a great rage with this Alector,
turned him into this kind of bird, with the same furniture which he then had,
and instead of an helmet, set such a comb as that upon his head: for this
cause are ye Cocks abhorred by Mars, as creatures good for nothing; yet, to
this day, when you think the Sun is toward rising, you crow out a great
while before to give knowledge of his approaching.


Cock. Thus the story says indeed; Micyllus, but I mean another matter: for I
was thus transformed into a cock but a little while sithence.


Micyllus. And by what means, I pray thee? I would give any thing in the
world to be truly informed of that.


Cock. Did thou know Pythagoras the Samian Philosopher was the son of
Mnesarchus, a carver of rings: he held that the souls, the body dying, passed
straight into some other, and according to the life that it had formerly led,
was honored with a better, as of a Philosopher or other famous man; or punish:
with a base one, as of a dog, or ass, and to maintain the truth of this
opinion averred that he could well remember that he himself had been in time
past in the Trojan wars: Euphorbus the son of Panthus, who was brother to
Hecuba, which Euphorbus was slain by Menelaus. Ovid. Met. 15. of the rest of
his tenets, see his life in Diog. Laert.
Pythagoras?


Micyllus. Meanest thou the Sophister? that idle fellow that made a rule that
men should taste no flesh, nor eat any beans, the best meat I can feed
upon, and as I think most wholesome: the same man also commanded his scholars
to keep silence for the space of five whole years together.


Cock. Then know this also, that the same man before he came to be Pythagoras,
was Euphorbus.


Micyllus. Thou speak strangely, Cock; as though he were one of them that
could change his shape by enchantments, and do such like wonders.


Cock. That very same Pythagoras am I; therefore forbear I pray thee to use
hard speeches: for thou art altogether ignorant of his manner of life.


Micyllus. Why this is the greatest wonder of all the rest; my Cock a
Philosopher? I pray thee thou son of Mnosarchus, how happened it that of a man
thou art become a bird, and of a Samian, a A city of Boeotia, Pausan. in Boeot.
in which Lucian places the scene of this Dialogue, because it was very famous
in former times for cocks of the game. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 21. He closely
taxes the vain opinions of Pythagoras, and shows how in some things he is
repugnant to himself.
Tanagrian: thou can hardly persuade me it is so, Nay, it is almost
incredible; for I have already noted in thee two things, which are contrary to
the doctrine of Pythagoras.


Cock. And what are those?


Micyllus. One is, that thou art given to prate and babble; but he, as I
remember, enjoined silence to his scholars for five years space. The other is
likewise repugnant to his rules; for I, having no other thing to give thee,
brought thee beans to day, as thou know; and thou without any scruple,
pickst them up: Therefore, either thou lie and art not Pythagoras, or
transgressest against thine own decrees in eating beans, which he said was
as great a wickedness, as for a man to devour his own fathers head.


Cock. O Micyllus, thou know not the cause hereof, nor what is convenient
for the life of every creature: I did then eat no beans, for I was a
Philosopher: but now I feed upon them, because it is a diet fit for birds of my
kind. But if you will give me leave, thou shall hear how of Pythagoras, I
came to take this shape upon me, and how many kind of lives I have past, and
what benefit I had by every alteration.


Micyllus. Tell me, for the love of God; for thou can not please me better:
so that if it were put to my choice, whether I had rather hear thee discourse
of thy life, or see again that sweet and happy dream I had even now, I know
not to which part I should incline: so like do I judge thy speeches to those
sweet visions, that I hold thy talk, and my most delectable dreams to be of
equal content.


Cock. Do thou yet ponder upon thy dreams, and still revolve in thy mind
those idle fantasies, printing that vain and fruitless pleasure, as the Poet
says, Homer. Odyss. lib. 19.
in thy memory?


Micyllus. Nay, know this Cock, that I will never forget that vision whilst I
have a day to live: such a honey sweetness did that dream when it departed,
leave in mine eyes, that I could not open mine eye liddes, but they would
straight fall to sleep again: and even as a fether stirred in ones ear, such
a tickling did that vision make in me.


Cock. O the great love that dreams have to thee, if it be as thou say:
whereas they being Virgil. Aeneid lib. 4.

Par levibus ve^tis volucrique simillima somno: and Tibullus Eleg. 2.

Postque venit tacitus fulvis circudatus alis somnus, etc.


winged (as some say) and having not commission to tarry with a man longer then
sleep, would for thy sake pass their bounds, and infix their sweetness and
force, even within thy waking eyes: I would gladly therefore hear what it was
that did so delight thee.


Micyllus. And I am as ready to tell thee, for the very remembrance and talk
of it, does exceedingly content me: but when will thou, Pythagoras, tell me of
thy sundry transformations.


Cock. As soon, Micyllus, as thou shall make an end of thy dream, and wipe
away that honey from thine eyes: yet tell me this one thing first, for my
learning: came thy dream flying unto thee through gates of Ivorie, or of horn?


Micyllus. Neither, Pythagoras.


Cock. Odyss. l. 19. v. 562. True dreams come through the gates of horn, and
false through those of Ivorie. Virgill imitates this of Homer in Aeneid. l. 6.
Sunt geminae somni portae, quarum altera fertur Cornea, etc.
Why Homer makes mention only of these two passages?


Micyllus. A pin for that foolish Poet, who never knew what dreams were;
yet, it may be that poor common dreams come through such gates, such as he
himself saw, and that was nothing at all, for He likens Micyllus for his
desire of gold, to Midas the Phrygian king, who having entertained Bacchus, and
being by him promised whatsoever he would ask, desired that whatsoever he
touched might become gold: which being granted him so, that his very meat and
drink was turned into gold, hunger and necessity compelled him to repent the
vanity of his wish.
he was blind: but my sweetest dream came flying to me through a gate of
gold, being gold it self, and compassed on every side with gold; bringing
abundance of gold with it.


Cock. Herodotus and Plutarch say that his right name was Melesigenes so
called from the river near unto which he was borne: but afterward called
Homer by the Cumaeans who call a blind man (...).
Good Midas talk not so much of thy gold: thy dream and his wish being alike
in all respects; for thou likewise imaginest thou had whole mines of gold.


Micyllus. Abundance of gold I saw, Pythagoras, abundance: O thou would not
think how it did glister and shine most gloriously; I pray thee put me in
remembrance, (if thou know it) what Pindarus speaks in the commendation of
it, where he says, that water is the best thing, yet prayseth gold above all,
uttering the commendation thereof in the very beginning of the principal of
all his sonets. Pind. Olymp. Od. 1. v. 1. Pindarus is much in the commendation
of gold, as in Isth. 3. and other places, insomuch that some have given him the
name of (...), a lover of money.



Cock. Are these the verses thou meanest*

Water is a goodly thing,
But gold is far more bright
Then any riches else beside,
And gives a fairer light
Then does the clear and flaming fire,
Within the darkesome night.

Micyllus. The very same: and I verily think Pindarus had sometime seen my
dream, because he so commended gold: wherefore, O thou most prudent Cock
that ever I knew, hearken a little unto me, and thou shall know what my dream
was: yesterday, if thou remember, thou had not thy dinner; for the rich
Eucrates meeting me in the market place, bad me It was the custom in ancient
times for man to bathe and annoint themselves with oil before they went to a
feast or sacrifice, as we may see in Homer. Iliad. 10. v. 577. speaking of
Ulisses and Diomedes.
go and bath my self, and when it was dinner time, come and feast with him.


Cock. I remember it very well, by the same token that I fasted all day, and
thou came drunken home at night, and did then bring me those five beans; a
poor pittance, God knows, for a cock of the game, Pythagoras was well
skilled and practiced in the Olympicke exercises Diog. Laert.
that had tried masteries publicly in the Olympian sports.


Micyllus. When I was come from the feast, and had given thee those beans, I
went straight to bed, and then (as Homer says) Iliad. 2. v. 56.
a heavenly dream indeed came to me in the dead time of the night.


Cock. First Micyllus, tell me what was done at Eucrates house at the feast,
what kind of banquet it was, and what happened therein: for it will be as good as
another meal to thee, to enter, as it were, into a second dream of what thou
had then, and to chew in thy memory the good cheer thou had eaten before.


Micyllus. I thought the report of that would have been troublesome to thee:
but because thou of thy self desire to hear it, thou shall have it: I never
in my life, O Pythagoras, The description of his invitation and dinner with
Eucrates, which was the occasion of his dream.
did feast at any rich man's table before; and yesterday by good fortune I met
with Eucrates, and saluting him, as I use to do, by the name of Lord, passed
by him, because I thought it would be a disparagement to him to be seen
talking with one in a threadbare cloak. But he calling me to him, said;
Micyllus, I celebrate this day my daughters birth, and have bidden many of my
friends: but one of them, says he, is sick and unable to dine with me; do
thou therefore, when thou have bathed, come in his turn, unless he which is
bidden, say he will come himself, for I am in doubt of it: when I heard this,
I made low courtesy and went my way, pouring out many prayers to all the gods
in heaven, and beseeching them to send either the quotidian ague, or the
pleurisy, or the gout to that sick man, whose substitute I was appointed to
be at the feast: and I thought it a whole year, till the time of bathing
came; still watching how the shadow of the dial went forwards, and when it
would be time to vvash: at the last, when the hour was come, I plunged in with
as much speed as I could, and departed, trimming up my self handsomely, and
turned my cloak the best side outward: when I came, I found many at his
gates, and amongst them, that sick man, whose turn I was to take at dinner:
and very sick he was indeed, for he groaned very pitifully, and coughed, and
vomited from the bottom of his stomach filth, which he could hardly get up;
his countenance was pale, and his body swollen: he was about threescore years
of age. They said, that he was one of these Philosophers, which now adays
teach men so many foolish toys. He had a monstrous long beard, which stood in
great need of a barber: but when Alchibias the Physician blamed him for coming
abroad in that case, he answered; duty must not be neglected, especially by
a Philosopher, He takes occasion here to inveigh against such hypocriti^
Stoics, and other Philosophers as made such an outward show of temperance and
strictness above others, and yet would not loose a good meal, or the honor
of being entertained, though it were to the hazard of their lives.
though a thousand diseases stood to resist me, for then might Eucrates well
think, we contemned him: nay, said I, he would rather commend you, if you
would die at your house, a^ not breath out life and fleame together in the
midst of the banquet at his table: but he was so stout, that he made as if he
understood not how I came over him. Presently, as soon as he had washed, came
Eucrates, and seeing there Thesmopolis, for so was that Philosopher named,
said: this is well done, master, that you are come your self, I vvish you take
no harm by it: but you should have fared never the worse, for though you had
been absent, yet would I have sent you all things needful. And when he had
said so to him, he went in, giving his hand to the sick man, who was held up
by the servants: then did I make my self ready to be gone: but Eucrates,
turning him about, and musing a little to himself; at the last, seeing me
look so heavily on the matter, said, come thou in too, Micyllus, and dine
with us: for I will cause my son to eat with his mother in the chamber,
that thou may have room at the table. Then, like a fool, went I in, gaping
about me The Wolf having lost his prey runs gaping up and down, and hence
grew the proverb, (...), a gaping Wolf, and is applied to the^, as are
prevented of their purpose.
almost like a wolf, I was so ashamed, because I thought it long of me, that
Eucrates son should loose his place at the feast. When the time was come that
we should sit down, first they took up Thesmopolis to place him; but with
much ado, God knows: five tall young men were about him at the least, which
did bolster him up with pillowes on either side, to make him fit upright, and
be upheld by them, as much as was possible. And when no man else could endure
to sit near him, they appointed me to be his camerade at the table. Then went
we to dinner, Pythagoras, where we had great cheer, and great store of
dainties: all the meat was served in gold and silver plate; our drinking cups
were all of gold, and proper serving men were appointed to attend upon us: we
had our Musicians, our gesters, and all kind of mirth to pass away the time
withal: Only one thing troubled me, and that was Thesmopolis, The
Philosophers absurd behavior.
who angered me at the heart to hear him discourse of virtue, and teaching me,
how two negatives make an affirmative; and how that when it is day, it is not
night: sometimes he said I had horns, with such like fond talk, making a long
Philosophical discourse to him that answered never a word; so that he marde
all our mirth: for neither the Musicians that played on instruments, nor the
singers could be heard for him: thus was our banquet.


Cock. And no great feast to thee Micyllus, to be matched at the table with
such a doting old man.


Micyllus. The Cobblers dream.
Now hear my dream: I know not how, but me thought that Eucrates being
childlesse, and like to die, sent for me, and in his Will made me heir of all
he possessed, and within a short space deceased. Then I entering into his house,
measured up the gold and silver by whole loades, which flowed upon me, like
the streams of a running river: and all his other goods, as apparel, tables,
vessels, and servants were all indeed mine own. Then was I carried in a
chariot drawn with white horses, wherein I sat, reverenced and regarded of
all that saw me: many went before me, many rode about me, and more followed
me. And I having his gorgeous apparel on my back, and great rings as many as
would serve sixteen fingers, commanded a sumptuous feast to be prepared:
whereunto I might invite my friends. They, as it is in dreams, were soon
come to me, my meat was prepared, the drink set ready in a place by it self:
I being busied herein, and taking a golden cup in my hand to drink a health to
all my friends, the broth being now set on the table, in an evil hour thou
beganst to fall a crowing, thou troubledst our feast, overturned the tables,
scattered abroad those riches, and brought them all to nothing: and do thou
think I complain of thee without a cause, whereas I would gladly have seen
that sweet vision three whole nights together?


Cock. Do thou so doat upon gold and riches, Micyllus, that thou
delightest only in them: and think thou it a happy thing to have a great
deal of money?


Micyllus. I am not the only man, Pythagoras, of that opinion, but even thou
thy self when thou wast Homer. Iliad. lib. 17. v. 50. speaking of Euphorbus
slain by Menelaus.

(...).

(...).

With noise, his clattring arms his corpse did quell,

And blood his Grace-like tresses did besmeare Which with pure gold and silver
platted were.

Danae, vid. the Necromantie. Omnis enim res virtus, fama decus, divina
humanaque pulchris Divitiis parent, quas qui construxerit, ille Clarus erit,
fortis, justus, sapiens etiam and rex. Horat. sermon. lib. 2. fat. 3.


Euphorbus, had thy hair curled with silver and gold wier, when thou
vventest to fight against the Gracians; and in battle I should think it
better to be well furnished with iron then with gold: yet thou in thy
greatest peril, tookest pleasure to have thy hair platted therewith: which
made Homer say, thou had hair like the Graces; because it was bound together
with gold and silver: and no doubt it must needs show the braver, for gold
platted in hair will make it have a glorious luster: therefore when thou
wast the son of Panthus, thou seemedst to be delighted with gold: yea, the
father of all gods and men, even Jupiter himself, the son of Saturn and
Rhea, when he was in love with that Argolian maid, knowing no more lovely
thing whereinto he might convert himself, or win the favor of Acrisius
guard; became, as thou have heard, gold: and entering in through the roof of
the house, obtained his love. And to what end should I use further speeches in
the praise thereof? how many benefits does gold bring with it? for whoso is
furnished therevvith, is made both beautiful, wise, and valiant: it is
accompanied with credit and honor of base and mean persons, it makes in
short space famous and honorable: for I am sure thou know my neighbor
Simon, a cobbler as I am, who supped with me not long ago, and put two
pieces of pudding in the pot, when I sodde pease at the feasts of Saturnalia,
it was a great and joyful feast amongst the Romans, celebrated in the month of
December: friends sending gifts and invitations unto each other, and during
this feast, every one was allowed a freedom and liberty of speech without
being liable to any exception: Whence some authors have entitled part of their
writings by this name, as Macrobius and others.
Saturn.


Cock. I knew him well, he is a short fellow with a hooked nose: he stole
away our earthen pipkin under his cloak when he had supped, which was all the
household stuff we had: I saw him do it, Micyllus.


Micyllus. And yet the knave sorswore it when I charged him with it: but why
did thou not then give me warning, and crow as loud as thou could when
thou saw us so spoiled of our goods, and robbed?


Cock. I chackled apace, and that was all that I could do: but what of him?
me thinks thou art about to say somewhat of him.


Micyllus. This Simon had a cosen that was an exceeding rich man; his name
was Drimylus: he as long as he lived, would not bestow one halfe-penny on
this Simon. And no marvel, for he could never find in his heart to bestow any
thing upon himself. But when he dyed, all his goods by the law came to this
Simon: so that he that was wont to go in a bare patcht cloak, and glad to
lick the dishes, is now clothed in purple and violet, has servants,
chariots, Aspetius nihil est humili, cum furgit in altum. Claud.
golden drinking vessels, and tables of Ivorie: and so reverenced by all men,
that he will not so much as look on me; for I happening by chance to see him not
long ago, came to him and saluted him; saying, Simon, God save you: but he
being offended hereat, said to his servants; bid this beggar not clip my name:
I am not Simon, but Who was a famous Lyrike Poet. Pausan.
Simonides. And which is most to be noted, women do now fall in love with
him; and to some of them he makes the matter dainty, and regards them not: to
others he is favorable, and does grant them his love: and they that are
forsaken, seem so much affectioned, that they threaten to kill themselves.
Thou see then how many good things gold is the cause of, so that it alters
the very shape of a man; making the uncomely look handsome and lovely, like
the The girdle of Venus, which was of that force and efficacy, that whosoever
wore it, it made her seem most amiable and beautiful: and therefore Juno
being to lie with Jupiter, borrowed this girdle of Venus. Iliad. 14. v. 219.
Euripid.
Poetical Cestum: thou have heard what the Poet says, O gold, thou art the
sweetest and the welcomest possession. And again, it is the gold that has the
dominion amongst all men: but, good cock, why do thou laugh so now?


Cock. To see how ignorance has deceived thee; Micyllus, as most men are, in
these rich men: for be it known unto thee, that they live a far more
miserable and wretched life then poor men do: I speak by experience, that
have been both rich and poor oftentimes, and have tried all sorts of life,
and so shall thou do shortly as well as I.


Micyllus. Indeed the time now serves well for thee to tell me of thy
transformations, and what things thou know were done in every one of those
lives.


Cock. Hear me, and I will tell thee: The mean estate the better.
but this one thing I will make known unto thee to begin withal, that I never
yet saw a more happy life then thou leadest.


Micyllus. Then I, Cock? such a life God send thee: thou make me fret to
hear thee: yet tell me all, beginning from the time thou wast Euphorbus,
until thou wast changed into Pythagoras; and from thence in order till thou
becamest a Cock: for I persuade my self, thou must needs see and endure many
contrarieties, being turned into so many diverse shapes.


Cock. Pythagoras begins to relate his several transmutations
From the first time that my soul came flying from Apollo, and on the earth
enclosed in man's body, it would be too long to tell thee what misery it
endured: and further, it is neither lawful for me to speak it, nor for thee
to hear of such matters: but at the last I became Euphorbus.


Micyllus. Micyllus his digression.
And I pray thee heartily, before thou proceed in the discourse of thine own
life, that thou would tell me whether I had ever any other shape, or not.


Cock. Yes indeed had thou.


Micyllus. And can thou tell me what creature I was? I would very feign
know that.


Cock. Thou wast an These Indian emmets are some of the bigness of a dog,
some of a wolf, of wonderful swiftnes, lying in holes under ground amongst
the sands of gold, as our emmets do in ant-hills. Herodot. lib. 3.
Indian Emmet, one of them that dig up gold out of the earth.


Micyllus. And what a rogue was I, that I could not provide some of those
scrappes for my self to live upon now? but I pray thee what shall I be after
I am gone out of this life? I do not think but thou can tell me that too: and
if it be so, that I shall hereafter be in any good estate, Cleombrotus the
Ambrociot having read in Plato of the immortality of the soul, threw himself
down from an high place, and so died.
I will go straight and hang my self upon the beam thou sit on.


Cock. That thou can know by no means: but I, when I was Euphorbus, (for
thither will I turn my tale again) was a soldier at Troy, and slain by
Menelaus: afterward in time, I came to be Pythagoras; but all the interim, my
soul was carried about without any body to dwell in, until at the last, my
father Mnesarchus framed an habitation for me.


Micyllus. I pray thee, livedst thou all that time without meat or drink?


Cock. Why not, Micyllus? for those things are convenient for the body only.


Micyllus. Then tell me first what was done at Troy, were all things acted as
Homer reported them to be?


Cock. How could he, Micyllus, know the truth of what was done there? for in
the time of those wars, he was a camel in As he brought before, Homer
against Pythagoras, so now he brings Pythagoras against Homer. A province of
Scythia.
Bactria: I, for my part, in these matters can inform thee how much he
overshot himself: for neither was Pausanias in his Atticks says as he is
informed by one Mysus, that the round bones of the knee, (which we commonly
call the pan) of Telamon Ajax was as big as the greatest coite wherewith
those that strove in the five exercises of Greece, and therefore called
Pentathli, did play: from whence may be gathered the proportion of his whole
body.
Ajax so mighty, nor He alludes here to the fable, which says that Jupiter in
the likeness of a Swanne lay with Laeda, and she brought forth an egg, of
which were borne Castor, Pollux, and Helena.
Helen so fair as he would have them to be: only, I remember she had a long
white neck, whereby may be judged, she had a swanne to her father: but her
other beauty, it was worn with age, for she was almost as old as The wife of
Priamus, mother to Hector and Paris.
Hecuba. At which time she could not in any likelihood be less then 15. Now
Hercules destroyed Troy 31. years before the last besieging of it, to which if
we add the other ten years of the siege, beside the time between her
carrying away by Theseus, and the destruction of Troy by Hercules, it will
amount to 56. years, so that by this computation she could not be much younger
then Hecuba.
For first Theseus took her away with him, and kept her in Aphidna: and he
lived in the time of Hercules. Now Hercules destroyed Troy before, in our
fathers time which then lived: whereby we may conjecture of her age. These
things, when I was very young, my father Panthus was wont to discourse of
unto me, who said that he had seen Hercules.


Micyllus. But was Achilles so worthy a man as the speech is? or is that also
a fable?


Cock. I never met him in the field, Micyllus, neither can I so perfectly
describe the Graecians unto thee, because they were our enemies: He fasty
boasts the killing of Patroclus, who was wounded by Euphorbus, but slain by
Hector. Iliad. 16. v. 826.
but I easily slew his friend Patroclus, for I thrust him through with a spear.


Micyllus. But with far more ease did Menelaus kill thee, and that soon
after; but enough of these matters: tell me now somewhat concerning Pythagoras.


Cock. Without doubt, Micyllus, I was a subtle fellow, (for I will tell thee
the truth plainly) and not unlearned, nor ignorant of the most commendable
arts: Diverse of the ancient Philosophers, traveled into Egypt, and
Chaldaea, because in former times learning flourished in those parts.
for I went into Egypt, to be instructed in wisdom by their Prophets, where
I secretly learned the books of Orus, or Horus was the son of Isis, and
Osiris: these three were the first that instructed the Egyptians in the
knowledge of letters: and therefore honored by them as gods: they likewise
invented the way of writing in Hieroglyphics, expressing what they meant by
the shapes and figures of living things, etc. In which kind of writing, all
their secret and mysterious knowledge was recorded, which they so highly
reverenced, that they thought it irreligious, to profane it with a common
character.
Orus, and Isis: from thence I sailed into How Pythagoras set up school in
Italy, and by what precepts and ceremonies his scholars were distinguished
from other sects, see Diog. Laert. in his life, Gellius, Justine, Livie, lib. 1.
Italy, and delivered such doctrine to the Graecians that dwelt there, that
they honored me as a God.


Micyllus. I have heard no less my self: thou also taughtest that men when
they were dead should revive again, and shewedst unto them a It is said that
the naked hippe of Pythagoras being discovered, seemed to be of pure gold:
Hermippus of Pythagoras in Laertius.
knuckle bone of gold: but what came in thy head, so straightly to forbid the
eating of flesh and beans?


Cock. Ask me not that question, good Micyllus, I pray thee.


Micyllus. Why so?


Cock. Because I am ashamed to tell the true cause thereof.


Micyllus. Be not abasht to tell it me that am thy fellow and friend: for I
will now no longer account my self thy master.


Cock. O Micyllus, it was no point of sound wisdom that moved me to it: but
when I considered, that if I should prescribe any common form of doctrine that
was agreeable to other men's rules, few would be drawn to follow it, Things
that are new and strange are always most admired.
because it was not strange: I thought that how much the more contrary my
doctrine was to other men's, so much the more rare it would appear: and this
was the cause that I devised those new rules, that diverse men having diverse
opinions of them, might all of them remain doubtful and uncertain of the
meaning, as they did in those dark and double intending oracles.


Micyllus. See thou? thou have partly made a fool of me, as well as thou
did of those Certain cities of Italy, amongst whom Pythagoras lived.
Crotonians, Metapontians, Tarentines, and such like simple fellows which
followed thy precepts, and walked in those erring steps which thou leavest
for them to tread in: but when thou did put off Pythagoras, with what body
vvast thou then enclosed?


Cock. I then came to be Pericles a great nobleman and general of the
Athenians, was so taken with the beauty and eloquence of this Aspasia, that he
married her, and as some think, for her sake only undertook the Samian war.
Aspasia, that famous strumpet of Miletus.


Micyllus. I am ashamed to hear: Why Pythagoras, among all other beasts, wast
thou also a woman? the time has been then, gentle Cock, that thou vvast an
Hen, and laidst an egg, when thou vvast Aspasia and got with child by
Pericles: then did thou card and spinne, and do all other work as women
ought to do.


Cock. All this did I; and not I only, but before me both Necrom. 1.
Tiresias, and How Caeneus the son of Elatus, was changed from a fair woman
to a man: see Ovid. Met. lib. 12.
Caeneus the son of Elates were both men and women: therefore if thou deride
me for that, thou scornest them as much.


Micyllus. And which was the merryer life of the two? when thou vvast a man,
or when thou wast got with child by Pericles.


Cock. Do thou not know how dangerous a question this is, and what
punishment Tiresias himself had for assoyling it?


Micyllus. Well, though thou resolve it not, In the person of Medea, who being
forsaken by her husband Jason, makes a great complaint against men's cruelty and
women's misery, and amongst the rest comes out with this. (...). We live they
say at home from perils free, Whilst they do fight at push of pike, but see
Their error, for thrice standing to my shield, I Would rather fight, then once
bring forth a child.
yet has Euripides, in my judgment sufficiently determined this doubt: who
says, he had rather bear a shield in battle three times, then bear a
child once.


Cock. When thou art in childbed, Micyllus, I will then put thee in mind of
this question: for thou likewise shall oftentimes become a woman in the
circuit and compass of thy lives.


Micyllus. Is it not a death to thee, Cock, to think all men are Milesians, or
Samians? For it is said, that thou, being Pythagoras, Pythagoras was very
beautiful, insomuch that his scholars supposed him to be Apollo. Laert.
and of rare beauty, wast many times Aspasia to the tyrant: but after Aspasia
who wast thou then, a man, or again a woman?


Cock. I was A Thebane Philosopher, scholar to Diogenes.
Grates the Cynicke.


Micyllus. Mighty gods, what a transmutation was that from a whore to a
Philosopher?


Cock. And then a King, and then a beggar; and shortly after a Duke: then a
horse, and a cow, and a frogge, and a thousand things else: for it would be
long to rehearse them all. Lastly, I have been a Cock oftentimes, for I
delighted in that life, and served many, He returns to the former discourse
concerning riches and poverty.
both kings, poor men, and rich men, and now am come to be thy Cock, where I
daily laugh to hear thee complain and grudge at thy poverty, and think so
well of rich men, whereas thou art ignorant of all those evils which accompany
them: for if thou did know the many cares wherewith they are oppressed, thou
would laugh at thy self, for ever thinking a rich man to be happy.


Micyllus. Wherefore, O Pythagoras, or whatsoever thou would be called (for I
would be loath to offend thee with calling thee sometimes one name, and
sometimes another.)


Cock. It makes no matter whether thou call me Euphorbus, or Pythagoras, or
Aspasia, or Crates, for I am all these: yet thou shall do best to call me as
thou see me, a Cock, and think it no reproach unto me to be called as a
poor bird, for I have the lives of many within me.


Micyllus. Then, Cock, forasmuch as thou have made trial almost of all kind
of lives, and knew them all, tell me in good sadness, how rich men, and how
poor men live, that I may know whether it be true as thou say, that we are
more happy then the rich.


Cock. Mark then, Micyllus, and consider well of it: for thou art not
troubled with any rumors of wars, The inconveniences that attend rich men, and
on the contrary, the freedom of the poorer sort in time of war.
when news comes that the enemies are in the country: then have thou no care,
neither of the spoiling of thy lands, nor breaking down of thy parkes, nor the
vvasting of thy vines: but as soon as thou hear the trumpet sound, thou
look about thee, vvhither to turn thy self for thy safety, and where to be
out of peril: but those rich men, what care are they in with all their
retinewe? they grieve to see from the walls their substance and goods
destroyed in the fields: and if any thing be to be brought to the City, they
are called to do it: or if a sallie must be made against the enemy, Their
happiness above the rich in the time of peace.

Especially where there is a popular government. Whereof we may find many
examples, both amongst the Romans and Graecians; but chiefly whilst the
commonwealth was governed by the people.

The power of the common people when they bear the sway.


they are sure to be foremost in peril, always appointed for Captains and
leaders in the battle, but thou with a strong pike in thy hand, stand
well prepared for thy defense, and ready to take part of the Captains feast,
when he sacrifices to the Gods after victory. Again, in the time of peace,
thou, as one of the comnaltie, go to the public meetings in the judgment
place, where thou raignest as king over these rich men: for they stand in fear
and doubt of thee, and glad to get thy favor with gifts, laboring to make
public bathes, plays and pageants to please thee withal, and thou viewest
and examinest them as exactly as if thou were a lord; sometimes thou vvilt not
so much as speak to them: and, if it please thee, thou may either drive them
away with stones, or confiscate their goods. Thou neither fear the crafty
Lawyer should beguile thee, nor the thief steal away thy gold, by clyming
over thy walls, or breaking up the house: neither art thou troubled with any
reckonings, nor demanding debts, nor beating evil servants, nor in care for
thine accounts: but when thou have cobled a shoe, have seven halfe-pence for
thy labor: and rising from thy work at sun set, (at which time thou may
bathe thy self, if it please thee) thou buyest thee some fishes, or herrings,
or a few heads of garlike, The benefit of a laboring life, and hard diet.
wherewith thou make merry, singing for the most part all the day long, and
practicing Philosophy in thy sweet poverty: this makes thee strong and
healthful in body, and able to abide the cold: for labor hardneth thee to
vvithstand courageously those things which other men think indurable, and
none of these hurtful diseases can lay hold on thee: for if thou be at any
time touched with a grudging of an ague, thou suffer it not to tarry long
with thee, but shakest it off speedily, and drivest it away even with very
hunger, so that it soon departs as if it were in fear to stay with thee, when
it sees thee drink cold water so heartily, The diseases and evils that
proceed from ryotousnesse.
and not abide the daily cures of the Physicians: but those miserable men, how
many evils does their ill diet bring upon them? as gouts, vomitings,
impostures of the lungs, and dropsies: for these be, as it were, the children
of delicate and well furnished feasts. Therefore those men, which like
Icarus, still soar to get aloft, and seek to approach the sun, Icaromenipp.
c.
not remembering that their vvings are fastened with wax, many times have a
grievous fall even headlong into the midst of the sea, but as many as with
Daedalus, climb not into the skies, nor set their minds on high places, but
flecke near the ground, that their vvings may sometimes be moistened with
salt water, those men for the most part fly in safety.


Micyllus. Thou meanest orderly and discreet men.


Cock. For the others, thou know what shameful wrackes and falls they have
been subject to. As The rich Lydian king, overcome by Cyrus the Persian, and
being ready to be burnt, at his earnest prayer to Apollo, the fire was quenched
with a great shower of rain, and so was saved. Herodot. lib. 1.
Croesus, who had his plumes plucked by the Persians, and by them laughed to
scorn, when he was cast on the pile of wood ready to be burnt: The younger
tyrant of Sicilie.
likewise Dionysius, being deposed from his kingdom, taught a grammar school
in Corinth, and after so pompous a reign, was forced to teach children to read
for his living.


Micyllus. But tell me Cock of thine own life, when thou raignest, (for thou
also, as thou say, have bin a king) what experience thou have of a kings
life. I think thou vvast then filled with all kind of felicity, because
thou did possess that which was the head and spring of all pleasures.


Cock. Good Micyllus, give me no cause to remember it: I was then so
miserable a wretch, that I tremble to hear of it: indeed as thou say, to
those that beheld me outwardly, I was thought to be happy and fortunate, but
within me, I had infinite millions of miseries dwelling and abiding.


Micyllus. And what were those? for it is strange it should be so, neither can
I believe it.


Cock. I reigned, Micyllus, over no small region; which flowed with plenty of
all kind of fruits: and for multitude of inhabitants, The unhappie condition
and estate of Tyrants.
and beauty of cities, to be accounted amongst the most flourishing kingdoms:
many navigable rivers ran through it, the sea yielding many commodious
havens, and stations for ships: I had a huge army of soldiers, horsemen in
great number, and pikemen infinite, a strong navy, coin innumerable, plenty of
gold plate, and all other things belonging to the pomp of a kingdom in great
abundance. When I went abroad, many honored and reverenced me, as if they had
seen a deity: they would run one over another to have a sight of me, and
climb up the house tops, thinking it a great matter to have a full view of the
chariot, the purple roabe, the diadem, of those that went before, and those
that followed: but I alone, knowing how many things did trouble and disquiet
me, could not but condemn them of folly, and bewail mine own misery. Three
famous Carvers. The resemblance of a Tyranny.
For I compared my self to such gallant Images and Colossus, as Phidias,
Myron, and Praxiteles have carved, for they in outward show resemble the shapes
of Jupiter, or Neptune, brave and comely in countenance, all wrought over with
gold and pearl; having either the thunder or lightning, or the three forked
mace in his right hand. But if thou stoop down to see what is within them,
then thou shall discern the bars, the wedges, the nails wherewith the whole
body is fastened and buckled together: the pieces of wood, the pinnes,, the
pitch, the mortar, Iliad. 10. v. 1.
and such like filth wherewith it is filled within: beside the multitude of
flies and spiders that have their dwelling there: such a thing is a kingdom.


Micyllus. Now compare the mortar, bars, and wedges, to the inner part of a
kingdom, and show what likeness the filth of the one has to the other; (if
there be any) as thou have likened that which is seen, carried abroad, ruling
over so many men, and worshipped so devoutly, to the wonderful Image of
Colossus; for indeed either of them have a seemly outside: tell me therefore
now, what resemblance there is between the one and the other for their inward
parts.


Cock. Their troubles and vexations.
What should I rehearse unto you, Micyllus, their fears, griefs, and
suspicions; the hatred and conspiracies of those that are nearest to them,
their short and unsound sleeps; their fearful dreams, their variable
thoughts, and ever evil hopes, their troubles and vexations, their collections
of money, and judgment of controversies, their military affairs, and warlike
expeditions, their edicts and proclamations, their leagues and treaties, their
reckonings and accounts, which suffer them not once to enjoy a quiet dream,
but they are compelled alone to have an eye in all things, and a thousand
businesses to trouble them. Great Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, could not enjoy
a quiet nights rest for the cares that occupied his head, no not when all the
Gracians else were asleep: what a grief was it to the Croesus sending to the
oracle at Delphos to know something concerning his son that was dumb was
answered that he had no great reason to desire that his son should speak,
for that day in which he should first hear it, would be the most unfortunate to
him that ever he saw, which fell out accordingly, for Sardis his regal City
being taken by Cyrus: a common soldier of the Persians meeting with Croesus
and his son, not knowing him to be the king, was about to kill him, at which
his son that was dumb before, suddenly cried out, do not kill Croesus.
Herodot. lib. 1.
Lydian king to have his son dumb? how did A Persian Captain that took
part with Cyrus, against his brother Artaxerxes. Plutarch.
Clearchus vex the Persian Artaxerxes, when he mustred soldiers against him,
to serve his brother Cyrus? Dionysius the younger.
another was offended at Dion, because he used but private speeches with the
Syracusians: another was troubled to hear but Some of the chief captains of
Alexander the great, who sharing his dominions amongst them after his death,
fell at length to deadly hatred, and bloody wars with one another. Necrom. 10.
Parmenio praised: Perdiccas envied Ptolome, and Ptolome, Seleucus: but if
there be but some speech of a rebellion, Lord, what fear are they in then, if
they see any three or four of their guard talking together. But the greatest
misery of all is, that they always suspect those most, that are their greatest
friends, still looking for mischief at their hands. One is poisoned by his
own child; and he again used in the same sort by his friend: and he too
perhaps within a short time, served with the same sauce by another.


Micyllus. Fie upon them; what horrible things are these, Cock? I see now, it
is a far safer kind of life for me, to labor at cobling shoes, then to
drink out of a golden cup, poison and venom mixed with the wine. The greatest
danger I am in, is least my paring knife should run awry in cutting my
leather; and so hurt some of my fingers. But those men make deadly banquets one
for another, daily inuring themselves to infinite villainies: but when they are
once fallen, then they rightly resemble, in my opinion these players of
Tragedies: amongst whom, a man may see many that for a time bear the persons
of Cecrops, A sturdy thief slain by Theseus king of Athens, he is feigned by
the Poets continually to roll a great stone in hell.
Sisyphus, or King of the Mysians.
Telephus, having crowns on their heads, swords with Ivorie hilts, glistering
hair, and cloakes embrodered with gold: but if (as it chances sometimes) any
of them be beaten and thrown down upon the stage, then is he a laughing
stock to all that see him, when his vizard and his crown shall be torn in
pieces; the blood running down from his broken pate, and his nether parts
turned up; showing his patcht and beggarly clothes, with his buskins ill
favouredly buckled upon his legs, and far unmeete for his feet. This
similitude is often used by Lucian.
See thou, good Cock, what a similitude thou have taught me to make? for
when thou wast a king, thy estate was like unto this: but when thou becamest a
horse, or a dog, or a fish, or frogge, how could thou away with this kind
of life?


Cock. Thou movest a question that would ask long speeches, and not to this
present purpose: He concludes man to lead the most unhappie life, because the
most vicious of all creatures.
but the sum of all is this: I could find no life to be so full of trouble
as the life of man, if it be considered only according to the natural
inclination and uses thereof: for thou can not find either an horse to be an
usurer, or a frogge a backbiter, or a crow a sophister, or a gnat voluptuous,
or a cock lascivious, and so of all the rest: for those vices which ye are
daily subject unto, thou can not perceive in them.


Micyllus. Herein thou say true indeed Cock, neither will I for my part be
ashamed to tell thee what cares I have endured: for never could I yet put out
of my mind, the desires I had from my youth to become rich, but even in my
dreams I have gold often presented unto mine eyes: and chiefly this knave
Simon does anger me at the heart, to see him live in such wealth.


Cock. I will soon ease thee of that grief, Micyllus, and therefore rise up
now whilst it is night and follow me: I will bring thee to Simon himself, and
to the houses of other rich men, that thou may see what case they are in.


Micyllus. How can thou do it? for their gates are now shut: and would thou
have me break thorough their walls?


Cock. No Micyllus, but Mercury, Certain creatures have been thought by the
ancients to appertain peculiarly unto each of the gods, and therefore
consecrated to them, as the Eagle to Jupiter, the Peacocke to Juno, the
Grasshopper to the Muses, and the Cock to Mercury. Why see above^.
to whom I am consecrate, has given a certain property to the longest
feather of my tail, that which is so weak, that it bends downwards.


Micyllus. But thou have two such feathers:


Cock. Then it is that on the right side; for whomsoever I shall suffer to
take it, as often as I will, he may open therewith any door, and see any in the
house, and not be seen himself.


Micyllus. I think, Cock, thou go about to cheat me now with some tricks
of legerdemaine: for if thou suffer me once to have it, thou shall soon see
all Simons goods in my house, for I will bring them away as fast as I can, and
make him again halt of his old sore, and glad to set on patches to get
himself drink.


Cock. That thou may not, for Mercury has commanded me, that if he which
has the feather go about any such matter, I should presently crow out and
make him taken.


Micyllus. The poets feign Mercury to be the patron and protector of theives.
That Is very unlike, as if Mercury being so cunning a thief himself, would
mislike the same in another? yet, let us go: for I will abstain from the
gold, if I can.


Cock. First, Micyllus, pluck off that feather: but what meanest thou to pull
them off both?


Micyllus. Because I would be sure to have the right, and thou the less
deformed: else, the one half of thy tail would be as it were maimed.


Cock. Be it so then; but shall we go first to Simon, or to some other rich
man?


Micyllus. Nay to Simonides for Simon.
Simon, I pray thee, because he was so proud of his riches, that he would have
had his name longe^ by two syllables: see, we are at his gates already, what
she I do with this feather?


Cock. Put it into the lock.


Micyllus. I have done so: O Hercules, how the doare opens as it were with a
key!


Cock. Do thou not see him now watching about his reckonings?


Micyllus. Yes, I see him sit by a small dim light: and how pale he looks? I
know not why: unless he pine and consume himself with cares, for I have not
heard that he has been sick.


Cock. Hearken what he says, and thou shall know the whole matter.


Simon. He describes the cares and perplexities of rich men, with their
wonderful distractions.
These seventy There are diverse sorts of talents, as the Egyptian, Syrian,
Antiochian, Syracusan, etc. but that which is most commonly understood by
authors, is the Attike talent, the the value whereof amounts to 600. French
crowns. Budeus de affe.
talents, I have hid safe enough under my bed, and no man knows where they be:
but the sixteen talents, Sosylus the horse-keeper saw me when I hid them under
the manger: yet he is one that has no great care of the stable, and but a
loyterer in his business, and like enough to steal a greater sum then that
from me: but how should Tibias be able to buy so much poudered meat, as he did
yesterday? they say also, that he bought an earing for his wife that cost him
five groats: certainly, they be goods stolen from me, that these men do thus
waste and consume: and my plate here, me thinks, being so much of it, stands
not very safely, and I fear lest some false knave or other will break down
my wall and take it away: many do envy and seek to deceive me, and chiefly
my friend Micyllus.


Micyllus. Thou lie like a knave: thou think I am like thee, that stole
away my pitcher under thy cloak:


Cock. Peace Micyllus, lest we be taken:


Simon. It is good to be wary of that watchful fellow, therefore go I round
about my house, and search every corner; who is there? I see thee well enough
thou would feign break into my house, but thou art happened against a pillar.
That Is good luck: I will go and tell my gold over again lest any slipped by
before. See: I hear some noise again: as I live, all men are set against me
and lay wait for me: where is my wood-knife if I chance to take the thief:
now will I go bury my gold again.


Cock. This is Simons life, Micyllus, let us go now to some other place, for
there is but a little of the night left.


Cock. O wretched creature! what a life leads he? I wish all mine enemies rich
in such sort: Diogenes the Cynicke being asked the reason why gold looked pale,
answered, that it was for fear, being there are so many that lay in wait to
catch it.
I will give him one box on the ear, and then be gone.


Simon. Who struck me now? alas poor wretch as I am: there are surely thieves
in my house.


Micyllus. Cry out, watch, make thy face as pale as the gold: pine away thy
self. Now Cock, if thou will let us go see Gniphon the usurer, he dwells
not far hence: lo, his door opens of it self.


Cock. Mark then how carefully he watches to account his gains upon his
fingers ends, consuming himself in that manner, and yet must shortly leave all
these vanities, and come to be some moth, gnat, or fly.


Micyllus. I see that miserable foolish fellow well enough, who in this very
life is in no better estate then a fly or a gnat: how has he withered himself
away with reckoning: but let us go to another.


Cock. To thy old friend Eucrate, if thou will: his door is open, therefore
let us go in.


Micyllus. All these riches were lately mine.


Cock. Do thou still think upon thy Dream of riches? behold Eucrates
himself, that old man, lying with one of his servants.


Micyllus. I see most abominable beastliness, and most unnatural filthiness,
not beseeming any man to commit: behold also his wife, in another corner of the
house, playing the adulterous harlot with her cook.


Cock. Would thou wish then, Micyllus, to inherit all that Eucrates has,
and to be heir of this his wickedness?


Micyllus. No certainly, Cock, rather would I die for hunger, than do such
villainy: farewell gold and dainty fare: I have more riches, possessing but
two halfe-pence, than they that are in continual fear to be robbed by their
servants.


Cock. The Conclusion.
So then let us now be gone to our own home for the day is ready to break, the
rest I will acquaint thee withal at another time.


THE INFERNAL FERRIE, OR THE TYRANT.
Charon. THou see, One of the three fatal Sisters. Atropos, Clotho, and
Lachesis, the daughters of Night and Erebus.
Clotho, our Barge has been ready this good while, and all things prepared,
meet for our passage: the pumpe is cleansed, the topmast is reared, the sails
are spread, and all the cares bound fast in their places, and there is no let
in me, but that we may weigh anchor and be gone: only Mercury plays the
loyterer, who should have been here long ago, which makes our vessel, as you
see, unfraught with passengers, otherwise we might have crossed the River three
times by this: it is now well in the after noone, and we have not gotten one
halfe-pennie this day: I am sure Pluto will think the stay was in me, and I
must bear the blame for an others default; whereas, that honest man Mercury,
being the Messenger of the Gods.
whose office it is to conduct unto us those that are dead, as if he had drank
upon earth of an other fountain of A River in hell, which whesoever drinks of,
forgets all that has been done in his life time.
Lethe, has quite forgot to come back again unto us, but is either These
qualities are appropriate to Mercury, because they that are borne under this
Planet, are naturally thus addicted. He is placed by the Poets between heaven
and hell, because he is the God of speech; by the use of which, there is a
mutual commerce betwixt those of the highest and the lowest rank. -- and jus
per limen ntrumque Solus habet, geminoque facit commercia mundo. Claud.
trying masteries with some youths that are his companions, or is playing upon
his harp, or is framing some speech or other, wherein to express his vanity,
or perhaps practicing to place the thieves as he comes along, for that is a
maine point of his profession: but we suffer him to have his own will so
much, that he cares not whether ever he come among us, though he belong f
half to our dominion.


Clotho. Thou know not, Charon, what important business may be imposed
upon him, being one Jupiter makes so much use of in his superior affairs, by
whom, you know, he is to be commanded.


Charon. But yet, Clotho, he ought not so extremely to domineer over his
fellow-officers, who never offer to detain him when he has occasion to
absent himself: but I know the cause why: for we have nothing with us, but
the herb Necromantie. n.
Asphodelus, with the oblations, parentations, and memorial sacrifices for the
dead: the rest is all obscure clouds, mists, and darkness, whereas in heaven
all things are perspicuous and clear: there they have Ambrosia by the belly,
and Nectar their fill, and therefore I cannot blame him, if he like that place
the better: for which he goes from us, he flies away as fast, as if he were
to make an escape out of a jail; but when his turn is to come hither, he is
as slow and dull, as if he came with no good will.


Clotho. Be patient, good Charon, he is now at hand, as you may see, and
brings a great company with him, or rather drives them before him with his rod,
as if they were some Heard of Goats: but how happens it, that one amongst them
is bound, an other comes laughing? a third I see with a scrip about his neck,
and a staff in his hand, casting a stern countenance upon them, and hastening
them forwards: and see you not Mercury himself, how he sweats, and how his
feet are all covered with dust, how he pants and blows, scarcely able to take
his breath? What Is the matter with thee Mercury? what makes thee so earnest?
and what has troubled thee so long?


Mercury. Nothing, Clotho, but following this paultrie fellow, that ran away
from me so far, that I thought I should not have seen you to day.


Clotho. Who may he be? or what was his meaning in running away?


Mercury. You may soon know that, because he would rather live still, than
be amongst you: he is some King or Tyrant, I know by the moan he makes, and
the matter of his laments, crying out, that he is deprived of some incomparable
and unspeakable felicity.


Clotho. Did the fool think, by running away to attain to life again, his
thread being wholly spun up, and quite cut asunder?


Mercury. Run away, say thou? nay, if this honest fellow here with the
staff, had not holp me to take and bind him, Tyrants very unwilling to die.
I think he would have made an escape from us all: for since the time that
Atropos delivered him up into my hands, he never ceased all the way we came, to
struggle and hang-an-arse, and to pitch both his feet against the ground so
fast, that we had much ado to get him forwards. Sometimes again he would
speak us fair, entreat, and beseech us to bear with him a while, promising
us great rewards, if we would do so much for him: but I would give no ear to
his impossible petition: and when we were come to the very mouth of the
passage, where I used to deliver to Rhadamanthus, Minos, and Aeacus were all
three Kings, for their justice called the Sons of Jupiter; and for their
sincerity, fained by the Poets to be Judges in Hell.
Aeacus the dead by account, and he to take the number of them, according to a
hill sent unto him from your Sister, I know not how this poultrie fellow, had
privily given us the slip, and I was one too short of my tale: with that Aeacus
casting an angry countenance upon me, Mercury, said he, practice not to
play the thief with all that comes to your hands: you may sport your self
enough in this kind, when you are in heaven: the number of the dead is
certain, and you cannot deceive me in that: you see there are set down in
your Bill 1004. and you have brought one too short of the number, unless you
will say, that Atropos did misreckon you: I blushing at this speech of his,
suddenly called my self to mind what had happened upon the way: and looking
about me, this fellow was not to be found: then I knew well enough he was
fled, and after him I followed as fast as I could the direct way that led
toward the light, and this good honest man followed after me of his own
mind, and we ran together, as if we should have run for a wager, and at
the last overtooke him, just when we were come to A Promontory of Laconia,
from whence, as the Poets fained, there was a passage into Hell.
Taenarus, so near was he got to make an escape.


Clotho. Then Charon, Mercury may well be excused for any negligence committed
in this service.


Charon. But why do we still trifle out the time, as if we had not loitered
enough already?


Clotho. Come on then, let them come aboard: I will sit upon the ship ladder,
as I was used to do, and taking the scrowle in my hand, examine every one that
enters, who, and whence he is, and by what means he took his death. And
thou, Mercury, receiving them at my hands, place them in order accordingly:
but let young infants take the first turn, for they are not able to answer for
themselves.


Mercury. Here Ferriman take them to thee, in number three hundred with the
fondlings.


Charon. O brave, here is a quarrie indeed: thou have brought them rotten that
were never yet ripe.


Mercury. Shall they come next, Clotho, that were past being mourned for?


Clotho. Because their death comes not unexpected, and therefore not so much to
be bewailed.
Old men thou meanest, do so if thou will, for what should I trouble my self to
examine matters past before the time of This Euclide was governor of Athens
presently after the 30. Spartans that ruled over them were cast out, in the
time of whose tyranny, many outrages were on all sides committed, insomuch
that having now regained their former liberty, to take away all remembrance of
past injuries, and to establish peace and quietness amongst themselves, they
by a general consent enacted, that whatsover had been done in Athens before
the time of Euclides government, should stand utterly void, and not so much as
be questioned or spoken of, and hence it seems the Author takes the proverb.
Euclide: All ye that exceed the age of three score years, make your
appearance: what is the matter? they are so deaf with age they cannot hear
me: Nay then take them without more ado, and away with them.


Mercury. The next are four hundred lacking two: all mellow and full ripe;
gathered in good time.


Clothe. Indeed these are well withered: now Mercury, bring those that are
hurt and wounded, and tell me first how you came by your deaths: but it were
better for me to peruse my scroule, and see what is set down of them:
yesterday they dyed in fight in the country of Media, four score and four,
and with them Gobares, the son of A King of the Bactrians.
Oxyartes.


Mercury. Here they are ready.


Clotho. Seven that killed themselves for love, and He brings these
particulars, not as things truly done, but to show the various means and
causes of men's ends, and that neither the name and reputation of a Philosopher
can free a man from vice or passion, nor the practice and skill of a Physician
secure the professor from sickness or death.
Theagenes the Philosopher, for his whore at Megara.


Mere. They are all at hand.


Clotho. Where is he that was killed by his wife, and he that made him
cuckold?


Merc. You may see him the next man to you.


Clotho. Then bring those that took their death by course of Law, I mean that
were hanged, or pressed to death: and those elveen men that were killed by
thieves, where are they Mercury?


Merc. The wounded men which you see are they: but is it your pleasure that I
should bring in the women also?


Clotho. What else? and they that perished by shipwreck, for they all died
together, and in the same manner: put them together also that died of an ague,
and with them Agathocles the Physician: but where is the Philosopher Cyniscus,
who was to die upon a surfeit of hard eggs, and raw fish, at the It was a
custom among the Greeks, to celebrate the supper of Hecate, called also the
Eleusine Feast, every new moon in this manner: The rich men set forth at night
into the streets bread, fish, hard eggs, and lupines or fig-beane, which was
eaten and carried away by the poor, and this Supper was thus prepared in every
part of the town, where three ways met together, because that Hecate is called
triformis, triple-shaped, being feigned by the Poets to be Diana on earth, the
Moon in heaven, and in hell Proserpina.
Feast of Hecate?


Cyniscus. In the person of this Cyniscus, who was a Cynick, he here commends
that sort of Philosophers for their strictness of life, and resolution in
death, of whom it seems he was far better opinion'd than of the rest.
Ready long since, good Clotho: and what have I offended, I pray you, that you
should let me continue alive so long? you have suffered my spindle to run
on, till the quill was almost quite spun up: and I was many times minded to cut
the thread in sunder, and come to you: but I know not how, it was more than I
could do.


Clotho. I did let thee alone, because I would have thee left for an
over-looker, and a curer of men's defaults, but now come and welcome.


Cyniscus. Not I, unless this fellow that is bound may be embarkt before me:
for I fear he will overcome thee with fair words.


Clotho. Let me see: what is he?


Mercury. In the person of Megapenthes he describes the miserable and
wretched condition of Tyrants.
Megapenthes, the son of Lacydes, the Tyrant.


Clotho. Come a-boord, sirrah.


Megapenthes. Not so, good Lady Clotho, I beseech thee forbear me, suffer
me to ascend again a little while, and then I will come to you of mine own
accord without any call.


Clotho. What is it that makes thee so willing to be gone?


Megapenthes. It seems to be spoken in imitation of Homers Protesilaus, Iliad.
2. v. 702. of which hereafter in the Surveyors. a.
Give me leave first to make an end of building my house, which I have left but
half finished.


Clotho. You do but trifle the time, away I say.


Megap. I will ask no long liberty of you: give me but one days respite,
sweet Clotho, that I may give my wife intelligence of my money, where I have
great store of treasure hidden.


Clotho. Content thy self, it shall not be so.


Megap. And shall so much gold be lost?


Clotho. Not lost, I warrant you: take you no care for that: for your Cousin
Megacles shall finger it all.


Megap. O disgraceful indignity! what, mine enemy? what a base-minded wretch
was I, that had not killed him before.


Clotho. He is the man: and he shall continue alive after thee forty years
and upwards to enjoy thy Concubines, thy apparel, and all the gold thou had.


Megap. This is an intolerable abuse, Clotho, to bestow what was mine upon mine
enemy.


Clotho. I beseech you, sir, did not you come by Cydimaclus goods by murdering
him, and cut his childrens throats also, before the breath was out of his body?


Megap. But now they were mine.


Clotho. And it may suffice you have enjoyed them so long.


Megap. A word with you, Clotho, in your ear; I would feign speak with you so
that no man else may be within hearing: friend, off a little I pray you: If you
will give me leave to run away, I promise to bestow upon you a thousand
talents of wrought gold, before this day be at an end.


Clotho. What a fool art thou, to have any thought of gold or talents.


Megapenthes. I will give thee two standing-cups more into the match, if thou will, which I got by killing Cleocritus, either of them weighes an hundred
talents of molten gold.


Clotho. Away with him, for he looks as if he would never come on willingly.


Megap. I beseech you be good to me: the City wall, and the harbor for
shipping which I was about to make, are not yet finished: if I had lived but
five days longer, I should have made an end of them both.


Clotho. Content thy self, the wall shall be made up by an other.


Megap. Yet let me obtain one request at your hands, which is so reasonable
that you cannot deny it.


Clotho. What may that be?


Megap. Let me live but so long, as to subdue the Pisidians, and bring the
Lydians under tribute, and erect a sumptuous monument for my self, whereupon I
may engrave all the great and warlike exploits that have been performed by me
in my life time.


Clotho. I thank you sir: is this your one days respite? why twenty years
will not serve his turn for this.


Megap. I will give you pledges for my speedy return: or if you will, I will
pawn my favorite to answer for me, man for man.


Clotho. O villain, how often have I heard thee wish, that he might be thy
surviver.


Megap. I have wished so indeed in my time, but now I am better advised.


Clotho. Thou shall have him here with thee before it be long, for thy next
successor will be sure to make a hand with him.


Megap. Yet, good Destiny, deny me not this one thing.


Clotho. What is that?


Megap. I would feign know what shall betide after my death, and in what manner
things shall be carried.


Clotho. Hear me then to thy further vexation: Midas thy bond-slave shall
marry thy wife, for he has kept her this many a day.


Megap. That villain? whom I by my wifes persuasion made a freeman,


Clotho. Thy daughter shall be one of the next Tyrants concubines: the images
and statues which the City aforetime erected for thine honor, are all
overthrown, and derided by every one that looks upon them.


Megap. Have I no friends then, that were offended to see me so abused?


Clotho. What friend have thou? or for what just cause could any man be thy
friend? do thou not know, that every one that honored thee, and praised all
that thou said or did, did it out of fear or hope, as friends to thy
Soverainty, and observing the time only?


Megap. It has been always the use of parasites and flitterers, to swear by
the names of Princes.
Yet would they run on heaps to the place where they heard I was to dine, and
with loud acclamations wish me all happiness, every one protesting himself
ready, if it were possible, to die before me, insomuch that they took their
oaths and swear by my name.


Clotho. Therefore one of the number, who feasted you yesterday made a quick
dispatch, and gave you a drench for your last, which sent you hither.


Megap. Me thought indeed it went down somewhat bitter: but what reason had
he to use me so?


Clotho. You propose many questions, but you are to go about an other matter.


Megap. Yet there is one thing, sweet Destiny, that vexes me more than all
the rest, and puts me into a longing to recover the light again for a while.


Clotho. And what may that be? some great matter I warrant you.


Megap. My man Carrion, as soon as he saw I was dead, about sunne-setting,
came into the chamber where I lay, when all things were at quiet (for then no
body was to look unto me) and pulling to the door after him, took his
pleasure of my Concubine Glicerie (whom I think he had kept long before) as if
there had been no man present: and when he had satisfied his desire, he looks
back upon me, and says, thou wretched carle, thou have many a time beaten me
without a cause: and with that he pulled me by the beard, and gave me a box on
the ear; and hawking with open mouth, spat in my face, and so bidding me be
packing to the pit of hell, he went his ways. I was vehemently kindled
against him, but knew not what to do to him, for I was stiff and cold: but
that cursed chambermaid of mine as soon as she heard the noise of some that
were coming in, moistened her eyes with spittle as if she had wept for me, and
howling out, called upon my name, and so went out of the room: but if I could
catch them.


Clotho. Threaten not too much now, but away your self: for it is time you
should be brought to the bar.


Megapenthes. And who dare be so bold, as to give sentence against a King?


Clotho. Against a King, no man: but against a dead man, Rhadamanthus will do
it, whom you shall quickly find to be just, and one that will give every man
his due: but now make no longer stay.


Megapen. The like is spoken by the ghost of Achilles to Ulysses. Hom. Od. 11.
v. 488.

(...).

(...).

(...). Renowned Ulysses, name not death to me, A plowman far, or slave I Would
rather be To some poor man that pines for want of bread, Than have dominion
over all the dead.


Sweet destiny, make me a private man, make me a poor man; nay, make me a
slave instead of a formerly King, so that I may revive again.


Clotho. Where is the man with the staff? and thou Mercury, take him between
you, and hoyse him into the ship: for he will never come of himself.


Mercury. Come Runaway: follow me now: take him to thee Ferry-man, and make
him sure to the maine Mast.


Megapen. By right I ought to sit in the best place.


Clotho. Why so?


Megapen. Because when I was a King, I had ten thousand attendants to guard and
wait upon me.


Cyniscus. Did not thy man Carrion well then in pulling thee by the Beard,
seeing thee to be such a fool? but now thou will find thy tyranny bitter
enough to thee, when thou shall taste of this staff.


Megapen. And dare Cyniscus stretch out his staff against me, whom for the
liberty of his tongue, his bitterness and sharp reproves, I was lately like
enough to have nailed to a post?


Cyniscus. And therefore now shall thou be nailed to the Mast.


Mycillus. I pray you Clotho, am I no body amongst you? or because I am poor,
must I therefore be the last that shall be shipped?


Clotho. Who art thou?


Mycillus. See the Cock.
Mycillus the Cobbler.


Clotho. Art thou angry because thou tarryest too long? see thou not how much
the Tyrant has promised to give us, to be dismissed for a small time, and why
should not delay be as welcome to thee?


Mycillus. Hear me, thou best of all the fates: this kind of Ulysses being in
the den of Polyphemus, a Giant that had one eye only, and that in the midst
of his forehead, called himself by the name of (...), that is, Nobody,
obtaining only this favor in promise from the Cyclops, that he should be the
last man that he would eat of all his company: but afterward Ulysses having
put out his eye, and he crying out for help, being asked who had hurt him,
could only answer that Nobodie had done it. Hom. Od. 9.
Cyclops courtesy can never content me, who promised, Vtis shall be the last
man I will eat: for whether I be first or last, the same teeth will still be
ready for me: and beside, the cause stands not with me as it does with rich
men, but rather our conditions, as they say, are in opposition one to another:
the Tyrant in his life time seemed a happy man, every man stood in fear of
him, every man cast his eye upon him, and he left so much gold and silver, and
apparel, so many horses, banquets, beautiful boys, and comely women behind
him, that he had cause to complain, and grieve to be distracted from them:
for, I know not how, the soul is as it were glewed to such delights as these,
and will not easily be brought to leave them, after it has been long inured
to them: or rather linkt fast in some indissoluble band, which makes them
mourn and lament when they are to part from them: and though upon other
occasions they are bold and hardy enough, yet are they found to be fearful
and timorous, when they are to take this journey in hand, and turn still
backwards like a forsaken lover, and covet to behold from a far off what is
done in the light, as this vain man lately did, that ran away as he was
coming, and thought now to prevail by entreating: but I had no such
engagements in my life time, no family, no lands, no gold, no household stuff,
no honor, no statues; Poor men have no allurements to make them in love with
living: and are therefore far more willing to leave the world than the rich.
and therefore could not choose but be succinct and nimble: no sooner could
Atropes give me a beck, but I suddenly cast down my cutting-knife and my
patches, and the slipper that was in my hand, leapt off my seat lustily,
barefoot as I was, and staid not so much as to wipe off the blacking, but
followed as fast as I could, or rather led the way; looking still forwards, and
nothing behind could recall me, or make me turn again. And in good sadness I
see nothing amongst you but pleases me passing well: for in that we are all
now of equal condition, and no difference betwixt man and man, it gives me a
great deal of content: here is no calling for debts, no paying of subsidies,
and, which is best of all, I shall not here starve for cold in the winter, nor
be troubled with sickness, nor be beaten by my betters: all is peace, and the
world turned upside down, for we that are poor do laugh and be merry, and
the rich men lament and mourn.


Clotho. I have observed your laughter, Mycillus, this good while: what is it
that has made you so merry?


Mycillus. Hearken then to me, most reverent goddess: I dwelt upon earth near
unto the Tyrant, and perfectly saw all that he did, and could think no
otherwise but that he was a kind of God: for when I beheld his glorious
purple robe, the multitude of his attendance, his gold, his goblets beset with
precious stones, and his Bedsteads of silver; I could not but think him a
happy man: nay, the very smoke of the dishes that were prepared for his dinner
made me almost mad, so that I thought him to be more than a man, and the most
fortunate of all other; yea, to be endued with greater beauty and comeliness
than any man else, advanced by fortune the height of a large cubit above all
other men: his gate was stately, he vaunted himself proudly, and all he met
withal he put out of countenance. But when he was dead and spoiled of all his
pomp, me thought I could not choose but laugh at him, and much more at my self
to see what a fool I was to admire so vile an animal, and think him happy by
the smell of his platters, or fortunate for having his roabes died in the blood
of the A shell fish, called the purple. Plin. not. hist. lib. 9. cap. 36.
Arist. hist. animal. lib. 5. cap. 15.
Fish taken in the Laconian Sea. Moreover, when I saw Gniphon the usurer
bemoaning himself, and repenting that he had not taken the benefit of his
riches in his life time, but to die and never have any taste of them; leaving
them to Rhodocharis the unthrift, who was his nearest kinsman, and next heir
by the Law: I knew not how to suppress my laughter, especially, when I
bethought my self of his pale complexion, his miserable condition, his
careful countenance, and that he was rich only in his fingers, wherewith he
counted his talents and his millions, gathering that by little and little,
which honest Rhodocharis would soon set That which is evil gotten by
oppression and usurie, the next heir commonly consumes in riot and prodigality.
flying: But why are we not going? the rest we will laugh at when we are under
sail, and shall see them mourn and weep.


Clotho. Come in then that the Barge-man may weigh anchor.


Charon. Whether go you so fast, sirrah? the boat is full already: tarry
there, and I will fetch thee over betimes to morrow.


Mycillus. I hope, Charon, you will not serve me so: leave a man behind thee
that is perfectly dead. I will complain to Rhadamanthus, believe it: Lord,
what ill luck have I: they are all upon their way, and I am left here alone by
my self: I cannot do better than to swim after them, for I am out of danger
of drowning being dead already, and the rather, because I have never an
halfepenny to pay for my passage.


Clotho. What meanest thou by that, Mycillus? tarry I say, it is not lawful
for thee to pass over in such a fashion.


Mycillus. But for all that, I may hap to get over as soon as you.


Clotho. It may not be so: therefore let us make toward him, and take him
aboard: help, Mercury, to hoist him to us.


Charon. Where shall he sit now he is here? for you see the barge is as full
as it can hold.


Mercury. If it please you upon the shoulders of the tyrant.


Clotho. That will do wondrous well, Mercury, in faith ascend therefore, and
bestride the neck of this notorious villain, and let us be gone with speed.


Cinyscus. Charon, I cannot choose now, but deliver the truth unto you,
half-pennie I have none to pay for my fare, and nothing left me but this scrip
which you see, and this staff: but if you will have any service at my hands,
either to cast out water or handle an oar, I am ready for it: and I hope you
will not be offended, if you find me sufficient and able to row.


Charon. Let us have thy help then, and that shall be all I will crave of thee.


Cyniscus. Shall we have never a call of encouragement all the way we go?


Charon. By all means if thou know any mariners song fit for the purpose.


Cinyscus. I know many, Charon, of that kind, but hear is such crying and
howling that it cannot be heard. The complaint of the rich.
The rich men: Alas for my goods: alas my lands: woe is me what a house have I
left behind me? how many talents shall my heir have of me to squander away
idly: alas, alas, for my young children: who shall gather the grapes of the
vines I set the last year?


Mercury. But, Micyllus, have thou nothing to lament for? no man must pass
this Ferrie without tears.


Micyllus. Away, away, I have no cause in the world to lament, if I may have a
good passage.


Merc. Yet let me hear thee cry a little for fashion sake. Micyllus mocked
them.



Micyllus. Why you shall, Mercury, If you will have it so: Alas for my
leather-patches: alas for mine old slippers: alas for my rotten shoes: wretched
man that I am, I shall never more sit without victuals from morning no night: I
shall never more go unshod and half naked in the winter, nor my teeth chatter
in my head with cold; who shall have my cutting-knife? who shall have mine
awle? I think I have done well for my part, for we are almost got to the
shore.


Charon. Come on my masters, first pay me your fare before you go any
further: you, and you, and you: so, I have all now but of Micyllus: cum sirrah,
give me an halfpenny from you.


Micyllus. I hope, Charon, you do but jest; or, as they say, write in the
water, do you hope to have a half-pennie from Micyllus? why man, for my part I
know not a half-pennie whether it be round or square.


Charon. A rich voyage, I have made a good days work of this: but away, that
I may go back to fetch the horses, oxen, dogs, and other creatures that are
to be transported.


Clotho. Bring them with you, Mercury, and I will pass over to the further
side of the river to bring along with me Indopates, and Herimathres two
Syrians, who are dead in fight one against another about the limits of their
lands.


Mercury. Come my masters, on before, or rather all in order follow me.


Micyllus. O Hercules, how dark it is? where is now the beautifuls Megillus?
or how should a man know here which is the fairer creature Two Grecian
strumpets.
Phrine or Simmiche? all are alike, and all of one color: A beautiful young
man of Corinth.
nothing is either fair or more fair: my threadbare coat which I lately
thought to be such a poor wearing, is now as much respected as the Kings
purple roabe, for they are both un-apparant, and drencht in the same degree of
darkness: but Cyniscus where art thou?


Cyniscus. I tell thee I am here, Micyllus, and if thou will let us go
together.


Micyllus. With all my heart: give me thy hand, and tell me good Cyniscus, for
thou have been initiated into the The feasts of Ceres which were always
solemnized by night.
Eleusinian ceremonies, do not they much resemble the manner of this place?


Cyniscus: As right as may be: but see here is one coming toward us with a
torch in her hand: what a terrible grimme countenance she has: is it not one
of the Furies?


Micyllus. It should seem so by her shape.


Mercury. Here, One of the ^ries, whose special office it is to punish
murder.
Tisiphone: take these with thee, in number a thousand and four.


Tisiphone. I can tell you, Rhadamanthus has tarried for you this good while.


Rhadamanthus. Bring them near Fury, and do thou Mercury make a
proclamation, and call them by their names.


Cyniscus: Good Rhadamanthus, for thy dear fathers sake, let me be the first
that shall be examined.


Rhadamanthus: Why so?


Cyniscus. I have occasion to accuse some of the company, of misdemeanors
committed by them in their life time: and my testimony will not be taken,
until it be first known what I am my self, and in what manner I have led my
life.


Rhadamanthus. And who art thou?


Cyniscus: Cyniscus good sir, by profession a Philosopher.


Rhadamanthus. Come near then, and be the first that shall undergo our
sentence: call his accusers?


Mercury. If any man have any thing to say against Cyniscus let him come into
the Court: no man appears: but yet, Cyniscus, this is not enough: strip your
self that we may see, what marks you have upon you:


Cyniscus. Do you think I have been burnt with a hot iron?


Rhadamanthus. Plato (with whose opinions Lucian often cavills) at the later
end of his Gorgias, has a story to this purpose, which is imitated by
Claudian in his 2 book in Ruffia.

Quid demens manifesta negas: en pectus inustae Deformant maculae --


Look how many evils any of you have committed in his life time, so many
spots will appear upon his soul.


Cyniscus. Look then for I am starke-naked: see if you can find any of those
marks upon me.


Rhadamant. This man is clear all over, unless for three or four spots that
are, very dim and hard to be discerned: but what is the reason of this? I
find here prints and marks where thou have been burnt, and yet I know not
how they are smitten out and wiped away again: how comes this to pass
Cyniscus? or by what means art thou made so clear?


Cyniscus. The benefit of Philosophy.
I will tell you, at the first I was evil for want of good breeding, and by
that means procured my self so many marks: but as soon as I began to study
Philosophy, by little and little, the spots, were all worn off my soul.


Rhadamanthus. You applied an excellent and most present remedy, depart
therefore into the Certain Islands, as some have thought, about the straights
of Gibraker, as others upon the Northern part of great Britain, fained by
the Poets to be the blessed habitation of good men after death.
Islands of the blessed, and associate your self with the best: but first you
are to accuse the Tyrant you spoke of, and then call for other.


Micyllus. There is little to be said to me also, Rhadamanthus, and a short
examination will serve my turn: for you see I am so naked already, that you
may take full view of me.


Rhadamanthus. Who art thou?


Micyllus. Micyllus the cobbler.


Rhadamanthus. Honest Micyllus, thou art clear indeed, and have no tokens upon
thee: go thy way with this Cyniscus: now call the Tyrant.


Mercury. Megapenthes, the son of Lacydes, come into the Court: whither do
thou turn thy self? come forth I say Tyrant, thou art called: bring him in
Tisiphone, whether he will or no: now Cyniscus lay what you can to his charge,
he is here face to face.


Cyniscus. I shall not need to speak much in the matter, for you will quickly
find what he is, The instruments commonly used to set up Tyranny, and the
means that maintain it.
by the marks he has upon him, yet will I open the man unto you, and in words
make him known more apparently: what villainies were committed by this varlet
when he was in the state of a private man, I will not trouble you withal: but
when he woone to himself the love of slanderous and desperate ruffians, and
advanced by their guard, made himself Tyrant over the city, he put to death
above ten thousand persons without judgment, and confiscated all their goods,
What vices continually attend it
by which means having attained to riches infinite be suffered himself to be
free from no kind of filthiness, but practiced all cruelty and villainy
against the poor Citizens: Virgins he deflowred, young men he unnaturally
abused, and lewdly insulted over all his Subjects: his scornefulnes, pride, and
insolent carriage toward all that came near him, were so notorious, that it
is not possible you should take so much punishment of him, as he deserves: a
man might as safely behold the Sun with open eyes, as look upon him: who can
express the strange kind of torments he devised to satisfy his cruelty, from
which his nearest familiars could not be free: and that this my accusation is
not fained, or frivolous; you shall presently understand, if you will call
before you the men whom he has murdered: but see, they are all in place
without any call, and stand so thick about him, that they are ready to stifle
him. All these, Rhadamanthus, have been put to death by this murderer: some
were laid hands on, because they had fair women to their wives: some, because
they grieved to have their children taken from them to be abused: some, because
they were rich: and some, because they were discreet understanding men, and
could not brook his proceedings.


Rhadamanthus. What say you to this sir knave?


Megapenthes. The murders that are objected, I acknowledge my self guilty of:
but for the rest, the adulteries, As before in the Necromantie he brings in
men's shadows to accuse them after death: so here he produces the Bed and
Lamp of the Tyrant, as witnesses of his villainies, according to the opinion of
some Greek Philosophers, who held everything to have a soul.
the abusing of young men, and the deflowring of maidens, Cyniscus has belyed
me in them all.


Cyniscus. I will bring good witness, Rhadamanthus, to prove it.


Rhadamanthus. What witness can thou bring?


Cyniscus. Call hither Mercury, his lamp, and his bed: they will testify
when they come, what they know by him.


Mercury. The bed, and the lamp of Megapenthes, come into the Court, you have
done well to appear.


Rhadamanthus. Declare your knowledge against this Megapenthes, and let the bed
speak first.


The Bed. What Cyniscus has objected against him, is nothing but truth: for I
am ashamed, Lord Rhadamanthus, to deliver what he has done upon me.


Rhadamanthus. Your testimony is good, though you cannot endure to publish it:
now Lamp, what say you?


The Lamp. What was done by him in day time, I have nothing to do withal; for
I was not present: but what he did or suffered in the time of night, I abhor
to speak of: many things I saw not fit to be uttered, the villainies he
committed were so monstrous as exceeded all measure, so that oftentimes I would
not suck in any oil willingly, because I would have been glad to be put out,
yet would he bring me nearer of purpose to see what he did, seeking to pollute
my light by all the means he could.


Rhadamanthus. This is enough: now sirrah, put off your purple roabe, that I
may see how many spots you have: good god, he is all of the color of clay,
marked all over black and blew, with spots from top to toe: what punishment
shall we have for him? Vid Necromant. L.
shall he be cast into Pyriphlegeton, or delivered up to Cerberus?


Cyniscus. Neither: but if it please you, I will devise a fit and a new kind
of torture for him.


Rhadamanthus. Tell me what it is, and I will be most thankful to thee.


Cyniscus. Vid. c.
I think it be a custom among you, that the dead should drink of the water of
Lethe.


Rhadamanthus. True.


Cyniscus. There can be no greater torment to such wretched men as have bin
happy, than the remembrance of their former felicity, joined with the feeling
of their present misery.
Let him be the only man that shall be deprived of that draught.


Rhadamanthus. And why?


Cyniscus. It will be torment enough for him to remember what a fellow he has
been, how powerful in his life time, and to think upon his delights then.


Rhadamanthus. You say well, and this sentence shall pass upon him: let him be
carried to Tantalus, and there bound, that he may remember what he did when he
was alive.


CHARON, OR THE SVRVEIOVRS.
Mercury. WHy laughest thou Charon? and why have thou left thy barge to put
thy self into the light of the day, that never yet had any thing to do in
these superior parts?


Charon. O Mercury, I had an intolerable desire to see the passages of man's
life, and how they bestowed themselves therein, and what they are bereft of,
that they all make such pitiful moan when they come to us, no man is able to
cross the stream without abundance of tears: This put me on (as did the
Protesilaus the son of Iphictus, one of the Princes of Greece, and the first
man of the^ that was slain at their landing before Troy. Il. 2. v. 702. he was
but newly married to Laodamia, the daughter of Acastus, who hearing of his
death, besought the gods that she might enjoy him one only day again on
earth, which having obtained, she her self expired in his embraces.
youthful Thessalian) to beg a play-day of Pluto for once, that I might have
leave to see what is done in the light: and here my good fortune is to meet
with you, who I know will be my guide, and walk the round with me, to show me
all things: for nothing is unknown to you.


Mercury. Faith Ferry-man, I cannot a while go with thee now: I am upon a
business to Jupiter that concerns mankind; and you know how passionate he
is in his humor: and I fear, if I should stay longer than my time, See the
Tyrant.
he would leave me to you for good and all, and put me into perpetual
darkness: or serve me as sometime he did Vulcan the god of fire, was (as some
say) the son of Jupiter, but being none of the handsomest, was kicked by his
father out of heaven, and having consumed a whole day in his descent, was at
last taken up in Lemnus an Island in the Aegaean Sea, and ever after lame of the
fall. Hom. Il. 1. v. 590.
Vulcan, kick me out of heaven by the head and shoulders, and so lame me with
the fall, that all the gods may laugh at my limping when I fill him out wine.


Charon. And will you then let me go up and down like a vagabond upon earth,
that am your friend, your Ferrymate and fellow conductor? remember your self,
Mercury was the son of Jupiter and Maia.
honest son of Maia, that I never wished you to do so much as cast water out
of the boat, or take an oar in hand, as long as you were with me, though
your bones be big enough to work: all that you did there, was to lie along
upon the hatches, and sleep till you snort again, or get some dead body or
other to find you talk by the way: when I, an aged man, am feign to play the
sculler my self, and labor at it both hands at once: but good Mercury, for
thy good fathers sake, leave me not so; show me all that is done in this
life, that I may see somewhat before I go down again: for if you forsake me,
I shall be in no better case than a blind man: and as they stumble and fall in
the dark, so shall I be doated in the light: and therefore do thus much for
me, sweet A name of Mercury from Cyllena, a mountain in Arcadia, where he is
said to be borne. Virg. lib. 8. Aeneid.
Cyllenius, and whilst I live, I will be your servant.


Mercury. This will cost me a swinging, I am sure of it, and the hier of my
directions I know will not be paid me under a box on the earth:
notwithstanding, I will do it for thee: for who can refuse a friend in a case
of such necessity? but Ferry-man, for you to have a perfect sight of all
things, is altogether impossible: it would require many years tarriance to
attain it: and then would Jupiter send hue and cry after me, as if I were
run away from him, and thou should be sure to be put out of office from
having any thing to do with the works of death. Plutoes Kingdom would be
impoverished for want of dead people, and Aeacus the rent-gatherer would be
quite out of heart, if he should receive no halfe-pence all that while: but
for the principal matters now in action, I will do what I can to procure you
a sight of them.


Charon. Please your self, Mercury, you can best tell what you have to do:
for I am a mere stranger upon earth, and know nothing.


Mercury. The only way is this, Charon, to get up to some high ground, and
from thence look about us to see what is done if it were possible forthee to
step up to heaven, I should think my labor well bestowed, for thence, as out
of a watch-towre, thou might have a perfect sight of all things: but because
it is not lawful for thee, that have been continually conversant with ghosts,
and grisley spirits to approach the palace of Jupiter, we must look out some
high mountain or other fit for our purpose.


Charon. You know, Mercury, A similitude.
what I have been wont to say to the company, when we were on shipboard
together: for if any storm arose that crossed our course, and made the waters
grow rough and troublesome, then though none of them knew what to say, yet one
would cry, strike sail, another let loose the halser, another run with the
weather: But I bid them all hold their tongues, for I know best what I have to
do: so must you now, Mercury, do even what you will your self: you shall be
the pilot, I the passenger: and sit quietly ready to do you service.


Mercury. Well said, and I will think upon somewhat that is to be done, and
find out some convenient spie-place or other for us: let me see, will not A
very high mountain in the north part of Asia, dividing India from Scythia.
Caucasus do well? or Mountains in Greece.
Pernassus, for that is the higher of the two: or Mountains in Greece.
Olympus, higher than them both? and now I look upon Olympus, a project comes
in my pate that may serve our turns well: but you must take some pains then,
and help me with your labor.


Charon. With all my heart, do but command, and I will toil as long as I am
able to stand.


Mercury. The Poet Homer says, that Otus and Ephialtes, Hom. Odyss. 11. v.
311. See Icaromenip. 16.
the two sons of Aloeus, when they were but children, devised a trick to
tear up mount Mountains in Thessalie.
Ossa by the roots, and clap it upon the top of Olympus, and Mountains in
Thessalie.
Pelion upon that again, supposing these three mountains would make a ladder
long enough to help them up to heaven: but they were younglings and wanted
wit, and therefore smarted for their presumption: but we having no ill intent
against the gods, me thinks might be bold to frame such a building and tumble
those mountains one upon another, to make the place higher for us, that we may
see the better.


Charon. Alas Mercury, we are but two of us, and how should we be able to
carry Pelion, or Ossa between us?


Mercury. And why not Charon? we are gods, and do thou think us weaker
than those silly infants?


Charon. Not so, but I think the doing of it to be a work that surmounts all
possibility.


Mercury. He speaks this in derision of Homer, and his impossible fictions,
whom he likewise prosecutes through the whole Dialogue.
In your conceit, Charon, for you are a silly fellow, and have not been
conversant with the poets: but honest Homer with only two verses, will make
heaven passable presently, and heap mountain upon mountain with a trice: and
I wonder you should think this so hard a matter that know A great Astronomer
and therefore feigned by the Poets to bear heaven on his shoulders.
Atlas so well, who being but a lone man, yet carries the pole upon his
shoulders himself, wherein all we are contained: and it may be you have heard
of my brother This is said to be done by Hercules, when he learned Astronomy
of Atlas. Hom. Od. 11. v. 315.
Hercules, how he sometime took Atlas office out of hands, whom he eased of
his burden, and undertook it himself.


Charon. I have heard as much, but whether it be true or no, Mercury, you and
your Poets look to that.


Mercury. Do thou make any question of it, Charon? as if wise men would
trouble themselves to write lies: wherefore let us first poise mount Ossa out
of his place, for the verse begins with that first, and so did our arts-master
Homer, and then set shadie Pelion on the top of Ossa: see you not how easily
and poetically we have brought this to pass? go to now, I will get up first,
and see whether it be high enough to serve our turns; or that we must lay on
more. Alas, alas, we are but in a vale yet, scarce got up to the skirt of
heaven, for Eastward I hardly have sight of Jonia and Lydia: and on the West
part, I can see no more but Italy and Sicily: and Northward, only the parts
about the river The same that Danubius, it runs through all Austria, and a
great part of Germany.
Ister: and this way, An Island in the Mediterranean Sea.
Crete is hardly to be discerned: we must to work again Ferry-man, and fetch
mount A mountain near Thermo. pylae.
Oeta hither also, and thou set Parnassus upon the top of them all.


Charon. Let us do so then: but beware we make not our foundation too weak,
being of so wonderful a height, lest it and we tumble all down together, and
make a woeful experiment of Homers Architecture, if we break our necks in the
service.


Mercury. I warrant thee, all shall be sure enough; bring mount Oeta hither:
now let Parnassas be set uppermost, and I will once again ascend. O brave, I
see every thing: do thou come up to now.


Charon. Give me thy hand, Mercury, and help me, for it it is no small pile
you are to place me upon.


Mercury. Why, Charon, you will needs have a fight of all: and you cannot
both see all, and stand on sure ground to: here, hold my hand, and take good
footing: well done, now thou art mounted as well as I; and because Parnassus
has a Herodotus calls one of these tops Thithoreus, and the other Hyampeus
lib. 8.

A brief description of the world.

The Sea.


forked top, either of us will get upon one, and there seat our selves: look
round about thee now, and behold every thing.


Charon. I see a great deal of earth, and a huge lake running about it, and
mountains and rivers, much bigger than Rivers in hell.
Cocytus, or Peryphlegethon, and men to: but they are very little ones, and
certain dens of theirs.


Mercury. Those are Cities man, which thou think to be dens.


Charon. Know Mercury, that for all this I am never the better: our labor is
all lost in dragging Parnassus from Castalia, and Oeta, and the rest of the
mountains.


Mercury. How so?


Charon. I can see nothing perfectly from such a height; and my desire was, not
only to see mountains and Cities, as they are described in a map, but to see
the men themselves, and what they do, and hear what they say: as I did, when
at our first meeting you found me laughing, and ask't me what I laughed at:
for then I heard a thing, which made me exceeding merry.


Mercury. What was that?


Charon. A man was invited by one of his friends, I think to supper: The
uncertaintie of man's life.
and promised faithfully to be with him the next day: no sooner was the word
out of his mouth, but a tilestone, loosened by some mischance, fell off the
house upon his head, and killed him, and I could not choose but laugh to see
what ill luck he had to break his promise: and now I think I must be feign
to creep down again, that I may see and hear the better.


Mercury. Be patient and I will have a plaster for this also, and make your
sight sharp enough I warrant you, I can fetch a charm out of Homer will do
the deed: and when I have said the verses, look that thou be dark no more,
but quick sighted.


Charon. Pronounce them then.


Merc. Iliad. 5.127. It was spoken by Pallas to Diomedes.
The darkness from thine eyes I now remove,
That thou may know both men and gods above.

Charon. What Is this?


Mercury. Icarome nip. 2.
Do thou see yet?


Charon. Exceeding perfectly: Lynceus himself is but a bussard to me: now
proceed to your direction, and answer to such questions as I shall ask of you:
but will you give me leave to propose them in Homers style, for I would have
you know, I am not altogether so unlearned as you imagine?


Mercury. I pray thee how came thou to know any thing of his, that art but a
boat-man and tied to thy oar?


Charon. Upbraid me not I pray you, with my profession: for when I transported
him at his death, I heard him pronounce many verses, of which I have kept some
in my remembrance to this day: by the same token a foggie storm had like to
have cast us all away: Odyss. 5. v. 291. etc.
for as he was singing (an unluckie poem for sailers, we may say) how
Neptune gathered the clouds, and stirred the seas with his trident like a ladle
in a pot, how he raised all the winds and tumbled all the waves together, a
sudden tempest with a darkness fell upon us that had like to have overturned
our boat, and made him so sea-sicke that he Homer was anciently pictured
vomitting, or making water in a basin, and the rest of the Poets standing round
about, and drinking everyone a part, to show that they received their
excellence from him.
vomitted up a great deal of his poem, with his Scylla, his Charybdis, and
all his Cyclops.


Mercury. Then thou might easily keep some for thy self, when thou saw
him to lay about him so lustilie.


Charon. Now tell me An imitation of Homer. II. 3. v. 226. where Priamus asks
the question of Helena concerning Ajax.
What bigge-bon'd man is this, so strong and tall,
By head and shoulders overtopping all?



Mercury. This is He began with a sucking calfe, and as that grew, so still
his strength increased, so that at length by continual exercise and custom he
grew able to carry a bull.
Milo, the Champion of A city in Italy very famous for men of activitie,
insomuch that at one Olympicke feast, all the Victors were of this town, and
hence grew that proverb. Qui Crotoniatatum postremus est, is reliquorum
Graecorum primus est.
Craton, so much magnified by the Grecians for bearing a bull upon his back,
through the Which was a mile long.
Olympian ^ace.


Charon. How much greater cause have they to magnify me, that must shortly
hoise up Milo himself when he comes to us, and put him into a little boat,
after he has been foiled by that invincible Antagonist, death, who shall
trip up his heels, and give him a fall he knows not how? then will he cry
and lament to us, when he remembers the garlands and acclamations that have
been made on earth for him, though he now strut it out like a brave fellow,
admired only for carrying of a bull: but what may we think of him Mercury?
that he ever had any thought of death?


Mercury. How should he remember death, that is in the prime of all his
strength?


Charon. Let us then leave him: for we shall laugh enough at him hereafter,
when we have him on shipboard, not able to carry the weight of a gnat, much
less to weild a bull: now tell me what stately majesticall person this is,
for by his habit he should not be a Grecian.


Mercury. Herodot. lib. 1. Iustine. See the rock 16 18.
It is Cyrus, Charon, that formerly reigned over the Medians, and at this time
King of the Persians: he lately vanquished the Assyrians, and brought Babylon
under his subjection, and is now preparing an army against Lydia, to subdue
Croesus, and make himself King over all.


Charon. And where is that Croesus?


Mercury. Look that way toward the great Castle compassed with a triple
wall: that is Sardis, and there you may see Croesus sitting upon a bed of gold
talking with One of the 7. wise men of Greece, and Lawgiver to the Athenians.
He writ his laws about the 33. year of Tarquinius Priscus reigning in Rome.
Gellius lib 17. c 21.
Solon the Athenian: shall we listen to hear what they say?


Charon. By all means.


Croesus. O thou Athenian stranger, thou have seen my riches and my treasure,
the abundance of gold I have yet unwrought, and the costly furniture of my
palace: tell me now what man thou think to be most happy.


Charon. What will Solon say to this?


Mercury. Take you no care for that Charon, for he will answer him bravely:


Solon. O Croesus, fortunate men are few, but of all I know, I think Two young
men the sons of an Argive woman-Priest, who having drawn their mother in her
chariot to the Temple, she in recompense of their piety besought the god^ to
bestow upon them that thing whatsoever it were that it was best for man to
have, whereupon having supped with their mother, and then betaking themselves
to their rest, in the morning they were both found dead. Herod. lib. 1.

No man is to be accounted happy before his death.


Cleobis and Biton to be the most happy, that were sons of a woman priest.


Charon. He means the two Argives, that dyed together, after they had drawn,
their mother in her chariot to the Temple.


Croesus. Be it so: put them in the first place of happiness: but who shall be
the second?


Solon. Tellus the Athenian, who led an honest life and died in defense of his
country.


Croesus. Thou base beggarly fellow: do thou not hold me to be a happy man?


Solon. I know not yet, Croesus, what to say of that till you come to the end
of your time, death is the true touchstone of happiness, and a continuance of
prosperity to the end of life.


Charon. God-a-mercie, Solon, that thou art not unmindfull of us, but make
the paying of their fare the true Judge of felicity: but who does Croesus now
send out from him, and what is it they bear upon their shoulders?


Mercury. Plates of gold, to consecrate as an offering to Apollo in liew of
his Oracles, Croesus sending to the Oracle at Delphos to know the issue of his
war, and continuance of his Kingdom was answered to the first, that if he
made war with the Persians, he should overthrow a great Kingdom, and to the
second, that his estate should suffer no alteration till such time as a mule
should reign over the Medes: thus he making construction of the former, the
best way for himself, and grounding upon the impossibility of the later
brought his Kingdom to destruction, and himself to ruin, but afterward
questioning Apollo for the truth of the Oracle, was answered that the Oracle
was not in the fault, but his own misconstruction, for by the great kingdom
was not meant the Persians but his own, and that of the mule was made good in
Cyrus his Conqueror, who was borne of parents of diverse countries, his mother
being daughter to Astyages King of the Medes, and his father a Persian and a
subject, and was so in all things like a mule which is begotten by a he ass
and a mare being more noble by the mothers side than the fathers. Herod. Clio.
which will shortly bring him to ruin: for the man is overmuch addict to
vaticination.


Charon. Is that shining thing gold, that glitters with a pale ruddie color? I
have heard much of it, but I never saw any before.


Mercury. That renouned name it carries, and this is it that men so fight for.


Charon. I cannot see what goodness is in it: only it lades them shrewdly
that carry it.


Mercury. Little do thou know the wars that have been made for it, the
treacheries, the robberies, the perjuries, the murders, the imprisonments, the
long voyages, the trafficks and the slaveries.


Charon. For this, Mercury, that looks so like brass? for brass I am well
acquainted with: you know I receive a halfe-pennie of every man that crosses
the ferrie.


Mercury. True, but brass is common, and therefore not in so great request:
for they that work in the mines, must dig a great depth to find a little of
this: for it grows in the earth, as lead and other metals do.


Charon. O the madness of mankind to be so besotted with such a pale and
ponderous kind of metal!


Mercury. Solon you see does not so much doat upon it, for he derides
Croesus, and all his barbarous ostentation: but it seems he is to say somewhat
more unto him: let us therefore harken what it is.


Solon. I beseech you, Croesus, tell me whether you think Apollo has any
need of these plates.


Croesus. Yes verily for he has not such an offering in Delphus.


Solon. Do you think you shall add any happiness to the god, if beside the
rest of his riches, you furnish him with these plates also?


Croesus. I think I shall.


Solon. Believe me, Croesus, you make heaven a poor place indeed, if they
must be feign to send to Lydia for gold when they lack it.


Croesus. The river Pactolus runs through Lydia, whose sands are all of gold.
And where is there so much gold in any place, as amongst us?


Solon. Does not iron grow in Lydia?


Croesus. Not at all.


Solon. Then you want the better metal.


Croesus. What, iron better than gold?


Solon. If you will answer me with patience, it shall plainly appear so.


Croesus. What is your question, Solon?


Solon. Which are the better, they that save others, or they that be saved?


Croesus. They that save others.


Solon. Then if Cyrus bring an army against the Lydians, as they say he will,
shall your soldiers fight with golden swords, or is iron fitter for their
purpose?


Croesus. Iron no doubt.


Solon. I, were it not for iron, your gold might be carried captive into Persia.


Croesus. For speak us not, I pray you.


Solon. God forbid it should be so: but then you must needs confess iron to
be the better.


Croesus. Should I then consecrate iron plates, and revoke my gold again?


Solon. He has as little need of your iron: but be it brass or gold you
dedicate, it will come to some men's hands one day, that will make rich use of
your offering, for either the The Phocens, and Boeotians made war for the
Temple of Delphos, and oftentimes spoiled it.

Herodot. Clio. The Tyrant. 1.


Phocens, or the The Phocens, and Boeotians made war for the Temple of
Delphos, and oftentimes spoiled it.

Herodot. Clio. The Tyrant. 1.


Boeotians, or the Delphians themselves or some sacrilegious tyrant or other,
will make good prise of them: god does little regard your gold works.


Croes. Thou art ever quarrelling and grumbling at my riches.


Mercury. Thou see, Charon, the Lydian King cannot away with his plain
dealing, nor endure to have the truth told him: but he shall have good cause
to remember Solon shortly, when he shall be taken captive by Cyrus, and cast
upon a pile of wood to be burnt: Herod. l. 2.3.
for I lately heard Clotho read over her book of destinies, and among the rest
this was also written, that Croesus should be taken prisoner by Cyrus, and that
Cyrus should be slain by yonder Queen of the Massagetes: do thou not see
that Scythian Lady there, that rides upon a white horse?


Charon. Yes.


Mercury. That is Tomyris: she shall cut of the head of Cyrus, and cast it
into a vessel full of blood: do thou not also see his son, that young man
with him? that is, Cambyses, who shall reign after his father, and failing of
his enterprises every way in Lybia and Aethiopia, in the end shall die mad,
after they have killed A calfe which the Egyptians worshipped for a god,
having these marks, it was all over black except a square white in the
forehead, and on his back the figure of an eagle, two white hairs in his tale
and a bettle upon his tongue. Herod. Thalia.
Apis.


Charon. O most ridiculous folly! now, who dare look upon them when they are
in their ruff? or who would believe, that so soon after, the one should be
taken prisoner, the other have his head cast into a vessel of blood? but who
is this, Merc. with the purple cassock buckled about him, and a diadem upon
his head, to whom his cook delivers a ring, cut out of a fishes belly, taken
in the sea? he is sure some King at the least. Hom. Odyss. 1.


Mer. Well spied out, Charon, for thou have now found All things succeeding
prosperously even to admiration with Polycrates, Amasis K. of Egypt with whom
he had made a firm league of friendship sent him this advise, that since
fortune was a fickle and unconstant goddess^, seeing that she now so
exceedingly flattered him, he feared she would sometime or other as enviously
cross him, and that he would therefore counsel him to temper his prosperity
with some voluntary misfortune, that so he might be prepared for any
alteration that might befall him, which he might do if considering with
himself what thing in the world he esteemed most he threw it quite away,
never to come in his sight again. Polycrates receiving this counsel, and be
thinking himself took a ring wherein was a smaragd signet, as the thing which
he most valued in the world, and taking boat cast it into the sea, but not
long after a fisherman presenting a very large fish, which he had taken, to
the King the very same ring was found in the fishes belly.
Polycrates, the tyrant of the Samians, the happiest man alive: yet his servant
Necrom. 7.
Moeandrius, that stands there by him, shall betray him into the hands of
Oraetes, who shall hang him upon a gibbet: and thus shall the wretched man fall
from his happiness in a moment: this I also heard from Clotho.


Charon. Bravely done, Clotho, serve them all in their right kind, cut off
their heads, hang them up, that they may know themselves to be but men: let
their advancement be only to make their fall the more bitter: how I shall
laugh to see them all naked in my little boat, and bring with them neither
purple, diadem, nor bed of gold.


Mercury. Enough of these: now behold the actions of ordinary men, Charon, of
which thou see some are sailers, some soldiers, some lawyers, some
plough-men, some usurers, and some beggars.


Charon. I see a confused throng of sundry sorts of people, and a life full of
vexation and trouble, and their cities like hives of bees, in which every be
has a particular sting to himself, wherewith he girdeth him that is next him,
and some among them, that like waspes spoil and oppress the weaker: but I see
a multitude of somewhat else, obscurely hovering about them: what may they be?


Mercury. A description of man's life.
They are hopes, Charon, and fears, and follies, and covetousness, and angers,
and hatreds, and the like: of which, folly, and hatred, and anger, and
jealousy, and ignorance, and poverty are mixed among them, and dwell in the
city with them: but fears and hopes fly aloft: the one when it falls upon
them, makes them amazed, and sometimes glad to keep close, but the hopes still
fly over their heads: and when a man thinks to have sure hold of them, they
take their flight and are gone, leaving them gaping after them, as you have
seen Tantalus below after the water: But if you look more narrowly, you shall
see how the destinies have spunne every man a spindle above, Man's frailnesse.
from which they all hang by slender twines: do you not see little threads as
small as spiders webbes coming down to every man from the spindles?


Charon. I see a slender thread for every man: but many of them cross from one
to another, and go in and out like a nett, this to him, and the same again to
another.


Mercury. So it must be, Ferriman: for it is this man's destiny to be killed by
him, and he by another: this man must be heir to him that has the shorter
thread, and another again to him: this is the reason of that crossing: do you
not see how little a line they all hang by? and he that is drawn on high,
shall the sooner down again by the breaking of the thread, when it is not
strong enough to hold his weight, and make a great noise in the fall: whereas
he that is drawn up but little, though he fall, it shall be without noise,
for his next neighbor shall hardly hear it.


Charon. This makes me laugh indeed, Mercury.


Mercury. It cannot be expressed in words, Charon, how much they deserve to be
derided, especially to see how ernest they are upon it, and yet they must be
gone in the midst of their hopes when they are clapped in the neck by honest
death, who you see, has many messengers and officers attending upon him for
that purpose, as chilling agues, burning fevers, consumptions, inflammations
of the lungs, swords, thieves, poisons, Judges, and Tyrants: Deaths officers.
yet none of all this comes in their heads as long as they are in health: but
when once they fall sick, then they cry, alas, alas, woe is me, what shall I
do: whereas if at the first they did consider with themselves that they are
mortal, Few men prepared for it.
and were to bestow but a little time as strangers in this life, and so to
depart again, as out of a dream, leaving all earthly things behind them,
they would live more temperately, and take their deaths more patiently: but now
because they hope after a perpetuity of things present, when the officer comes
to call them, and takes them aside, and fetters them fast with some fever or
consumption, they grieve and take on at their departure, because they never
dreamed of such a separation: what would he do, think you, that is busy in
building him a new house, and hastens his workmen forward as fast as he can,
if he knew it should hasten his end also, and that as soon as he raised the
roof, he was to be gone, and leave his heir to enjoy it, himself, miserable
man, not once making a meal in it? or he that is jocund because his wife has
brought him a male child, and feasts his friends for joy, and sets the fathers
name upon him, Epictet. c. 8. etc.
if he knew the child should die, as soon as he came to seven years of age?
do you think he would take so great comfort in his birth? the reason is,
because they take great notice of him that is fortunate in his child, if he
prove to be a Champion, and get the mastrie in Olympus: but if their next
neighbor carry a child to burial, they never think upon it, nor what web
he hung by: thou see also many, that strive and contend for the limits of
their lands, and that gather and heap up riches in abundance, yet before they
can take benefit of them, are called aside by those messengers and officers I
before told you of.


Charon. I see all this: and muse in my self what pleasure they take in this
life, and what that is, they are so loath to leave behind them.


Mercury. If a man should examine the state of their Kings, who are thought to
attain the highest degree of happiness (excepting only the uncertaintie of
fickle fortune) he shall find them filled with more vexation than pleasure:
as fears, troubles, hatreds, trecheries, angers and flatteries: for to them
all these are incident: I omit their sorrows, sicknesses, and misfortunes,
which domineer over them in equal authority: than if their condition be so
ill, you may easily conjecture how it fares with private men.


Charon. I will tell you, Mercury, my conceit, and what I think men, and
their whole manner of life, are most like unto: A comparison of man's life.
I have often seen those bubbles that rise now and then by the fall of water
out of some spring: I mean those swelling things whereof froth is engendered:
and I have noted that some of them are small, which break quickly and are soon
dissolved: some again last longer and by the addition of others grow bigger
and bigger till they swell to a great height: yet in the end they burst also:
for it cannot be avoided: such is the life of man, they are all puffed up with
wind, some more, some less: some have a short continuance of swelling: and
some vanish as soon as they are risen: but all must needs burst in the end.


Mercury. Well said, Charon, Iliad. 6. v. 146.
thou have made as good a comparison as Homer, for he likens the generation of
men to the leaves of trees.


Charon. They are no better, Mercury, and yet you see how busy they are, and
what a stir they make in striving for dignities, honors and possessions,
which they must all leave behind them, and bring but one poor halfe-pennie
with them when they come to us: what if I should call aloud unto them, now we
are got to such a height, and exhort them to abstain from their vain
employments, and to live, as having death always before their eyes, and say
unto them, O foolish men, why do you bestow your time upon such trifles?
mis-spend not your travels to so ill purpose: ye shall not live for ever:
nothing you here affect can be perpetual neither shall any man bring any of it
away with him at his death, but of necessity he must come stark naked, and
leave his house, his land, and money behind him, to be for ever in the
possession of others, and subject to the changes of many masters: if I should
proclaim this and the like amongst them, out of a place whence all might hear
me, do you not think it would do a great deal of good, and make them more
wary in their carriage?


Merc. O honest Charon, little do thou know how they are bewitched with
ignorance and error, and their ears so stopped, that they can hardly be boared
open with an awgar: Ulysses could not make his followers ears more fast with
wax from hearing the Sirens: you may break your heart with calling before
they will harken to you: Od. 12. v. 177,
for look what virtue the water of Lethe has with you, the same operation has
ignorance with them: yet there are some few amongst them, that will suffer no
wax to be crammed into their ears, but are attentive to the truth, see
perfecty how the world goes, and able to judge of it accordingly.


Charon. What if I call to them?


Mercury. It were bootelesse to tell them what they know already: you see how
they stand aloof off from the multitude, and deride their actions, taking no
contentment in them: perceive you not how they are upon consultation to turn
fugitives out of this life, and run to you? for they are hated of all men
because they reprove their ignorance.


Charon. Few men wise.
Well done honest hearts: but Mercury me thinks there be but few of them.


Mercury. These are all: let us now down again.


Charon. One thing more, Mercury, I desire to hear from you: let me know but
that, and you shall make your guidance complete: I would feign see the places
where dead bodies lie when they are cast into the earth.


Mercury. They are called monuments, Charon, and tombs, and sepulchers: do
thou not see those heaps of earth that are cast up before their cities? and
the pillars, and the The Egyptian sepulchers built by their Kings at a
wonderful charge.
Pyramides? those are all storehouses and receptacles of dead carcases.


Charon. But why do they crown those stones with garlands, and anoint them
with sweet ointments? some make a great pile of wood before those heaps of
earth upon which they burn costly and delicate banquets: The manner of burial
in ancient times.
and dig a pit in the earth, into which they power, as I suppose, wine, and
honey mixed with it.


Mercury. Believe me Ferriman, I do not know wha^ good all this can do to
them that are in hell: but perhaps they are persuaded, the souls below, come
up again to feed upon the savor, and smoke of the feast as they fly about
it, and to drink of the liquor in the pit.


Charon: They eat or drink, whose sculls are withered and dried up? but I am
a fool to say so much to you that conduct them every day, and know it
unpossible for them to get up again when they are once under the earth: I were
in a poor case then indeed, and should have somewhat to do, if I were not
only to bring them down, but also carry them up again to drink: O vain men
and ignorant, not knowing upon what terms the state of dead and living men
depend, nor the manner of our being, where Animitation and inversion of some
of Homers verses Iliad. 1. and Od. 10. etc.
No difference is, but all is one
Whether they have Tombs or none,
Poor Irus of as great a birth
As Agamemnon under earth:
Thersites has as good a feature
As Thetis son that comely creature.
All empty skulls naked and dry
In Asphodelus medows lie.



Mercury. O Hercules, what a deal of Homer have thou pumpt up together! but
now thou have put it into my head, I will show thee Achilles tomb: see where
it stands upon the sea shore: for that is the Both Promontories nere unto Troy.
Trojan Sigeum, and over against it is Ajax entombed in Both Promontories nere
unto Troy.
Rhoetium.


Charon. These are no such great monuments, Mercury: but now let me see those
famous cities we have heard of below, as Ninivie.
Ninus, the city of Sardanapalus, and Babylon, and Ancient cities of Greece.
Mycenae and Ancient cities of Greece.
Cleonae, and the city of Troy: for I remember I have transported many a man
from thence: All the time of the Trojan war.
ten years together I had no time to draw up my boat into the dock, nor once
to make it clean.


Mercury. Ninus, ferriman, is utterly vanished, no token of it remaining,
neither can any man tell where it stood: but Babylon you may see yonder, the
city that has so many towers, and takes up so great a circuit of ground,
shortly to be sought after as well as the other: as for Mycenae and Cleonae, I
am ashamed to show them, and especially Troy: for I know when you are got down
again, you will have about with Homer for magnifying them so much in his
verses: yet in former time they have been famous places, though now decayed,
for cities must die, Ferriman, as well as men: and which is more to be admired,
even whole rivers are perished from having any being: A river said to be in
the country Argos.
Inachus has not so much as a sepulcher to be seen in all the country of
Argos.


Charon. Alas good Homer, that thou should commend them so highly, and set
them forth with such stately titles, as sacred Ilium, spacious Ilium,
beautiful Cleonae: but whilst we are busy in talk, who are they that are
fighting yonder, and kill one another so desperately?


Mercury. There thou see the Argives and Lacedaemonians in battle, Charon,
and Othryades their captain, half dead (...). Others will have it, (...),
writing a trophie of the victory with his own blood. The Lacedaemonians and
the Argives being to fight for the country of Thyria, it was at last agreed
upon betwixt them that three hundred of each side should end the controversy,
of which there were only three left alive: of the Argives, Alcinor, and
Cromius who returned to Argos supposing that they had got the victory: of the
Lacedaemonians Othryades, who remained in the field, spoiled the bodies of his
slain enemies, and wrote his name in his shield with his own blood in token
of the victory.
and writing down his own name, as a trophie of the victory.


Charon. What do they fight for, Mercury?


Mercury. For the same country they fight in.


Charon. O gross ignorance: they know not, that although every man amongst
them had as much as all The greatest peninsula of all Europe, joined to the
rest of Greece by the Corinthian Isthmus, it is now called Morea.
Peloponnesus in his possession, yet Aeacus would allow no more, than a plot of
a foot broad for a man to abide in: and this country must often be plowed up
by man after man, which many times with their plow shares shall turn up
trophies out of the depth of the earth.


Mercury. This must be so: therefore now let us down again and depart: I, to
the business I was sent about, thou to thy boat, and I will bring thee
passengers, as spedily as I can.


Charon. You have done me a friendly favor, Mercury, and I will record you
for my benefactor everlastingly: for by your means I have got knowledge of
matters appurtenant to miserable mankind, and have seen Kings, plates of
gold, sacrifices, and battles: but not a word of Charon.


LVCIAN HIS TRVE HISTORY.
EVen as Champions, and wrastlers, The Pr^me.
and such as practice the strength and agilitie of body, are not only careful
to retain a sound constitution of health, and to hold on their ordinary
course of exercise, The mind requires some recreation, as well as the body.
but sometimes also to recreate themselves with seasonable intermission, and
esteem it as a maine point of their practice: so I think it necessary for
Scholars, and such as addict themselves to the study of learning, after they
have traveled long in the perusal of serious authors, to relaxe a little the
intention of their thoughts, that they may be more apt and able to endure a
continued course of study: And this kind of repose will be the more
conformable, and fit their purpose better, if it be employed in the reading of
such works, His purpose in writing this history.
as shall not only yield a bare content by the pleasing and comely composure
of them, but shall also give occasion of some learned speculation to the mind,
which I suppose I have effected in these books of mine: wherein not only the
noveltie of the subject, nor the pleasingnes of the project, may tickle the
Reader with delight, nor to hear so many notorious lies delivered perswasively
and in the way of truth, but because every thing here by me set down, does in
a Comicall fashion glance at some or other of the old Poets, Historiographers,
and Philosophers, which in their writings have recorded many monstrous and
intolerable untruthes, whose names I would have quoted down, but that I knew
the reading would bewray them to you. He wrote also 30. books of the Persian
History Su^d.
Ctesias, the son of Ctesiochus, the Cnidian, wrote of the Region of the
Indians, and the state of those Countries, matters, which he neither saw
himself, nor ever heard come from the mouth of any man. Jambulus also wrote
many strange miracles of the great sea, which all men knew to be lies and
fictions, yet so composed that they want not their delight: and many others
have made choice of the like argument, of which some have published their own
travells, and peregrinations, wherein they have described the greatness of
beasts, the fierce condition of men, with their strange and uncouth manner of
life: but the first father and founder of all this foolerie, was Homers
Ulysses, Odyss. 9. etc.
who tells a long tale to Alcinous, of the servitude of the winds, and of wild
men with one eye in their foreheads that fed upon raw flesh: of beasts with
many heads, and the transformation of his friends by enchanted potions, all
which he made the silly Phaeakes believe for great sooth. This coming to my
perusal, I could not condemn ordinary men for lying, when I saw it in
request amongst them that would be counted Philosophical persons: Tam vacui
capitis populum Phaeaca putavit. Juven.
yet could not but wonder at them, that writing so manifest lies, they should
not think to be taken with the manner; and this made me also ambitious to
leave some monument of my self behind me, that I might not be the only man
exempted from this liberty of lying: and because I had no matter of verity to
employ my pen in, (for nothing has befalne me worth the writing) I turned
my style to publish untruthes, but with an honester mind than others have
done: for this one thing I confidently pronounce for a truth, that I lie: and
this I hope, may be an excuse for all the rest, when I confess what I am
faulty in: for I write of matters which I neither saw nor suffered, nor heard
by report from others, which are in no being, He professes himself a liar.
nor possible ever to have a beginning: let no man therefore in any case give
any credit to them.

Disankering on a time from the Two mountains, one in Europe, the other in
Afric, on each side the Straits of Gibraltar.
pillars of Hercules, the wind fitting me well for my purpose, I thrust into
the West Ocean: the occasion that moved me to take such a voyage in hand, was
only a curiosity of mind, a desire of novelties, and a longing to learn out
the bounds of the Ocean, and what people inhabit the farther shore: for which
purpose, I made plentiful provision of victuals and fresh water, got fifty
companions of the same humor to associate me in my travells, furnished my
self with store of munition, gave a round sum of money to an expert pilot
that could direct us in our course, and new rigd, and repaired a tall ship
strongly, to hold a tedious and difficult journey: Thus sailed we forward a
day and a night with a prosperous wind, and as long as we had any sight of
land, made no great have on our way: but the next morrow about sun rising,
the wind blew high, and the waves began to swell, and a darkness fell upon us,
so that we could not see to strike our sails, but gave our ship over to the
wind and weather: thus were we tossed in this tempest, the space of threescore
and nineteen days together, on the fourescorth day, the sun upon a sudden
brake out, and we descried not far off us, an Island full of mountains and
woods, about the which the seas did not rage so boisterously, for the storm
was now reasonably well calmed: there we thrust in, and went on shore, and
cast our selves upon the ground, and so lay a long time, It was requisite the
tempest^ should continue thus long, and he sail altogether in the dark lest
he should be asked the way to this strange Island.
as utterly tired with our misery at sea: in the end we arose up, and divided
our selves: thirty we left to guard our ship: my self, and twenty more, went
to discover the Island, and had not gone above three furlongs from the sea
thorough a wood, but we saw a brazen pillar erected, where upon Greek letters
were engraven, though now much worn and hard to be discerned, importing, Thus
far traveled Hercules and Bacchus: there were also near unto the place, two
portraitures cut out in a rock, the one of the quantity of an acre of ground,
the other less: which made me imagine the the lesser to be Bacchus, and the
other Hercules: and giving them due adoration: we proceeded on our journey:
and far we had not gone, but we came to a river, the stream whereof seemed
to run with as rich wine, as any is made in An Island in the Aegaean sea,
famous for excellent wines.
Chios, and of a great breadth, in some places able to bear a ship, which made
me to give the more credit to the inscription upon the pillar, when I saw such
apparent signs of Bacchus peregrination: we then resolved to travel up the
stream, to find whence the river had his original: and when we were come to
the head, no spring at all appeared, but mighty great vine trees of infinite
number, which from their roots distilled pure wine which made the river run so
abundantly: See our Authors modesty, for this carries more probability by
far, than that a spring of wine should rise out of the earth.
the stream was also well stored with fish, of which we took a few, in taste
and color much resembling wine, but as many as eat of the^, fell drunk upon
it: for when they were opened and cut up, we found them to be full of lees:
afterward me mixed some fresh water fish with them, which allayed the strong
taste of the wine. We then crossed the stream where we found it passable, and
came among a world of vines of incredible number, which toward the earth had
firm stocks and of a good growth but the tops of them were women, from the
hips upwards, having all their proportion perfect and complete: Half a virgin
and half a tree.
as painters picture out Daphne, who was turned into a tree when she was
overtaken by Apollo: at their fingers ends sprung out branches full of grapes,
and the hair of their heads was nothing else but winding wires and leaves, and
clusters of grapes: when we were come to them they saluted us, and joined hands
with us, and spoke unto us some in the Lydian, and some in the Indian language,
but most of them in Greek: they also kissed us with their mouths, but he that
was so kissed fell drunk, Many men have thus lost themselves, in the yielding to
the bewitching enticements of wine and women.
and was not his own man a good while after: they could not abide to have any
fruit pulled from the^, but would roar and cry out pitifully, if any man
offered it: some of them desired to have carnal mixture with us, and two of
our company were so bold as to entertain their offer, and could never
afterward be loosed from them, but were knit fast together at their nether
parts, from whence they grew together, and took root together, and their
fingers began to spring out with branches, and crooked wiers, as if they were
ready to bring out fruit: whereupon we forsook them and fled to our ships,
and told the company at our coming what had betide unto us, how our fellows
were entangled, and of their copulation with the vines: then we took certain
of our vessels, and filled them, some with water and some with wine out of the
river, and lodged for that night near the shore. On the morrow we put to sea
again, the wind serving us weakly, but about noone, when we had lost sight
of the Island, upon a sudden a whirlewinde caught us, which turned our ship
round about, and lifted us up some three thousand furlongs into the air, and
suffered us not to settle again into the sea, but we hung above ground, and
were carried aloft with a mighty wind which filled our sails strongly. The
Island of of the Moon.
Thus for seven days space and so many nights, were we driven along in that
manner, and on the eight day, What wind blew them thither.
we came in view of a great country in the air, like to a shining Island, of
a round proportion, gloriously glittering with light, and approaching to it,
we there arrived, and took land, and surveying the country, we found it to
be both inhabited and husbanded: He closely taxes their opinion who hold the
Sun, Moon, and Stars to be inhabited countries.
and as long as the day lasted we could see nothing there, but when night was
come many other Islands appeared unto us, some greater and some less, all of
the color of fire, and another kind of earth underneath, in which were cities,
and seas, and rivers, and woods, and mountains, which we conjectured to be the
earth by us inhabited: and going further into the land, we were met withal and
taken by those kind of people, which they call A made word signifying
hors-vultures, or vulture-horses, or vulture riders: and so are the rest that
follow, names coined, and composed for his purpose.
Hippogypians: these Hippogypians are men riding upon monstrous vultures, which
they use instead of horses: for the vultures there are exceeding great, every
one with 3 heads apiece: you may imagine their greatness by this: for every
feather in their wings was bigger and longer tha^ the mast of a tall ship:
their charge was to fly about the country, and all the strangers they found
to bring the^ to the King: and their fortune was then to seize upon us, and by
them we were presented to him: As soon as he saw us, he conjectured by our
habit what countrymen we were, and said, are not you strangers Grecians? which
when we affirmed, and how could you make way, said he, through so much air as
to get hither? then we delivered the whole discourse of our fortunes to him,
whereupon he began to tell us likewise of his own adventures, how that he
also was a man, by name Icaromen. c.
Endymion, and rapt up long since from the earth, as he was asleep, and brought
hither, where he was made King of the Country, and said it was that region:
which to us below seemed to be the Moon, but he bad us be of good cheer,
Endymio^ King of the Moon.
and fear no danger, for we should want nothing we stood in need of: and if
the war he was now in hand withal against the Sun, succeeded fortunately,
we should live with him in the highest degree of happiness: then we asked of
him what enemies he had, and the cause of the quarrel: and he answered, The
son of Phoebus and Clymene, who having obtained leave to ride one day about
the world in his fathers Chariot, though sore against his will, by his
unskilful driving scorcht a great part both of heaven and earth, and was
therefore struck dead with a thunderbolt by Jupiter. Ovid. Met.
Phaethon the King of the inhabitants of the Sun (for that is also peopled as
well as the Moon) has made war against us a long time, upon this occasion.
I once assembled all the poor people and needy persons within my dominions,
purposing to send a Colonie to inhabit the Morning Star, because the country
was desert, and had no body dwelling in it: This Phaethon envying, crossed me
in my design, and sent his Hippomyrmicks, to meet with us in the midway, by
whom we were surprised at that time, being not prepared for an encounter, and
were forced to retire: now therefore my purpose is once again to denounce
war, and publish a plantation of people there: if therefore you will
participate with us in our expedition, I will furnish you every one with a
prime Vulture, and all armor answerable for service: for to morrow we must
set forwards: The morning there, but the evening here.
with all our hearts, said I, if it please you: then were we feasted and abode
with him, and in the morning arose to set our selves in order of battle: for
our scouts had given us knowledge that the enemy was at hand: our forces in
number amounted to an hundred thousand, besides such as bare burdens and
enginiers, and the foot forces, and the strange aids: of these fourscore
thousand were Hippogypians, and twenty thousand, The number of their forces.
that road upon Lachanopters, which is a mighty great foul, and instead of
feathers, covered thick over with wort leaves: but their wing feathers, were
much like the leaves of lettices: after them were placed the Cencrobolians and
the Scorodomachians: there came also to aid us from the bear star, thirty
thousand Psyllotoxotanes, and fifty thousand Anemodromians: these
Psyllotoxotans, ride upon great fleas, of which they have their denomination:
for every flea among them is as big as a dozen elephants: the Anemodromians
are footmen yet flew in the air without feathers in this manner: every man had
a large mantle reaching down to his foot, which the wind blowing against,
filled it like a sail, and they were carried along as if they had been boats:
the most part of these in fight were targetiers: it was said also that there
were expected from the stars over Cappadocia, threescore and ten-thousand
Struthobalanians, and five thousand Hippogeranians, but I had no sight of them,
for they were not yet come, and therefore I durst write nothing, though
wonderful and incredible reports were given out of them: this was the number
of Endymions army: the furniture was all alike: their helmets of bean hulls,
which are great with them and very strong, their breast-plates all of lupines
cut into scales, for they take the shells of lupines, and fastening them
together, make brest-plates of them which are impenitrable, and as hard as any
horn: The order of Endymions battle.
their shields and swords like to ours in Greece: and when the time of battle
was come, they were ordered in this manner. The right wing was supplied by the
Hippogypians, where the King himself was in person, with the choicest soldiers
in the army, amongst whom we also were ranged: the Lachanopters made the left
wing and the aids were placed in the maine battle as every man's fortune fell:
the foot, which in number were about six thousand Myriades, were disposed of
in this manner: there are many spiders in those parts of mighty bigness,
every one in quantity exceeding one of the Islands They are in the Aegaean
sea, in number 53.
Cyclades: these were appointed to spinne a web in the air between the
Moon, and the Morning Star, which was done in an instant, and made a plain
Champian, upon which the foot forces were planted, who had for their leader,
The order of Phaetons battle.
Nycterion the son of Eudianax, and two other associates. But of the enemies
side the left wing consisted of the Hippomyrmekes, and among them Phaethon
himself: these are beasts of huge bigness and winged, carrying the resemblance
of our emets, but for their greatness: for those of the largest sise were of
the quantity of two acres, and not only the riders supplied the place of
soldiers, but they also did much mischief with their horns: they were in
number fifty thousand: in the right wing were ranged the Aeroconopes, of which
there were also about fifty thousand, all archers riding upon great gnats:
then followed the Aerocordakes who were light armed and footmen, but good
soldiers, casting out of slings a far off huge great turnips and whosoever
was hit with them lived not long after, but died with the stink that proceeded
from their wounds: it is said they use to anoint their bullets with the poison
of mallows: after them were placed the Caulomycetes, men at arms and good at
handstroakes, in number about fifty thousand: they are called Caulomycetes,
because their shields are made of mushrums, and their spears of the stalks of
the herb Asparagus: near unto them were placed the Cynobalanians, that were
sent from the Dog-starre to aid him, these were men with dogs faces, riding
upon winged acornes: but the slingers that should have come out of Via lactea,
and the Nephelocentaures came too short of these aids, for the battle was done
before their arrival, so that they did them no good: The fight.
and indeed the slingers came not at all, wherefore they say Phaethon in
displeasure overran their country: these were the forces that Phaethon
brought into the field: and when they were joined in battle, after the signal
was given, and the asses on either side had braied, (for these are to them
instead of trumpets) the fight began, and the left wing of the Heliotans, or
Sun soldiers, fled presently, and would not abide to receive the charge of
the Hippogypians, but turned their backs immediately, and many were put to the
sword: but the right wing of theirs were too hard for our left wing, and drove
them back till they came to our footmen, who joining with them, made the
enemies there also turn their backs and fly, especially when they found their
own left wing to be overthrown. Thus were they wholly discomfited on all
hands, many were taken prisoners, and many slain: much blood was spilt, some
fell upon the clouds, which made them look of a red color, as sometimes they
appear to us about Sun setting: some dropped down upon the earth: which made
me suppose it was upon some such occasion, Iliad. lib. 16. v. 459.
that Homer thought Jupiter rained blood for the death of his son Sarpedon:
returning from the pursuit, we erected two Trophies: one for the fight on
foot, which we placed upon the spiders web: the other for the fight in the
air, which we set up upon the clouds: as soon as this was done, news came
to us by our scouts, that the Nephelocentaures were coming on, which indeed
should have come to Phaethon before the fight. And when they drew so near unto
us that we could take full view of them, it was a strange sight to behold such
monsters, composed of flying horses and men: that part which resembled
mankind, which was from the wast upwards, did equal in greatness the
Icaromenip. y
Rhodian Colossus, and that which was like a horse, was as big as a great
ship of burden: and of such multitude that I was fearful to set down their
number, lest it might be taken for a lie: and for their leader, they had the
Chiron the Centaur, who was translated into heaven, and made one of the 12
signs of the Zodiake.
Sigittarius out of the Zodiake: when they heard that their friends were
foiled, they sent a messenger to Phaethon to renew the fight: vvhereupon they
set themselves in array, and fell upon the Selenitans or the Moon soldiers
that were troubled, and disordered in following the chase, and scattered in
gathening the spoils, and put them all to flight, and pursued the King into
his city, and killed the greatest part of his birds, overturned the Trophies
he had set up, and overcame the whole country that was spunne by the
spiders: My self and two of my companions were taken alive: when Phaethon,
himself was come, they set up other Trophies in token of victory, and on the
morrow we were carried prisoners into the Sun, our arms bound behind us
with a piece of the cobweb: yet would they by no means lay any siege to the
city, but returned and built up a wall in the midst of the air, to keep the
light of the Sun from falling upon the Moon, The reason of the Moons
Eclipse.
and they made it a double wall, wholly compact of clouds, so that a manifest
eclipse of the Moon insued, and all things detained in perpetual night:
wherewith Endymion was so much oppressed, that he sent Ambassadors to entreat
the demolishing of the building, and beseech him that he would not damn them
to live in darkness, promising to pay him tribute, to be his friend and
associate, and never after to stir against him: Phaethons counsel twice
assembled to consider upon this offer: and in their first meeting would remit
nothing of their conceived displeasure, but on the morrow they altered their
minds to these terms. The Heliotans and their colleagues have made a peace
with the Selenitans and their associates upon these conditions, that the
Heliotans shall cast down the wall, and deliver the prisoners that they have
taken, upon a rarable ransom: and that the Selenitans should leave the other
stars at liberty, and raise no war against the Heliotans, but aid and
assist one another, if either of them should be invaded: that the King of the
Selenitans should yearly pay to the King of the Heliotans in way of tribute,
ten thousand vessels of dew, and deliver ten thousand of their people to
be pledges for their fidelity: that the Colonie to be sent to the Morning
star, should be jointly supplied by them both, and liberty given to any else
that would; to be sharers in it, that these articles of peace should be
engraven in a pillar of amber, to be erected in the midst of the air upon the
confines of their country: These names of the inhabitants of the Sun, are
taken from things belonging to the day, those of the Moon from things
appertaining to the night.
for the performance whereof were sworn of the Heliotans, Pyronides, and
Therites, and Phlogias: and if the Selenitans, Nyctor, and Menias, and
Polylampes: thus was the pleace concluded, the wall immediately demolished and
we that were prisoners delivered: being returned into the Moon, they came
forth to meet us, Endymion himself and all his friends: who embraced us with
tears, and desired us to make our abode with him, and to be partners in the
colonie: promising to give me his own son in marriage (for there are no
women amongst them) which I by no means would yield unto, but desired of all
loves, to be dismissed again into the sea: and be finding it unpossible to
persuade us to his purpose, after seven days feasting, The strange novelties
he observed in those parts.
gave us leave to depart. Now, what strange novelties worthy of note I
observed during the time of my abode there, I will relate unto you. The first
is, that they are not begotten of women but of mankind: for they have no
other marriage but af males: the name of women is utterly unknown among them:
until they accomplish the age of five and twenty years, they are given in
marriage to others: from that time forwards they take others in marriage to
themselves: for as soon as the infant is conceived the leg begins to swell,
and afterward when the time of birth is come, they give it a lance and take
it out dead: Why that part which we term the calfe, is called by the Grecians
the belly of the leg.
then they lay it abroad with open mouth toward the vvinde, and so it takes
life: and I think thereof the Grecians call it the belly of the leg,
because there in they bear their children instead of a belly. I will tell you
now of a thing more strange than this: there are a kind of men among them
called Dendritans, which are begotten in this manner: they cut out the right
stone out of a man's codd, and set it in their ground, from which springs up a
great tree of flesh, with branches and leaves, bearing a kind of fruit much
like to an acorne, but of a cubite in length, which they gather when they are
ripe, and cut men out of them: their privy members are to be set on, and taken
off, as they have occasion: rich men have them made of Ivorie, poor men of
vvood, wherewith they perform the act of generation, and accompany their
spowses: when a man is come to his full age he dies not, but is dissolved
like smoke and is turned into air. One kind of food is common to them all:
Their food.
for they kindle a fire and broyle frogs upon the coals, which are with
them in infinite numbers flying in the air, and whilst they are broyling, they
sit round about them, as it were about a table, and lap up the smoke that
rises from them, and feast themselves therewith, and this is all their
feeding: for their drink, they have air beaten in a mortar, Their drink.
which yields a kind of moisture much like unto dew: they have no avoydance
of excrements, either of urine or dung, neither have they any issue for that
purpose, like unto us: their boys admit copulation, not like unto ours, but in
their hammes, a little above the calfe of the leg, for there they are open:
they hold it a great ornament to be bald, for hairie persons are abhord with
them, Because that Comets seem to be hairie, and have their name from thence.
and yet among the Stars that are Comets, it is thought commendable, as some
that have traveled those coasts reported unto us: such beards as they have,
are growing a little above their knees: they have no nails on their feet, for
their whole foot is all but one toe: every one of them at the point of his
rumpe, has a long colewort growing out in stead of a tale, always green and
flourishing, which though a man fall upon his back, cannot be broken: the
dropping of their noses is more sweet than honey: when they labor or exercise
themselves, they anoint their body with milk, whereinto if a little of that
honey chance to drop, it will be turned into cheese: they make very fat oil of
their beans, and of as delicate a savor as any sweet ointment: they have many
vines in those parts, which yield them but water: for the grapes that hang upon
the clusters are like our halestones: and I verily think, that when the vines
there are shaken with a strong wind, there falls a storm of hail amongst us,
by the breaking down of those kind of berries: their bellies stand them
instead of sachels, to put in their necessaries, which they may open and shut
at their pleasure, for they have neither liver, nor any kind of entralls, only
they are rough and hairie within, so that when their young children are cold,
they may be enclosed therein to keep them warm: the rich men have garments of
glass, very soft and delicate, the poorer sort of brass woven, whereof they
have great plenty, which they inseame with water, to make it fit for the
workman, as we do our wool. If I should write what manner of eyes they have, I
doubt I should be taken for a liar, The cause of hail.

The like is feigned by the Poets of the Gorgons, three sisters that had but
one eye amongst them which they used by turns when they went abroad.


in publishing a matter so incredible: yet I cannot choose but tell it: for they
have eyes to take in and out as please themselves: and when a man is so
disposed, he may take them out and lay them by till he have occasion to use
them, and then put them in and see again: many when they have lost their own
eyes, borrow of others: for the rich have many lying by them: their ears are
all made of the leaves of plane-trees, excepting those that come of acornes,
for they only have them made of vvood. I saw also another strange thing in the
same court: a mighty great glass, lying upon the top of a pit, of no great
depth, whereinto, if any man descend, he shall hear every thing that is
spoken upon the earth: if he but look into the glass, he shall see all
cities, and all nations as well as if he were among them: there had I the
sight of all my friends, and the whole country about: whether they saw me or
not I cannot tell: but if they believe it not to be so, let them take the
pains to go thither themselves and they shall find my words true: then we
took our leaves of the king, and such as were near him, and took shipping,
and departed: at which time Endymion bestowed upon me two mantles made of
their glass, and five of brass, with a complete armor of those shells of
lupines, all which I left behind me in the whale: and sent with us a thousand
of his Hippogypians to conduct us five hundred furlongs on our way: In our
course we coasted many other countries, and lastly arrived at the morning
star now newly inhabited, where we landed, and took in fresh water: from
thence we entered the Zodiake, passing by the Sun, and leaving it on our
right hand took our course near unto the shore, but landed not in the
country, though our company did much desire it, for the wind would not give
us leave: but we saw it was a flourishing region, fat, and well watered,
abounding with all delights: but the Nephelocentaures espying us, who were
mercenary soldiers to Phaethon, The city of lights.
made to our ship as fast as they could, and finding us to be friends, said no
more unto us, for our Hippogypians were departed before: then we made
forwards, all the next night and day, and about evening-tide following we came
to a city called Lychnopolis, still holding on our course downwards: this
city is seated in the air between the Pleiades and the Hyades, somewhat
lower than the Zodiake, and arriving there, not a man was to be seen, but
lights in great numbers running to and fro, which were employed, some in the
market place, and some about the haven, of which many were little, and as a man
may say, but poor things, some again were great and mighty exceeding
glorious and resplendent, and there were places of receipt for them all, every
one had his name as well as men, and we did hear them speak: these did us no
harm, but invited us to feast with them, yet we wear so fearful, that we
durst neither eat nor sleep as long as we were there: their court of
justice stands in the midst of the city, A very proper death.
where the governor sits all the night long calling every one by name, and
he that answers not is adjudged to die, as if he had forsaken his ranks:
their death is to be quenched: we also standing amongst them saw what was
done, and heard what answers the lights made for themselves, and the reasons
they alleged for tarrying so long: there we also knew our own light, and
spoke unto it, and questioned it of our affairs at home, and how all did
there, which related every thing unto us: As some have affirmed every country
to be governed specially by some particular Star, so he faignes a light in
this city for every nation which could tell all that was done amongst them.
that night we made our abode there, and on the next morrow returned to our
ship: and sailing near unto the clouds had a sight of the city
Nephelococcygia, which we beheld with great wonder, but entered not into it,
for the wind was against us: the King thereof was Coronus the son of
Cottyphion: and I could not choose but think upon the Poet In his Comedy
called the Clouds, which he wrote against Socrates.
Aristophanes, how wise a man he was, and how true a reporter, and how little
cause there is to question his fidelity for what he has written. The third
after, the Ocean appeared plainly unto us, though we could see no land, but
what was in the air: and those countries also seemed to be fiery and of a
glittering color: the fourth day about noone, the wind gently forbearing,
settled us fair and leasurely into the sea: and as soon as we found our
selves upon water, we were surprised with incredible gladness, and our joy was
unexpressible: we feasted and made merry with such provision as we had, we
cast our selves into the sea, and swamme up and down for our disport, for it
was a calm. But oftentimes it falls out, that the change to the better, is
the beginning of greater evils: for when we had made only two days sail in
the water, as soon as the third day appeared, about Sunrising, upon a
sudden we saw many monstrous fishes and whales: but one above the rest
containing in greatness fifteen hundred furlongs, which came gaping upon us
and troubled the sea round about him, so that he was compassed on every side
with froth and foam, showing his teeth a far off, A fish of an indifferent
size.
which were longer than any beech trees are with us, all as sharp as needles,
and as white as Ivorie; then we took, as we thought, our last leaves one of
another, and embracing together, expected our ending day: the monster was
presently with us, and swallowed us up ship and all: but by chance, he caught
us not between his chops, for the ship fliot through the void passages down
into his entralls: when we were thus got within him we continued a good while
in darkness and could see nothing, till he began to gape, and then we
perceived it to be a monstrous whale of a huge breadth and height, big enough
to contain a city that would hold ten thousand men: and within we found
small fishes, and many other creatures chopped in pieces, and the masts of ships,
and ankers, and bones of men, and luggage: in the midst of him was earth and
hills, which were raised, as I conjectured, by the settling of the mudde which
came down his throat: for woods grew upon them and trees of all sorts, and all
manner of herbs, and it looked as if it had been husbanded: A country
within the whale.
the compass of the land was two hundred and forty furlongs: there were also
to be seen all kind of seafowle, as gulls, halcyons, and others that had made
their nests upon the trees: then we fell to weeping abundantly: but at the
last I roused up my company, and propt up our ship: and stroke fire: then we
made ready supper of such as we had, for abundance of all sort of fish lay
ready by us, and we had yet water enough left which we brought out of the
Morning Star: the next morrow we rose to watch when the whale should gape:
and then looking out, we could sometimes see mountains, sometimes only the
skies, and many times Islands: for we found that the fish carried himself with
great swiftness to every part of the sea: when we grew weary of this, I took
seven of my company, and went into the wood to see what I could find there,
and we had not gone above five furlongs, but we light upon a temple erected to
Neptune, as by the title appeared: and not far off we espied many sepulchers
and pillars placed upon them, with a fountain of clear water close unto it;
we also heard the barking of a dog, and saw smoke rise a far off, so that
we judged there was some dwelling thereabout: wherefore making the more have,
we lighted upon an old man and a youth, who were very busy in making a garden
and in conveying water by a channel from the fountain into it: whereupon we
were surprised both with joy and fear: and they also were brought into the
same taking, and for a long time remained mute: but after some pause, the old
man said: what are ye, you strangers? any of the sea spirits? or miserable men
like unto us? for we that are men by nature, borne and bred in the earth, are
now sea-dwellers, and swim up and down within the Continent of this whale,
and know not certainly what to think of our selves: we are like to men that
be dead; and yet believe our selves to be alive. Whereunto I answered: for our
parts, father, we are men also, newly come hither, and swallowed up ship and
all but yesterday: and now come purposely within this wood, which is so large
and thick: some good angel, I I think did guide us hither to have the sight
of you, and to make us know, that we are not the only men confined within
this monster: tell us therefore your for tunes we beseech you, what you are,
and how you came into this place: but he answered, It was a custom in ancient
times to entertain all strangers with a feast before they enquired of their
affairs.
you shall not hear a word from me, nor ask any more questions, until you
have taken part of such viands as we are able to afford you: so he took us,
and brought us into his house, which was sufficient to serve his turn, his
pallets were prepared, and all things else made ready: then he set before us
herbs, and nuts, and fish, and filled out of his own wine unto us: and when
we were sufficiently satisfied, he then demanded of us what fortunes we
had endured, and I related all things to him in order that had betide unto us,
the tempest, the passages in the Island, our navigation in the air, our war,
and all the rest, even till our diving into the whale: vvhereat he wondered
exceedingly, and began to deliver also what had befalne to him, and said: by
lineage, O ye strangers, I am of the Isle An Island in the eastern part of the
Mediterranean sea, betwixt Syria and Cilicia.
Cyprus, and traveling from mine own country as a merchant, with this my
son you see here, and many other friends with me, made a voyage for Italy
in a great ship full fraught with merchandise, which perhaps you have seen
broken in pieces in the mouth of the vvhale: we sailed with fair weather,
till we were as far as Sicilie: but there we were overtaken with such a
boistrous storm, that the third day we were driven into the Ocean, where it
was our fortune to meet with this whale which swallowed us all up, and only
we two escaped with our lives, all the rest perished, whom we have here
buried and built a Temple to Neptune: ever since we have continued this course
of life, planting herbs and feeding upon fish and nuts: here is wood enough
you see, and plenty of vines which yield most delicate wine: we have also a
well of excellent cool water, which it may be you have seen: we make our
beds of the leaves of trees, and burn as much wood as we will: we chase
after the birds that fly about us, and go out upon the gills of the monster
to catch after live fishes: here we bath our selves when we are disposed,
for we have a lake of salt water not far off, about some twenty furlongs
in compass, full of sundry sorts of fish, in which we swim and sail upon
it in a little boat of mine own making. This is the seven and twentieth year
of our drowning, and with all this we might be well enough contented, if our
neighbors, and borderers about us were not perverse and troublesome,
altogether insociable and of stern condition. Is it so indeed, said I, that
there should be any within the whale but your selves? many said he, and such
as are unreconcileable toward strangers, and of monstrous and deformed
proportions: the western countries, and the taile-part of the wood, are
inhabited by the Tarychanians, that look like ^les, with faces like a
lobster: these are warlike, fieres, and feed upon raw flesh: they that dwell
toward the right side, are called Tritonomenditans, which have their upper
parts like unto men, their lower parts like oattes, and are less offensive
than the rest: On the left side inhabit the Cancinachirians and the
Thinocephalians, which are in league one with another: the middle region is
possessed by the Pagurodians, and the Psittopodians, a warlike nation and swift
of foot: eastwards toward the mouth is for the most part desert, as over washed
with the sea: yet am I feign to take that for my dwelling, paying yearly to
the Psittopodians, in way of tribute, five hundred oysters: of so many nations
does this country consist: we must therefore devise among our selves, either
how to be able to fight with them, or how to live among them. What number may
they all amount unto, said I? more than a thousaid he: and what armor have
they? none at all, said he, but the bones of fishes: then were it our best
course, said I, to encounter them, being provided as we are, and they
without weapons: for if we prove too hard for them we shall afterward live
out of fear: this we concluded upon, and went to our ship to furnish our
selves with arms: the occasion of war we gave by Nonpayment of tribute,
which then was due: for they sent their messengers to demand it, to whom he
gave a harsh and scornful answer, and sent them packing with their arrant: but
the Psittopodians and Paguradians, taking it ill at the hands of Scintharus,
for so was the man named, came against us with great tumult: and we suspecting
what they would do, stood upon our guard to wait for them, and laid five and
twenty of our men in ambush, commanding them as soon as the enemy was past
bye, to set upon them: who did so, and arose out of their ambush, and fell upon
the rear: Who supplied the room of the two that were lost.
we also being five and twenty in number (for Scyntharus and his son were
marshalled among us) advanced to meet with them, and encountered them with
great courage and strength: but in the end we put them to flight and pursued
them to their very dens: of the enemies were slain an hundred threescore
and ten: and but one of us beside Trigles our pilot, who was thrust through
the back with a fishes ribbe: all that day following, and the night after,
we lodged in our trenches, and set on end a dry back bone of a Dolphin,
instead of a Trophie: The next morrow the rest of the country people
perceiving what had happened, came to assault us: the Tarichanians, were
ranged in the right vving, with Pelamus their Captain: the Thynocephalians
were placed in the left vving, the Carcinochiririans made up the maine
battle: for the Tritonomenditans stirred not, neither would they join with
either part: about the temple of Neptune we met with them, and joined fight
with a great cry, which was answered with an echo out of the whale as if
it had been out of a cave: but we soon put them to flight being naked
people, and chased them into the vvood, making our selves masters of the
country: soon after they sent Ambassadors to us, to crave the bodies of the
dead, and to treat upon conditions of peace: but we had no purpose to hold
friendship with them, but set upon them the next day, and put them all to the
sword, except the Tritonomendetans, who seeing how it fared with the rest of
their fellows, fled away through the gills of the fish, and cast themselves
into the sea: then we traveled all the country over, which now was desert,
and dwelt there afterward without fear of enemies, spending the time in
exercise of the body, and in hunting, in planting vineyards, and gathering
fruit of the trees, like such men as live delicately, and have the world at
will, in a spacious and unavoidable prison: this kind of life led we for a
year and eight months: but when the fifth day of the ninth month was come,
about the time of the second opening of his mouth (for so the vvhale did once
every hour, A gaping clock.
whereby we conjectured how the hours went away) I say about the second
opening, upon a sudden, we heard a great cry, and a mighty noise, like the
calls of mariners, and the stirring of oars, which troubled us not a little:
wherefore we crept up to the very mouth of the fish, and standing within
his teeth, saw the strangest sight that ever eye beheld: men of monstrous
greatness, half a furlong in stature, sailing upon mighty great Islands, as
if they were upon shipboard: I know you will think this smells like a lie,
but yet you shall have it: the Islands were of a good length indeed, but not
very high, containing about an hundred furlongs in compass, every of these
carried of those kind of men, eight and twenty, of which some sat on either
side of the Island, and rowed in their course with great Cypres trees,
branches, leaves and all, instead of oars: on the stern or hinder part, as I
take it, stood the governor, upon a high hill, with a brazen rudder of a
furlong in length in his hand: on the forepart stood forty such fellows as
those, armed for the fight, resembling men in all points, but in their hair,
which was all fire and burnt clearly, so that they needed no helmets: instead
of sails, the wood growing in the Island did serve their turns, for the wind
blowing against it, drove forward the Island like a ship, A strange sea fight.
and carried it which way the governor would have it, for they had Pilots to
direct them, and were as nimble to be stird with oars as any long boat: at
the first we had the sight but of two or three of them: afterward appeared no
less than six hundred, which dividing themselves in two parts, prepared for
encounter, in which many of them by meeting with their barks together were
broken in pieces, many were turned over and drowned: they that closed, fought
lustiliy, and would not easily be parted, for the soldiers in the front showed
a great deal of valor, entering one upon another, and killed all they could,
for none were taken prisoners: instead of iron graples, they had mighty great
A fish with many feet.
Polypodes fast tied, which they cast at the other, and if they once laid hold
on the wood, they made the Isle sure enough for stirring: they darted and
wounded one another with oisters that would fill a waine, and spunges as big
as an acre: the leader on the one side was Aeolocentaurus, and of the other
Thalassopotes: the quarrel, as it seems, grew about taking a booty: for they
said that Thalassopotes, drove away many flocks of dolphines that belonged to
Aeolocentaurus, as we heard by their clamours one to another, and calling
upon the names of their kings: but Aeolocentaurus had the better of the day and
sunk one hundred and fifty of the enemies Islands, and three they took with
the men and all: the rest vvithdrevv themseves and fled, whom the other
pursued, but not far, because it grew toward evening, but returned to those
that were wrackt and broken, which they also recovered for the most part, and
took their own away with them: for on their part there were no less than
fourscore Islands drowned: then they erected a Trophie for a monument of this
Island fight, and fastened one of the enemies Islands with a stake upon the head
of the whale: that night they lodged close by the beast, casting their cables
about him, and ankered near unto him: their ankers are huge and great made all
of glass, but of a wonderful strength: the morrow after when they had
sacrificed upon the top of the whale, and there buried their dead, they sailed
away, with great triumph and songs of victory, and this was the manner of the
Islands fight.

The second Book.
Upon this we began to be weary of our abode in the whale, and our tarriance
there did much trouble us, we therefore set all our wits aworke to find out
some means or other to clear us from our captivity: first, we thought it
would do well to dig a hole through his right side, and make our escape that
way forth, which we began to labor at lustily: but after we had pierced him
five furlongs deep, and found it was to no purpose, we gave it over. Then we
devised to set the wood on fire, for that would certainly kill him without all
question, and being once dead, our issue would be easy enough: this we also
put in practice, and and began our project at the tail end, which burnt seven
days, and as many nights, before he had any feeling of our fire works: They
set the whale on fire.
upon the eighth and ninth days we perceived he began to grow sickly: for he
gaped more dully than he was wont to do, and sooner closed his mouth again:
the tenth and eleventh he was thoroughly mortified, and began to stink: upon
the twelfth day we bethought our selves, though almost too late, that unless
we underpropt his chops, when he gaped next, to keep them from closing, we
should be in danger of perpetual imprisonment within his dead carcass, and
there miserably perish, we therefore pitched long beams of timber upright
within his mouth to keep it from shutting, and then made our ship in a
readiness, and provided our selves with store of fresh water, and all other
things necessary for our use, Scintharus taking upon him to be our pilot, and
the next morrow the whale died: then we haled our ship through the void
passages, and fastening cables about his teeth, by little and little settled it
into the Sea, and mounting the back of the whale, sacrificed to Neptune, and
for three days together, took up our lodging hard by the Trophie, for we were
be calmed: the fourth day we put to sea, and met with many dead corpses that
perished the late sea fight, which our ship hit against, whose bodies we took
measure of with great admiration, and sailed for a few days in very temperate
weather. But after that the North wind blew so bitterly, that a great frost
ensued, wherewith the whole sea was all frozen up, not only superficially upon
the upper part, but in depth also the depth of four hundred fadomes, so that
we were feign to forsake our ship and run upon the Ice: the wind sitting
long in this corner, and we not able to endure it, put this devise in practice,
which was the invention of Scintharus: with mattocks and other instruments, we
made a mighty cave in the water, wherein we sheltered our selves forty days
together: in it we kindled fire, and fed upon fish of which we found great
plenty in our digging: at the last, our provision falling short, we returned
to our frozen ship which we set upright, and spreading her sails, went
forward as well as if we had been upon water, leasurely and gently sliding
upon the Ice: but on the fifth day the water grew warm, and the frost brake,
and all was turned to water again. We had not sailed three hundred furlongs
forwards, but we came to a little Island that was desert, where we only took
in fresh water (which now began to sail us) and with our shot killed two wild
bulls, and so departed: these bulls have their horns growing not upon their
heads, but under their eyes: Momus found fault with Jupiter for not setting the
bulls horns in this manner Arist. de part. any. l. 3. he was the god of
feasting, and of carping amongst the Heathen, Hesiod. in his Theog. says that
he was the son of the night, but begotten without a father.
as Momus thought it better. Then we entered into a sea, not of water, but of
milk, in which appeared a white Island full of vines: this Island was only a
great cheese, well pressed (as we afterward found when we fed upon it) about
some five and twenty furlongs in bigness: the vines were full of clusters of
grapes, out of which we could crush no wine but only milk: in the midst of
the Island, there was a temple built, dedicated to A sea Nymph daughter of
Nereus and Doris, so called because of her whiteness, as pure as milk.
Galatea, one of the daughters of Nereus, as by the inscription appeared: as
long as we remained there, the soil yielded us food and victuals, and our
drink was the milk that came out of the grapes: in these, as they said,
reigns Of her Neptune begot Pelias, and Neleus the father of Nestor.
Tyro, the daughter of Salmoneus, who after her departure, received this
guerdon at the hands of Neptune: in this Island we rested our selves five
days, and on the sixth put to sea again, a gentle guale attending us, and the
seas all still and quiet. The eight day as we sailed onward, not in milk any
longer, but in salt and azure water, He was King of Elis a territory of
Peloponnesus, and for imitating the thunder, by running his chariot over a
bridge of brass, was slain with a thunderbolt by Jvpiter.
we saw many men running upon the sea, like unto us every way forth, both in
shape and stature, but only for their feet which were of cork, whereupon I
suppose they had the name of Phellopodes: we marvelled much when we saw they
did not sink, but keep above water, and travel upon it so boldly: these came
unto us, and saluted us in the Grecian language, and said they were bound
toward Phello, their own country, and for a while ran along by us, but at
last turned their own way and left us, wishing us a happy and prosperous
voyage. Within a while after many Islands appeared, and near unto them, upon
our left hand stood Phello, the place whereunto they were traveling, which was
a city seated upon a mighty great and round cork. Further off, and more
toward the right hand, we saw five other Islands, large and mountainous, in
which much fire was burning: but directly before us, was a spacious flat
Island, distant from us not above five hundred furlongs: and approaching
somewhat near unto it, a wonderful fragrant air breathed upon us, of a most
sweet and delicate smell, such as Herodotus the storie-writer says arises out
of Arabia the happy, consisting of a mixture of roses, daffadills,
gilli-flowres, lillies, violets, myrtles, baies, and blossoms of vines: such a
dainty odoriferous savor was conveyed unto us: being delighted with this
smell, and hoping for better fortunes after our long labors, we got within a
little of the Isle, in which we found many havens on every side, not subject
to over floting, and yet of great capacity, and rivers of clear water
emptying themselves easily into the sea, with meadows and herbs, and
musical birds, some singing upon the shore, and many upon the branches of
trees, a still and gentle air compassing the whole country: when pleasant
blasts gently stirred the vvoods, the motion of the branches made a continual
delight some melody, like the sound of wind instruments in a solitary place:
a kind of clamor also was heard mixed with it, yet not tumultuous nor
offensive, but like the noise of a banquet, when some do play on wind
instruments, some commend the music, and some with their hands applaud the
pipe, or the harp, all which yielded us so great content; that we boldly
entered the haven, made fast our ship and landed, leaving in her only
Scintharus, and two more of our companions behind us, passing along through a
sweet meadow, we met with the guards that used to sail about the Island,
who took us, and bound us with garlands of roses (which are the strictest
bands they have) to be carried to their governor: from them we heard as we
were upon the way, that it was the Sea the Tyrant. y.
Island of those that are called blessed, and that Rhadamanthus was governor
there, A controversy concerning Ajax, who being overcome by the eloquence of
Ulysses about Achilles armor, fell mad and slew himself.
to whom we were brought and placed the fourth in order of them that were to
be judged: the first trial was about Ajax the son Telamon, whether he were
a meet man to be admitted into the society of the Heroes, or not: the
objections against him were his madness: and the killing of himself: and
after long pleading to and fro, Rhadamanthus gave this sentence, that for the
present he should be put to Hippocrates the Physician of Cou^, to be purged
with Elleborus, and upon the recoverie of his wits to have admittance: the
second was a controversy of love, Theseus and Menelaus contending, which had
the better right to Hellen: but Rhadamanthus gave judgment on Menelaus side,
in respect of the manifold labors and perils he had incurred for that marriage
sake, whereas Theseus had wives enouogh beside to live withal as the Hippolyta.
Amazon, Ariadne, and Phaedra.
and the daughters of Manos: the third was a question of precedencie, between
Alexander the great.
Alexander the son of Philip, and The son of Amilchar, and General of the
Carthaginians against the Romans, see Plutarch in his life.
Hannibal the Carthaginian, in which Alexander was preferred, and his throne
placed next to the elder The son of Cambises who translated the kingdom from
the Medes to the Persians see the surveiors. The younger Syrus was the son of
Darius Nothus, and brother to Artaxerxes, of whom Xenophon.
Cyrus the Persian: In the fourth place we appeared, and he demanded of us,
what reason we had, being living men, to take land in that sacred country,
and we told him all our adventures in order as they befell us: then he
commanded us to stand aside, and considering upon it a great while, in the end
proposed it to the benchers, which were many, and among them Plutarch. He
describes the city of the blessed, and the Elysian fields, and and to their
perpetual shame, out-lies Homer and all the Poets.
Aristides the Athenian, surnamed the just: and when he was provided what
sentence to deliver, he said, that for our busy curiosity, and needless
travels, we should be accountable after our death: but for the present, we
should have a time limited for our abode, during which we should feast the
Heroes, and then depart, prefixing us seven months liberty to conclude our
tariance, and no more: then our garlands fell off from us of themselves, and
we were set loose, and led into the city to feast with the blessed: the city
was all of gold, compassed with a wall made of the precious stone Smaragdus,
which had seven gates, every one cut out of a whole piece of timber of cinnamon
tree: the pavement of the city, and all the ground within the walls was Ivorie:
the temples of all the gods are built of Berryll, with large altars made all of
one whole Amethyst, upon which they offer their sacrifices: about the city
runs a river of most excellent sweet ointment, in breadth an hundred cubits
of the larger measure, and so deep that a man may swim in it with ease: for
their bathes, they have great houses of glass, which they warm with cinnamon:
and their bathing tubbes are filled with warm dew instead of water: their
only garments are cob-webs of purple color, neither have they any bodies, but
are intactile and without flesh, a mere shape and presentation only: and
being thus bodilesse, they yet stand, and are moved, are intelligent, and can
speak: and their naked soul seems to wander up and down, in a corporal
likeness: for if a man touch them not, he cannot say otherwise, but that they
have bodies, altogether like shadows standing upright, and not, as they are of
a dark color: no man waxes any older there then he was before, but of what
age he comes thither, so he continues: neither is there any night with them,
nor indeed clear day: but like the twilight toward morning before the Sun be
up, such a kind of light do they live in: they know but one season of the
year which is the spring, and feel no other wind but Zephirus: Homer.
the region flourishes with all sorts of flowers, and with all pleasing
plants fit for shade: their vines bear fruit twelve times a year, every
month once, their pomegranate trees, their apple trees, and their other fruit,
they say, bear thirteen times in the year: for in the month called Minous
they bear twice. Instead of wheat, their ears bear them loaves of bread
ready baked, like unto mushrummes: about the city are three hundred threescore
and five wells of water, and as many of honey, and five hundred of sweet
ointment, for they are less than the other: they have seven rivers of milk
and eight of wine: they keep their feast without the city, in a field
called Elysium, which is a most pleasant meadow environed with vvoods of all
sorts, so thick that they serve for a shade to all that are invited, who fit
upon beds of flowers, and are waited upon, and have every thing brought unto
them by the winds, unless it be to have the wine filled: and that there is no
need of: for about the banketing place are mighty great trees growing of
clear and pure glass: and the fruit of those trees are drinking cups and
other kind of vessels of what fashion or greatness you will: and every man
that comes to the feast gathers one or two of those cups, and sets them before
him, which will be full of wine presently, and then they drink: instead of
garlands, the nightingales, and other musical birds, gather flowers with their
becks out of the meadows adjoining, and flying over their heads with chirping
noates scatter them among them: they are anointed with sweet ointment in this
manner: sundry clouds draw that unguent out of the fountains and the rivers,
which settling over the heads of them that are at the banquet, the least blast of
wind makes a small rain fall upon them like unto a dew: After supper they
spend the time in music and singing: their ditties that are in most request,
they take out of For he was in most esteem among the ancients.
Homers verses, who is there present himself and feasteth among them sitting
Ulysses had good reas^n to give place to Homer, who lied so lustily for his
credit.
next above Ulysses: their quiers consist of boys and virgins, which were
directed and assisted by Two excellent musicians.
Eunomus the Locrian, and Two excellent musicians.
Arion the Lesbian, and Two famous Lyrick Poets.
Anacreon, and Stesichorus having much inveighed against Hellena in his verses
as the cause of all the Trojan war, was struck blind by Castor and Pollux, but
upon his recantation recovevered his sight. Excellent liquor for a feast.
Stesichorus, who has had a place there: ever since his reconcilement with
Hellena. As soon as these have done, there enter a second quier of swans
swallows and nightingales: and when they have ended, the whole woods ring like
wind instruments by the stirring of the air: but that which makes most for
their mirth, are two wells adjoining to the banqueting place, the one of
laughter the other of pleasure: of these every man drinks to begin the feast
withal, which makes them spend the whole time in mirth and laughter. I will
also relate unto you, what famous men I saw in that association. There were all
the demigods, and all that fought against Troy, excepting This Ajax; when Troy
was taken, ravished Cassandra the daughter of Priamus, being a virgin, and
priest to Minerva in the Temple of Pallas, for which the goddess sent a
tempest which dispersed the navy of the Grecians as they returned, and sunk
Ajax with a thunderbolt.
Ajax the Locrian, he only, they told me, was tormented in the region of the
unrighteous: of Barbarians, there was the elder and the younger Cyrus, and The
only wise man among the Scythians, who endeavoring to bring in the Athenian
laws amongst his barbarous countrymen, was slain by the King his brother.
Laert.
Anacharsis the Scythian: Scoller and servant to Pythagoras.
Zamolxis the Thracian, and The second Roman King.
Numa the Italian: there was also Law giver to the Lacedaemonians.

Plutarch.


Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian, and Two wise men of Athens that professed
poverty. Plutarch.
Phocion and Two wise men of Athens that professed poverty. Plutarch.
Tellus the Athenians, and and all the wise men, unless it were Who was K. of
Corinth and a Tyrant.
Periander: I also saw Socrates the son of Sophroniscus prattling with Nestor,
and Palamedes, and close by him stood Socrates professed himself learned in
nothing but only love, and that of young youths, which he held to the best and
noblest affection: seeing that this was the best means to bring up the younger
sort in the knowledge of goodness and vertuo, but his enemies made the worst
construction of it, and therefore Lucian brings him in here with these young
and beautiful laddes.
Hyacinthus, the Lacedaemonian, and the gallant Narcissus, and Hyllas, and
other beautiful and lovely youths, and for ought I could gather by him, he
was far in love with Hyacinthus, for he discoursed with him more then all
the rest: for which cause, they said, Rhadamanthus was offended at him, and
often threatened to thrust him out of the Island, if he continued to play the
fool in that fashion, and not give over his idle manner of jesting, when he
was at their banquet: only Such a one as he would have in his common wealth.
Plato was not present, for they said he dwelled in a city framed by himself
observing the same rule of government and laws, as he had prescribed for them
to live under: Aristippus and Epicurus are prime men amongst them, because they
are the most joviall good fellows, and the best companions: Diogenes, the
Sinopean, was so far altered from the man he was before that he married
with Lais the harlot, and was many times so drunk, that he would rise and
dance about the room, as a man out of his senses: The fable-maker. No Sto^cks
in Elysium.
Aesope the Phrygian served them for a jester: there was not one Stoicke in
company but were still busied in ascending the height of virtues hill: Nectom.
r.
and of A Philosopher scholar to Zeno the greatest Logician of his time, and
chief of the Stotcks sect.
Chrysippus, we heard that it was not lawfell for him by any means to touch
upon the Island until he have the fourth time purged himself with Elleborus:
the He means not the Platonicks who are called the old Academicks, but the
new Academicke, who would affirm nothing, and held it impossible that anything
should be truly known, and therefore he says they abolished all kind of
judgment. What was the difference between these and the Pyrrhonians or
Scepticks. See Gellius 1.11. c. 5.
Academicks, they say were willing enough to come, but that they yet are
doubtful, and in suspense, and cannot comprehend how there should be any such
Island: but indeed, I think they were fearful to come to be judged by
Rhadamanthus, because themselves have abolished all kind of judgment: yet
many of them, they say, had a desire, and would follow after those that were
coming hither, but were so sloathfull as to give it over, because they were
not comprehensive, and therefore turned back in the midst of their way: these
were all the men of note that I saw there: and amongst them all, Achilles was
held to be the best man, and next to him Theseus: for their manner of venerie
and copulation thus it is: they couple openly in the eyes of all men, both with
females and male kind, and no man holds it for any dishonestie: only Socrates
would swear deeply that he accompanied young men in a cleanly fashion, and
therefore every man condemned him for a perjured fellow: and Hyacinthus snd
Narcissus both confessed otherwise for all his denial: the women there are all
in common, and no man takes exception at it, in which respect they are
absolutely Plato in his commonwealth would have all women common.
the best Platonists in the world: and so do the boys yield themselves to any
man's pleasure without contradiction: after I had spent two or three days in
this manner, I went to talk with Homer the poet, our leisure serving us both
well, and to know of him what country man he was, a question with us hard to
be resolved, and he said he could not certainly tell himself, Seven Cities of
Greece strove for the birth of Homer, which are comprised in this verse,
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salame^, Chios, Argos, Athenae.
because some said he was of Chios, some of Smyrna, and many to be of
Colophon: but he said indeed, he was a Babilonian, and among his own
countrymen not called Homer but Tigranes: and afterward living as an (...)
signifies a pledge or hostage.
hostage among the Graecians, he had therefore that name put upon him: then I
questioned him about those verses in his books, that are dasallowed, as not of
his making, whether they were written by him or not, and he told me they were
all his own, much condemning Two carping grammarians that undertook to
correct some of Homers verses.
Zenodatus, and Two carping grammarians that undertook to correct some of
Homers verses.
Aristarchus the Grammarians for their weakness in judgment: when he had
satisfied me in this, I asked him again This touches some Commentators upon
Homer, who have gone about to give a reason almost of every word he wrote.
why he began the first verse of his poem with anger: and he told me it
fell out so by chance, not upon any premeditation: I also desired to know of
him, whether he wrote his Odysses before his Iliads, as many men do hold: but
he said it was not so: as for his blindness which is charged upon him, I soon
found it was far otherwise, and perceived it so plainly, that I needed not to
question him about it: thus was I used to do many days, when I found him
idle, and would go to him, and ask him many questions, which he would give
me answer to very freely: especially when we talked o a trial he had in the
court of justice, wherein he got the better: for See Necromant. b.
Thersites had preferred a bill of complaint against him, for abusing him, and
scoffing at him in his Poem, in which action Homer was acquitted, having Who
was an eloquent Orator.
Ulysses for his advocate: about the same time came to us See the Cock, a. and
h.
Pythagoras, the Samian, who had changed his shape now seven times, and lived
in as many lives, and accomplished the periodes of his soul: the right half
of his body was wholly of gold: and they all agreed that he should have place
amongst them, but were doubtful what to call him, Pythagoras or Euphorbus.
Icaromenip. a. and b.
Empedocles also came to the place, scorcht quite over, as if his body had
been broild upon the embers: but could not be admitted, for all his great
entreaty: the time passing thus along, the day of prizes for masteries of
activitie now approached, which they call Games and masteries among the dead.
Thanatusia: the setters of them forth were He alludes to the manner of the
Roman magistrates, who when they exhibited plays unto the people, the names of
the setters forth were Registered and the time how often they had done it.
Achilles, the fifth time, and Theseus the seventh time: to relate the whole
circumstance would require a long discourse: but the principal points I will
deliver: at wrestling, Carus, one of the lineage of Hercules had the best; and
wanne the garland from Ulysses: the fight with fists was equal between Arius
the Egyptian who was buried at Corinth, and Epius, that combated for it:
there was no prize appointed for the Fighting at all manner of weapons.
Pancratian fight (...)er do I remember who got the best in running: (...)etrie
though Homer without question were to good for them all, yet the best was given
to Homer and Hesiod lived about the same time, and it has been controverted by
many which was the better poet.
Hesiodus: the prizes were all alike, garlands plotted of peacocks feathers. As
soon as the games were ended, news came to us, that the damned crew in the
habitation of the wicked, had broken their bounds, escaped the Jaylours, and
were coming to assail the Island, led Who were all bloody Tyrants, or
notorious robbers.
by Phalaris the Acragentine, Busyris the Egyptian, Diomedes the Thracian,
Sciron, Pitnocamptes, and others: which Rhadamanthus hearing, he ranged the
Heroes in battle array upon the sea shore, under the leading of Theseus, and
Achilles, and Ajax Telamonius, who had now recovered his senses, where they
joined fight: but the Heroes had the day, Achilles carrying himself very
nobly. Socrates also, who was placed in the right wing, was noted for a brave
soldier, Plato in his Laches or Dialogue of fortitude, prayseth Socrates, for
his manhood at Delium, in which battle the Athenians were overthrown by the
Boeotians, and ran all away.
much better than he was in his lifetime, in the battle at Delium: for when
the enemy charged him, he neither fled, nor changed countenance: wherefore
afterward, in reward of his valor, he had a prize set out for him on pupose:
which was a beautiful and spacious garden, planted in the suburbs of the
city, whereunto he invited many, and disputed with them there, giving it the
name of Academia was a woody place about a mile from Athens, where Socrates
did sometimes meet his scholars and dispute with them: here Plato was borne,
and from hence Lucian takes this name which signifies the Academie of the dead.
Necracademia: then we took the vanquished prisoners, and bound them, and sent
them back to be punished with greater torments: this fight was also pend by
Homer, who, at my departure, gave me the book to show my friends, which I
afterward lost, and many things else beside: but the first verse of the poem
I remember was this: Somewhat like the beginning of his Odyss.
Tell me now, Muse, how the dead Heroes fought: when they overcome in fight,
they they have a custom to make a feast with sodden beans, wherewith they
banquet together for joy of their victory: only See the Cock.
Pythagoras had no part with them, but sat aloof off, and lost his dinner
because he could not away with beans. Six months were now past over, and
the seventh half way onwards, when a new business was beg(...)ongst us: for
Cynirus the son of Scintharus, a proper tall ^oung man, had long been in
love with Helena, and it might plainly be perceived, that she as fondly doted
upon him, for they would still be winking and drinking one to another whilst
they were a feasting, and rise alone together, and wander up and down in the
vvood: this humor increasing, and knowing not what course to take, Cinyrus
devise was to steal away Helena, A second rape of Helena.
whom he found as pliable to run away with him to some of the Islands
adjoining, either to Phello, or Tyroessa, having before combined with three of
the boldest fellows in my company, to join with them in their conspiracy:
but never acquainted his father with it, knowing that he would surely punish
him for it: being resolved upon this, they vvatcht their time to put it in
practice: for when night was come, and I absent, (for I was fallen asleep at
the feast) they gave a slip to all the rest, and went away with Helena to
ship-bord as fast as they could: Menelaus waking about midnight, and finding
his bed empty, and his wife gone, made an outcrie, and calling up his brother
went to the Court of Rhadamanthus: as soon as the day appeared, the scowts
told them they had descried a ship, which by that time was got far off
into the sea: then Rhadamanthus set out a vessel made of one whole piece of
timber of Asphodelus vvood, manned with fifty of the Heroes to pursue after
them, which were so willing on their way, that by noone they had overtaken
them, newly entered into the milkie Ocean, not far from Tyroessa: so near
were they got to make an escape: then took we their ship and haled it
after us with a chain of roses and brought it back again: Rhadamanthus
first examined Cinyrus and his companions whether they had any other partners
in this plott, and they confessing none, were adjudged to be tied fast by the
privy members, and sent into the place of the wicked, there to be tormented,
after they had been scourged with rods made of mallows: Helena all blubbered
with tear(...) so ashamed of her self, that she would not (...): they also
decreed to send us packing out of the (...) our prefixed time being come, and
that we should stay there no longer then the next morrow, wherewith I was
much aggrieved and wept bitterly to leave so good a place, and turn wanderer
again I knew not whither: but they comforted me much in telling me, that
before many years were past I should be with them again, and showed me a
chair and a bed prepared for me against the time to come, near unto persons
of the best quality: then went I to Rhadamanthus, humbly beseeching him to
tell me my future fortunes, and to direct me in my course: and he told me
that after many travels and dangers, I should at last recover my country, but
would not tell me the certain time of my return: and showing me the Islands
adjoining, which were five in number, and a sixth a little further off, he
said, those nearest are the Islands of the ungodly, which you see burning all
in a light fire, but the other sixth is the Island of dreams: and beyond that
is the Ogygia, an Island between the Phoenician and Syrian seas in which
Calypso a seanymph the daudhter of Oceanus and Thetis, being Queen entertained
Ulysses in his travels and falling in love with him detained him with her seven
years.
Island of Calypso, which you cannot see from hence: when you are past these,
you shall come into the great Continent, over against your own country, where
you shall suffer many afflictions, and pass through many nations, and meet
with men of inhumane conditions, and at length attain to the other continent.
When he had told me this, he plucked a root of mallows out of the ground,
and reached it to me, commanding me in my greatest perils, to make my
prayers to that: advising me further, neither Mest have interpreted this
Pythagorian precept, not to stir up the anger of great and powerful persons.

(...),


to rake in the fire with my knife, nor to feed upon lupines, nor to come near
a boy, when be is past eighteen year of age: if I were mindful of this, the
hopes would be great that I should come to the Island again: then we prepared
for our passage, and feasted with them at the usual hour, and next morrow I
went to Homer, entreating him to do so much as make an Epigram of two verses
for me, which he did: and I erected a pillar of Braylstone n^ unto the haven,
and engraved them upon it: the Epigram was this: Lucian, the gods beloved did
once attain
To see all this, and then go home again.
after that days tarrying, we put to sea, brought onward on our way by the
Heroes: where Ulysses closely coming to me, that The wife of Ulysses.
Penelope might not see him, conveied a letter into my hand to deliver to
Calypso, in the Isle of Ogygia: Rhadamanthus also sent The son of Neptune and
Amymone the daughter of Danaus King of the Argives.
Nauplius the feriman along with us, that if it were our fortune to put into
those Islands, no man should lay hands upon us, because we were bent upon other
employments: no sooner had we past beyond the smell of that sweet odor but
we felt a horrible filthy stink, like pitch and brimstone burning, carrying
an intolerable sent with it, as if men were broyling upon burning coals: the
air was dark and muddie, from which distilled a pitchie kind of dew: we
heard also the lash of the whips, and the roarings of the tormented: yet went
we not to visit all the Islands, but that wherein we landed, was of this
form: it was wholly compassed about with steep, sharp, and craggie rocks,
without either wood or water: yet we made a shift to scramble up among the
cliffes, and so went forwards, in a way quite overgrowne with briars and
thorns through a most vilanous ghastly country, The Islands of the tormented.
and coming at last to the prison and place of torment we wondered to see
the nature and quality of the soil which brought forth no other flowers but
swords and daggers, and round about it ran certain rivers, the first of
dirt, the second of blood, and the innermost of burning fire which was very
broad and unpassable, floting like water, and working like the waves of the
sea, full of sundry fishes, some as big as firebrands, others of a less
sise like coals of fire, and these they call Lychniscies: there was but one
narrow entrance into it, and Timon of Athens appointed to keep the door yet
we got in by the help of Nauplius, and saw them that were tormented, both
Kings, and private persons very many, of which there were some that I Knew, for
there I saw Cynirus tied by private members, and hanging up in the smoke: but
the greatest torments of all are inflicted upon them that told any lies in
their lifetime, and wrote untruly, as Two historians.
Ctesias the Cnidian, Herodotus, and many other, which I beholding, was put in
great hopes that I should never have any thing to do there, Witness this
history.
for I do not know, that ever I spoke any untruth in my life: we therefore
returned speedily to our ship (for we could endure the sight no longer) and
taking our leaves of Nauplius, sent him back again. A little after appeared
the Isle of Dreams near unto us, The Island and City of Dreams described.
an obscure country, and unperspicuous to the eye, endued with the same
quality as dreams themselves are: for as we drew, it still gave back and
fled from us, that it seemed to be farther off then at the first, but in the
end we attained it and entered the haven called (...) Sleep.
Hypnus, and adjoined to the gate of Ivorie, where the temple of Or Alector.
Alectryon stands, and took land somewhat late in the evening: entering the
gate we saw many dreams of sundry fashions: See the Cock.
but I will first tell you somewhat of the city, because no man else has
written any description of it: Odyss. lib. 9 v. 562.
only Homer has touched it a little, but to small purpose: it is round about
environed with a wood, the trees whereof are exceeding high Herbs procuring
sleep.

The names both of places and persons here are compounded of such words as
signify something belonging to dreams, sleep, or to the night.


Poppies, and Mandragoras, in which an infinite number of owls do nestle, and
no other birds to be seen in the Island: near unto it is a river running,
called by them Nyctiporus, and at the gates are two wells, the one named
Negretus the other Pannychia, the wall of the city is high and of a changeable
color, like unto the rainebow: in which are four gates, though Homer speak
but of two: for there are two which look toward the fields of flowth, the one
made of iron, the other of potters clay, through which those dreams have
passage, that represent fearful bloody and cruel matters: the other two
behold the haven and the sea, of which the one is made of horn, the other of
Ivorie, which we went in at. As we entered the city, on the right hand
stands the temple of the Night, whom with Alectryon, they reverence above all
the gods: for he has also a Temple built for him, near unto the haven: on
the left hand stands the palace of sleep: for he is the sovereign King over
them all, and has deputed two great Princes to govern under him, namely
Taraxion the son of Matoegenes, and Plutocles the son of Phantasion: in the
midst of the marketplace is a well, by them called Careotis, and two temples
adjoining, the one of falsehood, the other of truth, which have either of them a
private cell peculiar to the Priests, and an oracle, in which the chief
prophet is Antipho, the interpreter of dreams, who was preferred by sleep to
that place of dignity: these dreams are not all alike either in nature, or
shape: for some of them are long beautiful and pleasing, others again are as
short and deformed: some make show to be of gold, and others to be as base and
beggarly: some of them had wings, and were of monstrous forms, others set out
in pomp as it were in a triumph, representing the apparances of Kings, Gods,
and other persons: many of them were of our acquaintance, for they had been
seen of us before, which came unto us and saluted us as their old friends, and
took us and lulled us asleep, and feasted us nobly and courteously, promising
beside all other entertainment which was sumptuous and costly, to make us Kings
and Princes: some of them brought us home to our own country to show us our
friends there, and come back with us the next morrow: thus we spent thirty
days and as many nights among them sleeping and feasting all the while, until
a sudden clap of thunder awakned us all, and we starting up, provided our
selves of victuals, and took sea again, and on the third day landed in Ogygia.
But upon the way I opened the letter I was to deliver, and read the contents,
Homer Odyss.
which were these: Ulysses to Calypso sends greeting: this is to give you to
undestand, that after my departure from you, in the vessel I made in have for
my self, I suffered shipwreck, and hardly escaped by the help of Leucothea
into the country of the Phoeacks, who sent me to mine own home, where I
found many that were vvooers to my wife, and riotously consumed my means: but
I slew them all and was afterward killed my self by my son Who being told by
his mother whose son he was traveled to Ithaca to see his father, but being
kept back by the guard, and not suffered to have admittance, he slew certain
of them, and at length Ulysses being drawn thither by the tumult, Telegonus
not knowing who he was ignorantly slew him.
Telegonus, whom I begat of Circe, and am now in the Island of the blessed,
where I daily repent my self for refusing to live with you, and forsaking the
imortalitie proffered me by you; but if I can spy a convenient time, I will
give them all the slip and come to you: This was the effect of the letter
with some addition concerning us, that we should have entertainment: and far
had I not gone from the sea, but I found such a cave as Homer speaks of, and
she her self working busily at her wool, when she had received the letter,
and brought us in, she began to weep and take on grievously, but afterward
she called us to meat, and made us very good cheer, asking us many questions
concerning Ulysses and Penelope, whether she was so beautiful and modest, as
Ulysses had often before bragged of her: and we made her such answer, as we
thought would give her best content: and departing to our ship, reposed our
selves near unto the shore, and in the morning put to sea, where we were
taken with a violent storm, which tossed us two days together, and on the third
we fell among the Colocynthopiratans: these are a wild kind of men, that
issue out of the Islands adjoining, and prey upon passengers: and for their
shipping have mighty great gowrds six cubits in length, which they make
hollow when they are ripe, and cleanse out all that is within them, and use the
rindes for ships, making their masts of reeds, and their sails of the gowrd
leaves: These set upon us with two ships furnished and fought with us, and
wounded many, casting at us instead of stones, the seeds of those gowrds: the
fight was continued with equal fortune, until about noone, at which time,
behind the Colocynthopiratans we espied the Caryonautans coming on, who as
it appeared, were enemies to the other: for when they saw them approach, they
forsook us, and turned about to fight with them, and in the mean space we
hoist sail and away, leaving them together by the ears, and no doubt but the
Caryonautans had the better of the day, for they exceeded in number, having
five ships well furnished, and their vessels of greater strength, for they are
made of nut-shells cloven in the midst and cleansed, of which every half is
fifteen fadome in length: when we were got out of sight, we were careful for
the curing of our hurt men, and from that time forwards went no more unarmd,
fearing continually to be assaulted on the sudden: and good cause we had: for
before sunsetting, some twenty men or thereabouts, which also were pirates,
made toward us riding upon monstrous great dolphines, which carried them
surely: and when their riders gat upon their backs, would neigh like horses:
when they were come near us, they divided themselves, some on the one side,
and some on the other, and flung at us with dried cuttle-fishes, and the eyes
of sea-crabs: but when we shot at them again and hurt them, they would not
abide it, but fled to the Island the most of them wounded. About midnight, the
sea being calm, we fell, before we were aware upon a mighty great Or
Kingsfisher.
Alcyons nest, in compass no less than threescore furlongs, in which the
Alcyon herself sailed, as she was hatching her eggs, in quantity almost
equalling the nest: for when she took her wings, the blast of her feathers
had like to have overturned our ship, making a lamentable noise as she flew
along: as soon as it was day, we got upon it, and found it to be a nest,
fashioned like a great lighter, with trees platted and vvound one within
another, in which were five hundred eggs, every one bigger than a tun of
Chios measure, and so near their time of hatching, that the young chickings
might be seen, and began to cry: then with an axe we hewed one of the eggs
in pieces, and cut out a young one that had no feathers, which yet was bigger
than twenty of our vultures: when we had gone some two hundred furlongs
from this nest, fearful prodigies, and strange tokens appeared unto us: for
the carved goose that stood for an ornament on the stern of our ship, suddenly
flusht out with feathers and began to cry: Scintharus our pilot, that was a
bold man, in an instant was covered with hair: and which was more strange
then all the rest, the mast of our ship began to budde out with branches,
and to bear fruit at the top, both of figs, and great clusters of grapes,
but not yet ripe: upon the sight of this, we had great cause to be troubled
in mind, and therefore besought the gods to avert from us the evil that by
these tokens was portended: And we had not past full out five hundred
furlongs, but we came in view of a mighty vvood of pine-trees and cypress,
which made us think it had been land, when it was indeed a sea of infinite
depth, planted with trees that had no roots, but floted firm and upright,
standing upon the water: when we came to it, and found how the case stood
with us, we knew not what to do with our selves: to go forwards through
the trees was altogether impossible, they were so thick, and grew so close
together: and to turn again with safety, was as much unlikely: I therefore
got me up to the top of the highest tree to discover if I could what was
beyond, and I found the breadth of the vvood to be fifty furlongs or
thereabout, and then appeared another Ocean to receive us, wherefore we
thought it best to assay to lift up our ship upon the leaves of the trees
which were thick grown, and by that means pass over if it were possible
to the other Ocean: and so we did: for fastening a strong cable to our ship,
we wound it about the tops of the trees, and with much ado poised it up to
the height, and placing it upon the branches, spread our sails, and were
carried as it were upon the sea, dragging our ship after us by the help of
the vvinde which set it forwards: at which time, a verse of the poet
Antimachus came to my remembrance, wherein he speaks of sailing over tops
of trees: when we had past over the wood, and were come to the sea again,
we let down our ship in the same manner as we took it up: Then sailed
we forwards in a pure and clear streme, until we came to an exceeding great
gulf or trench in the sea, made by the division of the waters, as many times
is upon land: where we see great clifts made in the ground by earthquakes and
other means: whereupon we stroke sail and our ship staid upon a sudden, when
it was at the pits brim ready to tumble in: and we stooping down to look into
it, thought it could be no less then a thousand furlongs deep, most fearful
and monstrous to behold, for the water stood as it were divided into two parts,
but looking on our right hand a far off, we perceived a bridge of water,
which to our seeming, did join the two seas together, and cross over from the
one to the other: wherefore we labored with oars to get unto it, and over it
we went, and with much ado got to the further side, beyond all our
expectation. Then a calm sea received us, and in it we found an Island, not
very great, but inhabited with unsociable people, for in it were dwelling wild
men named Bucephalians, that had horns on their heads like the picture of A
monster who was half a bull and half a man, begotten on Pasiphae the wife of
Minos King of Creete, by a bull with which she fell in love, etc. Ovid. Met.
Minotaurus: where we went ashore to look for fresh water and victuals, for
ours was all spent: and there we found water enough, but nothing else
appeared: only we heard a great bellowing and roaring a little way off,
which we thought to have been some heard of cattle, and going forwards, fell
upon those men, who espying us, chaced us back again, and took three of our
company: the rest fled toward the sea: then we all armed our selves, not
meaning to leave our friends unrevenged, and set upon the Bucephalians, as they
were dividing the flesh of them that that were slain, and put them all to
flight, and pursued after them, of whom we killed fifty, and two we took
alive, and so returned with our prisoners, but food we could find none: then
the company were all earnest with me to kill those whom we had taken: but I
did not like so well of that, thinking it better to keep them in bonds, until
ambassadors should come from the Bucephalians to ransom them that were
taken, and indeed they did: and I well understood by the nodding of their
heads, and their lamentable lowing, like petitioners, what their business
was: so we agreed upon a ransom of sundry cheeses, and dried fish, and
onions, and four dear with three legs a piece, two behind and one before:
upon these conditions we delivered those whom we had taken, and tarrying
there but one day, departed: then the fishes began to show themselves in the
sea, and the birds flew over our heads, and all other tokens of our approach to
land appeared unto us: within a while after we saw men traveling the seas,
and a new found manner of navigation, themselves supplying the office both for
ship and sailer: and I will tell you how: As they lie upon their backs in
the water and their privy members standing upright, which are of a large sise
and fit for such a purpose, they fasten thereto a sail, and holding their
cords in their hands, when the vvinde has taken it, are carried up and down
as please themselves: after these followed others riding upon cork: for they
yoke two dolphines together, and drive them on, (performing themselves the
place of a coachman) which draw the cork along after them: these never
offered us any violence, nor once shunned our sight, but past along in our
company, without fear in a peaceable manner, wondering at the greatness of
our ship, and beholding it on every side. At evening we arrived upon a small
Island, inhabited, as it seemed only by women, which could speak the Greek
language: for they came unto us, gave us their hands, and saluted us, all
attired like wantons, beautiful, and young, wearing long mantles down to the
foot: the Island was called Cabalusa, and the city Hydamardia: so the women
received us, and every one of them took aside one of us for herself, and made
him her guest: but I pausing a little upon it (for my heart misgave me) looked
narrowly round about, and saw the bones of many men, and the sculls lying
together in a corner: yet I thought not good to make any stir, or to call my
company about me, or to put on arms: but taking the mallow into my hand,
made my earnest prayers thereto, that I might escape out of those present
perils: within a while after, when the strange female came to wait upon me, I
perceived she had not the legs of a woman, but the hoofes of an ass:
whereupon I drew my sword, and taking fast hold of her, bound her, and examined
her upon the point: and she though unwillingly, confessed that they were
sea-women, called Onosceleans, and they fed upon strangers that traveled that
way: for said she, when we have made them drunk, we go to bed to them,
and in their sleep, make a hand of them: I hearing this, left her bound in the
place where she was, and went up to the roof of the house, where I made an
outcrie, and called my company to me, and when they were come together,
acquainted them with all that I had heard, and showed them the bones, and
brought them into her that was bound, who suddenly was turned into water, and
could not be seen: notwithstanding I thrust my sword into the water, to see
what would come of it, and it was changed into blood: then we made all the
have we could to our ship, and got us away: and as soon as it was clear
day, we had sight of the maine land, which we judged to be the country
opposite to our continent: whereupon we worshipped, and made our prayers and
took counsel what was now to be done: some thought it best, only to go a
land, and so return back again: others thought it better to leave our ship
there, and march into the midland, to try what the inhabitants would do: but
whilst we were upon this consultation a violent storm fell upon us, which
drove our ship against the shore, and burst it all in pieces, and with much
ado we all swam to land with our arms, every man catching what he could lay
hands on: These are all the occurrences I can acquaint you withal, till the
time of our landing both in the sea, and in our course to the Islands, and in
the air: and after that in the whale: and when we came out again, what
betide unto us among the Heroes, and among the dreams, and lastly among the
Bucephalians, and the Onosceleans: what past upon land, the next Books shall
deliver.

TIMON OR THE MANHATER.
O Jupiter, that art also Names derived from the several offices of Jupiter.
called Philius, and Xenius, and Hetaerius, and Ephestius, and Asteropetes, and
Hercius, and Nephelegeretes, and Erigdupus, and I know not how many names else,
which the braine-sick poets have been used to put upon thee, especially when
they want words to make up their meeter: for then thou art a plain alias
dictus among them, and they call thee they care not what, Timons complaint.
wherewith thou supportest the ruins of their rythmes, and closest up the
crannies of their verses: what is now become of thy fiery flashes of lightning,
thy clattering claps of thunder, and thy dreadful horrible terrible
thunderbolt? all these are now come to nothing, no more esteemed than a
poetical fume, were it not for the noise of their names only: and that
renowned far fetching engine of thine, that was ready at all assaies, I know
not by what means is now utterly quenched, and coold: not the least spark of
wrath reserved to be darted out against malefactors: No knight of the post, nor
common perjuror but stands more in dread of the dead snuff of a candle, than
of the all consuming heat of thy thunderbolt, and they make no more account of
it, than of a dark torch held over their heads, that yields neither fire nor
smoke, and think all the hurt it can do them, is to fill them with sutt. This
made True Hist, l. 2. d.
Salmoneus already presume to answer thee again with thunder: a bold daring
braggadochio, that knew how cool Joves anger would be well enough: for how
should it be otherwise? thou being surprised with so dead a sleep as if thou
had eaten Ibid. g.
Mandrakes, neither able to hear them that commit perjurie, nor see them that
are actors of vilany, but art either so purblind or so hoodwinkt that thou
can discern nothing that is done, and thy ears as deaf as a doting old
man's. Indeed when thou wast in thy younger blood, and had thy spirits about
thee, and thy choler apt to be stirred, thou did work wonders against those
that were unjust and violent, and would never take any truce, or come to any
composition with them, but thy thunderbolt was ever in action, thy target ready
brandished, thy tempest roared, thy lightning flasht amain to fetch them off
at length, thy earthquakes were like riddles, thy snow fell down by heaps,
and hailestones as big as rocks, and to tell the home indeed, thy shoures of
rain were all impetuous and violent, every drop as big as a river, which
suddenly made such a The general deluge. Ovid. Met. 1.1.
Deucalion, that all things were drencht under the floods, and surely one small
caske remained to arrive at The place where Deucalion and Pyrrha escaped from
the flood.
Licoreus, which preserved a poor spark of humane seed for the generation of
greater mischiefs. Wherefore thou reapest at their hands a just reward of thy
sluggishnesse for no man now does sacrifice unto thee, or so much as set a
garland upon thy head, unless it be slightly at the games of Olympus, holding
it no matter of duty neither, but only for form and fashion sake: and in a
while, they will make thee, that art the prime metropolitan of all the gods,
to become a second The father of Jupiter and thrown by him out of his kingdom.
Saturn, and utterly despoile thee of thy sovereignty: I forbear to tell how
often times they have robbed thy temples, yea how some have been so bold as,
to lay hands on thy sacred person in thy Olympian temple, whilst thou, the high
and mighty thunderer, would not take so much pains as to waken a dog, or
call neighbors about thee to help to apprehend them, when they were all
preparing to run away: but thou, that worthy wight, that had confounded the
giants and vanquished the Giants the sons of Titan, elder brother of Saturn
who made war against Jupiter.
Titans, satst still and did nothing, whilst A proverb importing
extraordinary stupiditie.
they clipped thy hair round about thy head, and yet had a thunderbolt in thy
hand, ten eubits long at the least. When shall this supine carelessness come
to an end, good Jupiter? and when will thou revenge thy self upon so great
in-justice? how many True Hist. lib. 1. g.
Phaethons? how many Dencalions would suffice to purge this immesurable abuse
of life? for to omit other men, and come to my self, that have set so many
Athenians floate, of miserable beggars have made them wealthy men, and
succored all that craved assistance at my hands, nay rather powered out my
riches by heaps to do my friends good, yet when by that means I grew poor
and fell into decay, I could never be acknowledged by them, nor they once so
much as cast an eye toward me, who before crouched and kneeled unto me, and
wholly depended upon my beck. If I chance to meet with any of them upon the
way, they pass by me as though I were a grave stone, laid over some man that
had been dead long before, and now worn to pieces, and will not tarry so
much as to read the inscription. Others, if they see me a far of, will turn
aside and take another way, a if I were some dismal and unluckie object to be
looked upon: who, not long before, had been their founder and benefactor. These
indignities have made me betake my self to this solitary place, to cloth my
self in this lether garment, and labor in the earth for four halfpence a
day, here practicing Philosophy, with solitariness and my mattocke: and
think I shall gain enough by the match, in that I shall have no sight of many
that are rich men without desert: for that would grieve me more then all the
rest. Now therefore thou son of Saturn and Rhea, shake off at the length,
Iliad. 2. v. 2.
this profound and dead sleep, wherein thou have laid drowsing longer than
ever did Proverb. who was sent by his father Agiasarchus into the field to
look to cattle, and being weary laid himself down in a cave and fell
asleep, and waked not again till 47. years were expired. Laert. and Plin.
Epimenides: give thy thunderbolt a fresh heat, or set whole mount Oeta on fire
to make it hot: deliver some show of a lusty and youthful Jupiter, unless it
be true indeed that the Crotans tell of thee, and of thy sepulcher.

Jupiter. Who may he be, Mercury, that makes such exclamation in the country
of Athens, at the foot of mount Icaromen. r.
Hymettus? a miserable poor wretch he seems to be, The Philosophers
blasphemous against the gods. See Icaromen.
clad all in leather, and by the action of his body it appears he is digging
in the earth: yet I find he has tongue at will and boldness enough to use
it: is he not one of these philosophers? for none but they would be so
impiously blasphemous against us.


Mercury. Why father, know you not Timon, the son of Echecratides, the
Colyttean? this is he that has often entertained us with sacrifices of the
best sort: that was so rich of late, that he offered whole Hecatombes unto us:
with whom we were wont to have so good cheer at the feasts of Icaromen. s.
Diasia.


Jupiter: Ah us, what an alteration is this? that good man, that rich man, that
had so many friends? how came he to be in such a case? miserably distressed,
feign to dig and labor for his living, as appears by holding so heavy a
mattocke in his hands.


Mercury. Some say his bounty undid him, and his kindness, and commiseration
toward all that craved of him: but in plain terms, it was his folly,
simplicity and indiscretion in making choice of his friends, not knowing that
he bestowed his liberality upon crows and wolves, that tare out the very
entrails of that miserable man, like so many vultures: he took them for men
that loved him well, and such as came to him for goodwill, when they took
pleasure in nothing but devouring, eating of the flesh to the bare bones: and
if there were any marrow remaining within, they would be sure to suck it out
clean before they went away, and so leave him withered and quite cut up by the
roots, taking no knowledge of him afterward nor once looking toward him, but
will be sure to be far enough of when they should help him, or do the like
by him again: this has made him as you see, betake himself to his mattocke
and his pelt, and forsaking the city for very shame, works in the field for
day wages, half madd with melancholy to think upon his misfortunes, and to
see them that were made by him pass along so proudly, that they will take no
notice of the name of Timon if they hear it pronounced unto them.


Jupiter. This man must not be unremembred, nor let alone so: I find he had
cause to complain upon his grievances: and therefore if we also should be
careless of him, we should do as those damned flatterers have done, and be
unmindfull of a man, that has sacrificed so many droves of oxen and goats
unto us upon our altars, that the savor of them sticks in my nostrils to this
day: but my Icaromenip. x
business has been so urgent, and I have had so much ado with perjurers,
oppressors, and thieves, beside the fear I stand in of temple robbers (who are
many in number and hard to be prevented) that I have had no leisure for a long
time to turn mine eyes another way, See Jupiters speeech against the
Philosophers in the end of Icaromenip.
or so much as look toward the country of Athens, especially since
philosophy, and contentious disputatious have been in request amongst them:
but of necessity must either sit still and stop mine ears, or apply my
self to them, whilst with open mouths they make much ado about virtue, and
incorporalities, and such like trifles, which was the cause we could not
have that care of him, as of a man no way ill deserving: but now Mercury, take
The God of riches, among the heathen.
Plutus with you and repair to him with all speed, and let Plutus take
treasure along with him also, and let them both make their abode with Timon,
and not depart with him lightly, unless he will again be so good as to force
them out of his doors by violence. As for those flatterers, and the
ingratitude they have expressed toward him, we will consider of it another
time, and they shall be sure to pay for it, as soon as my thunderbolt is in
case: for two of the greatest tines of it were broken or blunted the other
day, when I darted it furiously at the sophister This Philosopher held that
the world was created and governed by an eternal spirit: and was therefore
thought by the Heathen to deny that there was any god. He was very great with
Pericles. See Plutarch in his life.
Anaxagoras, who was persuading his scholars that we were no gods: but I mist
of my mark, for Pericles held up his hand before him, and it struck sidewise
into the temple of Castor and Pollux, which it set on fire, and it self was
almost broke in pieces against a rock: but for the present, it will be plague
enough unto them, to see Timon rich again.


Mercury. This it is to be clamorous, importunate, and and bold, not only
among them that plead for matter of right, The benefit of importunacie.
but is useful also, it seems, to men in their prayers. Now must Timon from a
poor beggarly wretch, be made a rich man again for his exclamation sake: and
his audacitie in prayer has made Jupiter turn his eye toward him, whereas if
he had dug in silence, he might have dug long enough and never have
been looked upon.


Plutus. For my part, Jupiter, to be plain with you, I will not come at him.


Jupiter: Why so, good Plutus, knowing it is my pleasure?


Plutus. The complaint of Plutus.
Because he has used me ill, Jupiter, drove me out of his doors, and cut
me into a thousand pieces though I had evermore been a true friend to his
father, yet would he needs cast me out of his house, as it were with a
forke, or as men would cast fire out of their hands: should I go again to
him, to be scattered among flatterers, parasites, and harlots? send me to
those men, Jupiter that are sensible of my worth, and will be careful of me,
that honor me, and are in love with me: as for such grosse-headed gulls as
these, let poverty be their companion on gods name, because they have preferred
her before us, and from her hands let them receive a leather pelt and a
mattocke, and content themselves, like miserable men, to earne four
halfe-pence a day, that have erst thought it nothing to cast away gifts of
ten talents worth at a time.


Jupiter. Timon will use thee so no more: his mattocke I trow, has tutored him
well enough for that: and the creek he has caught in his back can teach
him, how much thou art to be preferred before poverty: but this is strange to
my ear, and thou show thy self too too querulous, and to be apt to
complain how ever the world go: Now thou criest out upon Timon, who set his
doors wide open to thee, and suffered thee to walk at pleasure without
restraint, or conceiving any jealous opinion of thee, whereas at other times
thou have found fault with the contrary: how thou had been used by rich men,
saying, that thou wast shut up by them under lock and key, with their seals
set upon thee so sure, that it was impossible for thee to put out thy head into
the light, or once look a broad: this have thou been wont to complain of to
me, and to tell me, that thou wast almost stifled in extreme darkness, which
made thee look so pale and wanne, to be filled with care and anxietie, that
thou did threaten to run away from them, if ever thou could find a fit
opportunity: thou did make a show then as if thou thoughtst thy self to be
in great extremity to be constrained to lead a virgins life like a second
Necroman. c.
Danae, kept in a closet of brass or iron, there to be fed up with interest
money and reckonings under the custody of exact and cruel keepers: thou
would tell me how strange and absurd a course they took, who loving thee
so tenderly, and it being in their power to have fruition of thee, yet durst
not adventure upon thee, nor use their loves freely, though they were Lords
over thee, but kept themselves waking to keep thee, and their eyes continually
bent upon the seal and the bolt without winking; and thought in so doing they
enjoyed thee well enough, not in having benefit of thee themselves, but in
barring others from having any part in thee, Proverb.
like the dog in the manger, that could neither eat barley himself, nor
suffer the hungry horse to have any: thou would also deride their parsimonie
and wariness, and which was more strange than all the rest, to see how jealous
they were even of themselves, not knowing that some roguish servant or cosening
steward, or cheating schoolmaster should secretly intrude himself, and
domineer over that unluckie and unlovely owner, whilst he sat watching his
interest money, by the poor dim light of a dry rush candle: How can this
hang together, to complain so much of them, and now to find fault with the
contrary?


Plutus. This Dialogue is for the most part an imitation of Aristophanes his
Plutus.
If you will rightly conceive of it, I think I may be well excused in blaming
them both: for as Timons unthriftinesse and carelessness may be a strong
argument how little account he made of me, so, they that keep me prisoner,
shut up in darkness under lock and key, to have me grow bigger, fatter and
groser by their careful heedinesse, not once so much as touching me, or
bringing me to light lest I should be seen of any, I hold them no better then
fondlings and abusers of me, in suffering me to be eaten with rust, that
never did them any wrong: not considering that they must shortly take their
farewell of me, and leave me to some other fortunate man. I neither commend
these, nor those that are so ready to be rid of me, but they that take a
moderate course between both, which is best of all, and neither altogether
abstain from me, nor be utterly lavish of me: consider of it, but thus, good
Jupiter: if a man should join himself in marriage with a young wife, fair,
and beautiful, and then carry no eye over her, but suffer her to gad abroad at
her pleasure night and day, and accompany with every one that would: nay more,
should offer to persuade her to play the harlot, Riches compared to a wife
set open his doors, be bawd himself, and allure all he could to come and
visit her, could such a man be thought to love his wife? I am sure, Jupiter,
you will never say so, that have so often been in love your self. Again, if
a man should join in wedlock with an honest woman, and bring her to his own
home, with purpose to beget children of her, and then neither touch her
himself, though she were a flourishing, and lovely damsel, nor suffer any
other to come at her, or so much as to look upon her, but keep her a virgin,
under lock and key, unfruitful and barren, and yet profess himself to love
her dearly, and gives instance of no less by the Which are the symptoms of
love.
palenesse of his complexion, the fading of his flesh, and the hollownesse of
his eyes, may not he be well thought to be out of his wits, it being in his
power to do the part of an husband, and take fruition of his marriage bed,
and yet will suffer a lovely and well looked virgin to pine and wither away as a
Nun in a cloister all the days of her life. This is it that I complain
upon, when some disgracefully kick me out of doors, consume and exhaust me
idle, others keep me fast in fetters, as if I were some fugitive servant.


Jupiter. Let neither of these sorts of men trouble thy patience, they both are
plagued according as they deserve: the one like The son of Jupiter and Plote
father of Pelops, and granfather of Agamemnon and Menelaus, who entertaining
the gods feasted them with the flesh of his own son, but they sore displeased
with the unnaturalness of the act, restored his son to life, but him they
thrust into hell, where he is continually tormented with extreme hunger and
thirst, standing in a clear river unto the chinne and delicate fruit hanging
over his head, but can neither touch the one nor the other.
Tantalus, neither eat nor drink, though their mouth be dry, but continue
still gaping upon their gold: the other like A King of Arcadia who was thus
punished by the gods, for putting out the eyes of his own son.
Phineus, have their food snatched out of their very choppes by the Ravening
birds with eagles claws, and women's faces. Virg. Enead.
Harpies, before they can swallow it down: but for your part, get you packing
to Timon, whom you shall now find to be a man of much better temper.


Plutus. But will he ever give over to set me a running, as it were liquor
out of a rotten vessel, and have to power me out, before I can be all put in,
to prevent an inundation lest for want of means to exhaust me, I should wholly
choke and drown him up? certainly for ought that I can find, I do no more
but power water into Proverb. Fifty sisters the daughters of D^naus, King of
the Argives, brother to Aegyptus, who in one night slew all their husband, the
sons of Aegyptus, except Hypermnestra, who saved her husband Lynceus. The
rest were condemned for this wicked act, continually to pour water in
(...)in^otubbes boared full of holes in the botome, they are also called
Belides from their grandfather.
the tubbes of the Danaides, and vainly seek to fill a concavitie that will
hold nothing: but before I can get in, almost all is run out, the holes of
the vessel have so wide a vent, that nothing can stop the passage.


Jupiter. If he do not now close up those gaps, that all may not gush out at
once to give thee a present issue, he may soon find his pelt and mattock
again in the lees of the vessel but for this time get you gone, and enrich him
once more, And you, Mercury, remember as you return to bring the Giants with
one eye in their forehead, the sons of Neptune and Amphitrite, and workmen
of Vulcan, they are said by the poets to be the smiths that make Jupiters
thunderbolts, and that mount Aetna in Sicilie, which flames on the top with
fire is their forge. Love and riches are both blind. Riches come but slowly to
the good.

But go away nimbly.


Cyclops to us from Aetna, to sharpen our thunderbolt, and make it fit for use,
for we must needs have it new whetted upon a sudden.


Mercury. Then let us be gone, Plutus. But what is the matter with thee now?
what makes the halt? I have been mistaken in thee all this while, for I
thought thee to be only blind, and now I perceive thou art lame also.


Plutus: I am not so at all times, Mercury, for when I go to any man as sent
from Jupiter, I know not how, I fall lame, and so decrepite on both legs,
that I can hardly get to my journeies end, before the man grow old that is to
enjoy me: but when the time of my departure comes, you shall see me with
wings on my back fly away more swiftly then a bird: A metaphor taken from
horse-races.
no sooner can the lash be given, but I shall have got to the end of the gole,
and be proclaimed victor, when the beholders some times could scarce have any
sight of me.


Merc. I cannot believe thee in that: for I could name many unto thee, that as
yesterday had not a halfepennie to buy themselves an halter, and this day come
to be rich and wealthy men, drawn up and down with a pair of white
coach-horses, that never were worth an ass of their own before: traverse the
streets clothd in purple, with gold rings on their fingers, when I verily
think, they scarcely believe themselves that their riches are any more than a
dream.


Plutus. That's another matter, Mercury: for I do not then go upon mine own
feet, He must needs go that the devil drives.
neither is it Jupiter, but Pluto that sets me a work to go to them, who is
also a bountiful bestower of riches, as his name imports: for when the time
comes that I am to be conveyed from one to another, they enter me first into
wills and testaments, The description of an inheritance.
and seal them up surely, then they take me by heaps and carry me away,
after they have cast the dead man into some dark corner of the house, Assured.
and covered his carcass within an old linen ragge, which are ready to go
together by the ears for. In the mean space, they that are competitors in the
prise, stand gaping in the market place, as Expected. Iliad. 2.
young swallows for their damme that hovers about them: but when the seal is
once taken off, and the string cut in two, Obtained by base means.
and the writing opened, and my new master published (whether it be some
kinsman, or parasite, or obscenous slave kept for sodomiticall sinfulness, his
masters minion, that still keeps his chinne, close shaven) in liew of so many
and manifold pleasures which in his elder age he supplied him withal, that
worthy wight shall receive me as a plentiful hire for his pains. Then he
whosoever he be, snatching me up, together with the letters testament, carries
me away clear, and instead of him that was lately called The names of slaves
and servants.
Pyrrhias, or Dromo, or Tibias, will now have his name altered to Names of
Princes and great men.
Megacles, or Megabyzus, or Protarchus, leaving the other silly fools behind
him, gaping one upon another with grief of heart to see Proverb. Those that
are base by nature can never change their conditions though they be raised to
the greatest fortunes.
what a fish had escaped their net, without swallowing down any part of the
bait: when he has thus made me sure to himself, (being an ignorant sot,
without wit or breeding, still fearing to be bound and whipped, but pricks up his
ears, and stands in as much awe of It was a punishment amongst the Romans to
make their slaves grind corn in a mill-house, where they were whipped and
lashed like horses.
a mill house as of a temple) he then grows intolerable among his companions,
wrongs the freeman, beats his fellow servants to prove if there be any such
power in him or not, till in the end, he either drop into some bawdie house,
or set his heart upon keeping race-horses, or give himself up to be led by
flatterers that will swear and stare he is more beautiful than Nireus, an
ancienter gentleman than Necrom. c. ib. k.
Cecrops, or Codrus, a wiser man than The wisest man and greatest Politician of
all the Grecians.
Ulysses, and richer than sixteen such as Croesus, and so in a short space he
shall be guld of all that which was so long in getting, by so many perjuries,
rapines, and deceits.


Mercury, You are in the right for that; but going as thou do, still on
foot, without a guide, and being blind withal, I marvel how thou can find
out the way, or learn out to whom thou art sent by Jupiter, and take notice
they are worthy to be made rich.


Plutus. Do you think I am able to find them out? And riotously wasted.



Mercury. I do not think thou can: otherwise thou would never have skipt
over A most just noble man of Athens, who died so poor, that he had not money
enough to pay for his burial.
Aristides to bestow thy self upon Rich Athenians but of base condition.
Scholiast. in Aristoph. Batrach.
Hipponicus and Callias, and many other Athenians, that never deserved to be
made worth an halfpenny: but what do thou do when thou art sent upon such
an arrant? what course do thou take?


Plutus. I wander up and down like a vagrant, till I light upon one or other
that looked not for me: and he that first finds me, carries me away with
him, returning many thanks to thee, Mercury, for his unexpected good fortune.


Mercury. Mercury was thought by the heathen to be a god that help men to
wealth and was therefore by them surnamed (...). i. enriching.

A good man hard to be found.


Is Jupiter then deceived? who according to his good meaning imagines thou
make none rich but whom he thinks worthy?


Plutus. He may thank himself for that, for he knows well enough how blind
I am, and yet will send me to seek out a thing so hard to be found, and so
long ago vanished from having any being, that Icaromen. b.
Lynceus himself could hardly light upon it, it is so obscure and insensible:
for which cause, there being so few good men to be found, and such swarms of
the worser, that they fill the city from one end to the other, I may the more
easily meet with them in my progress, and be circumvented by them.


Mercury. But when thou art to forsake them, how can thou escape with any
ease, not knowing the way?


Plutus. My sight is then sharp enough, and my legs well able to carry me
off, only for the time of my departure.


Mercury. Let me ask thee one question more: thy sight being defective, (for
I will speak my mind freely) Cock. d*
thy complexion discolored, and thy limbs so feeble and decrepit, how comes
it to pass that thou have so many lovers, and that all men affect thee,
thinking themselves fortunate if they can attain thee, and their life
livelesse, if they cannot enjoy thee: I have known some, and not a few, that
have been so far besotted with thee, that they have An imitation of
Theogius. v. 176. and 176.
cast themselves into the deep sea, and from the top of steep rocks doubting
lest they were despised by thee, because thou never would vouchsafe to afford
them any grace: and I am sure thou will freely confess, if thou kn^west thy
self, that they are all mad men to dote upon such a love.


Plutus. Do you think I appear to them to be such as I am indeed, lame,
blind, with all my other imperfections?


Mercury. What else, Plutus, unless they be all as blind as thou.


Plutus. Blind they are not, good Mercury, but ignorance and error, which
now-a-daies are predominant, do cast a mist before their eyes: and for my own
part, Riches have only a fair outside.
because I would not appear altogether deformed, I put a lovely visard upon my
face, wrought over with gold, and thick beset with pearl, and cloth my self
with costly garments when I come unto them, which makes them think they see
beauty in her own colors, whereupon they fall so far in love with me,
that they even perish if they cannot enjoy me: whereas if a man should show
me to them naked, and stripped of my accoutrements, no doubt they would condemn
themselves, for being so deceived, and for loving so unlovely and misshapen a
thing.


Mercury. But when they are grown rich, and have put the same visard upon
their own faces, why are they yet deceived, and rather would lose their heads
from their shoulders, then suffer themselves to be unmasked by any: me thinks
they should not then be ignorant that thy comeliness was but counterfeit, when
they have full sight of the inside.


Plutus. There are many things that afford me good help, Mercury, in this
case.


Mercury. What may they be?


Plutus. At my first coming to any man, when he sets open his doors to
receive me, there enter privily with me, pride, folly, presumption,
effeminacie, contempt, Vices and infirmities that accompany riches.
delusion, and infinite of the same stamp, which do so possess the soul of
the silly fellow, that he admires things not worthy of estimation, and covets
after things that are to be eschewed, and does so do at upon me, that am the
father of all this cursed crew, and continually attended by them, that he
would endure any thing, rather then suffer himself to be deprived of me.


Mercury. Riches are slipperie.
But thou have another fault, Plutus, thou art so nimble and slipperie, so hard
to be held, and so fleet in flying away, that thou will give a man no fast
hold, but like an eele or a snake, slip through his fingers I know not how:
whereas poverty is apt to be apprehended, and quickly caught, But poverty is
easy to be laid hold on.
having an hundred sort of fish-hookes, fastened to every part of her body,
wherewith she suddenly catches hold upon all that come near her, and will
not easily be unloosed again. But while I spend the time in this trifling
talk, we have been forgetful of that which we had most reason to remember.


Plutus. What is that?


Mercury. To bring treasure along with us, who is a principal party in this
service.


Plutus. Take you no care for that: I left him safe in the earth when I
ascended to you, charging him to keep home, and the door shut, and to open to
no man, unless he hear me call.


Mercury. Let us then be traveling toward Attica: take hold by my cloak and
follow me, until we are come to the confines of the country.


Plutus. You do well, Mercury, to be my guide, for if you leave me, I am
like enough to be caught up by A seller of lamps in Athens, who was a very
knave, and dealt almost in all kinds of trades (as our chandlers do) he grew
rich by mixing lead with the copper of his lamps and so cozened the buyer.
Scholiast. on Aristoph.

A leather-seller one of the same stamp. Aristoph.

Virtues accompanying poverty.


Hyperbolus or Cleon, as I rome I know not whither. But what noise is this I
hear, as it were iron grating against a stone.


Mercury. It is Timon, who is opening the earth hard by upon the side of a
rockie mountain. But what shall we do with him? I see he has got poverty
to him, and labor, and sufferance and wisdom, and fortitude and a whole
regiment, of the same rank, mustered up by hunger: a troop of more worth than
thou will be able to furnish him withal.


Plutus. Let us tarry no longer then, good Mercury I pray you: for we shall
never do good of a man guarded with such attendants.


Mercury. Jupiter has otherwise determined, and therefore we must not
shrink in the service.


Poverty. Mercury, whither do you lead this man?


Mercury. We are sent to Timon here, by Jupiter himself.


Poverty. Comes Plutus now to Timon, whom I entertained, and took up, when
he was in ill case, God knows, and utterly spent with riot and disorder? is
poverty so contemptible a creature with you, and so fit a subject to receive
injury, that you come to deprive me of the only possession I thought my
self sure of, and whom I had trained up to all degrees of virtue, that Plutus
may again take him to his tuition, and then give him over to insolency and
pride, which will make him as effeminate base and foolish, as ever he was
before, and so return him again to me, no better that a ragged clout?


Mercury. O Poverty, it is Joves pleasure to have it so:


Poverty. Then I will give place: and you my old familiars, labor, wisdom,
and the rest, follow me, and he shall soon find what a friend he has
foregone, how true a companion in his labor, and how good a teacher of the
best things: in whose society, his body was healthful, See the Cock.
his mind valorous and constant, and he lived like a man depending upon
himself, and holding matters of superfluity, and the like to be, as they are
indeed, nothing appertaining to him.


Mercury. They are all departed, therefore let us draw near.


Timon. what are you, ye damned wretches, or what make you here, to molest a
laboring man, that works for his living? yea shall dearly buy it before you
go, base villains as you are, for with clods and stones I will let drive at
you as fast as I can.


Mercury, Forbear good Timon, and cast not at us: mistake us not: we are not
men: I am Mercury, this is Plutus whom Jupiter hearing thy prayers has sent
unto thee: wherefore, in good time receive thy happy fortune and desist from
thy labor.


Timon. I will make you both repent it, though ye be gods: for I hate all
alike both gods and men: and this blind knave, whosoever he be, shall soon
find to his cost the weight of my mattocke.


Plutus. For gods sake Mercury let us be gone, the man is sure more than
mad, and will do me a mischief before I shall get from him.


Mercury. Be not self vvill'd Timon, I pray you, but lay aside this
fierceness and bitterness: stretch out your hands, receive good fortune, be
rich again and the chief among the Athenians, live in despite of those
ungrateful wretches, and no man happy but thy self.


Timon. I tell you plainly I have no occasion to use you: trouble me not: this
mattocke is riches enough for me: and for all other matters, I think my self
best at ease, when no man comes near me.


Mercury. Good sir, will you show your self so ill bred, as to Iliad. l. 15.
v. 202. Iris to Neptune.
return such a harsh and unmannerly answer to Jupiter? though you have some
cause to hate mankind that have dealt dishonestly with you, yet be not a hater
of god by any means, considering how ready the gods have been to relieve you.


Timon. For your part, Mercury, and so I say for Jupiter, I yield you hearty
thanks, for the care you have had of me: but for this Plutus, I will have
nothing to do with him.


Mercury. What is your reason for that?


Timon. Because he has been the means of the infinite miseries that have
betide unto me, betrayed me into the hands of flatterers, delivered me up to
those that lay in wait for me, Riches the means of diverse evils.
stirred up hatred against me, undid me with voluptuous pleasures, caused
every man to envy me, and at the last most treacherously and perfidiously
forsook me: The benefits of poverty.
whereas honest poverty exercised me in manlike labors, brought me
acquainted with truth and plain dealing, furnished me with necessaries when I
was sickly, and taught me to repose the hopes of my life only in my self,
and to contemn all other things. Showed me what riches I had by her means,
which neither the flatterer by fair speeches, nor the sycophant by
subornation, nor the people by their indignation, nor the judge by indirect
sentence, nor the tyrant by all his trecheries and policies are able to
deprive me of. Wherefore being enabled by labor, I dig in this plot of
ground with a love to my work, and out of sight of those vilanies that are
practiced in the city, my mattocke furnishing me sufficiently with food to my
content. Back again therefore, good Mercury, the same way you came, and take
Plutus along with you to Jupiter for I desire no more but this, to be a
perpetual vexation to all men from the youngest to the oldest everlastingly.


Mercury. You are to blame in that, I must tell you, for all men deserve not
such a measure of extremity: therefore cast off this pettish and childish kind
of humor, and accept of Plutus, Iliad. l 3. v. 65. Paris to Hector.
gifts sent from Jupiter are not to be rejected.


Plutus. Will you give me leave, Timon, to tell you truth? and will you not
take it ill at my hands?


Timon. Speak then, but be short: make no proeme, as the damned Rhetoritians
are wont to do: for I am content to hear a word or two from thee, for this
honest Mercuries sake.


Plut. Your objections have bin so many, that perhaps they require a longer
answer than so: Plutus excuses himself to Timon.
notwithstanding consider with your self whether I be guilty of such wrongs as
you have charged me withal: for I have bin the author of all your greatest
delights, honor, prerogative, ornaments, and all the delicacies you ever
enjoyed. In that you have bin respected, reverenced and affected by all men, it
was by my means: if you have been abused by flatterers, the fault is not in
me, for I have more cause to say I have bin ill used at your hands, in
prostituting me basely to lewd and vile persons, that bewitched you with
praises, so to get me into their fingers: at the last you say I proved
treacherous toward you, when contrariwise, I may more justly condemn you, for
driving me away by all the devises you could imagine, and thrusting me out of
your house by head and shoulders. Wherefore instead of costly raiment,
venerable poverty has put this pelt upon you: and Mercury himself can
witness with me, how earnest a suitor I was to Jupiter, that I might never
more come at you, for using me so discourteously before.


Mercury. But now, Plutus, you see he is another manner of man, wherefore
take a good heart unto you, and go dwell with him; you Timon, dig as you did
before, and do thou Plutus conveigh treasure unto him under his mattocke, for
he will hear thee at the first call.


Timon. I am content for this once, Mercury, to be ruled by you, and to be
made a rich man again: for what can a man do withal, when the gods do so
importune him? but consider I beseech you, what a pecke of troubles you plunge
me miserable man into, that have lately lived most happily, and must now
suddenly be endowed with such a mass of gold, without doing any injury, and
taking so many cares upon me.


Mercury. Endure it all, Timon, for my sake: unless in your discretion you
think it heinous to have your former flatterers burst with envy: for I will
take my flight over mount Aetna, and so into heaven.


Plutus. He is gone, I perceive by the fluttering of his wings: but abide thou
there, or if thou like better of it strike with thy mattock into the earth. Ho
treasure! golden treasure I say, attend to this Timon, and deliver thy self to
be taken up by him. Dig now Timon as deep as thou can, I will give way
unto you.


Timon. Come on then my good mattocke, strengthen thy self for my sake, and
be not tired with provoking treasure to show himself openly, out of the
bowels of the earth: O miraculous Jupiter, and ye friendly Corybantes, and
auspicious Mercury, how should so much gold come hither? or is all this but a
dream? Proverb.
I doubt I shall find it to be but coals when I awake: nay certainly, this is
pure gold, ruddie, weighty, and lovely to look upon? Pindarus Olymp. 1.
O Gold, that deservest the best welcome mortal men are able to give thee,
that glitterest as gloriously night and day, as the clear flaming fire: come
to me sweet friend, and dearest love: well may I now believe that Jupiter
sometime turned himself into a shower of gold: for what virgin would not with
open arms embrace so beautiful a lover, falling into the room through the
roof of the house? The Cock. m ib. q.
O Midas, and Croesus, and ye The Surveior. b
consecrated gifts of Delphos, how poor are you in respect of Timon and Timons
riches, to whom the Persian King is not to be compared: O my sweet mattocke,
and my dear pelt, I will consecrate you as an offering to The sheepheards god.
Timons resolution.
Pan, I will purchase the whole confines of this country, and build a tower
over my treasure big enough for my self alone to live in, and which I
purpose shall be my sepulcher at my death: and for the remainder of my ensuing
life. I will resolve upon these rules: to accompany no man, to take notice of
no man, and to live in contempt of all men: the title of friend, or guest, or
companion, or the altar of mercy, are but mere toies, not worth a straw to be
talked of: to be sorry for him that weeps, or help him that wants, shall be a
transgression and breach of our laws: I will eat alone as wolves do, and have
but one friend in the world to bear me company, and that shall be Timon: all
others shall be enemies and traitors, and to have speech with any of them, an
absolute piacle: If I do but see a man, that day shall be dismal and accursed:
I will make no difference between them and statues of stone and brass: I will
admit no messenger from them, nor contract any truce with them, but so
litarinesse shall be the maine limit betwixt me and them: to be of the same
tribe, the same fraternity, the same people, or the same country, shall be
but poor, and unprofitable terms to be respected by none but fools, let
Timon alone be rich, and live in despite of all other, let him revell alone by
himself, far from flattery, and odious commendations: let him sacrifice to
the gods, and make good cheer alone, as a neighbor conjoined only to
himself, discarding all other: and let it be further enacted, that it shall be
lawful for him only to shake himself by the hand, that is, either when he
is about to die, or to set a crown upon his head: and the welcomest name to
him in the world is to be called Manhater: the notes and ensigns of his
conditions, shall be austeritie, cruelty, frowardness, anger and inhumanitie:
if thou see any man in the fire ready to be burnt, and he entreat to have it
quenched, pour into it pitch and oil: if any man be driven down the stream
in a flood, and shall stretch out his hands to thee for help, give him a knock
on the pate, and send him to the botome, that he may never be able to put up
his head again: so shall they receive according to their desert. He alludes
here to the common form and manner of publishing statutes and decrees in those
times: so does he likewise before Necromant. x. and by and by again in the
speech of Demeas.
Timon the son of Echecratides, the Colyttean, has published this law: and
the same Timon in parliament has confirmed it: so it is: so have we decreed,
and will constantly persist therein. Now it would do me good at the heart, to
have all men take notice of mine abundant riches, for it would be as bad as a
hanging to them to hear of it: but how comes this to pass? good god upon a
sudden? how they come running in every way, as soon as they had recovered, I
know not by what means, the sent of this gold? whether were it best for me to
ascend this hill, and from the higher ground drive them away with stones, or
dispense with mine own order for once, and enter conference with them to their
greater vexation, when they shall see themselves despised? It shall be so: I
will therefore receive them and tarry their coming: But let me see: Who is
the foremost man of the company? who but A common name for a parasite.

The base condition of flatterers described.


Gnathonides the flatterer: whose benevolence I craved not long ago, and he
held me out a halter, who had many times spewed whole tubfulls at my table,
he has done well in repairing hither so speedily, for he is the first that
shall repent it.


Gnathonides. Have I not always said, that the gods would never be forgetful
of Timon, so good a man? Hail Timon, the comliest of all creatures, the most
pleasing of all companions, and the flower of all good fellowship.


Timon. And thou Gnathonides, the most ravenous of all vultures, and the vilest
of all men.


Gnathonides. O Sir, you always love to break jests upon your friends, but
where shall we meet and sup together? I have brought you here a new song of
the last edition which I have lately learned.


Timon. But I will first make thee sing a sorrowful Elegy under this Mattocke.


Gnathonides. What Is the matter now? do thou strike me Timon? bear
witness, alas, alas: I warn the to appear at Areopagus the court of Athens.
Mars his hill, upon an action of battery.


Timon. If thou tarry a little longer, thou shall have cause to warn me upon
an action of manslaughter.


Gnathonides. I will none of that: yet I pray you make me a plaster of gold
to lay upon my wound: for I have heard it has an excellent virtue in
staunching blood.


Timon. Art thou here yet?


Gnathonides. Nay then I am gone, and little joy shall it be to thee, of so
courteous a man, to become so cruel.


Timon. What bald-pated fellow is this that comes next? it is Philiades, the
impurest parasite that ever lived: this knave had from me a whole Lord-ship,
Another Parasite.
and two talents I gave his daughter to her marriage, because he once
commended my singing: for when all the company beside were silent, he alone
extold me to the skies, and swear I had a sweeter voice than ever had swanne:
but when he saw me sickly a while ago, and that I came to him to crave his
relief, the rascal fell a beating of me.


Philiades. O Impudency do you now acknowledge Timon? would Gnathonides now be
his friend, and play-fellow? wherefore his reward has bin righteous, in
respect of his ingratitude: whereas I, that have been his old acquaintance,
brought up with him from a child, and of the same tribe, do yet so moderate my
self, that I may not seem to be an intruder. Hail noble Timon, and I beseech
you free your self from these base flatterers that come only to fill their
bellies, and are indeed no better than cormorants. No man is to be trusted now
adays: all are unthankful and wicked: I was bringing a talent along with me,
to help to furnish you with necessaries: but being upon the way, I heard of
wonderful riches that were come to your hands: whereupon, I made the cause of
my visitation to be only to give you good counsel, though I know you are
endued with such wisdom, that you needed not to be advised by me, but are
able to tell An ancient and wise Prince of the Grecians, who lived thrice the
age of an ordinary man.
Nestor himself what he has to do. Timon. It may be so, Philiades, but come a
little nearer, that I may see, how well I can welcome you with this Mattocke.


Philiades. Help neighbors: this unthankful man has broke my head, because
I counseled him for his good.


Timon. Behold a third man, Demeas, the Rhetorician with a decree in his hand,
who professes himself to be one of our kindred: I paid to the city for this
fellow, eleven talents in one day, which he was fined in, and committed until
he should make payment: and for pity set him at liberty: yet the other day,
when it was his lot to distribute At the times of public plays or sacrifices,
there was distributed a certain quantity of money to every citizen.
dole money among the Erechthean tribe, and I came to him to crave my share,
he said he could not tell whetherd were a citizen.


Demeas. All hail, Timon, a bounteous benefactor toward your kindred, the
bulwark of Athens, and the ornament of Greece, the people, and both the
counsels are all assembled, expecting your coming long ago: but first, I
pray you, Extreme flattery.
harken to this decree, which I have pend down for you. In imitation of the
form as before.
For as much as Timon, the son of Echecratides, the Colyttean, a man not
only honest and virtuous, but so wise and discreet withal, that his like
again is not to be found in Greece) has evermore sought the good of the
city, and has got the best prize at combating, wrestling, and running at the
Olympian games in one day, beside the race chariot and coursing horses.


"Timon. Why man, I never went to see the Olympian "games, in all my life.


Demeas. What then? you may see them hereafter: and for such matters as these,
it is better the mention of them should precede then follow. He also fought
bravely of late in the quarrel of his country, against the Acharnens, and cut
in pieces two companies of the Lacedaemonians.


Timon. What Is that? I protest for my part, because I had no skill in arms, I
was never yet inrold into any military company.


Demeas. You speak to poorly of your self: but we might be thought
unthankful if we should not remember it: moreover: By publishing Decrees, by
giving good counsel, and by good command in war, he has procured no small
benefit to the city: for all which considerations, be it enacted by the
counsel and the people, and the highest court of the city, according to their
tribes, and all the multitude in particular and general, that a golden statue
shall be erected to Timon in the castle, and placed next to the image of
Minerva, holding a thunderbolt in his right hand, and the sunbeams shining
about his head, and he be crowned with seven crowns of gold, and this to be
publicly proclaimed this day in the new tragedies of Bacchus: for the feasts
of Bacchus are to be celebrated by him this day: this sentence is pronounced by
Demeas the Rhetoritian, his kinsman in the nearest degree of blood, and his
scholar beside, for Timon is also a good Rhetoritian, and good at every thing
else whatsoever he will. This is the Decree that I have framed for you.
Moreover, my purpose is to bring my son unto you shortly, and after your name
to call him Timon.


Timon. How should that be, Demeas, when thou never had any wife that I ever
heard of.


Demeas. The very imagination of inheriting Timons wealth makes him build these
castles in the air.
But I mean to be married, god willing the next year, and will beget a child,
and the infant that shall be borne, for it must be a boy, I will have called
Timon.


Timon. I know not whether it will be your fortune ever to come to marriage,
friend mine, if this blow with my Mattocke do but fall aright.


Demeas. Alas, alas: what meanest thou by this? do thou tyrannize, Timon, and
beat freemen, that art no true freeman, The treasure of Athens was kept in the
castle.
nor citizen thy self? but be sure of it, I will cry quittance winh thee out
of hand one way or other: especially for burning the castle.


Timon. No such matter: for that thou see stands unburnt, and therefore thou
show thy self a plain sycophant.


Demeas. But thou art rich, and have broken in through the back door.


Timon. Neither is that broken up: and therefore thou art idle every way.


Demeas. But broken up it will be: and thou have already got into thy hands all
the riches that were within it.


Timon. Take one blow more for that.


Demeas? O my back: what shall I do?


Timon. Do thou cry? I have yet a third blow to bestow upon thee if thou
tarry, The Character of a pretender to Philosophy.
it would be a shame for me, that could cut in pieces two companies of the
Lacedoemonians without arms and should not now be able to confound one
withered fellow: in vain it was then, that I got the prise at Olympus, for
wrestling and running: but who comes now? is it not Thrasycles the Philosopher?
it can be no other: see how he strokes his beard at length, lifts up his eye
brows, and comes muttering somewhat to himself, looking like a This is often
used by Lucian for a fierce and truculent aspect, as in Icaromenip. etc.
Titan, and the hair of his forehead cast back like some The Northwinde.
Boreas or A Sea-god, and Neptunes trumpeter.
Triton pictured by An excellent painter.
Zeuxis: this man that has such a grave countenance, such a sober gate: and is
so succinct in his apparel: he that in a morning will deliver you a thousand
precepts for virtue, cry out upon them that are addicted to pleasure, and
speak in praise of frugalitie, as soon as he has bathed and come in to
supper, and his boy filled him one full bowl (for he loves a cup of good wine
with all his heart) as if he drunk of the water of Lethe, will pleasantly
give an instance contrary to his forenoone speeches, strike at the meat like a
kite at his pray, justle his next neighbor out of his place, slabber all his
beard over with sauce, and cramme in like any curre dog, hanging his head
perpetually over the platters, as if he meant to find out virtue in the
bottom of the dishes, and wipes them every one with his forefinger as clean
as a cup, because he would not leave a drop of sauce behind him: he is as
sure a card at his cup as at his meat, and will be as drunk as any ape, not
only to the height of singing; and dancing, but till it make him brabble,
and fall out: then will he pass many speeches over the pot, and talk of
nothing else but temperance and sobriety, when he is all-to-peeces himself,
and brings out his words so scurvily, that all the company laughs him to
scorn: then falls he to spewing, until at the last some take him away, and
carry him out of the room, though he catch hold upon some of the wenches as
strongly as he can: but when he is at the best, he shall subscribe to no man
for lying, and audaciousnesse, and covetousness: he is the prime of all
parasites, and the easiest drawn to commit perjurie: imposture leads the way
with him, and impudency follows after: yet would he seem to be wholly made
of wisdom, and every way forth absolute and perfect. I will make him smoke
for it, as soon as he comes, for his goodness sake. What Is the reason that
Thrasycles has been so slow in coming to visit me?


Thrasycles. I come not, Timon, with the same intent as other men do, which
aim at thy riches, Gross dissimulation.
and run themselves out of breath in hope to get silver gold and good cheer
by thee, expressing a great deal of flattery toward a man so honest and
plain as thou art, and so ready to impart of any thing that is within thy
power: as for me, you know a piece of barley bread will serve me to supper
sufficiently, and no better victuals with it, than a sallade of of time, and
cresses, or if I list to exceed, a bit or two of powdered meat: my drink is no
other but clear The water of a fountain in Athens which has 9 spouts, and is
therefore called (...): it is also called Callirrhoe. Pausan. 1.1.
fountain water, and this threadbare cassock I prefer before the richest
purple you can desire: but for gold I have it in no more estimation, than the
rubbish that lies upon the sea shore: for your sake it is that I am come
hither, lest this mischievous and most deceitful possession of riches should
corrupt you, which has oftentimes been the cause of incurable mischiefs to
many men: wherefore if you will be ruled by me, take it and cast it all into
the sea as an unnecessarie clogge to a good man that is able to discern the
riches of Philosophy: I mean not into the maine sea, good Sir, By no means.
but that you would go into it as far as a man is forked before the going
forth of the tide, and suffer no man to see you but my self: or if you like
not well of this take another course, which perhaps may do better: disburden
your self of it so soon as you can, leave not one halfe-pennie, but
distribute it to all that stand in need: to one man, five drachmes, to another,
a pound, to a third a talent: but if any Philosopher come in your way, you
cannot upon your conscience, but give him twice or thrice as much as any other:
for my part I crave nothing for my self: but to bestow upon my friends that
are in want, and I shall hold my self well satisfied, An indifferent size for
a scrip
if you will but fill me this satchell, which does not altogether contain two
bushels of Aegina measure: for a Philosopher ought to be content with a little,
and observe the mean, and never stretch his thoughts wider than his scrip.


Timon. I commend thee Thrasycles, for this in faith: but before I deal with
thy scrip, let me try whether I can fill thy head with blows and measure
them out with my mattocke.


Thrasycles. Popular government.
O Democracie, and laws: I am beaten by a rebellious wretch in a free city.


Timon. Why do thou complain, my honest Thrasycles? have I deceived thee in
thy measure? I am sure I put in four quarts more than was thy due. But what is
the matter of this? they come now tumbling in by heaps: there is Blepsias, and
Laches, and Gniphon, and a whole rabble of such rascals as shall be sure to
rue for it: I will therefore ascend this rock, and forbear the use of my
mattocke a while, which has made me over weary, and lay as many stones as I
can on heaps together, and dung amongst them as thick as hail.


Blepsias. You may save your self that labor, Timon, for we will be going.


Timon. But I hope, not The Greeks called a victory gotten without blood
(...): and the Latins, Incruenta victoria: for which, Ovation only was due to
the Conqueror but not a Triumph. Lucian here allude: to this, bringing in
Timon desirous to triumph over his enemies.
without blood or blows.


LVCIAN, HIS FEAST, OR THE LAPITHES.
What he touches upon else where by the by concerning the lives and manners of
some pretenders to Philosophy, is here described to the full, in a meeting of
theirs at a certain feast, where diverse of several sects and opinions
fortuned to be, and falling out among themselves, most ridiculously betray
their several infirmities.
I Hear there was much ado amongst you yesterday, Lucinus, at Aristoenetus
house at supper, and that certain Philosophers made some speeches there, which
begot so great a quarrel in the company, if Charinus told me true, that they
grew at the last to blows, and could not conclude but in blood.

Lucinus. How came Charinus to have such knowledge in the matter Philo, and was
not amongst us?


Philo. He had it, as he said, from Dionicus the physician, and Dionicus I
suppose was one of them that was at supper with you.


Lucinus. True: but Dionicus was not there soon enough to know how it began:
for he came late in, about the midst of the brabble, a little before they fell
to blows, and therefore could not deliver any certainty, not knowing
whereupon the quarrel grew, that it should proceed so far, as to end in
blood.


Philo. For which cause Charinus wished us to repair to you, Lucinus, if we
desired to be fully informed in the whole carriage of the business, for that
Dionicus told him, he was not there at the first: but that you knew all that
was done to a hair, and remembered every word that was spoken, not carelessly
suffering any thing to slip from you, but attentively noting it with all
diligence: wherefore you shall not escape us, without sweetning our lips also
with your dainty junkets, for to me, no banquet in the world can be more
pleasing than your reports: and the rather because we may here feast together
soberly and quietly out of danger of blows or bloodshed, whether they be old
men or young, that shall so far abuse themselves in drink, as to say or do
they care not what.


Lucinus. Why Philo, do you think it fit, that matters of this nature should
be communicated to all men, and every thing published that is done in wine and
drunkenness? These kind of businesses ought rather to be committed to
forgetfulness, and construed to be the works of the great god Bacchus, who
will not suffer any of his Orgies to be curtailed or uncompleat: it is the
property of ill conditioned persons strictly to examine that which ought
rather to be suppressed in silence: and you know the Proverb: Odi memorem
compotorem.
I hate a memorative companion: Neither has Dionicus done well in making it
known to Charinus, or in scattering abroad what past among philosophical
persons: and for my part I will not speak a word of it.


Philo. Do you make the matter strange Lucinus? betwixt you and me, it shall
not be so, for I am sure of this, that you are in a greater longing to tell it,
than I to hear it: and I do not think, but for want of auditors, you would be
glad to creep to some pillar or statue of stone and there pour it all out
with open mouth, if I should but offer to leave you, I know you would not
suffer me to stir a foot from you until I had heard it all: but would come
to me, follow after me, and entreat me to tarry it out, I will therefore be
as strange to you as you to me, god speed you well, if you be so minded, we
will be gone to hear it from some other, and not be beholding to you.


Lucinus. Nay, rather than you should take it ill, I will hasard the telling of
it all, if you be desirous to hear it: but I would not have you make all the
world acquainted with it.


Philo. Either I have forgot Lucinus, or you will be the apter man your self
to disperse such news as this, and therefore you need not to entreat me
that: but tell me first: did Aristoenetus make that feast for the marriage of
his son Zeno?


Lucinus. No, but he gave his daughter Cleanthis in marriage to a young
student in Philosophy, the son of Eucritus the Usurer.


Philo. He is a pretty youth indeed, but a little too young, not yet ripe
enough for marriage.


Lucinus. I know not where he could have matched her better: for he seems to
be a well governd young man, and to have a good liking to learning: beside, he
is the only child of Eucritus, who is a rich man, and therefore choice was
made of him for a bridegroom before all others.


Philo. Eucritus riches had been motive sufficient to make up the match: but
who were the guests Lucinus, that were bid to the feast?


Lucinus. I cannot tell you the names of them all, but for Philosophers and
learned men, which I think you are most desirous to hear of, Philosophers
invited to the feast.
there was old Zenothemis the Stoicke, and with him came Diphilus, surnamed the
Labyrinth, for he was tutor to Zeno, Aristoenetus son. Of the sect of the
Peripatetikes, came Cleodemus: do thou not know that fowle-mouth'd fellow,
that wrangler? his scholars call him the sword and dagger. There came also
Hermo the Epicure, These two sects are directly opposite one to the other, the
Stoics professing a strictness and austeritie of life, the Epicure affirming
pleasure to be the chief felicity.
who was no sooner within the door, but presently the Stoickes began to look
a sconce, and turned the one shoulder toward him, that all the company might
perceive how bitterly they abhord him, as if he had been some parricide or
execrable person: these were invited as friends and anciently acquainted with
Aristoenetus himself, and with them came Hestiaeus the Grammarian, and
Dionysodorus the Rhetorician. And for the bridegroom Choereas sake, Io the
Platonist, was also invited, who was his tutor: ^ grave man, and of a comely
personage, expressing a great deal of moderation in his countenance, he is
commonly called by the name of Canon, because of the true direction of his
judgment, when he came in, they all rose up, and saluted him as the better
man, and the presence of the precious Io was as welcome to them, as if some god
had appeared amongst them: It was now time to sit to meare, for almost all the
guests were come: on the right hand as you enter the room, the women took up
all the seats on that side, for they were many, and among them the bride,
covered with a veil from top to toe, and environed round with a whole flock
of females: right before the door sat the rest of the company, every man in
his degree: over against the women: first sat Eucritus, and after him
Aristoenetus: then the question was, who should sit next Zenothemis the
Stoicke, because he was an old man, or Hermo the Epicure, for he was the priest
of Castor and Pollux, and one of the best gentlemen in the city: but
Zenothemis had soon assoiled that doubt: for Aristoenetus, said he, if you
think me to be no better a man than this fellow Hermo, who, to speak no
worse of him, is one of Epecurus sect, I will be gone and leave all your feast
to your self, and with that calling his man, made as though he would depart:
But Hermo answered, nay tarry, and take the better seat, good Zenothemis,
though it had been good manners in you to have given place, if for no other
respect, yet because I am a priest: speak of Epicurus as ill as you can: I
scorn, said Zenothemis an Epicure priest and so sat him down, and next to
him, for all that, sat Hermo: then Cleodemus the Peripatetike, then Io, and
next to him the bridegroom, then my self, and after me Diphilus, and beneath
him Zeno his scholar: then the Rhetorician Dionysodorus, and Hestiaeus the
Grammarian.


Phili. Good god, Lucinus, call you this a feast? you may rather term it a
school of many learned and discreet men: and I commend Aristoenetus, for
inviting men of such wisdom to take part of his good cheer at such a joyful
meeting, filling up his feast with the prime flo^es of every sect, not making
choice of one, and leaving out another, but coupling them all together for
company.


Lucinus. Indeed, friend, many rich men use not that circumspection: but he
has been always inclined to learning, and has spent the most part of his
time in conversing with such: but to the matter: we did eat our meat in
great quiet for a while, and plentiful provision was made for us: I need not
rehearse the sundry sorts of brothes, baked meats, and banqueting dishes that
were prepared in abundance: but whilst we were busy at it, Cleodemus bowing
his head to Io, see you not, said he yonder old fellow, meaning Zenothemis
(for I overheard him) how fast he crammes it in, that all his coat is covered
over with slabber, and what a deal of meat he has given to his man that
stands behind him, thinking no body looks upon him, nor remembering what
company he is in? I pray you show it to Lucinus that he may be witness with
us, but I needed no information from Io, for I saw it plain enough before. No
sooner were these words out of Cleodemus mouth, but in comes Alcidamus the
Cynick unsent for, and instead of some pleasing insinuation, bolted out this
old worn proverb, Il. ^.
Menelaus comes though not invited: but all the company thought it an impudent
part, and replied again with verses of the same stamp: Il. n. 109.
one said, thou art a fool Menelaus: Il. ^. 29.
another, but Agamemnon Atreus son, was not well pleased with this, and other
conceited jests fit for the occasion: but all with a low voice, for no man
durst make him any open answer, they stood in such fear of Alcidamus, who was
so notorious a brawler, that he would make more noise than all the Cynicks
besides, and for that gift was terrible to all men: but Aristoenetus bade him
welcome, and wished him to take a stool and sit down by Hestiaeus, and
Dionysodorus, which he refused, saying, it was a mere womanish devise to sit
upon chaires and stools, or to feast as you do now, lying almost along upon a
soft bed, and a purple coverlet spread under you: I mean to take my meat
standing, and walk about at pleasure, if I be weary, I will spread my
mantle on the floare, and there lie down opon one elbow, like the Hercules is
commonly so painted.
picture of Hercules: As it please you, said Aristoenotus, and so he began to
traverse his ground, taking his supper like a A wandering nation who kept no
constant abode in any place.
Scythian, fleeting continually from place to place, to see where he could
find best pasture: thus vvandred he like a vagrant among the waiters that
brought in meat, eating and prating all at once about vice and virtue,
scoffing at gold and silver, and asking Aristoenetus what he would give for
so many earthen pots of the same making, that should be of equal weight, but
when he began to be troublesome, Aristoenetus stopped his mouth for a time, by
commanding his man to fill him a great cup of wine up to the brimme: this he
thought he had done for the best: but little did he know how many mischiefs
that bowl would bring after it: Alcidamus took it, and was silent for a
while: but afterward, casting himself upon the floare, as he before said he
would do, lay along half naked upon his elbow, and held the pot in his right
hand, as Hercules is painted drinking with A Centaure, the son of Ixion,
begotten on the cloud, which he embraced instead of Juno, who entertained
Hercules as he went to Pirithous wedding.
Pholus: then the cup began to walk merrily among the rest of the company,
there was drinking and talking of all hands, till lights were brought in. In
the mean time I perceived the boy that waited upon Cleodemus, a pretty smirke
youth, and a well faced cuppe-bearer, sometimes smile a little, (for I must
tell you all, even the very appendancies to the feast, especially, if any thing
were done that might move delight) I therefore watched as narrowly as I could,
to find out what it was he smiled at: and not long after he came to take
the cup from Cleodemus, who giving him a crush on the finger together with
the cup, gave him, I think two pieces of silver: the boy, at the crush of
his finger smiled again, but I imagine he was not aware of any money: for,
receiving it not, the pieces fell down and clattered in the flower, vvhereat
they both blushed exceedingly: yet they that ^re next knew not whose money it
was, the boy denying that he let fall any, and Cleodemus, near unto whom the
noise was, would not acknowledge he cast any down: so it was let slip,, and
nothing said of it: for there were not many that saw it, but only I think
Aristoenetus: for within a while after, the boy was sent packing out of the
room, and an old withered fellow, I think some muleter, or horse keeper,
commanded to wait in his place: thus the matter was hushed up, which would have
been a great discredit to Cleodemus, if it should have been known openly,
and not smoothered, as Aristoenetus discreetly did, imputing it to much wine:
but Alcidamus, the Cynike, who by this time had got a pot in his pate, when he
had learned out the name of the bride, commanded silence with a loud voice, and
turning himself toward the women: a health to thee, O Cleanthis, said he,
and Hercules be thy good guide: and when all the company laughed at him, laugh
you, said he, base scabbs, because I drunk to the bride in the name of The
Cynickes honored Hercules above all other gods, whom they would likewise seem
to imitate in their manner of life, going barefoote, wearing only a mantle
about them, and a club in their hands.
our god Hercules? I would have you know this, if she pledge me not, she
shall never be mother of such a son as I am, of firm strength, free mind,
and able body: and with that showed his naked limbs so far as was beyond
all shame: whereat the company laughed again: but he rising up in rage, cast a
crabbed countenance upon them, as if his fingers itcht to have a bout with some
of them, and no doubt some or other should have paid for it, if in the very
nicke, a huge tart had not been served in which drew his eyes that way, and
made him grow more calm, and his anger well allaid: for he walked the round
still the same way it went, and crammed in as fast as he could: by this time
most of the company was drunk, and began to roar a pace: Dionysodorus made
some speeches by fits, and was commended by the servants that stood behind:
Hestiaeus the Grammarian spoke verses, making a mingle mangle of Pindarus,
Hesiodus, and Anacreon, out of them all to patch up one absurd poem: and these
verses were ever in his mouth prophesying what would succeed: their shields did
clatter one against another: Il. 4.448.451.
and men's woeful cries, and joyful showts were heard there both at once:
Zenothemis read somewhat out of a little book which his man brought with him:
but in the distance, as many times it happens, before the coming in of the
second course, Aristoeuetus unwilling to have that time lost without delight,
called for his jester to come in, to say or do somewhat to make the company
merry: and presently comes an ill-shapt fellow, with his head Iesters and
mimicks were in those times all of this cut.
shaved all over, except a few hairs that were left standing upright upon the
top of his pate, who began to dance and show tricks, turning himself every way
to appear the more ridiculous, hudling up many verses together which he
pronounced in an Egyptian kind of dialect, and in the end he began to break
jests upon the company, every man laughing at what was said, and took it all
in good part, but when he thought to be as bold with Alcidamus, and called him
the The Cynicks were so called from (...), a dog, because of their snarlings
and currish humors: this properly signifies such a dog as we call a foysting
curre.
little curre of Malta, he grew angry, being not well content with him
before, because he saw he was pleasing to the company, and detaining them in
beholding his sports: wherefore suddenly casting off his cassocke, he
challenged him to cuffes, which if he refused, he threatened to make him feel
the weight of his cudgel: whereupon poor Satyrion, for so was the jester
named, settled himself to buffets: and better sport in this world could not be
made, than to see a Philosopher oppose himself against a jester, to strike and
be stricken again by such a fellow as he: the company were some ashamed, and
some laughed, until Alcidamus gave over in the plain field, quite beaten out
of the pit by a poor fellow, put upon him of purpose, which made them all
laugh heartily, and at that very instant Dionicus the Physician came in, a
little after the combat: for he was constrained, as he said, A trick of a
mad man.
to stay somewhat longer than he thought to have done, to give physic to
Polyprepon the Musician, who was lately taken with a frenzy: and he told us a
merry jest that befell him up on that occasion: for coming, as he said, into
the room to him, not thinking to have found him in his fit, the sick man
suddenly rose up, and locking the door upon him, drew his sword, and
delivering his pipes into his hands, commanded him to play, and because he
would not, began to beat him, holding a lash in his hands aloft over him: being
in this extremity, he devised to put this trick upon him: he challenged him
to play upon the pipe with him for a wager, which should be for a certain
number of stripes, to be given him that did worst: and when he had played first,
(but ill-favouredly enough god knows) he delivered him the pipe, and took the
lash into his own hands: and stepping suddenly to the sword, cast it out of
the window into the open court, and calling in neighbors to break open the
door, by that means escaped: then he showed the prints of the blows he had
received, and some black and blew spots upon his face. This narration of
Dionicus, was as pleasing as all the gesters merriments, and so he thrust in
by Hestiaeus, and supt upon the remainder of that was left. And no doubt it was
the providence of some god, that sent him so seasonably amongst us, to do good
offices for the company in businesses that fell out afterward: for suddenly
in the midst amongst us all appeared a servant, sent, as he said, from
Etoemocles the Stoicke, with a little writing in his hand, which he told us his
master commanded him to read publicly, that all the company might hear it,
and then come back to him again: which when Aristoenetus had given way unto,
he went nearer to the light, and there read it.


Philo. Was it any thing tending to the commendation of the bride, or some A
marriage song.
Epithalamium, which are used to be made upon such occasion?


Lucinus. Indeed I had thought it had been some such matter, but it fell out
otherwise, for the contents of the writings were these. Etoemocles the
Philosopher, to Aristoenetus: How I stand affected to feasting, the whole
course of my fore-passed life, can give large testimony: for though I am daily
invited by many, far richer men than your self, yet can I by no means endure to
be drawn unto it, knowing how subject such meetings are to disorders and
drunkenness: but you are the man, above all others, An impudent and foolish
lettter of a grave Philosopher.
I have most reason to complain me of, whom I have so long observed, with all
careful diligence, and now not thought worthy to be numbered amongst your other
friends, but the only man that could have no part with you, though dwelling so
near a neighbor to you, which makes my grief the greater, that you should
show your self so unkind: I repose felicity, neither in the limb of a wild
boar, nor in the leg of a hare, nor in a piece of a march-pane: I can have all
this plentifully from others, that are not to learn their duty: for I was this
day invited to supper by my scholar Pammenes, where I should have fared
richly: but, like a fool, I reserved my self for you, and you have utterly
pretermitted me, and imparted your good cheer to others: very good: for you
are not able to discern the better from the worse, nor have yet attained the
apprehensive faculty: but I know who are the men that have wrought me this, it
proceeds all from your rare Philosophers, Zenothemis and the Labyrinth, whose
mouths, without envy be it spoken, I am persuaded I could quickly stop with one
poor syllogism: let any of them tell me, if they can, what Philosophy is, or
the first elements of learning: the difference betwixt a strong disposition and
a habit, or, not to speak of more difficult points, what is A dilemma.
a horned reason, what a Sorites, what a collective argument: but much good may
it do you with them: I that hold only goodness to be happiness, can easily
digest these indignities. And to cut of all excuse, you may fortune hereafter
to fly unto, as to say, you had forgot me among so great a multitude, or that
you had so many matters in your head, [I tell you, I spoke to you twice this
day: first in the morning at your house, and afterward, when you were
sacrificing to Castor and Pollux, if you think it much I should take offense
for losing a feast, do but remember King of Calydonia.
Oeneus, and you shall see how angry Diana was, because he omitted her alone
from being a guest at his sacrifice, and feasted all the gods beside: Homer
speaks of it in this manner: Il. 1.533.
Either he forgot, or not regarded,
Which great neglect was wrathfully rewarded,
and Euripides,
Calydonia is a part of Pelops country found
By sea right opposite to us, a fertile happy ground: And Sophocles,
A monstrous This bore was afterward slain by Meleager and his company.
Ovid. Met. 8.
swine was into Oeneus land
Sent in revenge, by great Diana's hand.
These few verses, out of many, have I produced, that you may know, what a man
you have relinquisht to entertain Diphilus, and committed your son to his
tuition: very good: indeed he is sweet and loving to the young man, and
couples with him for affection sake: but if it were not a shame for me to
deliver such filthy matter, I could tell you more, which you may learn if you
will from Zopyrus, his schoolmaster: for it is true: but I have no desire to be
troublesome at your marriage feast, nor to accuse others of crimes so
abominable: though Diphilus have been thought worthy to deprive me of two
scholars, yet for Philosophers sake, I will be silent. My servant I have
commanded, that if you should offer him any part of your wild boar, or of your
venison, or of your banqueting dishes, in way of excuse for my not being at
supper with you, that he should not receive it, lest he might be thought to
be sent for that purpose. Whilst this letter was reading, I protest unto you,
good friend, that the sweat ran down my face for very shame, and I wished
that even the earth would open and swallow me up, There wants not such in
these times.
when I saw how the company laughed at every word they heard, especially such
as knew Etoemocles to be-a gray headed man, and to carry such a show of
gravitie: and I mused how he could conceal himself, being such a one, and
cosen others only with the length of his beard, and his formal countenance:
but as far as I could gather, Aristoenetus left him out, not as careless,
but doubtful lest he would not come at him if he were invited, nor expose
himself to such a man, where he thought best not to tempt him at all: when the
servant had done reading, all the guests cast their eyes upon Zeno, and
Diphilus, to see how pitiful and pale they looked upon it, their very
countenance bewraying the guilt of the crime that Etoemocles, laid to their
charge, which much troubled Aristoenetus, and filled him with vexation:
notwithstanding, he wished us to drink and be merry, setting as good a face
as he could upon the matter, and with a little smile, sent away the servant,
saying, he would be careful to look to such matters: soon after, Zeno
conveied himself closely from the table, his schoolmaster beckoning to him to
be gone, because it was his fathers will. But Cleodemus, who had long looked for
some occasion to be doing with the Stoics, and was even mad with himself that
no opportunity was offered, had now good hold given him by this Epistle. These
are, said he, the rare works of the excellent Chief founders of the sect of
the Stoics.
Chrysippus, admired Zeno, and famous Cleanthes, miserable poor stuff, bare
questions only, and seeming philosophy: for any matter else, the most of them
are but such as Etoemocles, whose Epistles you see how well they become a man
of his years, concluding Aristoenetus to be Oeneus, and Etoemocles Diana: a
proper piece of work, and well becoming a marriage feast: but Hermo (who sat
next above him, and I think had heard of a wild swine that was dressed for
Aristoenetus supper, and therefore thought the Calydonian boar might be
oportunely remembered) I beseech you Aristoenetus, said he, send him the first
cutting, lest the old man should pine for hunger, and consume away as did The
son of Oeneus and Althaea, who having slain with the help of his
companions, the monstrous boar sent by Diana, which miserably wasted his
fathers country, gave the head of it to Atalanta the daughter of Jasius King
of the Argives, she being the first that had drawn blood of him: which
Plexippus and Toxeus his uncle by the mothers side greatly stomaking, would
have taken it from her, but he opposing himself against them slew them both,
for which cause his mother threw the fatal brand, by which the destinies had
proportioned the length of his life into the fire, and so as that consumed he
wasted away and died. Ovid. Met. 8.
Meleager: though it be all one to him, for Chrysippus holds all these things
to be indifferent. And dare you mention the name of Chrysippus, said Zenothemis
(rousing up himself, and roaring it out as loud as he could) and by the
absurdity of one only man, I mean that unworthy Philosopher, Etoemooles the
sorcerer, conclude against Cleanthes, and Zeno, men of such profound wisdom?
what are ye your selves that you censure so audaciously of others? did not
thou Hermo clip of the hair that was upon the heads of The Dioscuri brothers
to Helena.

The Cock. a Bravely done of Philosophers.


Castor and Pollux, which was all of gold, and for that fact delivered to the
tormenter to be punished? and did not thou Cleodemus, abuse the wife of
Sostratus thy scholar and being taken in the manner, did, suffer shamefully
for it? cannot you keep silence of others, that know so much by your selves?
but I was never bawd to my own wife, said Cleodemus, as thou art: nor ever
took any new scholars exhibition into my hands as a pawn, and forswear it
when I had done: nor set out money to loan for four groats interest, nor
persecute my scholars, if they paid me not at their day: but thou can not
deny, said Zenothemis, that thou sold'st Crito a drench to poison his father
vvithall: and taking up the bowl to drink, cast all he left in it between
them, almost half a cup: whereof Io had part for neighborhood sake, and
well worthy of it: but Hermo stooping forwards, vvip'd the wine of his pate,
showing all the company how he was abssed: Cleodemus for want of a cup, to
answer him the like, spit in Zenothemis face, and laying hold on his beard with
his left hand, was about to give him a box on the ear, which sure would have
killed the old man, if Aristoenetus had not held his hand, and stepping in
beyond Zenothemis, set himself between them to divide them, by his
interposition to make them keep the peace: There is good use to be made of
other men's ill actions.
while this business was in hand, many cogitations came into my head: first,
that to know learning was to little purpose unless a man did frame his life
the better thereby: seeing now, men that were so excellent at speaking, None
show themselves in passion so ridiculous as they that pretend most wisdom and
greatest gravity.
show themseselves so ridiculous in their actions: next, I began to doubt, lest
the common saying should be true indeed, that learning brings them out of their
right minds, who apply themselves only to their books, and perpetually
ponder upon them: for among so many philosophers as were there, a man could
hardly cast his eye upon any that were free from taxation, but some were filthy
in their actions, other more filthy in their speeches: neither could it be
imputed all to drunkenness, considering what Etoemocles a fasting man had
written: but all was turned the clean contrary way: The vulgar, eat their
meat orderly not seen either to exceed in drink, or to behave themselves
unmannerly: only, they laughed, and could not choose, I think, but censure
them, whom they before admired as men of worth, in respect of their habit: but
the wise men were past all shame: they raild, and were drunk, and scolded, and
went together by the ears: as for the admirable Alcidamus, he showed himself
so shameless a knave, as to piss in the midst among them, without reverence
of the women. And certainly a man could not liken this feast to any thing
better, then to that which the Poets speak of the goddess The goddess of
contention.
Eris: for she being not invited to The father of Achilles, upon the golden
apple was this inscription, let it be given to the fairest which Paris judged
to be Venus, for which she bestowed upon him Helena, which was the occasion of
the Trojan war.
Peleus wedding, cast an apple into the room amongst them, which occasioned
all the stir that was at Troy: in like manner, Etoemocles cast his epistle
into the company instead of an apple, to work such another mischief as the
Trojan war: for Zenothemis, and Cleodemus would never give over brawling,
though Aristoenetus sat between them. It is enough said Cleodemus, for this
time, that you are proved to be unlearned persons: to morrow I will revenge my
self in such manner as it should be: for answer me, Zenothemis, if thou
can, thy self, or the doughtie Diphilus, in what respect you say the
possession of riches is a thing indifferent, and yet care for nothing so much
as to get more: this makes you intrude your selves among the rich, to become
usurers, and set forth money to loan, and to teach young men for money: again
you hate pleasure, and exclaim against Epicures, and yet do, and suffer all
manner of filthiness for pleasures sake: if a man invite you not to his feast,
you will take pepper in the nose, if you be invited, you will gorge your selves
and cramme in till your gutts do crack, beside what you give away to your
servants: and with that word, he snatched at the napkin which Zenothemis man had
about him, (for it was full of all sorts of good flesh) which he would have
loosed, and cast them all into the floate, but the fellow held hard, and would
not let it go: well done, Cleodemus, said Hermo: let them tell me now, why
they cry out against pleasure, and yet strive for it more than any other? no,
said Zenothemis, but do thou tell me Cleodemus, in what respect thou hold
riches to be not indifferent: no said he, but answer thou me, and thus they
were at it a great while, till Io stepped forth and said, I pray you be silent,
and I will propose a fit argument to be handled at this present, only, you
shall speak your minds every man without contending, and listen, as if you
were busy at disputation in the presence of our Plato. All that were present
praised him for this: especially Aristoenetus and Eucritus hoping now to be
freed from their vexation, insomuch that Aristoenetus shifted into his own
place again, expecting nothing but peace: then came in that service, which is
called, the With us the second course.
accomplishing of the feast, which was to every man a foul, a piece of the
boares flesh, a share, a fish fried, and sugar cakes: eat what they would, and
the rest they might carry away: yet every man had not a private platter to
himself, for Aristoenetus and Eucritus had but one dish in common betwixt
them, and either of them was to take that for his part which was next to him:
in like manner another dish was in common between Zenothemis the Stoike and
Hermo the Epicure: the next in order were Cleodemus, and Io, after them the
bridegroom, and my self, and then Diphilus, who had two parts set before him,
for Zeno his scholar, that should have been his partner, was risen from the
table, remember this good Philo for much matter depends upon it.


Philo. I will not forget it I warrant you:


Lucinus. Then said Io: the first speaker shall be my self, The speech of Io
the Platonist.
if it please you: then pausing a little: it were most seemly for me, said
he, in the presence of such men, to speak of Ideas, and incorporalities, and
the immortality of the soul, but because I would not be oppugned by
Philosophers which hold otherwise, I will forbear, and speak my mind of
marriage: for I hold it the best course not to marry at all, but to be ruled by
See true Hist. l. 2. b. and e. Spoke like a Platonist.
Plato and Socrates, and bestow our love upon boys: for such are the only men
that attain the perfection of virtue: but if marry we must, let us take
Plato's course in that, and have our wives in common, for so shall jealausie be
avoided: They all burst out in laughter at this, as spoken in a season most
unseasonable: for Dionysodorus said to him for shame give over this rusticall
and barbarous speech where can we find jealousy now, or in whom? are you a
prating you rogue, Th(...)marians ri^us stuff.
said the other? and I think Dionysodorus paid him in the same coin again.
But honest Hestiaeus the Grammarian, peace, said he, and I will read an This
Epithalamium in the original is in verse, which for the meannesse of the
Greek poetry, the translator, I believe thought not worthy to be put into the
like in English, yet for the readers satisfaction, I have endeavored to make
it express the rudeness of the Greek as near as I can.

Divine Cleanthis choicely like a Queen
Bred in her fathers fair house such is seen,
All other virgin: she does far excel
And from the Moon or Venus bears the bell.
And bridegroom hail of young men best in truth
Stronger than Nercus, or Thetis youth.
And we will often chant this bridal song
Unto you, that does to you both belong.

Epithalamium amongst you: and so began to read his elegy, which was this, as
I remember: Such is the daughter of Aristoenetus, divine Cleanthis, curiously
brought up in his house, as a Queen, the prime of all virgins, surpassing
Venus or the moon: and hail bridegroom the worthiest of all worthies, more
puissant than Nereus and Thetis son: this bridal song shall often be
chaunted over in praise of you both: At this they were all ready to burst, as
good reason they had: but now the time was come to take away what was set on
the table: so Aristoenetus and Eucritus took either of them what was before
them: so did I and the bridegroom what was set before him, and Io and
Cleodemus in like manner: but Diphilus would have had also what was set before
Zeno who was gone, contesting that they were set only to him, and strave with
the waiters, who held it fast from him: and taking hold of the bird dragged and
drawed it, like the dead Who fighting in Achilles armor was slain by Hector,
and a bloody battle ensued between the Grecians and Trojans which should have
his body.
body of Patroclus: but in the end he proved too weak, and let his hold go,
which stirred much more laughter among the guests, and most of all to see in
how ill part he took it, as if he had been wronged in the highest degree:
likewise Hermo and Zenothemis sat together, as I before told you: Zenothemis
above and the other next to him, and all viands were set between them in an
equal proportion, which they parted peaceably: only the foul that was before
Hermo, was the fatter, which I think was mere chance, and these they were to
take away, either of them his own: but then Zenothemis, (now, Philo, let me
entreat your diligent attention for we draw near to the best part of the
pageant) Zenothemis I say, overskipping that which belonged to himself, would
have taken that away which was set to Hermo (for as I told you, it was the
better fed) and Hermo laid hands on it to keep it, and would not suffer him to
have any other than what was due to him: then there was an outcrie betweeene
them, and they fell together by the ears, beating the birds about one another
face, and either of them catching hold upon the others beard, called for help
Hermo for Cleodemus: and Zenothemis for Alcidamus and Diphilus: and all took
parts, some with the one, and some with the other, only Io excepted, who
reserved himself indifferent between them: the rest all fought grappled
together pell-mell: but Zenothemis, taking a bowl from off the table, that
stood before Aristoenetus, flung it at Hermo, but mist of his mark, and fell
upon another, for it hit the bridegroom a cruel blow on the head, and brake
his pate pitifully: then the women shriekt and thrust in between them,
especially the mother of the young man, when she saw the blood run about her
sons ears: the bride also leapt off the seat where she sat. But Alcidamus
all this while played the devil in taking Zenothemis part, and with his staff
brake Cleodemus head, and gave Hermo a soar blow on the jawe bone, and wounded
some of the servants that came to help them: yet for all that, the other side
would not give it over so, but Cleodemus with the point of his finger, tare one
of Zenothemis eyes, and closing with him, bit of his nose: and as Diphilus was
coming to aid Zenothemis, Hermo flung him of his stool to the ground with his
head forwards: Hestiaeus the Grammarian caught a blow amongst them too, for
Cleodemus, I think, gave him a kick in the mouth, mistaking him for Diphilus:
and there lay the poor fellow, as Homer says, spewing up his blood, all was
full of tumult and tears: the women howled out pitifully compassing Choerea,
but the most kept themselves out of the shrape: for Alcidamus did more
mischief then all the rest, laying about him on every side, and striking he
cared not who, and many more I am sure had fallen if his staff had held: but I
standing up against the wall, durst not for my life once come among them, for
Hestiaeus had showed me a president, how dangerous it was to part such a
business. A man would have thought he had seen the At the wedding of
Pirithus and Hippodamia, Ovid. Met.

Which gives the title to the Dialogue.


Lapithes and the Centaures together by the ears: tables were overturned,
blood run down, and bowls flung about: but at the last Alcidamus struck out
the light, and we were all in darkness, and far worse than we were before:
for another light could hardly be brought in amongst us, so that many
mischiefs were done in the dark. In the end when a light came in, though it
were long first, Alcidamus was found lifting at a wenches clothes, and would
have ravished her in the dark whether she would or no: Dionysodorus also was
taken in the manner with another trick: for rising up from the place where he
sat, a silver bowl fell out of his bosom: but he excused the matter and
said, that Io took it up in the tumult, and gave it him to keep lest it
should be lost: and Io, to save his honesty, affirmed it to be so: Thus was
the feast broken up in tears: and some again laughed as fast at Alcidamus,
Dionysodorus, and Io: the wounded men were feign to be carried out of the
room, in ill case, especially old Zenothemis, who took grievously the loss
of his eyes and his nose, and cried out that he was almost dead with pain:
The Stoics (...) things to be indifferent which are not in our own power.
then Hermo thought his own case were bad enough for two of his teeth were
stricken out, yet could not choose but upbraid him, saying, remember now
Zenothemis, that henceforth you never hold pain to be a thing indifferent. The
bridegroom after Dionicus had laid a plaster to his wound, was led into the
house, and when they had bound up his head close with linen clothes, they put
him into the coach which came from the bride and carried him away: a woeful
wedding day poor wretch to him. Others, Dionicus looked unto us as well as he
could, and when they were fallen asleep, the rest were had home, most of them
spewing all the way they went: but Alcidamus tarried there still (...) for all
the house were not able to get him out of doares: when he had once cast
himself overthwart the bed and so fell asleep: this was the end of our feast,
honest Philo, whereunto the tragic verses may be well applied: Eurip ^oe^ and
And Andromad fin.
Fortune varies every way,
And God can that effect
We think not of, and make us fail
Of what we do expect.
for I Will be sworn, I little thought of such a business as this, but I have
got this for my learning, that it is no safe course for quiet men to feast with
Philosophers.


FINIS.

