THE PVRSVIT OF THE HISTORY OF LAZARILLO DE TORMEZ. GATHERED OVT of the
Ancient Chronicles of Toledo. By IEAN DE LVNA, a Castilian. And now done into
English, and set forth by the same Author.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop for Thomas Walkley and are to be sold at his
shop at the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, Lord STRANGE, Mr ROBERT STANLEY, And The Lady
ANNE CARRE.
The Hopeful Issue of the Truly Noble William, Earl of Darby, and his
virtuous Countess Elizabeth, a fruitful Branch of the Ancient and Illustrious
House of OXFORD.

T. W. in humble acknowledgement of his Duty and Service to their Parents,
themselves, and both the Families, from whence they are derived.

Dedicateth this strangely recovered Continuation of the pleasant History of
LAZARILLO DE TORMEZ.

CARTA DEDICATORIA. AL ILLVSTRISSIMO y excellentissimo Sen^or Don Roberto Car
de Ancram, Cauallero titulado, y de la Camara Priuada, gran Tesorero de cosas
extra ordinarias de su Alteca el Principe de Galls.
Illustrissimo y excelentissimo Sen^or:
DOs cosas me han mouido a dedicar a vu Senoria esta obra: la vna y mas
principal es, para mostrar en algo la voluntad que tengo de seruir a quien por
tantos titulos lo merece, y a quien estoy tan obligado. La otra para arrimar al
pobre Lazaro a la sombra, y amparo de quien con su autoridad le defienda, con
su virtud lo adorn, y con su sauiduria lo califique. Las verdades desnudas y
sin reboco que este libro dize, le han hecho pasar por el fuego, para que
acrisolado llegasse a las manos de vu Sen^oria. He lo hecho traducir en Ingles,
fiel, y literalmente, para que se manifieste su inocencia, y vea que en el no
ay cosa que pase los limits de vna honesta, licita y loable recreacion: antes
es vna centinela que descubre de lexos los enemigos, y muestra los tropiecos y
barrancos, en que los inorantes por falta de aduerte^cia caen, y tropiecan.
Suplico a vu Sen^oria le reciua con su clemencia, y bondad acostumbrada, no
echando a atreuimiento, lo que ha nacido del deseo que tengo de emplear mi
vida, y fuercas, en seruicio de quien soy el mas humilde, y obediente de sus
criados.

I. DE LVNA.

THE AVTHOR to the Reader.
THe occasion (gentle Reader) of Printing the Second Part of Lazarillo de
Tormes has been, that there came to my hands a little Pamphlet, which treats
of his Life, without any likelihood of truth. The greatest part of it is
stufft, with telling how Lazaro fell into the Sea, where he was turned into a
Fish called a Tunny, and lived there many years, marrying with a she Tunny,
by whom he had Children, as much Fishes as the Father and Mother. It relates
also the Wars that the Tunnies made, Lazaro being their Captain, and many
other Tales, as ridiculous as false, and as ill grounded as foolish. And
questionless, the Author of it had a mind to utter some foolish Dream, or
some dreamed folly. That Book (I say) has been the first motive, that has
moved me to bring to light this second Part, word for word, without adding or
diminishing, as I have seen it written in certain Scroules kept in the
Treasury of Records of the Beggars of Toledo, and as I have heard it a hundred
times told by my Grandmother, and Aunts, by the Fires side in the Winter
nights, and with the which my Nurse has weaned me. For the better
confirmation, I remember how they and others of our neighbors would dispute,
How it could be possible that Lazaro could be so long under water (as is said
in this second Part) without drowning? Some held pro, and the others, con. The
first quoted Lazaro himself; who said, That the Water could not get into him,
by reason that he was filled and crammed up to the very mouth. A good old man,
well skild in swimming, to prove that to be an easy matter, interposed his
authority, affirming, That he had seen a man, who going to swim in the
river Tagus, diued under Water, and remained in certain Caves from Sunneset
until next morning, that by the Sunshine he did find the way out: and when as
his Parents and Friends were weary of bewayling and seeking his Body, to give
it burial, he came forth safe and sound. The other difficulty that they found
in his life, was, That no body did take Lazaro for a man, and that as many as
saw him, should take him for Fish. To this answered a good Canon (who by reason
that he was very old, did commonly sit in the Sun among the
Distaffe-Spinsters) That it was most likely of all, as agreeing with the
opinion of many ancient and modern Writers, as among others, Pliny, Aelian,
Aristotle, Albertus Magnus, who affirm, That there are certain Fishes in the
Sea, the Males they call Titons, and the Females Nereids, and all of them
Seamen, who from the Girdle upward have the shape of perfect Men, and from
thence downward of Fishes. And I say, that although that opinion had not been
defended by so well approved Authors; yet the License that the Fishermen had
from the Lords Inquisitors, might suffice to excuse the Spanish ignorance,
seeing it had been a case of Inquisition to have doubted of a matter which
their Lordships had consented should be shown for such. And to this purpose
(though out of my compass) I will relate an accident that befell a laboring
man of my Country: which was, That one of the Inquisitors having sent for him,
to beg some of his Pears of him, which he had heard were excellent; the
poor Clown not knowing why his Lordship should send for him, was so skared,
that he fell sick upon it, till that by the means of a friend of his he
understood the business: And then presently starting from his Bed, he ran
into his Garden, plucked up the Tree by the root, and presently sent it with
the Fruit, saying, he would not keep in his house an occasion for their
Lordships to send for him another time; so great is the fear that not only
laboring men, and the baser sort of people, but even the Lords and Grands have
of them. All of them tremble when they hear these words, Inquisitor, and
Inquisition, more then the Leaves upon the Tree with the gentle Zephirus. This
is that which I have been willing to warn the Reader of that he may be the
readier to answer, when such Questions shall be propounded in his presence. If
he accept this Second Part, let him expect the Third, with the Death and
Testament of Lazarillo; which is the best of all: If not, he may at least
receive my good will. Farewell.

THE PVRSVIT OF THE HISTORY OF LAZARILLODE TORMES: Gathered out of the ancient
Chronicles of Toledo.
CHAP. I. In the which, Lazaro tells how he parted from Toledo, to go to the
Wars of Argiers.
WHo has the best, and worst does love; must not be grieved if worst he
prove. I speak it to this purpose, that I neither could nor would contain my
self in that good course which Fortune had offered me: Change being in me as
an inseparable accident, that accompanied me as well in my best and plenteous,
as in my worst and disastrous fortunes; enjoying then the happiest life that
ever Patriarch did, eating like an invited Friar, drinking more then at a
Gossipping, better clothed then a Jesuit, and with two round dozens of Ryals
in my Purse, surer then any Huckster of Madrid; my House full, as a Bee-hiue; a
daughter got in Capricorn; and an Office, which the Dog-whipper of the
Cathedral Church of Toledo might well have enuyed: News came of the
Expedition for Argiers, which disquieted me very much, and made me determine
(as a good son) to follow the steps and tracke of my good father Thomas
Gonzales (who^ God absolve) with a desire to leave to poster ages a pattern
and example, not to lead a crafty blind man, pick the Loaf of a covetous
Priest, serve a needy thredbare Squire, and lastly, to proclaim the faults of
other men: but to open the eyes of Mores, blinded with errors; to sink and
batter the bold and Pyraticall Navy; to serve a valiant Captain, of the Order
of S. John; with whom I placed my self Butler, upon this condition, That
whatsoever I should get in war, should be mine own, as it was; and lastly,
the pattern and example that I meant to leave, was, to encourage and animate,
in crying S. James, and, Stand to it Spain. I took leave of my well-beloved
wife and of my dear daughter: The one entreated me not to forget to bring her
a little Blackamore; the other desired me to be mindful to send her by the
first Carrier a Slave, to wait upon her, and some Barbary Cecchines, with which
she might comfort her self in my absence. I asked leave of the Archpriest my
Master, to whose care and custody I committed both my Wife, and Daughter, who
promised me to deal with them in no worse manner, then if they had been his
own. I parted from Toledo iouiall, stately, and content (as all are that go
to the Wars) puffed up with glorious hopes, accompanied with a great number of
friends, and neighbors, that went the same Voyage, carried with a desire of
bettering their fortune. We came to Murcia, with intention to go ship our
selves at Cartagena: where, there befell me that which I little wished, to make
me know, that Fortune, who had set me on the top of her unconstant Wheel,
and advanced me to the highest degree of earthly felicity, began already (in
her swift course) to hurl me down headlong to the lowest. The chance was,
that coming to our Lodgings, I saw a semy-man, who seemed rather a he Goat,
by reason of his ragged and tottered Garments: his Hat was pulled down over
his eyes, so that I could by no means see his face; he leaned his cheek upon
his hand, and had his leg cross over his Sword, which he wore in a half
Scabbard made of Lists: his Hat (right Beggars Block) had no crown, the
better to euaporate the humors of his head: his Doublet was of the French
fashion, so cut and slasht with wearing, as there was not a piece left big
enough, to wrap up half a frathing worth of Cummin Seed in: his Shirt was of
flesh, which might be seen through the Grate of his Garment; his Breeches were
suitable: his Stockings, the one red, the other green, came scarce to his
Anckles; his Shoes without Soles, were as good to be drawn as carried. By a
Cocks Fether which he wore in his Hat, I thought he should be a Soldier;
With this imagination, I asked him from whence he was, and whither he went?
He casting up his eyes, to see who he was that questioned him, straight knew
me, and likewise I him; it was the Squire whom I had served in Toledo: I was
astonished to see him in such a pickle. He observing my amazement, said to me;
I marvel not (friend Lazaro) if thou do wonder to see me in this Equipage:
but anon thou shall leave wondering, when I have told thee what has happened
unto me, since the time that I left thee in Toledo until now. Returning to my
Lodging, with the change of my Pistolet to discharge my Creditors, I met with a
Woman, close wrapped up in her Veyle; who pulling me by the Cloak, with tears,
and sighs, mingled with sobs, entreated me earnestly to be favorable unto
her, in an urgent necessity. I bad her speak her grief, which she should be
longer in telling, then I in helping. She continuing her weeping, with a
maidenly shamefastness said, That the courtesy which I was to do her, and
whereof she was to request me, was, to accompany her unto Madrid, where she
was told, that a Gentleman was, who not content to have dishonored her, had
also robbed her of all her Jewels, without any regard to the promise of
Marriage which he had given her; and that if I would do this for her, she
would do for me what a thankful woman is obliged to do. I comforted her
after the best manner that I could; giving her this hope, that if her enemy
were to be found in the World, she might hold her self already revenged. To
conclude, without any delay we set forward toward the Court, whitherto I bare
all the charges. The good Damsel (that knew well whither she went) carried me
to a Band of Soldiers, who received her with all cheerfulness, and brought
her before the Captain, to have her enrolled for one of their Cockatrices:
Then turning her self toward me, with a shameless and brazen countenance
she said, Farewell Master Lubber, I have now no more need of you. I seeing my
self thus gulled, began to rage and foame at my mouth, telling her, that if
she had been a man, as well as she was a woman, I would have pulled her
Soul up by the roots out of her Body. A petty Soldier among the rest rose up
to me, and laying his hand upon my face, made me advance a Baboones Snowt; not
daring to give me a box on the ear; which if he had, his Grave might have
been dug in the same place. When I saw the matter grow worse and worse, Mum
said I, and went my way a little faster then ordinary, to try if some tall
fellow or other durst have followed me, that we might have cut one another
throat; for had I encountered with any of the baser stamp, and had killed him
(as without doubt I had) what honor or what credit had I gotten? But if the
Captain had come forth, or some Swash-buckler, I would have given him more
slashes then there is Sand in the Sea. When I perceived that none durst follow
me, I went away very well pleased. After that, I sought for a Service, and
because I could not find such a one as I deserve, I am as thou see me. The
troth is, that I might have been Butler or Usher to five or six
Botcher-Wiues; Offices, that though I were ready to starve, I would not accept
of. Finally, my good Master said, that because he could not meet with
certain Merchants of his Country, who would have lent him Money, he was
without it, and knew not whither to go that Night. I, that straight smelt his
meaning, invited him to the half of my Bed, and Supper; which offer he
willingly accepted. As we went to Bed, I desired him not to lay his Clothes
upon it, because it was too little for so much company. The next morning,
thinking to rise without any noise, I reached my hand to my Clothes, but I
found Blancko; for the Slave had stolen them, and was gone away with them. I
thought verily I should have died in my Bed for sorrow: and it had been far
better for me, for then had I escaped the many deaths, which since I have
suffered. I begun to cry as loud as I could, Thieves, Thieves; which those of
the house hearing, came up, and found me as a Swimmer new come out of the
Water, seeking in every corner of the Chamber something to cover me. They all
fell a laughing, as if they had been mad, and I a swearing, like a Carman. I
gave to the Devil that Thief, and bragging Cheater, who half the night long
had kept me awake, with telling me the greatness of his person, and kindred.
All the remedy that for that time I could find (no body helping me with a
better) was to try, if the Garments of that said Braggadocio could fit me,
till God had sent me some others. But it was a Labyrinth; they had neither
beginning, nor ending: there was no difference betwixt Breeches, and Ierkin. I
thrust my Legs into the Sleeves, and wore the Breeches for a Doublet; not
forgetting the Stockings, which seemed to be some Chandlers drawing Sleeves:
the Shoes were like Shackles about my Legs, because they wanted Soles. I
blockt on the Hat, the Crown downward, because it was less greasy. And as
for the troops that traveled over me on foot and horseback, I let them
pass. In this Habit went I to my Master, who had sent to call me; who
wondering to see such a skare-Crow, fell into such a laughter, that his
backe-strings slackening, he could hold no longer, but made flush; the which
(for his credit) it is fitting ones tongue should pass over with silence.
After a thousand stoppes, he asked me the reason of this Disguise; I told it
him: And thereupon, in stead of taking pity of me, he chid me, and turned
me out of doors, saying, That as then I had brought that man into my Bed;
so another time, I would do the like with some other, that would rob him.

CHAP. II. How Lazaro took shipping at Cartagena.
I Always have had a gift, not to stay long with one Master; no more did I
with this, though not by my fault. I saw my self forsaken, alone, and
distressed; in such plight, as every one would thrust me from him, gybing and
laughing at me. One would tell me, That Hat with a Back-doore, is not much
amiss; it looks like a Dutch-womans Cappe: Another would say, That Doublet is
of the Fashion, it is like a Hoggestie; and the rather, seeing your Worship is
in it: they run so thick, that he might kill them, and send them salted to
the good Lady his Wife. A Snap-sacke-bearer said to me, Fore God Sir Lazaro,
those Stockings make you a very good Calfe. Every one did so scoff and flout
me, that I was in mind to return home again, but that I thought, that there
would be but poor Wars, if I should not get more then I had lost. That, that
grieved me most, was, that they fled from me as from one that were infected.
We took shipping at Cartagena: the Ship was great, and well provided. They
hoysted up the Sails, and committed them to the Wind, which carried it, and
drove it with great swiftness. The shore vanished from our sight, and the Sea
begun to swell with a contrary Wind, which raised the Billows unto the Clouds.
The tempest increased, and our hope diminished. The Mariners and Pilots gave us
over: The wayling and weeping was so great, that me thought we were at a
Good Friday correction. The noise was so great, that nothing of what was
commanded, could be understood: The one runn'd to one place, the other to
another: we all seemed Braziers. Every one confessed himself to whom he
could: such there were as confessed themselves to a Punke; who gave them the
absolution after as good a manner, as if she had exercised the Office many
years. It is good angling in a muddie Water: When I saw that they were all
busy, I said to my self, Die then, and die full. And thereupon I went down
to the bottom of the Ship, where there was great store of Bread, Wine,
Pasties, and Preserues, for no body said so much as, what make you here? I
began to eat of all, and to fill my belly, that I might have provision enough
till Doomes-day. In the mean time there came a Soldier to me, desiring me to
shriue him: Who, amazed to see me with so good Cheer, and Appetite, asked me,
How I could eat, seeing death before mine eyes? I answered him, That I did it
for fear lest the Seawater, which I was to drink in my drowning, should do
me any harm. This my simplicity, made him fetch a laugh from his heels.
Many confessed themselves to me, not able to utter one true word for grief and
fear; nor I to hearken unto them, for have that I had to fill my self. The
Captains, and men of note, with two Priests that were there, saved themselves
in the Cock-boat. I being ill apparrelled, could not be received into it. When
I had eaten my fill, I went me to a Hogs-head of good Wine, and there pouring
down my Throat as much as ever I could, I forgot both my self and the
Tempest. The Ship ouerturned, and the Water came in, as in her home. A
Corporal taking hold of both my hands amidst the pangs of death, desired me
to hear a sin whereof he would confess himself unto me; which was, That
he had not fulfilled a Penance which had bin enjoined him, to go on
Pilgrimage to our Lady of Loretta, having had many opportunities to effect it;
and that then, when he would, he could not. I told him, that by the
authority which I had received, I did change it him; and that in stead of
going to our Lady of Loretta, he should go to S. James. Alas Sir (said he) how
willingly would I accomplish this Penance; but already the water begins to get
into my mouth so that I cannot. If it be so, said I again, I enjoin you for
your Penance to drink all the water of the Sea: but he did not execute it, by
reason that there were others that drunk as much as he. The water coming to
my mouth, I cried out, To another door, for this cannot open; and although it
had been open, yet could it not have entered, because my body was so full of
Wine, that it looked like a puffed Bladder. At the noise of the cracking of the
Ship, came a great quantity of Fish, eating the flesh of the Wretches that
were drowned (and not in a little Water) as if they fed in a Common. In the
little time that I was a going to the bottom, and coming up again, I saw
incredible things: An infinite number of Bones, and Bodies of Men; great store
of Coffers, full of Money and Jewels, great quantity of Arms, Silks, Linen,
and Spices. I had a great mind to all, and it grieved me much, that I had it
not all safe at home, with which (as a Biscay said) I would eat my Bread
printed with Sardaines. If I could but get out these Riches now (said I to my
self) no Inne-keeper in the World should fare more delicately then I. I would
build Houses, establish Revenues, and purchase a Garden in the Zigarrales. My
Wife should Zigarrales is a place in Toledo, where there are very pleasant
Gardens.
style her self Lady, and I Lordship: I would marry my daughter to the richest
Cook in my Country. Every one would come and congratulate me, and I would
tell them, that I had wraught fairly, drawing my Wealth, not out of the
entrails of the Earth, but from the very heart of the Sea: not wet with sweat,
but through wet with water, as any dried Poore-Iohn. In all my life, I was
never so content as then; not considering, that if I opened my mouth, I should
remain there buried with the Treasure, for ever and a day.

CHAP. III. How Lazaro came out of the Sea.
SEeing my self so near unto my end, I feared; and so nigh the Treasure, I
rejoiced: Death affrighted me, the Treasure delighted me. To shun that, since I
could not enjoy this, I rent off from my back the rags that the Squire my
Master had left me, for the good services which I had done him, and began to
swim (though I had but very little skill therein) Necessity giving Wings to
my feet, and Oars to my hands. I know not how; a Cord fastened about my foot,
which (as far as I could perceive) was tied to a great Chest (without doubt,
full of Jewels) which, though I could, I would not vnloosen; imagining, whether
my former thoughts might not have been some prophecy. But such was my bad
luck, that if all the prophecies in the World had promised me some happy and
constant fortune, yet none of them had come to pass. As the Cord lengthened,
my hopes and ambition increased, believing, that if I could but come a shore
with it, I would draw and pull out of the Sea that great Chest, wherewith
Lazaro should be more wealthy, and more respected, then Prester John of the
Indies. The Fishes which were about me, came to bite me, thrusting me
forward with their bobs, which were to me as a Stirrup: And so they iogging,
and I kicking, we came almost to the top of the Water, where there befell me
a chance, which was cause of all my misfortune. The Fishes and I ran into a
Net, which certain Fishermen had cast forth: who feeling a Draught, drew it up
with such violence (and the Water with no less, beginning to enter into me)
that unable to resist, I began to drown, and could not have escaped, if the
Sailors (according to their accustomed haste) had not drawn up the prey into
their Boat. The Devil take that filthy savor: in all my life time I never
drunk worse stuff; it tasted somewhat like the Worshipful Archpriest his
Piss, which once my Wife made me drink, telling me it was Wine of Ocana.
Ocana, a City in Spain, where very good Wine is made.
Having put into the Boat the Fishes, and I among them, they began to draw the
Cord, by the which (as it is said) they pulled up the bottom: they found me
tied at it; whereat much amazed, they said, What Fish is this, that has the
face of a man? Is it not some Devil, or some Spirit? But let us draw this
Rope, and see what Clogge hangs at the heels. Then fell they a haling and
tugging, with such might and maine, that they had like to have sunk the Boat:
Perceiving the danger, they presently cut the Rope, and with it, the hopes of
Lazaro of ever attayning The Goths were the first Kings of Spain, from
whence, when a man is termed rich and great, he is said to be of the Goths.
to the greatness of the Goths. They held my head downe-ward, that I might
the better cast out the Water, as also the Wine, which I had drunk. They
perceived, that I was not dead (which had not been the worst for me) and gave
me a little Wine, with the which (as a Lamp with Oil) I came again to my
self. They asked me a hundred Questions, but I answered to done of them,
until such time as they gave me some Meat. Then recovering breath, the first
thing that I asked them, was for the Clogge which I dragged at my foot: They
answered me, that they had cut it, to save themselves from the danger wherein
they were. There did Troy loose her self, and Lazaro his well-placed desires:
there began his pains, griefs, and torments. There is no greater vexation in
the World, then to have been rich, and elevated to the Horns of the Moon;
and afterward, to become poor, and subject to fools. All my Chimera's were
built upon the Water; and in an instant, it drowned them all. Then did I relate
unto the Fishermen, what both they and I had lost, by cutting off my Iesses:
which, when they understood, they were so grieved, that one of them had like to
run mad. But one of the grauest among them said, That it would be good to
turn me again into the Sea, and to stay there for me, until I came forth
again. They were all of his opinion; and, notwithstanding all the
inconveniences which I represented unto them, they persisted in their
deliberation, saying, That since I knew the way, it would be an easy thing
for me (as if it had been no more, then to go to a Cooks Shop, or to a
Tavern.) They were so blinded with covetousness, that already they would
have thrown me over board; if my good, or rather bad fortune, had not brought
to the place where we were, another Boat, which came to carry away their
Draught. Wherefore they held their peace, left the others should know of the
Treasure which they had discovered, and were constrained for that time, to
desist from their cruel intention. They brought their Boats to the Shore, and
craftily threw me among the Fishes, with intent to return to seek me
again, when conveniently they might. Then two of them took me, and secretly
carried me to a little Cottage, not far from thence. One that knew not the
mystery, asked them what was that? They answered, That it was a Monster which
they had taken with the Tunnies. When I saw my self in the Lodge, I desired
them to give me some rags, or other, to cover my nakedness, that I might
show my self before men. That shall be (answered they) when the Reckoning is
made with the Hostess; but I understood not (at that present) that kind of
language. The fame of the Monster did spread it self throughout all the
Country, so that much people came to the Cottage, for to see me: But the
Fishermen would not show me, saying, That they expected a License from the
Bishop and Inquisitors to that end; until when, they desired to be excused. I
was amazed, not knowing what to say, or do, little imagining what their
intention was. It was with me as with Cuckolds, who are the last that know,
that they are such. These Devils found out an Invention, the Devil himself
could not have invented the like; which requires a new Chapter, and new
attention.

CHAP. IIII. How Lazaro was carried through all Spain.
OCcasion makes the thief. Which the Fishermen seeing to offer it self so
fair unto them, took hold of, not only by the fore-top, but by the whole
body. For perceiving that so great number of people came to see the new Fish,
they determined to recompense themselves of the loss that they had made, in
cutting the Rope from my foot: and therefore they sent to demand a License of
the Inquisitors, to show over all Spain a Fish, that had a man's face. They
obtained it very easily, by means of a Present which they made to their
Lordships, of the best fish they had taken. When then the good Lazaro was
giving thanks to God, that he had drawn him out of a Fishes belly (which was
a miracle, by so much the greater, by how much my skill and cunning was the
less, swimming like a Bar of Iron) four of them (who seemed rather
Executioners, such as crucified Christ, then men) came and took me up, and
binding my hands behind my back, put me on a Beard, not forgetting the great
Mustachios, and a Perewig made of Moss, that made me show like a wild man in
a Garden. They wrapped up my feet in Flagges, as a Trowt of the Mountains. I
The best Trowts in Spain are taken in the Springs of Riners in the Mountains,
from whence they are brought wrapped up in flagges, for fear of spoiling.
bewailed my mishap, I sighed, complaining of my Destiny. O Fortune (said I)
why do thou persecute me thus? In all my life I never saw nor knew thee:
but if by the effects one may judge of the cause; by the trial which already
I have had of thee, I am verily persuaded, that no Syrene, Baziliske, Viper, or
Lioness with Whelps, is more cruel then thou art. Thou raysest men by thy
flatteries, and cherishings, to the highest of thy delights, and riches, and
from thence do hurl them headlong into the depth of all miseries and
calamities, by so much the greater, by how much thy favors have been great.
One of these my Tormentors hearing my complaint, with a Carter-like voice said
to me, If Master Tunnie speaks but a word more, he shall presently be salted
with his companions, or be burned for a Monster: The Lords of the Inquisition
(continued he) have ordained, that we carry him through all the Cities and
Places of Spain, to make him be seen of all men, as a Prodigy, and Monster
of Nature. I swore and vowed unto them, that I was neither Tunnie, Monster, nor
any such thing, but as good a man as any Neighbors Child whatsoever: and that
if I was come out of the Sea, it was by reason I had fallen into it, among
those that were drowned, going to the Wars of Argters. But they were deaf;
and so much the more, that they were not minded to understand me. Seeing that
my prayers were as vainly spent, as Suddes about an Asses face; I put on
patience, expecting till Time, that procures all, should cure my anguish,
proceeding from those cursed Metamorphosis. They put me in a half Tubbe, made
after the fashion of a Brigantine, full of Water; so that sitting in it, it
came up to my Lips. I could not stand upon my feet, for they were tied with a
Rope, whereof one end came out through a Leaden Pipe, put between the hoopes
and boards of the said Tub, in such sort, that if by mischance I grunted never
so little, in pulling only the Rope, they made me plunge (like a Duck) and
drink more Water then one that has the Dropsy. I shut my mouth close, till
such time as he that pulled the Rope, had slackned it; and then I peeped out
with my head like a Tortoyse, learning from thence-forth by my own harm to be
wary. Being laid in this manner, they showed me to every one: and the number
of those that came to see me, was so great, that in one day (every one paying
three halfepence) they got two hundred Ryals. That is, five pound.
The more they gained, the more they coueted; which made them have a great care
of my welfare. They entered in consultation, whether it were best every night to
take me out of the Water, least the overmuch moistness and cold might shorten
my life, which was dearer unto them then their own, for the profit which they
received by it. At length they concluded, that I should still remain therein;
persuading themselves, that custom would turn into nature: so that by that
means, poor Lazaro was as green Rice, or Hemp in a standing Poole. I leave
to the charitable consideration of the gentle Reader, what in such a case I
might endure, seeing my self detained in so strange a kind of Prison; a
Captive in a Land of freedom, and fettered by the malice of those covetous
Puppet-players; and (which was worst, and plagued me most) was to be forced to
counterfeit the dumb man, without being so; nor to have power so much as to
open my mouth, because that at the instant that I did open it, my Centinell was
so watchful, that (without being discovered by any one) he would stop it with
Water, for fear least I should speak. My meat was soaked Bread, which those
that came there, threw me, to see me eat: so, that in the space of six
months that I remained in that Bath, the Devil a bit of any thing else that I
did eat, being ready to die for hunger. My drink was the Water of the Tubbe;
which not being very clean, was the more substantial: for the coldness
thereof gave me a Laske, which lasted as long as I continued in that watrie
Purgatory.

CHAP. V. How Lazaro was carried to the Court.
THese Extortioners carried me from City to City, from Town to Town, and
from Farm to Farm, more jocund with their gain, then the Earth with May
flowers; and flowting poor Lazaro, thus did sing:

Long life and health God grant unto the Fish,
Who (without working) does maintain our Dish.
The Hearse wherein I was, was carried upon a Cart, and attended by three; the
Car-man; he that drew the Cord when I did offer to speak; and he that
related my life: who likewise made the speeches, telling the strange means
they had used to catch me, and lying more confidently, then any Tailor upon an
Easter Eve. When we traveled through inhabited places, they suffered me to
speak; which was the greatest courtesy I received of them. I asked them, what
Devil had put it into their heads, to carry me up and down after such a
manner in a Tubbe. They answered me, That if they had not done so, I would have
died presently; for being (as I was) a Fish, they knew I could not live out of
the Water. Seeing them so confident, I determined to be one; and so I persuaded
my self, since that every one esteemed me so; believing, that the Seawater
might have transformed me (the voice of the People being, according to the
Proverb, the voice of God) so that from thence-forward I was as silent as if I
had been at Mass. They brought me to the Court; where their gain was great,
the followers thereof being very desirous of novelties, as men that live in
perpetual idleness. Among many that came to see me, there were two
Scholars, who considering more exactly my Physiognomie, said in a low voice,
That they durst swear upon a Book, that I was no Fish, but a Man; and that if
they had been in any charge of Justice, they would have sifted out the naked
truth, with a Whip on their naked shoulders. I prayed to God in my mind that
they would do it, so that I might have been freed from thence: and thereupon
I thought to help them forwards, saying, the Gentlemen Scholars are in the
right. But scarce had I opened my mouth, when my Centinell had popped it under
Water. The shouting that all the people kept when I ducked my self (or rather
they ducked me) hindered the good Licentiates to proceed any further in their
discourse. They threw me Bread, and I gobled it up before it could be through
wet; but they gave me not half so much as I could have eaten. Then I remembered
the plenty that I had in Toledo, and my good friends the Germans, and what good
wine I was wont to cry; beseeching God not to suffer me to die by water, my
greatest enemy. After that I entered into consideration of what the students had
said, which by reason of the noise, no body had understood, and confirmed my
self in the opinion that I was a man, and from thence-forward I held my self
to be one, although my Wife had oftentimes told me that I was a Beast; and the
Boys of Toledo were wont to say unto me, Good M. Lazaro pull your Hat down
lower upon your forhead, for one may see your horns: and their carrying of me
thus in pickle, had made me doubt whether I were a perfect man, or no. But as
soon as I heard these blessed and quick-sighted Overseers speak, I made no
more doubt of it, but sought means to free my self from the hands of those
Chaldeans. One Night, in the deadest time, seeing my Guards fast asleep, I
tried to unbind my self: but by reason that the Cords were wet, it was
impossible for me. I thought to cry out, but I considered, that it would
avail me nothing, for the first of them that should hear me, would have
stopped my mouth with a pottle of Water. Seeing this Gate shut to my remedy,
with great impatience I began to tumble and wallow in my mire, and at length,
with my tossing and struggling, I overthrew the Tub, and my self withal,
spilling all the Water. When I saw my self free, I began to call out for
help. The Fishermen awaking, all amazed to see what I had done, came in haste
to relieve me, by stopping my mouth, and cramming it with Grass: and the
better to confound my exclamations, they likewise with a louder strain fell a
crying, help, help; and amidst this hurly-burly, they ran to a Well hard by,
and with an incredible diligence filled up the Tub again. The Host came forth
with a Halberd, and all those of the house, some with Spits, and some with
Poles. The neighbors came running in, and a Baylife with his associates, that
were passing that way. The Inne-keeper asked the Sailors what the matter was,
who answered, that Thieves would have stolen away their Fish; which he
hearing (as if he had been mad) fell a crying out, Thieves, Thieves. Some
watched if they would steal out at the door; others looked, if they did not
climb from one house to another: but already my Keepers had returned me into
my Bath. It happened, that the Water which had been spilled, ran all through
a hole into a lower Chamber, upon the Bed where the daughter of the house did
lie, who moved with charity, had affoorded part of it to a Priest, who for
her sake was come to lodge there that Night. They were so skared with the
deluge of Water that fell upon their Bed, and with the outcries and noise that
every one did make; that, not knowing what shift to make, they threw themselves
out at a window, as naked as Adam and Eve. Now did the Moon shine so bright,
that she might have entered in comparison with him from whom she does receive
her brightness. As soon as they saw them, they cried out, There be the
Thieves, stop the Thieves. The Baylife and his assistants ran after them, and
ouertooke them not far from thence (by reason that being barefooted, the
stones did hinder their speed) and without any delay carried them to Prison.
The Fishermen the next morning very early took leave of Madrid to go to
Toledo, not knowing what was become of the kind-hearted Wench, and the devout
Priest.

CHAP. VI. How Lazaro was carried to Toledo.
THe Industry of Men is vain; their Knowledge, Ignorance; and their Might,
Impotencie; when God does not strengthen, direct, and guide them. My labor
served only to increase the care and solicitude of my Iaylors; who angry for
their last nights Alarm, gave me so many Bastonadoes by the way, that they
left me almost for dead, saying, Accursed Fish, would you have been gone? Do
you not acknowledge the great good one does you, in not killing you? you are as
the Oak, that yields not his fruit without cudgelling. After this manner
bruised, vpbraided, and almost dead for hunger, they entered me into Toledo, and
lodged themselves hard by a place called the Zocedober, at a Widows House,
whose Wine I was wont to cry. They put me in a lower Room, where a multitude
of people came to see me, and among others, my Eluira, holding my daughter by
the hand. When I saw them, I could not but give way to two Niles of tears,
that gushed out of mine eyes. I wept, and sighed, but within my self, for
fear they should deprive me of what I so much loved, and of the sight of that,
which I desired to have a thousand eyes to see, though it had been better,
that those who hindered my speech, had also taken from me my visible faculty.
For looking earnestly upon my Wife, I saw her (I know not if I may speak it) I
saw her with a belly mounted to her mouth. I was amazed and astonished,
although (had I been in my right wits) I had had no great cause, for the
Archpriest my Master had told me, when I went to the Wars, that he would
deal with her as if she had been his own. But what most vexed me, was, that
I could not persuade my self that she was with child by me, having been
absent above a year. Indeed when I dwelt with her, and that we were at Bed
and Board together, and that she would say to me; Lazaro, do not believe
that I am false to thee; for so doing, thou do wondrous ill: I was so well
satisfied, that I abhorred to conceive an evil thought of her, even as the
Devil does Holy Water; I lived jouiall, content, and without Jealousy, the
Disease of Fools. I have oftentimes considered with my self, that this matter
of Children does chiefly consist in imagination: for how many are there, that
love such as they think to be theirs, who indeed belong to them no otherwise,
then by name and number? and others, who (for certain Chymera's forged in
their brains, that their Wives have grafted upon their heads the punishment of
Acteons temeritie) do hate and abhor those that be their own? I began to
reckon the months, and days, but I found the way stopped, to my comfort. I
thought, whether my dear bedfellow were not sick of the Dropsy; but that
pious imagination lasted me but very little: for, as soon as she was gone
forth, two old Gossips began to say one to another, What think you of the
Arch-Priestresse? she has no want of her Husband. Who has got her with
Child, asked the other? Who? replied the first: Marry, the reverend
Archpriest; who is so good, that (for to give no scandal, if she should be
delivered in his house without having a Husband) he does marry her the next
Sunday to Peter Gabacho, who will be as patient as my Gossip Lazaro. That was
the Touchstone, and Non plus vltra of my patience; it began to overcome my
Heart: So that, sweating within the Water, and unable to help my self, I fell
down in a swoone within the Hog-stie. The water then entering amain through
all the passages, without any resistance, I appeared to be dead (much against
my will, which was, to live as long as it would please God, and I should be
able, in spite of Galicians, and all cross fortune.) The Fishermen very
heavy, caused all that were there, to go out, and in all haste lifted my head
out of the Water; but they found, that I was without pulse, or breath, as they
themselves were for very grief, bewayling their loss, which to them was none
of the least. They took me out of the Tubbe, and did what they could to make
me vomit that which I had swallowed; but all in vain, for death (as they
thought) had already shut the door after her. They remained blanke (as at a
running Lottery) not knowing any remedy, nor how to ease their grief. It was
at last decreed by the Council of three, that the Night following they should
carry me to the River, and should there throw me in, with a stone about my
neck; to make that my Grave, which had been the instrument of my death.

CHAP. VII. What happened to Lazaro upon the way to the River Tagus.
LEt no man despair, how afflicted soever he sees himself; for when he
shall least expect it, God will open the Gates and Windows of his Mercy, and
show, that nothing is impossible unto him; and that he can and will change the
designs of the wicked into wholesome and comfortable remedies, for such as put
their trust in him. These Knaves in grain thinking that Death did not jest
(whose custom is little so to do) put me into a Sack, and (laying me In
Spain, they use to carry Wine or Water upon Mules or Horses. in Goats or
Calves skins, fitted to that purpose, which they call Caques.
overthwart a Mule, as a Goats skin of Wine, or rather of Water, being full
thereof to the very mouth) took their way down the Hill of the Carmelites,
more sorrowful then if they had been going to bury the Father that begot
them, or the Mother that bare the^. It was my good fortune, when they put me
upon the Mule, to be laid upon my stomach and belly; so that going with my
mouth downward, I began to cast out Water, as if a Sluce-gate had Frago with
the Spaniards is a fish that out of his mouth does sometimes cast so much
water, that it is able to drown a Boat.
been opened, or as if I had been the fish * Frago, by means whereof I came
again to my self; and gathering breath, I perceived that I was out of the
water, and out of that accursed Tub: but I neither knew where I was, nor
whither they carried me. Only I heard them say, It is best for our safety to
seek out some Pit very deep, that he may not be found so soon. By the thread I
recovered the needle, and imagining presently what the matter was, and seeing
that the Crow could be no blacker then his wings, hearing a noise of people
thereabouts, I began to cry out, Help, help, for the Lords sake. The stir
which I heard, was the Watch, who came instantly to my outcry with their naked
swords, and ransacking the Sack, found poor Lazaro through soaked, as a
Greene-fish. They carried us all, as they found us, to the jail; the fishermen
weeping to see themselves prisoners, and I laughing for being at liberty. They
put them in a dungeon, and me in a good Bed. The next day being examined, they
confessed, That indeed they had carried me up and down through Spain: but
that they had done it, believing that I was a Fish; and that to that effect
they had obtained a License of the Lords of the Inquisition. For my part, I
told the whole truth, and how those Rascals held me bound, and put me into such
a posture, as I was not able so much as to grunt. They brought in the
Archpriest, and my good Elutra, to prove if it were true that I were that
Lazaro de Tormes, whom I said I was. My Wife entered the first, and earnestly
beholding me, said, That the truth was, that I somewhat resembled her good
husband; but she believed I was not he: for though I had always bin a great
Beast, I was more Because he loved Wine well, as Gnats do; and like an Ox
had Horns, being a Cuckold.
likely to become a Gnat or an Ox then a Fish. Having thus spoken, and made a
low Cursie, she went forth. My hangmens Attorney required, that I might be
burned, because without doubt I was a Monster, which he did bind himself to
prove. (The Devil I am as soon, (said I to my self) unless some Conjurer
now should persecute me, transforming me into what he listed.) The Judges
commanded him to be silent. Then came in the reverend Archpriest, who seeing
me so bleake, and wrimpled, like an old Wives belly, said, That he neither knew
me by my face, nor shape. I then remembered him of some old passages, and many
secrets that had passed between us; particularly I bad him remember the Night
that he came naked unto my bed, saying, that he was afraid of a Hob-goblin that
haunted his chamber, and laid himself between my Wife and me. He, for fear I
should have proceeded any farther in tokens, confessed it to be true, that I
was Lazaro, his good friend and servant. The Suit ended with the testimony of
the Captain that had carried me from Toledo (and was one of those that escaped
the Tempest in the Cock-boat) who acknowledged, that I was in person Lazaro his
servant; and all this did agree with the relation of the time and place where
the fishermen said they had caught me. They condemned every one of the^ to two
hundred stripes, and their goods confiscated, the one part to the King, the
other to the Prisoners, and the third to Lazaro. They were found to have two
thousand Fifty pounds.
Ryals, two Mules, and a Cart; of the which (all duties and charges paid) there
fell to my share twenty A Duckat is five shillings six pence of our money.
ducats. The Sailors remained bare and comfortless, and I rich and content;
for in all my life before I had not seen my self Master of so much money at
once. I went to the house of one of my Friends: where, after I had poured down
my Throat some Gallons of Wine, to wash away the evil savor of the Water, and
put my self into good Clothes, I began to walk like an Earl, faring like a
King, honored of my Friends, feared of mine Enemies, and welcome to all. The
miseries I had passed, seemed to me a Dream; the present happiness, a Haven
of rest; and the future hopes, a Paradise of pleasure. Adversity does humble,
and prosperity puff up the mind. All the time that the twenty ducats
lasted, if the King had called me Cousin, I had taken it for an affront. When
we Spaniards can but get a Ryall, we are Princes; and though we do want it,
we do not want presumption. If you ask but a shake-ragge who he is, he
will answer, that (at the least) he is descended from the Goths, and that
his bad fortune has thus dejected him; being the property of the foolish
World, to eleuate the base, and debase the worthy: and yet such as he is, he
would not yield to any, nor esteem himself less then the greatest; and would
rather sterue, then put himself to any Trade; or if he does, it is with such
contempt and distaste, that either he will not work at all; or if he does, it
is so ill, that hardly in all Spain shall one find a good workman of a
Spaniard. I remember that there was a Cobbler in Salamanca; who, when one did
bring him any thing to mend, would make a long discourse to himself,
complaining of his evil fortune, that had reduced him to the necessity of
working in so base a Trade, being descended from such a house and from such
parents; who for their worth were known over all Spain. I asked one day a
neighbor of his, of what Kindred that Bragadocio was. He told me, that his
father was a treader of Grapes in Vintage time, and a Hogge-killer In Spain,
and other Countries, to make their Wines, they put their grapes into great
Tubs, into the which men go bare legged and sometimes naked to tread the
grapes, for to express the juice.
in Winter; and his mother a Tripe-washer, I mean a Tripe-wife's maid. I had
bought a Suit of old peeld Velvet, and a long thredbare Cloak of Segouia
Serge; I wore my Sword so long, that the Chape vnpaued the stones of the
streets, as I walked. When I came out of Prison, I would not go see my Wife;
to give her a greater desire to see me, and to be revenged of the scorn that
she had made of me. I believed undoubtedly, that seeing me so well
apparrelled, she would repent her self, and receive me with open arms; but
obstinate she was, and obstinate she remained. I found her in Childbed, and
newly married. When she saw me, she cried out as if she had been mad, Take
from before me that ill watered Fish, that Face of a new-pluckt Goose; or by
the blessedness of my dead Fathers Soul, if I rise, I will scratch out his
eyes. I, with a great deal of phlegm, answered her, Fair and softly (good
Mistress Wagtaile) if you know me not for your Husband, nor I you for my Wife,
let me have my daughter, and as good friends as ever before, for I have got
wherewith to marry her very honorably. Me thought those twenty ducats should
have been like little John of God's five Twelve Blanckes make an English penny.
Blanckes; who, as soon as he had spent them, found five other still in his
Purse: but with me, as I was Lazarillo of the Devil, it fell out otherwise,
as shall appear in the next Chapter. The Archpriest opposed himself against
my demand, saying, That she was not mine; and for proof thereof, he showed
me the Church Book for Christnings, which compared with the Register of
Marriages, it appeared, that the Girl was borne four months after that I
first carnally knew my Wife. My man Thomas fell down, who till then had been
on horseback, and I perceived the error in the which I had lived until that
time, believing her to be my daughter, that was not so. I shaked upon them the
dust of my shoes, and washed my hands in token of innocence, and of parting
for ever, and so I turned my back unto them, with as much comfort as if I had
never known them. I went to seek some of my friends, to who^ I related the
whole matter: they comforted me; which was a thing very easy for the^ to do. I
would not return to the Office of common Crier, for my Velvet had rooted out
such petty thoghts. Going toward the Gate called de Vilagra as I passed through
that of S. John of the Kings, I met with an old acquaintance of mine; who,
after she had saluted me, told me how that my Wife was grown more gentle,
since she had understood that I had money; particularly that, that Gabacho had
as good as new dressed her from top to toe. I desired her to let me understand
the business: she did it, saying, that Master Archpriest and my Wife had
entered one day into consultation, whether it were best to take me home again to
them, and turn out that Gabacho, bringing reasons of the one side and of the
other. This their consulting was not so secret, but that the new Husband heard
of it: who dissembling, the next morning went out to work at the Olive trees,
whither his Wife and mine at noone did go to carry him his dinner. He then
bound her fast to a Tree, and having stripped her starke-naked, gave her there
above a hundred stripes; and not content with that, made a bundle of all her
Clothes, and pulling her Rings off her fingers, ran away with all, leaving
her bound, naked, and in a pitiful case: where (without doubt) she had died
if the Archpriest had not sent to seek her. She went on, saying, that she
believed without all peradventure, that if I sent but any one to entreat them,
they would receive me to them as before: for she had heard my Eluira say,
Wretched that I am, why did I not admit my good Lazaro, who was eue^ as good as
the good Bread; not hard to please, nor scrupulous, who suffered me to do
whatsoever I would? That was a touch, which turned me topsie-turuie, and made
me resolve to follow the counsel of the good old Woman: Nevertheless, I
thought good first to confer of it with my friends.

CHAP. VIII. How Lazaro pleaded against his Wife.
WE men are somewhat a kin to laying Hens: for if we mind to do any good, we
presently proclaim and kackle it abroad: but if evil, we will not that any one
know it, least they should dissuade us from that, from the which it were good
we should be diuerted. I went to see one of my friends, and I found three
together; for since I had money, they were multiplied as flies in the Fruit
season. I told them my intention and desire, which was, to go and live again
with my Wife, and shun the slandering speeches of maleuolent tongues; a known
evil being better then an unknown good. But they made the deed so heinous and
odious unto me, telling me, that I was a man without either black in my eyes,
or brains in my head, that I would go to dwell with a Punke, a Cockatrice, a
Catamountaine, and lastly, the Devils Hackney (for so in Toledo do they call
Priests Wenches.) They said such and so many things to me, and so persuaded me,
that I determined neither to entreat her, nor to seek to her. These my good
friends (I would the Devil had had the^) seeing that their counsel and
persuasions had wrought with me, proceeded farther, saying, That they
counseled me (because I was so dear unto the^) to take away the spots, and
cleanse the stains of my reputation; to stick close to it, and not let it
fall to the ground: And therefore that I should exhibit a Complaint in Law
against the Archpriest and my Wife; for all should cost me neither penny, nor
farthing, they being (as they were) Officers of Justice. The one (who was an
Attorney for lost Suites) offered me a hundred ducats for my gettings. The
other, as better experimented (being a Solicitor for Traders) told me, That if
he were in my Coat, he would not give my gains for two hundred. The third
assured me, That (as he did well know, being, as he was, a Sergeant) he had
seen other Cases, not so plain, and a great deal doubtfuller then this, that
had been worth to the undertakers an innumerable sum; although he believed,
that upon the first Writ the good Domine Bacchalaure would fill my hands, and
grease theirs, that we might give over the Suit, desiring that I would return
again to my Wife: which would be much more honorable and profitable for me,
then if I had made means unto her. They so highly commended this business
unto me, alluring me with fair and great hopes, that they brought me to
what they would, not knowing how to answer their sophistical arguments:
howbeit, I know, that it was better to forgive and humble my self, then to
prosecute things to the extremities, fulfilling that most difficult
commandment of God, To love our enemies. And then, my Wife did never behave
her self like an enemy toward me: contrariwise, by her I began to grow into
credit, and to be known of many, who would point at me with their finger,
saying, There goes patient Lazaro: by her I began to have an Office, and
Benefice. If the daughter, which the Archpriest said was none of mine, were so
or no; God, who searches the reins, best knows; and it may be, that as I may
have been mistaken, he likewise may have been deceived. As it may happen,
that some one, who reading this simplicity of mine, will burst out into such
laughter, as he may chance to moisten the Linings of his Breeches; does
maintain the children of some reverend Friar; and does labor, sweat, and
moyle, to leave them rich, that beggar him of his reputation; believing for
certain, that if there be one honest Woman in the World, it is his. And
moreover, it may be, that the Pedigree whereof thou do boast (gentle Reader)
as derived from Mars, is deducted from Vulcan. But leaving every one in his
good opinion, all these good considerations did not withstand, but that I
formed a complaint against the Archpriest, and against my Wife: and (having
ready money) within four and twenty hours they put them into Prison; him,
into the Archbishops; and her, into the common Iayle. The Lawyers did bid me,
not to regard the Money that I did lay out for that business, by reason that I
should recover it all again of the Domine. So that, for to do him more harm,
and that the charges might be so much the greater, I gave them whatsoever they
did ask me. And because they smelt my Cash, as Bees do Honey, they were so
careful and diligent to run too and fro, not making one idle step, that in
less then eight days the Cause was very forward, and my Purse very backward.
The Evidences were produced with great facility, by reason that the Sergeants
that had arrested them, had taken them napping; and even as they were in their
shirts, had carried them to Prison. The witnesses were many, and their
depositions true. But my honest Attorney, Counselor, and Register, perceiving
my Purse to be at an ebb, began to grow so careless and lazy, that to have
made them advance one step, they had needed more spurring the^ any Hackney
Jade. When the Archpriest and his friends understood our great neglect, they
began to crow up, and grow peart, greasing the hands and feet of their Agents;
being like the weights of a Clock, which do mount proportionally as the others
go down. They took such a course, that within a fortnight after they came out
of Prison upon Bail; and within less then a week more, by means of false
witnesses, they made poor Lazaro be condemned to ask pardon, pay all charges,
and to be banished for ever out of Toledo. I demanded pardon, as it was most
just he should, who with twenty crowns had undertaken to plead against him
that measured them by Pecks. I gave all to my very shirt to help to pay the
charges, going out with my bare skin to my banishment. I saw my self in one
instant, rich, at Law with one of the Powers of the holy Church of Toledo (an
enterprise only for a Prince) respected of my Friends, feared of mine Enemies,
and in the predicament of a Gentleman, that would not suffer an affront; and in
the same instant I found my self cast (not out of the Earthly Paradise, my
private nakedness obumbrated with Figge-leaues, but) out of the place which I
most loved and esteemed; where I had received so much good entertainment, so
many pleasures. My Nuditie being covered with certain Rags which I found upon
a Dunghill, I betook me to the common comfort of the distressed; believing,
that since I was at the lowest of Fortunes Wheel, necessarily (at her turning)
I was again to rise. At that time I remembered what once I had heard my Master
the Blind-man say, (who, when he did set himself a preaching, would do
wonders) That all the men in the World did ascend and descend by the Wheel of
Fortune; some following her motion, others going against it: this only
difference being between the^; that those that went with the stream, with the
same swiftness that they did climb up, with the same they do tumble down:
and those that go against it, if once they attained unto the top (though with
great pains and labor) they maintained themselves there a long time. I, like
the former, did run the smooth way of her Wheel, but with such swiftness,
that I scarce yet was come to the top, when she threw me into the bottomless
pit of all calamities. I saw my self a Beggar, even of the most beggarly,
having until then been one of a better stamp; and might well have said,
Naked did I come into the World, and naked do I go out, I neither win nor
loose. In this pickle I took my way toward Madrid, craving the charitable
benevolence of well disposed persons, as one that best could do it; for I was a
Miller: to which Trade, I, to return, by need was made. I made my moan to
every one: some did pity me, others did laugh at me, and others did give
me their alms; so that having neither Wife nor daughter to maintain, I had
often meat and drink to spare. That year such store of wine had bin gathered,
that almost at every door I came to, they would ask me if I would drink,
because they had no Bread to give me; I never refused it: so that sometimes it
has been my chance, before breake-fast, to have gulped up four pottles of
Wine, wherewith I was more jocund and merry then Schoole-Boyes upon a holy day
Eve. If I may speak what I think, the Beggars life is the only life; all the
others do not deserve that name. If rich men had but tried it, they would
forsake their riches for it, as the ancient Philosophers did; who, for to enjoy
it, left what they possessed; I say, for to enjoy it: for the Philosophers life
and the Beggars is all one; only they are distinguished, in that the
Philosophers did forsake what they had for the love of it; and the Beggars
without forsaking any thing, do find it. They did despise their wealth, that
with less impediments they might contemplate both natural and divine things,
with the Celestial motions: These, that they may (vncurbed) run through the
fields of their loose appetites. They did cast their goods into the Sea; these
do bury them in their stomachs. They did despise them as perishable and
transitory things; these do not esteem them, because they carry with them
care and labor, things altogether out of their element. So that the Beggars
life is quieter then that of either King, Emperor, or Pope. In it therefore
did I mean to walk, as in a way most free, less dangerous, and very
delightful.

CHAP. IX. How Lazaro did make himself a Porter.
THere is no Trade, Science, nor Art, but, to attain to the perfection
thereof, it is needful to employ the capacity of the best understanding in
the world. You shall have a Shoemaker, that has been thirty years at his
Trade, if you did him make you a pair of shoes broad at the toes, high of
instep, neat, and without puckering; do you think he will do it? before he
make you a pair such as you desire, he will spoil your foot. Ask a
Philosopher, why Flies upon a white thing do mute black, and contrariwise,
upon a black, white; and you will make him blush, like a Maid upon her Marriage
night, not knowing how to answer; or if he do to this, he will not to a
thousand other fooleries. It was my chance to meet, near to Mescas, an
Arch-Rogue, Mescas, a City between Madrid and Toledo.
and by his countenance perceiving what he was, I paced toward him as to an
Oracle, to enquire of him how I might govern my self in my new life, without
bringing my self within the compass of the Law. He answered me, That if I
meant cleanely to come off, and without danger, his counsel was, that I should
join to the life of an Hypocrite; that is to say, that though I were a Rogue
in profession, yet (not to seem so) I should give my self to some employment,
as to skullerie in a Kitchen, to cry Broomes, to sweep Chimneyes, to scrape
Trenchers, or to carry Burdens from one place to another; which would serve as
a Buckler, to cover my Beggerie. He told me moreover, that by reason that he
had not done so since these twenty years that he followed that Occupation, he
had the day before received two hundred stripes as a Rogue and Vagabond. This
advise pleased me, and I followed his counsel. As soon as I came to Madrid, I
got me a Porters Cord, with the which I quartred my self in the midst of the
Market place with more content then a starued Cat with Gibblets. And in good
time, and happy hour, the first that did set me to work, was a Maid (God
forgive me, for I lie) of some eighteen years of age, that simpred more then
a new vayled Nun; she bad me follow her, and led me through so many streets,
that I thought she had undertaken it as a task, or that she did it to abuse
me: at length we came to a house, which, by the Wicket thereof, great Court,
and the Wenches that danced there, I knew to be the public Brothell. Then did
she bring me into her Cell; where she asked me, if I would be paid for my
pains before we went out: I answered her, that there was no haste, until we
came to the place where I was to carry my burden, which I took up, and set
forward to the Gate of Guadalachara, where she told me she was to take
Wagon, to go to the Fair of Nagera. The Fardle A City in Spain.
was light, most part thereof being nothing but little Sawcers, Bottles with
Painting, and Waters. As we went, I understood how she had been eight years
of that Trade. The first that did set me abroach (said she) was the Father
Rector of the Jesuits of Seuil, where A City in Spain.
I was borne; who did it with so great devotion, that from that day to this, I
have been very devout. He recommended me to one of the holy Women, devoted
to their Those women are called Beatae.
Order, with whom I remained above six months, well provided of all things
necessary. I was drawn thence by a Captain, and so have roued up and down
from one place to another, and am where thou see. And would to God I had
never departed out of the protection of that good Father, who entertained me as
his Daughter, and loved me as his Sister. Finally, I have been constrained to
follow an Occupation, to get my living. With this discourse we came to the
wagon, which was ready to set forth. I discharged my Burden into it, and
praying her to pay me for my labor, the Rag-taile answered, That I will very
willingly; and with that, lifting up her hand, she gave me such a Box on the
ear, that she felled me to the ground, saying, Art thou such an Ass, as to
ask Money of one of my Profession? Did I not bid thee, before thou came out
of the house of Fellowship, to pay thy self, if thou would, upon me? With
that (as nimbly as a Grasse-hopper) she leaped into the Wagon, and away she
went, and left me fretted at the heart, and as blancke as a Bell-founder, not
knowing what ayled me; only I considered with my self, that if the progress of
my new Trade did follow the beginning, I should thrive fairly at the years end.
Upon my departure thence, there came another Wagon from Alcala de Henares; A
City in Spain.
out of the which, the passengers (who were all Whores, Scholars, and Friars)
being alighted, one of the Order of S. Francis asked me, if I would do him
that charity, as to carry his Trusse to his Covent, I answered him with
cheerfulnes, that I would, for I persuaded my self, that he would not cousen
me, as that Drab had done: therefore I took it up, and it was so heavy, that
I could scarce carry it; yet for the hope of my good pay, I strayned my self.
Being come to the Cloister very weary, because it was far, the Friar took
his Pack, and saying, For Gods sake be it done, went in, and shut the door
after him. I waited there until he should come to pay me; but seeing that he
did tarry long, I knocked at the Gate. The Porter came forth, and asked me what
I would have; I told him, My payment for the burden which I had brought. He
answered me, That I should go in Gods name, for they never paid any thing,
and so locked the door, charging me to knock no more, by reason it was a time
of silence; for if I did, he would give me a hundred lacings with his knotty
girdle. My courage was cooled. A poor man that stood at the Gate said to me;
Brother, you may well go your way, for these Fathers do handle no money, for
they live altogether upon other men's dishes. Let them live upon what they can
(said I) they shall pay me for my pains, or I will be no longer Lazarillo;
and thereupon I fell a knocking with great anger. The Lay Brother came forth
with greater, and without any farther complement gave me such a push, that he
threw me backward to the ground as if I had been a mellow Pear; and kneeling
upon me, he gave me half a dozen such punches with his knee, and as many
flamms with his girdle, that he left me all bruised, as if the Clock-Tower of
Saragosa A City in Spain.
had fallen upon me. I lay there stretched above half an hour, not being
able to arise; I considered my evil fortune, and the strength of that
irregular Friar so ill employed, which had been fitter to serve the King our
Lord and Master, then to devour the alms ordained for the poor; though
indeed they be scarce good for any employment, being idle and lazie-packs, as
the Emperor Charles the fifth gave well to understand: for when the General
of S. Francis his Order, offered two and twenty thousand Friars to assist him
in his wars, none above forty, nor under two and twenty; the invincible
Emperor answered, That he would not have them, by reason that he should have
needed every day two and twenty thousand fleshpots: intimating thereby, that
they are fitter by far for the Kitchen, then for any labor or service. God
forgive me, for since that day I have so abhorred those Lay-clergie-men, that
me thought when I saw them, I did see Droanes of a Bee-hiue, or spunges of the
fat of the porridge-pot. I was minded to give over my office, but I expected
the reuolutio^ of the 24 hours, Those that dye in Spain of sudden death, are
kept 24 hours before they be buried.
as the custom is for those that die of sudden death.

CHAP. X. How Lazaro met with an old Baud, and what happened unto him.
Weak and dead for hunger, I went little by little up the street, and passing
through the Barly-place, I met with an old mumbler, that had more tusks then a
wild Boar, who came to me, and asked me, if I would carry a trunk for her to
a friend of hers not far from thence, and she would give me four Four
quartos make a Royal, which is six pence.
quartos. I had no sooner heard her, but I gave God thanks, that from so
filthy a mouth as hers should proceed so sweet a speech as that, She would
give me four Quartos. I told her, Yes, with a very good will; though that
very good will was more to finger the four Quartos, then to carry the burden,
having at that time more need to be carried my self, then to carry. I took up
the Trunk with much ado, by reason it was great and heavy: the good woman bad
me carry it fair and softly, because that within it were bottles of Waters,
which she esteemd very much. I answered her, that she should not need to fear
that, I would go softly enough; for though I would have done otherwise, it had
been impossible for me, being so hungry that hardly I could put one foot
before another. We came at length to the house where we did carry the Trunk,
the which they very gladly received, especially a young Gentlewoman, plumpe
and round faced (would all the cattle of my bed were such, my belly being
full) who with a cheerful countenance said, that she would keep it in her
Closet. I carried it thither, and the old Woman gave her the Key of it,
desiring her to keep it until she returned from Segouia, where she A City
in Spain.
was going to visit a Kinswoman of hers, hoping to come back again within
four days. Then embracing her, she took leave of her, whispering her in the
ear I know not what, which made the Damsel blush like a rose; (and although I
then did like her very well, I should have liked her far better, had the
vacuity of my guts been stuffed with good prouender) she took likewise leave
of all those of the house, desiring the Father and Mother of the Maid to
excuse her boldness and importunity; who told her, that their house was at her
command. She gave me four Quartos; bidding me in mine ear the next morning
very early to come to her house, and she would make me earne as much more. I
departed more iocund then a Shroue-tuesday, or a Midsommers Eve. I supped with
three of them, keeping one to pay for my lodging. I then fell to consider the
power and virtue of money; for at the instant that the old woman had given me
those few Quartos, I found my self lighter then the wind, more valiant then
Hector, and stronger then Hercules. O Money, it is not without reason that most
men do hold thee for their God! thou art the cause of all good, and the
procurer also of all evil. Thou art the inuenter of all Arts, and the
maintainer of them in their perfection. For thee are Sciences had in
estimation, and with thee are opinions defended. By thee cities are sortified,
and again by thee their strong towers are made level with the ground. By thee
are kingdoms established, and by thee in the same instant overthrown. Thou art
the vpholder of virtue, and again the destroyer thereof. By thee Ladies do
maintain themselves chaste, and by thee many that are so, become others.
Lastly, there is nothing in the world, be it never so hard, but to thee is
easy; nothing so hidden, but thou can penetrate; no hill so lofty, but thou
can pull down; no dale so low, but thou can eleuate. The next morning I
went to the old Woman's house, according as she had appointed me, who bad me
go with her to fetch again the Trunk which I had carried the day before.
Being come to the house, she told the Master and Mistress, that she came for
her Trunk, by reason that upon the way to Segouia (about a mile from Madrid)
she had met with her Kinswoman, who came with the same intention (that she
went) to see her, and that therefore she did need it instantly, to have out
some clean linen that was in it, to give her entertainment. The Maid of a
new stamp returned her the Key, kissing and embracing her with more affection
then at the first time; and after she had whispered her again in the ear,
they helped up with the Trunk, which seemed unto me far lighter then the day
before, because my belly was better provided. Coming down the stairs, it
was my chance to meet with I know not what stumbling block, which I think the
Devil of purpose had laid in my way, that made me stumble and tumbled down
Trunk and all to the bottom of the stayres, where stood the Father and the
Mother of the simple and kind-hearted Wench. I broke my Nose and short Ribs
with the fall, and the damned Trunk, with the Knocks and Ioults flew open. In
it there appeared a young Gallant, without his Cloak, his Rapier and Dagger at
his side, in a green Satin Suit, with a feather of the same color, a pair
of Carnation Garters and Roses, Crimson Silk Stockings, and white open Shoes:
who rising up very mannerly, and making a low reverence, straight went out of
doors. They were so amazed with that sudden Vision, that they looked one upon
another like so many Matachines or Antickes. But when they were come to
themselves, they called in all haste two sons that they had, and with great
storming, declared the matter unto them: Who presently taking their Swords, and
crying, Kill, Kill, went out to seek the young Mad-cap. But he had posted
away in such haste, that it was impossible for them to overtake him. The Father
and Mother (who all this while had remained below stayres) shutting the doors
fast, went up, thinking to revenge themselves upon the Baud: but she that had
heard the noise, and known the cause thereof, had already with her Scholar
in the O. Q. P. taken the air at a backe-doore. When they found themselves
gulld, and prevented, they came down and let fly at me, I being so sore, and
bruised, that I could not stir; for otherwise I had waited upon him, for
whose sake I was so ill handled. The two brothers returned sweating, and out of
breath, swearing and vowing, That since they had not ouertake^ the villain,
they would kill their sister and the Baud. But when they were told, that they
had made an escape at the Backside, then they fell a blaspheming, cursing, and
swearing. The one said, Why do I not meet now with the Devil himself, with an
infernal Crew, that I might make hauock of them as of so many Flies? Come
Devil, Come. But now that I call thee, it is certain, that wheresoever thou
art, thou do fear my anger, and dare not appear before me. O had I but
seen that Coward, with my very breath I had carried him so far, as no body
should ever have heard any news of him. The other went on, saying, Had I but
overtaken him, I would not have left one piece of him so big as his ear: but
if he be in the world, nay, though he be not, he shall not escape out of my
hands; for I would plough him up, were he bid in the Center of the Earth.

These and such like brags and threatenings did they thunder out, whilst poor
Lazaro was expecting that all the storm should light upon him; but yet I stood
in more fear of ten or twelve Boys that were there then of those
Braggadillos. In the end, both great and small in a cluster fell upon my
Iacket; the one kicked me, the other thumped me; some pulled me by the hairs,
others boxed me about the ears. My fear was not vain: for the Boys thrusted
great Pinnes into my Buttocks up to the head, which made me skreeke unto the
heavens; the slaves did so pinch me, that they made me at noonday see a
thousand Stars. Some said, let us kill him; others, It is better to throw him
in the Privy. The hammering of me was such, that they seemed Thrashers in a
Barn, or Hammers of a Fulling-Mill, by reason of the perpetual motion. At
length feeing me breathless, they desisted from beating, but not from
threatening me. The Father as most ripe, or most rotten, commanded them to let
me alone; and that if I would tell them truly who was the robber of their
honor, they should not do me any more harm: but I could not satisfy their
desire, because I knew not who he was, having never seen him before he came
out of the Trunk. Seeing that I answered them nothing, they began anew to
torment me. There was the wayling, there the weeping for my mishap; there was
the sighing, there was the cursing of my cross fortune. But when I perceived,
that continually they found new ways to persecute me, I prayed them as well as
I could to forbear me, and that I would tell them all the business. They did
so; and I told them without any omission, what had passed; but they would give
no credit to the truth. Feeling the storm to continue, I determined to cousen
them, if it were possible, and therefore I promised to inform them, who the
Malefactor was; whereupon they left thrashing of me, promising me wonders.
They asked me his name, and where he lived. I answered, that I knew it not;
and less, that of the Street wherein he dwelt: but that, if they would carry
me (for it was impossible for me to go, they had so misused me) I would show
them his house. That pleased them well, and therefore they gave me a little
Wine, with the which I came again to my self: then (being well armed) two of
them took me under the arms, like a French Lady, and led me through Medrid.
Some that did see me, said, They carry that man to Prison; others, to the
Hospital: but none did hit the mark. I went amazed, and astonished, not
knowing either what to say, or what to do; for I durst not cry out for help,
least they should complain of me to the Justices, whom I feared more then
death it self: and to run away, was impossible, not only by reason of my
former ill usage, but also for being between the Father, Sons, and
Kinsfolks, who for that purpose had joined themselves, eight or nine together,
armed at all points, like so many S. Georges. We crossed many Streets, and went
through many Lanes, not knowing where I was, or whither I did lead them. At
length we came to the Sunne-Gate, and down a Street right ouer-against it, I
perceived a Gallant that came tripping it upon the toes, his Cloak jerked
under one arm, a piece of a Glove in one hand, and a Gillyflower in the other,
his arm keeping time with his foot, so that one would have taken him for the
cousin germane of the Duke of Infantado: he made a thousand several faces and
odd countenances. I knew him at the instant to be the Squire my Master, who
had stolen away my Clothes at Murcia: and without doubt, some Saint or other
(for I had not left one vnprayed to in all the Letanie) had brought him thither
for my redemption. As I saw the occasion offer it self so fair, I caught hold
of it by the fore-top, and with one stone I determined to kill two Birds, that
is, to be revenged of that bragging Cheater, and to free my self from those
hangmen. Which to bring to pass, I said unto them, Gentlemen, look about you,
for yonder comes the Gallant, that has robbed you of your honor, who has
only changed his Apparel. They blinded with rage and anger, without any
farther discourse, asked me which was he. I pointed him out unto them:
Whereupon they rushed upon him, and taking him by the Collar, threw him to the
ground, where they kicked and cuffed him out of all measure. One of the young
striplings, Brother to the Gentlewoman, would have run him through with his
Sword, but that his Father hindered him; and calling Officers to their help,
they bound him hand and foot. When I perceived the Cards to be thus shuffled,
and that they were all busy, as well as I could, I began to show them a fair
pair of heels, and went and hid my self. My honest Squire (who knew me)
thinking they were some of my acquaintance, that demanded my Apparel, did cry
out unto them, Let me alone, Let me alone, and I will pay for two Suits. But
they stopped his mouth with good blows with their fists; and all bloody,
bruised, and broken-headed, carried him to Prison: And I took my leave of
Madrid, cursing both the Occupation, and the first inuentor of it.

CHAP. XI. How Lazaro parted from Madrid, to go into his own Country: and
what happened unto him upon the way.
I Was minded to put my self on my way, but I found my strength far unequal
to my courage; for which cause, I remained yet some days in Madrid: which I
passed well enough, by reason, that helping my self with Crutches (without
which I was not able to go) I went begging from door to door, and from
Covent to Covent, till I found my self strong enough, and able to travel. I
made the more haste, for a thing that I heard related by a Beggar, who, with
others, was lowsing himself in the Sun. It was the history of the Trunk,
as already I have told it: adding, that the man whom they had imprisoned,
thinking it had been he of the Trunk, had proved the contrary; for at the
very instant that the business happened, he was at his Lodging, and no body
thereabouts had seen him with other apparel, then that wherewith they had
taken him: but that notwithstanding, he had bin exposed to the public shame of
a Vagabond, and banished Madrid. He told also, how the Gentlewomans friends did
seek for a Porter, that had dressed that Mess of Knauerie, swearing to make a
Syue of his skin with their Rapiers, if ever they met him. I opened my eyes,
to prevent this accident, clapping a patch upon one of them, and shauing my
beard like a Monk; for I assured my self, that in this disguise, the Mother
that bare me, could not have known me. I departed from Madrid, with
intention to go to Teiares, to try if (being new molded) Fortune would
mistake me. I passed by the Escurial, a Building which does speak the
greatness of the Monarch that did erect it, (for it was not yet altogether
finished) and is such, that it may be reckoned among the Meruailes of the
World; though it cannot be said, that the pleasant situation has bin a motive
to build it there, the ground being very barren and hilly: but well, the
temperatenesse of the air; which in Summer is such, that remoouing only to
the shade, the Heat is not troublesome, nor the Cold offensive, but exceeding
wholesome. Within less then two miles from thence, I met with a company of
Gipseyes, lodged in an old decayed house: who, as soon as they perceived me a
far off, thought I was some one of their Troop, for my attire did promise no
less: but coming nearer, they saw their error, and were somewhat daunted with
my presence, because (as far as I could perceive) they held a Consultation,
or were debating an Election. They told me, that that was not the right way to
Salamanca, but to Valledolid. Seeing my business did not constrain me to go
rather to one place then to another; I told them, that since it was so, I would
see that City, before I went into my Country. One of the ancientest asked
me, whence I was? And understanding that I was of Teiares, he invited me to
Dinner for neighborhoods sake, for he was of Salamanca. I accepted his offer;
and afterward they desired me to relate unto them my life, and adventures. I
did it, without any farther entreatie, as briefly as things of such moment
could permit. When I came to speak of the Tub, and what had happened unto me in
an Inn at Madrid, I made them laugh extremely, especially two Gipseyes, a Man
and a Woman, who could scarce stand for laughing. I began to be ashamed, and to
blush, when the old Gipsey, my Countreyman, who had taken notice thereof, said
unto me; Be not out of countenance, Brother: for these Gentles do not laugh
at your life; being such, as it rather deserves admiration then laughter: of
which, since you have given us so full an account, it is reasonable, that we
pay you in the same Coin. Wherefore, resting upon your prudence, as you have
done upon ours, if the company will give me leave, I will tell you the
occasion of their laughter. Every one answered, that he was well content; for
they knew, that his great discretion and experience would not suffer him to go
beyond the limits of reason. Know then (said he) that those two whom you see
yo^der, almost out of breath with laughing, are the Priest and the Damsel,
that leaped naked out at the Window, when the inundation of your Tub had like
to have drowned them; who (if they please) will tell you how and by what means
they have attained to this state of life. The Gipsey offered her self very
willingly, and craving the benevolence of the worthy Auditorie, with a loud,
but gentle and grave voice, she thus began her own story. The day that I came
out, or (to say better) that I leaped out of my Fathers house, they carried me
to Prison, and put me in a Chamber, rather dark then clean, and far more
stinking then handsome. As for the worshipful Master Vruez, who is here
present, and may disprooue me if I speak untruth, they clapped him up in the
Dungeon, till he told them that he was a Priest: wherefore they presently sent
him to the under Bishop; who very sharply reprehended him for having been so
faint-hearted, as for a little Water to have leaped out at a Window before all
the World, and given such a scandal: But with promise that he made him, to be
more wary and circumspect another time, and to do his business in such sort,
as the ground it self should not be privy to his ingresse and egresse; he let
him go, enioyning him for penance, That for three days he should not sing
Mass. I remained in the custody of the chief Keeper or Captain of the
Prison; who being youthful and lusty, and I young and not unhandsome, did
whatsoever he could to please me. The Prison to me was a Palace, and Garden of
delights. My Father and my Mother, though greatly displeased with my
looseness, did what they could to set me loose, but all in vain; for the
Captain did work all possible means to detain me still in his keeping. In
the mean time, Master Licentiat, here present, went round about the Prison,
like a setting Dog, to see if he could speak with me: which at length he
did, by the means of a Baud, the best of her Profession; who dressed him in
the attire of one of her Maids, with a Petticoat and Wastcoat, and a Muffler
before his Beard, as if he had had the Mumpes: at this enterview was the plot
laid for my escape. The night following, there was great feasting and reuelling
at the Earl of Miranda's house, and in the end, the Gipseyes were to dance;
with whom Canil (for so is the reverend Vruez now called) consorted himself,
to have their help in his pretenses: which they so well executed (thanks to
his wit and industry) that we enjoy both our desired liberty, and his
company, that is the best in the world. The afternoon before the Feast, the
Captain kept more fidling about me, then a Cat about a Tripe-Wife; and made me
more protestations and promises, then a passenger in a Storm at Sea: all which
(as bound thereunto) I encountered again with the like. He desired me to ask
him whatsoever I would, and he would grant it me, so it were not to be
deprived of my presence. I thanked him very much, telling him, that to want
his, would be to me the greatest mischance that ever could happen unto me.
Perceiving I had hit the mark, I entreated him to carry me that night (since
well he might) to the Earls house, to see the Dancing. This thing seemed very
hard unto him; nevertheless, not to go back from his word, and because the
little blind Archer had wounded him with one of his Arrows, he did promise
it me. Now was the High Sheriff in love with me, and had given charge to all
the Guards, and to the Captain himself, to give me good entertainment, and to
have a care that no body should carry me forth. To convey me therefore more
closely to the Revels, he attyred me like a Page: my Doublet and Hose were of
green Damask, laid with Gold Lace; the Cloak of Velvet, of the same color,
lined through with yellow Satin; a Bonnet with a Herons-top and feather, and a
Diamond Hat-band; a Ruff with seaming Lace, and Peakes; Straw-colour Stockins;
great Garters and Roses, suitable to my Apparel; a pair of White Pinckt
Shoes; with a gilded Rapier and Dagger, according to the fashion. We came to
the Banquetting-Roome, and found there a great number of Ladies and Gentlemen;
the Gentlemen jouial, and in good equipage; the Ladies gallant, and beautiful:
and also many muffled up in their Cloakes, and Women with Veyles. Canil was
dressed like a Roarer; and seeing me, came straightwayes on the other side of
me; so that I was between him and the Captain. The Reuelling began; where I
saw things, which because they belong not to what I intend to speak of, I will
omit. But at length, the Gipseyes came to dance, and show tricks: whereupon two
of them grew to words, and so from one thing to another, the one gave the other
the Lie; who answered him with a slash with his Sword over the head, that made
him bleed like an Ox. The company, that till then had thought they had been
in jest, began to be amazed, and to cry out, Help, help. Some Officers and
Sergeants, that were there, began to bestirre themselves. Every one put his
hand to his Sword, and I drew mine; but when I saw it naked in my hand, I fell
a quiuering for very fear of it. They laid hold on the offender, and there
wanted not some, who (being there set for the purpose) said, That the Captain
of the Prison was there, to whose charge they might deliver him. The High
Sheriff called him out, to give him charge of the Murderer. He would
willingly have carried me along with him: but fearing least I should be known,
he bad me withdraw my self into a corner which he showed me, and not to
stir from thence, until he returned. When I saw the Crab-lowse had let go
his hold, I took my Domine Canil (who was still at my elbow) by the hand, and
in two strides we got out into the street, where we found one of these
Gentlemen, who brought us to their Rendez-vous. When the wounded man (whom
already every one thought to be dead) imagined in himself that we were
escaped, he rose up and said, Gentlemen, the jest shall end here, for I am in
good health; and what has been done, has been only to make sport to the
company. And with that, he pulled off the Cap he had on, under the which
(upon an Iron Skull) was an Oxes Bladder full of blood for that purpose; which,
with the blow that the other had given him, had been broken, and so spilt.
Every one fell a laughing at the jest, except the Captain, who found it to be
a troublesome one: for coming to the place appointed, and not finding me
there, he began to seek up and down the room, till that asking an old Gipsey
woman, if she had not seen a Page with such and such tokens, she (that knew
the whole drift) told him, Yea, and that she had heard him say as he went out,
holding a man by the hand, Let us go retire our selves to S. Phillips. He
went thither in all haste, for to seek me, but to little purpose; for he went
toward the East, and we fled toward the West. Before we left Madrid, I had
changed my Clothes for others, and had two hundred Ryals to boot: I sold the
Hat-band for four hundred Crowns, whereof I gave two hundred to these
Gentlemen, for our entrance into their company; for so had Canil couenanted
with the^. This is the whole discourse of my liberty: If Master Lazaro does
desire any thing else, let him command, and he shall be served, according as
his worthy and jouiall presence does deserve. I thanked her for her courtesy;
and with as much as I was able, I took my leave of them all. The good old man
brought me a mile on my way: and as we went, I asked him, If all those that
were there, were Gipseyes, borne in Egypt. He answered me, The Devil a one
there was in all Spain; but that they were all Priests, Friars, Nuns, or
Thieves that had broke out of Prison, or out of their Cloisters: but yet, that
among them all, those that came from Monasteries, were the greatest and most
notorious Villains, changing a contemplative life into an active. He returned
to his company, and I on horseback upon S. Francis his Mule, followed my way
to Valledolid.

CHAP. XII. What happened to Lazaro in a Tavern two miles off from Valledolid.
ALl the way long did I nothing but think upon my good Gipseyes, their life,
customs, and behavior. I wondered much, how the Magistrates would suffer
public Thieves to go so freely and openly; all the World knowing, that to
filch and steal, is their only Employment and Occupation. They are the Refuge
and Receptacle of all Rogues; the Sanctuary for Apostataes; and the School of
all mischief. But chiefly I did marvel, that Friars should forsake their
sweet and quiet life, for the miserable and toilesome life of a Gipsey. Neither
had I believed to be true, what the old Gipsey told me; had he not shown me,
half a mile from the place where they were lodged, behind the Wall of a
Close, a Man and Woman Gipsey: he frolic and lusty, she plumpe and comely;
he not parched with the Sun, she not blasted with the unkindness of the
Weather: The one sung a Verse of the Psalms of David; the other answered with
another. The good old man assured me, that they were a Friar and a Nun; who,
not above eight days before, were come to their Congregation, with a desire to
make profession of a most austere life. I followed my way, until I came to a
Tavern two miles off from Valledolid; at the door whereof, I found sitting
the old Woman of Madrid, and the young Gentlewoman, of whom I have spoken.
There came out a young Gallant, to bid them come in to Dinner. They could not
know me, I was so disguised, with my Patch still upon my Eye, and my Clothes
right Beggars Cut; but I knew my self to be that Lazaro that was come out of
the Grave, that had been so costly unto me. I went in after them, and stood
before them, to see if they would give me somewhat: but it had been a hard
matter for them so to do, having not enough for themselves: for the worthy
Gentleman, that had played the Steward, had been so liberal, that for
himself, his Sweetheart, and the old Baud, he had caused to be made ready a
little Hogs Liver, with a sauce to whet their appetite; all which, I could
easily have gobled up, in less then two Morsels. The Bread was as black as
the Table-Cloth, which seemed like the Cassocke of some Penitent, or the
Maulkin wherewith The ghostly Fathers enjoin to some for a penance, to wear
black Buckeram Cassocks, with a Wax Candle in their hands, to accompany others
that do whip themselves.
an Oven is made clean. Eat, my Love (said the Gentleman) for this is a diet
for a Prince. The Baud fell too roundly, and said not one word for fear of
losing time, because she saw that she was not to go often to the Dish; which
they began to lick, and rub so hard, that (it being of Earth) they scraped
away all the Varnish. Their pitiful and short Meal being ended, (which had
rather provoked, then in any manner assuaged their hunger) the gentle Lover
made his excuse, saying, That the Tavern was unprovided. I seeing, that there
was nothing there for me, asked the Host, If he had any thing to eat? who
answered me, According to the pay; and would have given me a little
Hogs-Haslet: but I asked him, if he had nothing else? he offered me a Quarter
of Kidde, that the amorous Gallant had refused, because it was too dear. I
thought to come over them with a Brauado, and so I bad him give it me. I went
and sat down with it at the lower end of the Table; where, it was a sport to
see how they looked upon me. Every bit that I put into my mouth, did draw six
eyes after it; for those of the Lover, of the Gentlewoman, and of the Baud,
were nailed to what I did eat. How comes it to pass (said the Damsel) that
yonder Beggar does eat a Quarter of Kidde, and we three have had nothing but
a poor piece of fried Liver? The Gallant answered, That he had asked the
Host for Partridges, Capons, or Hens, and that he had told him, that he
had nothing else to give him. I, that knew how the matter went (and that for
fear of spending, or for not having wherewithal, he had dieted them) did
notwithstanding hold my peace, and ply my Victuals. I think in my conscience,
that that Kiddes meat was a Loadstone; for when I least took heed, I found
them all three round about my Dish. The shameless and brazen-faced Wench took
a piece, and said, Brother by your leave; but before she had it, it was
already in her mouth. The old Mumbler replied, Do not take away the poor
Wretch his meat from him. I will not take it away (answered she) for I do
mean to pay him very well for it; and in saying so, she fell to it with such
haste and greediness, that it seemed she had not eaten in six days before.
The good Matron took a bit, to know how it tasted. What (says my Gallant) do
you like it so well? and therewith pops me a piece in his mouth as big as his
fist. But I perceiving them to grow somewhat too bold, took all that was in
the Dish, and made but one mouthfull of it; which was so great, that I could
neither get it backward nor forward. Being in this perplexity, there came to
the Tavern gate two horsemen, armed with coats of Mayle, Headpieces, and
Bucklers, each of the^ carrying a Petronel at his side, and another at their
Saddle-bow: who alighting, gave their Mules to a Footman, and asked the Host
if he had any thing to eat? he answered them, That he had wherewith to give
them good entertainment; and therefore, if it pleased their Worships, they
might walk into the Hall, whilst Meat was a making ready. The old Woman, who
hearing the noise, was gone out to the door, and came straight in again, with
her two hands upon her face, bending and bowing her body a thousand times like
a new hooded Monk, speaking as out of a Trunk, and wresting and wringling now
one side, then the other, as if she had been in Childbirth, as low and as
well as she could, she said, We are all undone, for the Brothers of Clara
(for so was the Gentlewoman called) are at the Gate. The young Wench hearing
this, began to take on, and to pull her self by the hairs, and to thumpe and
mis-use her self, as if she had been out of her wits. But the young Gallant,
that was stout and courageous, comforted her, and bad her be of good cheer;
and that where he was, she needed not to fear any thing. I (who all this
while had still the great piece of Kidde in my mouth) when I understood that
those Swash-bucklers were there, was like to have died for fear; and had died
indeed, had it not been that my Throat being stopped with the Meat, my Soul
could find no passage to get out, and therefore was constrained to return
again into her place. The two roaring Boys came in; and as soon as they
perceived their sister, and the old Hagge, they cried out, Here they be, Now
we have them, Kill, kill them. At this vproare, I was so affrighted, that I
fell to the ground; and with the fall, I cast out the Kidde that did choke me.
The two Women put themselves behind the Gentleman, as Chickens do under the
Hens wings, when they run away from a Kite. He with a brave spirit drew
out his Rapier, and went toward them with such fury, that for very fear they
stood still like two Statues, their words being frozen in their mouths, and
their Swords in their Scabberds. He asked them what they would, or what they
sought? and with that coming to the one, he pulled out his Sword, holding the
point thereof at his eyes, and of his own at the eyes of the other; so that at
the least motion of the Swords, they quaked and trembled like Leaves upon a
Tree. The old Woman and the Sister seeing the two Brauachios so heartlesse,
came to them, and disarmed them. The Host came in at the noise that we made
(for I was already got up, and had one of them by the Beard) not unlike to the
counterfeit Bulls of my Country, which children at first sight do fly from;
but growing bolder by little and little, and perceiving that they are not
wild, nor what they seem to be, do come so near the^, that (having lost all
fear) they cast and hang upon them a thousand Dish-clothes. So I seeing that
those scar-Crowes were not what they appeared to be, took heart at grass, and
set upon the^ with as much boldness as my former fear could afford me. What
is the matter here, said the Host? What stir is this in my house? The Women,
the Gentleman, and I began to cry out, They are Thieves, that come following
us, for to rob us. The Host that saw the^ without their weapons, and us with
the victory, said, What? Thieves in my house? And thereupon laid hands upon
them, and with our help, did put them into a Vault under ground,
notwithstanding any thing they could allege to the contrary. Their man, who
by this time had given meat to their Mules, coming in, and asking for his
Masters, was by the Host sent to keep them company. Then did he take their
Cloake-bagges, Mayles, and other furniture, and locked them up; dividing their
Weapons between us, as if they had been his own. He asked nothing of us for
his Meat, that we might be Witnesses in the Information which he had made
against them; upon the which, as an Officer of the Inquisition (which he said
he was) and as Justice of that place, he condemned them all three to the
Galleyes for ever, and each of them to two hundred stripes round about the
Tavern. They appealed unto the Chancerie of Valledolid; whither the good Host,
and three of his servants did carry them. But when the unfortunate Wretches
thought they had been before the secular Judges, they found themselves before
the Inquisitors: for the subtle and malicious Tauerner had put within the
Informations certain speeches that they had said against the Ministers of the
holy Inquisition; an irremissible offense. They put them in dark Dungeons;
from whence (as they thought to have done) they could not write to their
Father, nor come to the speech of any that might help them. And there we will
leave them in good hold, to return to our Host, whom we met on the way: who
told us, That the Lords of the Inquisition had given him charge to bring before
them the Witnesses, that had given evidence in the cause; but that
notwithstanding (as our friend) he did advise us to absent our selves. The
Gentlewoman gave him a Ring that she had upon her finger; desiring him so to
work, as we might not appear before them: he did promise it. Now had the
Rascal said this, only to make us be gone; for fear that (if we had been
heard) his Villainy (which was not the first) should have been discovered.
About a fortnight after, there was a general Execution at Valledolid; where,
among other prisoners, I saw the three poor Devils come forth with Gags in
their mouths, as Blasphemers, that had been so presumptuous, as to touch with
their tongue the Ministers of the holy Inquisition; men even as holy and
perfect, as the Justice they do administrate. They wore each of them a
penitent Garment, called a Sanbenito, and a Paper Miter upon their heads;
whereon were written their offenses, and the punishment to be inflicted upon
them for the same. It grieved me to see the poor Footman pay what he did not
owe: as for the two other, I had not so much pity of them, for the little they
had had of me. They confirmed the Sentence of the Host, adding moreover and
above to every one of them three hundred stripes: so that they gave them five
hundred apeece, and sent them to the Galleys, where their brags and brauadoes
had leisure to take breath and cool themselves. For my part, I did seek my
fortune, and many times Magdelaine Field, is a place to walk in at Valledolid,
as Moore-Fields in London.
in * Magdelaine Field did I meet the two Women, who never yet knew me, nor
thought that I had known the^. A while after I saw the young Gentlewoman, who
had taken up a Lodging, where she lay backwards, and did let her fore-roomes,
to get wherewith to maintain her self and her Gallant. As for the old Woman,
she fell again to her old Trade in that City.

CHAP. XIII. How Lazaro was Gentleman Usher to seven several Women at one time.
I Came to Valledolid with six Ryals in my Purse; by reason that every one
seeing me so lean and so pale, did give me their Charities very freely, and I
was not slack in receiving. I went directly to the Brokers; where, for four A
Quartillo is three half pence.
Ryals and a Quartillo I bought me a long Frize Cloak, that had been some
Portugals, even as thredbare as tattered and unsown; wherewith, and a high
Steeple-crownd Hat, with broad brims, like a Franciscan Friar, that I bought
for half a Ryall, and with a Staff in my hand, I walked the streets. All
that saw me, did laugh at me, and every one gave me their Squib. One called me
Tauerne-Philosopher: another, Behold where Saint Peter goes, apparrelled as on
a holy day Eve. Some would say, Gentleman of Portugal, will you have any
Grease to anoint your Boots. Others there were, who affirmed, that I seemed to
be the Ghost of some Hospital Physician. But I with Merchants ears, heard
all, said nothing, and still passed on. I had not gone through many Streets,
when I met a Woman with a great Fardingale, and Pattens of the largest size,
who leaned her hand upon a Boys head, and was covered with a Cypres Veyle unto
her stomach; she asked me if I could tell her of any Gentleman-usher: I
answered her, that I knew of none, but my self, of whom (if it pleased her) she
might dispose as of her own. The agreement was made betwixt us without any
farther delay, she promising me for meat, drink and wages, three quartillos
a day. I took possession That is 4. pence half penny.
of the Office, and gave her my arm, and threw away my Staff, as having now
no more need of it, for I carried it only to be thought sick, and move people
to compassion. She sent the Boy home, bidding him tell the Maid she should
lay the Cloth, and make ready dinner. She led me above two hours up and down
from one place to another. The first visit we came at, the good Gentlewoman
warned me, that when we came nigh the house that she was to go to, I should
run before and enquire if the Master or the Mistress were within, and say, My
Mistress Ieane Perez (for that was her name) is here, who desires to kiss
their hands. She told me moreover, that when she did stay any where, I was
never to have my Hat on before her: I answered her, that I knew very well the
duty of a Servant, and that I would perform it. I had an exceeding desire to
see the face of my new Mistress, but I could not, because she was veiled. She
told me that she could not maintain me alone for her self; but that she
would find some of her neighbors whom I might serve, and that between them
they would give me the consideration she had promised me, and in the mean
time (till they were consorted, which would be very shortly) she would pay me
her part. She asked me, if I knew where to lie a Nights? I told her, No. You
shall not want Lodging (said she) for my Husband is a Tailor, and has
Prentices, with whom you shall share Bedding: You could not have found a better
place in the whole City; for before three days be at an end, you shall have
six Mistresses, and every one shall give you a Quarto, which will be 3. Blankes
are 3. fardings.
three Blancks more then I have promised you. I could not but wonder at the
state and gravity of that Woman, who seemed (at the least) the Wife of some
great Gentleman, or wealthy Citizen: and withal, it astonished me to
consider, how for three poor Quartillos, and three Blanckes a day, I was to
wait upon seven Mistresses. But I considered, that something was better then
nothing, and that the Office was not painful, a thing I hated as the Devil
himself: for I have always chosen rather to eat Cabbage and Garlike without
working; then to work, and feed upon Hens and Capons. When we came home,
she gave me her Veyle and Pattens, to deliver them to the Maid, and then I saw
what I so much desired. I found, that my little Woman was handsome enough; she
was brown, of a good behavior, and comely feature. What I only disliked in
her, was, that her face did shine like an Earthen Porrenger varnished. She gave
me the Quarto, bidding me come twice a day, once at eight a clock in the
morning, and again at three in the afternoon, to know if she would go abroad,
or no. I went from thence to a Cookes-shop, and with a Pie of a quarto I made
an end of my allowance, passing the rest of the day like a Cameleon; for I had
already spent the Alms that had been given me upon the way, and durst not
fall a begging again, for my Mistress (if she had known it) would have
eaten me quick. I went to her house at three a clock; she told me, that she
would not go forth, but that she would have me know, that from thence forwards
she would pay nothing that day she went not abroad, and if so be she went out
but once in a whole day, I should then have but two Marauedies. Furthermore,
she A Marauedy is the least money they have in spain, and is worth a little
above half a farding of our money.
said, that since she allowed me my bedding, she did also expect to be served
before all others, and that I should entitle my self her servant. The Bed (to
speak truth) was such, as it deserved well that prerogative and much more, for
she made me lie with her Prentises upon a great Table, and the devil any
thing else there was, but an old rotten threadbare Blanket to cover us. I
passed four days with the plentiful Diet that four Marauedies could afford
me, and at the end of them, there entered into the society a Tauerners wife who
was above an hour in bargaining for the poor quarto. To conclude, within five
days I found seven Mistresses, and seven quartos a day of allowance, so that
I began to live very splendidiously, drinking not of the worst Wine, though not
altogether of the best, that so I might cut my Cloak according to my cloth.
The other five were, a Sergeants widow, a Gardners wife, the bare footed
Nuns Chaplains Niece (for so she styled her self) a wench for any thing;
and a Tripe-wife, whom I did best affect, because that when she did pay me her
Quarto, she would always bid me to some of her Tripe-broath, of the which
before I went out of her house, I would send some three or four Porrengers full
into my guts; so that I lived so well that I pray God I may never live worse.
The last was a devout woman (called a Beata) with whom I had more to do, then
with all the rest; for she never visited any but Monks and Friars, with whom
when she was alone, she was in her kingdom: her house was like a Bee-Hiue,
some went out, and other came in, but all of them with their great sleeves
stored with one thing or other. They gave me (that I might be secret) some
pieces of meat, which they saved in their sleeves, out of their allowance in
the Conuet. I never saw in all my life a better hypocrite then this my
Mistress was; when she went through the street she never lifted her eyes from
the ground; and her beads were never out of her hands wherewith she still
mumbled her prayers. Al such as knew her would desire her to pray to God for
them, for without doubt her prayers were very acceptable unto him. She would
answer them, that she was a great sinner (wherein she lied not, but cousened
them with the naked truth.) Now had every one of these my Mistresses their set
hours, when one had told me that she would not stir forth, I went to
another till I had ended my task. But especially I was (and that without
fail) to go find them again at my appointed time; for if by mischance I
missed never so little, then would my Mistress, before all the company that
she visited, scold and rail me out of my skin; and threaten me, that if I
continued in this carelessness and negligence, she would seek out another
Gentleman-usher that should be more diligent, obseruant, and punctual. So that
to hear her brawle and threaten with such arrogance, a man would have thought
she had given me every day 2. Ryals for my diet only, and 30 Ducats a year
standing Wages. When they went abroad, one would have taken them for the wives
of some Presidents of Castilla, at the least of some Councillors. It fortuned
one day that the Chaplains Niece, and the Sergeants wife met together in a
Church, and being both of them to return home at the same time, there arose a
great controversy between them, which of the two I was to accompany, making a
noise as if they had bin in a Fair. They pulled and tugged me, one of this
side, another of that side, with such rage and fury, that at length they tore
my cloak in pieces, leaving me stark naked; for the devil any other clothes
had I under it but a ragged shirt that looked like a fishermans net. Those that
through the casements thereof did cast their eyes upon the nuditie of my flesh,
did burst out into extreme laughter. Some would mock poor Lazaro; and others
gave ear to the two women who pulled their grandfathers out of their graves.
The haste I had to gather up again the pieces of my cloak, which, for being
somewhat too ripe, were fallen to the ground, would not permit me to hear what
they said one to another; only I heard the widow say, Where has this Baggage
(I wonder) gotten all this pride? but yesterday she was a Tankard-wench, and
to day she ruffles it in her silks, at the cost of the souls in Purgatory.
The other replied, But you Mistress Wag-taile do mince it in your Stammell,
earned of those who with a Deo gratias, and a God reward you, do pay for
whatsoever they possess: and if I yesterday carried the water Tankard, you
bear to day the wine Bottle. The company that stood by parted them, for they
had already one another fast by the hair. Having gathered up the disme^bred
member of my poor cloak, I asked a couple of pinnes of a mumbler of
Pater-nosters that was there, wherewith I mended it as well as I could to hide
my nakedness: and leaving them brawling, I went me to my Mistress the Tailors
wife, who had warned me to come and fetch her at eleven a clock, because she
was to go to dinner at a friends house; when she saw me in this pickle, she
began to fall a scoulding at me; saying, What do you think to earne my money by
waiting on me thus like a Rogue? with far less wages then I give you I
could have a Gentleman-usher with handsome Trouses, a neat Doublet a good
Cloak, and a comely Bonnet; and you do nothing but Tipple up all I give you.
What Tippling (said I to my self) with seven poor quartos that I earne a day,
when I earne the most, for many passed that my Mistresses for fear of paying
me my quarto, would not go abroad. She made the pieces of my Cloak to be
stitched one to another, and for very haste they put them vpside downwards, in
which manner I waited on her.

CHAP. XIIII. Lazaro rehearsed what happened at a Banquet.
WE posted like a Friar invited to a feast; for the good Lady feared there
should not be enough for her. We came to her friends house, where we found
other women that were likewise invited, who asked my Mistress, Whether I was
sufficient to keep the door? she answered them, Yes. Then they said to me,
Stand here brother, to day you shall fare royally. There came in many gallants,
every one pulling out of his pocket, this man a Partridge, and that man a
Hen; one brought forth a Rabbet, another a pair of Pigeons; this a piece of
Mutton, that a chine of Porke; some drew out Sawsiges or Chitterlings: and such
a one there was, that pulled out a Pie of a Ryall wrapped up in his
Handkercher. They delivered all to the Cook, and whilst dinner was in
preparing, they sported with the Gentlewomen. What passed there between them,
is neither lawful for me to rehearse, nor for the Reader to contemplate. But
the Play being ended, meat was served in, and all sat down, the Gentlewomen
plying the dishes soundly; and the Gallants taking their Cups roundly. What
remained upon the table, the women put it up in their pockets. The Gentlemen
returning to their ha^dkerchiefs, drew forth their last course. One brought out
apples, another Cheese, another Olives, and one of them (who was the chief and
stitched the Tailers wife) drew out half a pound of Comfits. This manner of
carrying meat so near at hand for any necessity, did please me wondrous well,
and therefore from thence forwards, I purposed to make three or four pockets
in the first breeches that God should send me (for at that time I had not any)
and one of them should be of such leather as black Iackes are made of, very
well sown to put porridge in. For if those Gallants that were so rich, and so
noted, did bring all the provision in their pockets: and the Gentlewomen did
carry it away crammed within theirs. I (who was but Usher to a crew of
Cockatrices) might very well do it. We went at length among us servants to
dinner, and the devil any thing else was there for us, but Porridge and Sops.
I wondered that the good Ladies had not also put that into their wide sleeves.
We had hardly begun to eat, when we heard a great noise in the Room where our
Masters were. They disputed who their Parents had been, and what the Women's
Husbands were; until that leaving words, they fell roundly to blows, and
pell-mell one with another, did let hands, feet, teeth, and nails do their
function, in scratching, biting, kicking, cuffing, and tugging one another by
the hairs. The occasion of this Uproar (as far as I could understand) was,
that some of the Gallants would neither give, nor pay any thing to the
Gentlewomen, telling them, that what they had eaten, did suffice. It chanced,
that upon this stir, a Commissarie, with other Officers of Justice, did pass
through the Street; who hearing the noise, came to the Door, and charged them
to open in the Kings Name: Which words being heard, every one began to run,
one this way, another that way: One left his Cloak, another his Sword: This
Woman left her Pattens; that, her Veyle: so that all vanished, and hid
themselves, every one where best he could. I, (who had done nothing for which
I should run away) did not stir; but (as I was Porter) opened the Door,
least they should accuse me to have resisted the Kings Officers. The first
Sergeant that entered, taking first hold of me by the neck, said, That he
arrested me: and being thus in his hold, they shut fast the Doors, and went
to seek those that had made the noise. They left no Chamber, Closet, Butterie,
Cellar, Garret, nor Privy unsearched: but seeing they could find no body,
they took my examination. I confessed from one end to the other, who those
were that were there, and what they had done. They wondered, that there being so
many, as I said; they could not find any: And to speak the truth, I my self
was much amazed at it, for there were twelve Men, and six Women. Wherefore I
told them (as indeed I did believe it) that I thought, that all those that had
been there, and made that noise, were Spirits; whereupon they fell a laughing
at me. The Commissarie asked those that had been in the Cellar, if they had
searched well in every corner: they answered him, Yes. But he not satisfied
therewith, caused a Torch to be lighted, to go down himself. Entering at the
door, they saw a great Tub roll up and down the Cellar; wherewith the
Sergeants being frighted, began to run away, saying: By God this man says
true, here are nothing but Hobgoblins. The Commissarie, who was more crafty,
stayed them, saying, That he did not fear the Devil; and with that, went to
the Tub, and opening it, found within it a Man and a Woman, both of them as
naked as their Mother brought them into the World, by reason, that when the
said Commissarie did knock at the door, they were a bed together upon terms
of agreement, and had not had the leisure, upon the sudden Alarm, to take
their Clothes; but as they were, had hid themselves within that empty Tub. They
were all amazed to see them both so fair; but casting Cloakes upon them, they
committed them to the custody of two Sergeants, and went on to seek the
others. The Commissarie discovered a great Earthen Vessel full of Oil, within
the which he found a man clothed, and up to the breast in the said Oil: who
(as soon as they perceived him) thought to have leaped forth; which he could
not do so artificially, but that both he and the Vessel came to the ground,
so that the Oil did rebound up to their Hats, and without any respect stained
them all; which made them curse both the Office, and the Devil that first
invented it. The Oily man, seeing that no body did stay him (but to the
contrary, that all fled from him as from a mad Dog) betook himself to his
heels; and though the Commissarie cried out, Stay him, Stay him, yet
nevertheless every one gave him way, so that he went out at a back-doore,
pissing Oil, of the which he had enough out of his Garments, to maintain the
Lamp of our Lady of Distresses a month and more. All the Officers remained
drenched in oil, cursing him that had brought the^ thither, and me also: for
they said I was the Bawd, and for such a one should be punished. They came out
of the Cellar as Fritters out of a Drying Pan, leaving a tract wheresoever they
passed. They were so angry, that they vowed to God and the four Evangelists to
hang all those that they found; which made us prisoners to stink for fear.
They went to Corn and Meal rooms to seek out the rest; and being there,
from above through a trap-doore was a sack of Meal powered upon them, wherewith
they were all blinded, and cried out, Violence to the Kings Officers: and if
they thought to open their eyes, they were instantly closed up with water and
meal. Those that had the keeping of us, left us to go help the Commissarie,
that roared out like a madman. But they were scarce entered, when their eyes
also were filled with Meal and Water: so that they went up and down, as if
they had been playing at Blindman-buffe; and meeting one another in this
manner, did enterchange such Cuffes and Blows, that they brake one another
Chops, and Teeth. When we saw them in such disorder, we came in upon them,
and they upon themselves with such might, that being weary, and out of breath,
they fell to the ground, where blows and spurns fell upon them as thick as
hayle, until they were as still as if they had been dead: for if any one did
but open his mouth to grunt never so little, he had it straightwayes filled
with Meal, and crammed like a Capon. We bound them hand and foot, and carried
them into the Cellar, and threw them into the Oil, like Fishes to be fried,
where they wallowed like Hogs in the mire. Then did we shut up all the
doors, every one returning to his own house. The owner of the house, where
these Reakes were played (who was gone into the Country) coming home
presently after, and finding the doors fast, and that no body did answer (by
reason that a Niece of his, to whom he had encharged his house, which she had
lent for that meeting, was gone home to her Fathers, for fear of her Uncle)
he caused the doors to be broken open. But when he found his house all
strewed with Meal, and bedawbed with Oil, he was so vexed, that he took on
as if he had been drunk: then he went into his Cellar, where he found all
the Oil spilt, and the Officers tumbling in it. With rage and madness to see
his goods spoiled after this manner, he took a great Cudgel, and gave the
Commissarie and the Sergeants so many blows, that he left them for half
dead: then calling his neighbors to his aid, they carried them into the
Street, where the Boys fell a throwing Mudde, Dirt, and Shoo-Clouts upon them;
for they were so full of Meal, that no body could know them. When they came
again to themselves, and perceived they were in the Street, and unbound, they
presently rose up, and betook themselves to their heels; so that one might
very well then have said, Stop the Constable. They left behind them their
Cloakes, Swords, and Daggers; not daring to return again for them, that no
body might know the Business. The Master of the house took possession of all,
in recompense of the loss he had sustained. When I went out of the house, to
go my way, I met with a Cloak that was none of the worst, which I took up,
and left mine in stead of it. I gave God thanks, that I came off so well in
that days adventure; which was a new world to me, who was wont always to go
by the worst. I went to the Tailors Wives house, where I found a great
hurly-burly, and the Tailor taking measure of his Wives ribs with a good
Cudgel, because she was come home alone, without Veyle, or Pattens, running
through the streets with more then a hundred Boys at her tail. I came in good
time: for as soon as the Tailor saw me, he left his Wife, and fell upon my
Jack, giving me a blow with his fist over the Face, wherewith he struck out
those few Teeth that I had left me, and some ten or twelve spurns in the
Guts, that made me cast up again that little which I had eaten. What (said he)
infamous Band, are you not ashamed to come to my house? You shall surely now
pay your old and new Score both at once: and calling to his Servants to bring
forth a Blanket, they put me into it, and tossed me at their pleasures, and my
great grief, leaving me for dead; and in that case they laid me upon a Bench,
being already night. When I came again to my self, and thought to have
stirred, I fell to the ground, and with the fall, I brake one of my Arms. The
Day being come, by little and by little I crawled unto a Church Gate: Where,
with a pitiful voice, I craved the charitable Alms of such persons as went
in and out.

CHAP. XV. How Lazaro made himself an Hermit.
LYing at the Church Door, and making a collection of my former life; I
considered all the misfortunes that I had passed, from the day that I began to
serve the Blind man, until the present instant: And all Reckonings made up, I
found, that rising early, did not bring on the day faster, nor continual toil
make a man always rich; but as the Song says:

The early riser does not thrive,
So well as he whom God does drive.
To him I recommended my self, that the end might prove better then either
the beginning or the middle had been. It was my chance to be close to a
venerable and white-bearded Hermit, having a Staff and Beads in his hand, at
the end whereof did hang a Deaths-head, of the bigness of a Conies. This good
Father seeing me distressed, with kind and mild speeches began to comfort me,
asking me from whence I was, and what chances had brought me to this estate? I,
in few and compendious terms, gave him to understand the long and large
extent of my bitter and painful Pilgrimage. He was amazed to hear me, and
moved with piety and pity toward me, he invited me home to his Hermitage.
I accepted of his offer, and as well as I could (which was with no little
pain) we came to the Oratorie, which was two miles from thence in a Rock;
close to the which, there was a Chamber with a hollownesse in one of the walls,
where his bed stood. Within the Yard was a Cisterne with fresh water, wherewith
he watered a Garden, more curious and neat, then vaste and spacious. Here (said
the good old man) have I lived these twenty years, free from the iarring and
unquietness of the World: this is (my Brother) the earthly Paradise. Here do
I contemplate both divine and humane matters: here do I fast when I am filled,
and eat when I am hungry: here do I watch, when I cannot sleep; and sleep,
when I am weary of watching. Here am I solitary, when I want company; and am
accompanied, when I am not alone. Here do I sing, when I am merry; and weep,
when I am sad. Here do I work, when I am not idle; and am idle, when I do
not work. Here do I think upon my bad life that is passed; and consider the
good one that is present. Here, lastly, it is where all things are unknown;
and where the knowledge of all things is attained. It did me good at the heart
to hear the merrily disposed Hermit: And therefore I desired him to give me
some notion of the Hermiticall life, for it seemed to me the quintessence of
all others. It is by so much the best (answered he) that he only can tell
who has made trial of it: but we can not now have leisure to discourse any
farther upon it, by reason that it is dinner time. I entreated him to give me
some remedy for my arm, which was very sore. He did it with such ease and
facility, as from thence forwards it pained me no more. We did eat like
Kings, and drank like Germans. Dinner being ended, in the midst of our
Noone-sleepe, the good Hermit began to cry out, I dye, I dye. I presently
arose, and found him ready to give up the Ghost. Seeing him in this case, I
asked him if he was a dying; he answered me, I, I, I: and only repeating I,
dyed within an hour after. I found my self in a pecke of troubles;
considering, that if the man did dye without witnesses, one might say, that I
had killed him, and so it would cost me my life, which till then with so much
ado I had preserved; and that few witnesses would serve to convince me of the
Fact, by reason that my Garb and Fashion would make me be taken rather for a
Robber upon the highwayes, then for a man of worship. I came instantly out of
the Cell, to see if I could find thereabouts any body, to be a witness of
that death: and looking on every side, I perceived a flock of Sheep not far
from thence, toward the which I went in all haste (though not without pain,
feeling the Tailor still upon my bones) where I found six or seven Shepherds,
and four or five Shepheardesses, under the shade of certain Willowes, near
adjoining to a delightful and clear Spring. The Shepherds did pipe, the
Shepheardesses did sing; some capered, and others danced: one held a Wench by
the hand, another slept in another Wenches Lap. Briefly, they all passed away
the heat of the day in Loue-Games and pleasant discourses. I came unto them
panting and out of breath, desiring the^, that without any stay they would come
with me, for the Hermit lay a dying. Some of them followed me, leaving the
rest to keep their flocks. Being entered into the Hermitage, they asked the
good Hermit, whether he did mean to die? who answered them, I, (but he lied,
for he had no mind to it, but was forced to it against his will.) When I saw
that he persisted still in one and the same note, answering I, to all
questions; I asked him, If he intended that those Shepherds should be his
Executors? he said, I. I asked him if he did not make me his sole and lawful
heir? he answered, I. I went on asking him, if he did not acknowledge and
confess, that whatsoever he did or might possess, was due unto me, both for
my good and acceptable services, as for diverse things which he had received
of me? he again said, I; which I, I wished might have been the last accent of
his life. But as I perceived, that there was yet some breath in his body
(fearing least he should bestow it to my loss and damage) I went on still
with my demands, causing one of the Shepherds to note down all that he said:
which the Shepherd did with a Coal against the Wall, because he had neither
Pen nor Inckhorne. I asked him, If he was not content, that that Shepherd
should sign and subscribe for him unto his Will, since he himself was unable
to do it? he answered, I, I, I, and thereupon dyed. We took order for his
Burial, making a Grave for him in his Garden with the greatest speed that
might be, for the fear that I had least he should rise again. I desired the
Shepherds to take part of a Collation; but they thanked me, by reason, that it
was already time to drive forth their Cattle, for to feed: and so they
departed, saying, they were very heavy for my loss. I locked fast the door of
the Cell, and ransacked instantly every corner. I found a great Earthen Vessel
full of good Wine, and another of Oil; two Pots of Honey, two sides of Bacon,
much poudred Meat, and some dried Fruits; all which did please me very well,
but yet it was not that which I did seek. I found his Chests full of Linen;
and in a corner of one of them, a Woman's garment. Although that made me wonder,
yet I wondered more, that a man so provident and thriftie as he was, should be
without Money. I was in mind to go to his Grave, and ask him where he had put
it; and me thought, that having asked him, he made me this answer: Thou Fool,
do thou think, that living in this vnneighboured and solitary place, at
the mercy of every Rogue and Thief, I was to keep within a Trunk (in danger
of losing it) that which I loved and esteemed more then my life? This
inspiration (as if really I had received it from his mouth) made me seek in
every corner: but finding nothing, I considered with my self, That if I were to
hide Money in such a place as no body might sind it, where would I put it? I
said, within yonder Altar; to the which I went instantly, and lifting up the
Cloth that hung before it, at one side of it, being all of Brick, I perceived
a Chinke wide enough only to put through a Ryall of eight. A Ryall of eight is
worth four shillings,
My blood began to rise, and my heart to pant. I took a Pick-axe, and in less
then two blows, I threw half the Altar to the ground, and discovered the
Relics that were there intombed. I found a Pot of Money, which I told out,
and found the sum to be six hundred Ryals. The joy and content that I
received was so great, that I had like to have died. I took it from thence, and
dug a Hole without the Hermitage, where I buried it, that (if I were driven
from thence) I might find without, that which I so highly and dearly cherished.
That done, I clothed my self in the Hermites Weeds, and went to the City, to
give notice unto the Prior of the Society, of what was passed; not forgetting
before I went, to mend up again the Altar as it was before. It was my fortune
to meet all the Brethren together, of whom the Hermitage did depend, which was
consecrated to Saint Lazaro, whence I gathered a good prognostic for my self:
who when they saw me already gray headed, and of an exemplary aspect (which is
most requisite for such Professions) although they found one difficulty, which
was, that I had no Beard (because it was not yet grown again, having shaued
it not long before) yet notwithstanding, seeing (by the report of the
Shepherds) that the deceased had made me his Heir, they gave me the hold and
possession of the Hermitage. But now I speak of Beards, I remember what a
certain Friar did once tell me, which was, that in their Order and in others of
the most reformed sort, they never make any Superior, unless he be well
furnished with Beard: by means where of it comes to pass, that many who are
sufficient and capable to exercise that charge, are excluded; and others
preferred to the same, though unworthy, so that their Chin be well stored with
down: as if to rule and govern well, did rather depend of hairs, the^ of a
good and ripe understanding. The Brothers admonished me to live according to
the example and good reputation of my Predecessor, which was such, as every one
held him for a Saint. I told them, that I would show my self a Hercules. They
warned me likewise, that I should not beg but upon Tuesdayes and Saterdayes,
because if I did otherwise, the Friars would punish me. I promised them to
fulfill in all points what they should ordain me (and the rather, because I
had no great mind to come into their clutches, having already tried of what
mettle their hands were made.) I began then to beg from door to door, with
a low, humble and devout tone (as I had learned in the blind man's School) and
that not for any need, but because it is a use and custom among Beggars, who
the more they have, the more they desire, and with more gust. The folks that
did hear me say, Pray bestow something toward the lamp of the good Saint
Lazaro, and did not know the voice, came out to the Door, and seeing me, did
wonder much, and asked me, Where the father Anselmo was? (for so was the good
old man called) I told them that he was departed this world. The one said, Now
God be with him and give him good rest that was so good a man. The others, May
his blessed Soul enjoy celestial happiness. Some said, Blessed be he that
led such a life; for in six years he has not eaten any hot meat
whatsoever. Others said He fasted with bread and water. Some foolish and
Superstitious women would kneel down and call upon the father Anselmo. One
asked me what I had done with his habit. I told her that it was the same that
I did wear. She (without saying what she would have) pulled out her Sizars,
and began to cut off a piece of that she could first lay hold on, which was
just before my fore-parts; whereupon I began to cry out, fearing she would have
gelded me. But she seeing me so dismayed, said, Fear not Brother, for I will not
be without a relic of that blessed man, but I will pay for the damage done to
your garment. Ah (said some) without doubt before six months be at an end, he
will be canonized, for he has done many miracles. There came so many to see his
Sepulcher, that the house was always full; wherefore I thought it fit to bring
him forth under a Penthouse before the Hermitage: and from thence forward, I
begd no more for S. Lazaro's Lamp, but for that of the Blessed Anselmo. I could
never yet understand that manner of Begging, Give to the Lamp, or for to light
the Saints. But I will not harp too much upon that string, for it will jarre in
the ears of those, who with the Saints Oil do maintain the Lamps of their
stomachs. I cared not much to go to the City, having within the Cell what I
desired; yet least they should say I was rich, and therefore I did not beg, I
went thither the day following, where befell me that which you may read in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XVI. How Lazaro would have married again.
GOod luck is better then a patrimony; to an unfortunate man, a Hog is no
better the^ a Dog. We see oftentimes many men spring from the slime of the
earth, and without knowing how, they do find themselves rich, honored, feared,
and esteemed. If you ask, Is that man learned? one will answer you, As an Ass.
Is he wise? As a Wood-Cock. Has he any good qualities? As many as a Carman.
From whence then comes to him all his wealth? One will tell you, From
Fortune. And contrariwise, many that are discreet, wise, prudent, full of a
thousand perfections, and fit to rule a kingdom, do see themselves needy,
scorned, dejected, and made the Dish-Clouts of the world. If you demand the
reason hereof: One will answer you, A cross Fortune does pursue them. The same
(as I think) pursued and persecuted me, giving in me an instance unto the
world, of what she is able to do; for since the foundation of it, no man has
been so tossed by that unfortunate Fortune. But to follow my discourse. I went
through a street begging (as I was wont) for the good Saint Lazaro; (for I
durst not beg within the City for the blessed Anselmo, that was only for
Idiots and superstitious women that came to rub their beads upon his
sepulcher, where according to their sayings, many miracles were done.) And
coming to a door, and doing there as at others, I heard some body call me
from the staires-head, saying; Come up, Father, come up: What mean you to be
so strange? I went up, and upon the midst of the stairs (which were somewhat
dark) certain women met me. The one hung about my neck, the others took me
by the hands, diuing with theirs into my pockets. All of them asked me, why
they had not seen me these eight days? But when we were come up to the
staires-head, and that by the light of the windows they saw me, they were all
amazed, and looked one upon another as if they had been Matachines; and in the
end brake out into such laughter, that one would have thought they did it for a
Wager, none of them being able to utter one word. The first that spoke, was a
little Boy, that said, This is not my Daddy. But when this flux of Laughter was
somewhat over, the Women (who were four) asked me for whom I begged? I told
them, for Saint Lazaro. For Saint Lazaro, said they? Why, is not the Father
Anselmo well? Well? (answered I) yes sure, he complayneth of nothing, for he
dyed eight days ago. When they heard this, they fell all a roaring; and if
their Laughing had been before great, their Wayling was now greater. Some
cried; others pulled themselves by the hayres; all of them together made such a
jarring Music, that a Quire of hoarse Nuns could scarce make a worse. One
said, What shall become of me Wretch that I am, without a Husband, without
Defense, and without Counsel? Whither shall I go? Who shall maintain me? O
heavy news! What mischance is this? Another brake out thus: My dear Son in
Law, and Master! How have you forsaken us, without bidding us farewell? O my
poor little Children, now Orphants, and comfortless, where is your good
Father? The little Brats held the Superius of that untuned Music. Every one
wept, every one took on; there was nothing but Sobs, nothing but Waylings. But
when the Waters of that great Deluge grew somewhat toward an Ebb, they
enquired of me, how, and of what Disease he dyed. I told it them; as also,
the Will which he made, leaving and ordaining me for his lawful heir and
successor. There was the blow. It was there that tears was turned into fury,
sobs unto blasphemies and wailings into threatenings. You are some thiese that
have murdered him, to rob him; but you shall not brag of it (said the youngest)
for that Hermit was my husband, and these three children are his: and unless
you do give us all his goods, and restore unto me a garment that I lent him to
disguise himself upon Shroue-Tuesday, we will make you be hanged: and if
justice be denied, there are Swords and Pistols in the world, wherewith to make
you loose a thousand lives, if so many you had. I told them that I had
sufficient witnesses, before whom he had made his will. These are all tricks
and gulleries (said they) for the same day that you say he died, he was here,
and told us, that he had no company. After I had considered with my self,
that the Will had not been made under the hands of Notaries, and that those
Women did threaten me; for the experience that I had of Law, and Suits, I
determined to speak them fair, to try if by that means I might compass that
which by Law I was assured to lose: as also, for that the tears of the young
Widow had penetrated to the interior parts of my heart. And so I desired them
to be quiet, telling them, that they should lose nothing by me; and that if I
had accepted to be his Heir, it was only because I thought that the deceased
was no married man, having never heard before that Hermits were married. They
(all sadness and melancholy being cast off) began to laugh, saying, That they
saw well that I was a Nouice, and little experimented in that Office, since I
knew not, that when an Hermit is termed solitary, it is meant that he is to
be sequestered from the company and society of men, and not of women; for there
is not any, but has one at the least, with whom he may pass in exercises of
action, the vacant time, from those of Speculation; imitating in that your holy
Predecessors: and so much the more, by reason that they are persons that are
better informed of the Will of God, who has ordained, that man should not be
alone: And therefore they, like dutiful and obedient Children, have each of
them one or two wives, who^ they maintain, though it be even of Alms; and
particularly, the unhappy Wretch that is dead, who nourished and kept four;
that poor Widow, and I that am her Mother, and those two her Sisters, besides
those three Infants that are his Children, or at least that he held for such.
Then she, who^ they said to be his Wife, said, That she would not be called
the Widow of that old rotten carcass, that had not remembered her at his death;
and that she would be sworn, that those Children were none of his; and that
from that time she did annull and break all contracts of Matrimony made
between them. I then asked her, what the contents of that contract were? The
Mother replied, saying, The Matrimonial couena^ts that I made, when I married
my daughter with that ungrateful man, were these that follow; which, that you
may the better understand, I must of necessity begin farther off. I lived
heretofore in a Town called Ducnas, some twelve miles hence, having only
remaining these three daughters, of three sundry fathers, who (to the nearest
conjecture) were a Monk, an Abbot, and a Priest, for I have bin always much
devoted unto the Church. But at length I came to dwell in this City, to eschew
the rumors which are frequent in such little places; for every one termed me
the Ecclesiastical Widow, by reason that (to my grief) all three of them were
dead. And though others presently did supply their places, they were men of
little gain, and of less authority; who not contenting themselves with the
Mother, laid snares to entrap the young ones: which to prevent, seeing the
danger eminent, and that the gain was not sufficient to maintain us, here I
pitched, and began to set up. At the report of the three Wenches, suitors came
as thick as Gnats to the Wine-tap; but to none of them all did I ever incline
so much as to Churchmen, being persons that are secret, rich, thriftie, and
patient. Now among others, the Hermit of S. Lazaro came a begging, and seeing
this Maid, fell in love with her, and in holiness and simplicity did desire
her of me for his Wife. I clapped up the Match upon these Articles and
Conditions that I will tell you. First, he obliged himself to feed our whole
household; and what we our selves could earne, should be to apparel us, and
to put up. Secondly, that if at any time my daughter did admit any Coadiutor
(he being somewhat old and crasie) he should not make any words of it.
Thirdly, that he should hold and esteem as his own, all the Children that
she should bear, to whom from that instant he assured all whatsoever he did
or might possess; and that coming to pass, that my daughter should he
without issue, he did make her his sole and lawful heir. Fourthly, that he
was not to come into our house, when he should see a Jar, Pot, or other
Vessel at the Window; a token, that then there was no room for him. Fifthly,
that if, he being in the house, any other did come, he was then to hide
himself where we should bid him, until the other were departed. Sixthly and
lastly, that he should be a Mediator, to bring hither twice every week some
friend or acquaintance of his, to make merry with us at their own charges.
These are (said she) the conditions, upon the which that Wretch betrothed
himself to my daughter, and she to him. The Marriage was made and ended,
without either Priest or Curate; for he told me that it was needless, since
the essence thereof did consist only in conformity of minds and mutual
intentions. I was amazed at the speeches of that other Celestina, and at the
Articles of her daughters marriage: I was perplexed, not knowing what to say,
until they opened a passage to my desires; for the young Widow fell about my
neck, saying, If that unhappy man had had this Angels face, how much should I
have loved him? and with that, she kissed me. After this kiss, there entered
into me I know not what, that began to set me a fire; so that without any
delay, or farther discourse, I told her, That if she were minded to forsake her
Widow-hood, and receive me as her own, I would not only keep and fulfill my
Predecessors Covenants, but all others whatsoever that they would add. They
were well pleased with that, and said, That they only desired, that I should
put into their hands all that which was in the Hermitage, and that they would
keep it. I promised them so to do, but with intent to conceal the Money for
a need. The concluding of the Match was referred unto the next day; and that
afternoon they sent a Cart to the Cell, wherein they carried away all, even to
the ashes, not forbearing so much as the Altar-Cloth, or the Saints Garments. I
was so loue-nettled, that if they had asked me the Phoenix, or Water out of the
Stygian Lake, I would have given it them. They left me nothing but a poor
Strawbed, whereon I might cast my self like a Dog. When the good Lady; my
future Wife (who came with the Cart) saw that there was no Money, she was
angry (for the old man had told her that he had some, but not where) and asked
me if I did not know where the Treasure lay? I told her, No. She, crafty and
subtle as she was, took me by the hand, that we might go seek it together,
and carried me into every hole and corner of the Hermitage. As we went about
the Altar, she perceived the side of the Wall which was newly made up,
whereupon she entered into suspicion of me. And therefore embracing and kissing
me, she said unto me, I pray thee my Love tell me where the Money is, that we
may make a merry Wedding with it. I still denied that I knew of any. Then she
taking me again by the hand, made me walk out round about the Hermitage,
still looking me in the Face; and when we came to the place where I had hid
the Money, my eyes were instantly toward it. She, who all this while watched
but for that action, called straightwayes to her Mother, bidding her seek under
a Stone that I had laid there; which she doing, met with the Money, and I with
my death. But she dissembled, saying, Look here, we will live a merry life
with this. Then showing me all manner of kindness, they presently (because it
grew late) retired to the City, and left me until the next morning, that I
was to go to their house, where we should make the merriest Wedding that ever
was seen. God grant it (said I to my self.) All that night I balanced
between hope and fear, Jest those Women should deceive me, although it
seemed impossible unto me, that a false heart should lurk under so good a
face; for, as the Biskey said, If thy face be good, thy actions will be
answerable. That night was a year to me. It was yet scarce day, when as
locking up my Hermitage, I went to be married, as if that had bin but a slight
matter; not remembering that Eluira was my wife. I came to the house at their
rising; where they received me with such joy, that I accounted my self a happy
man; and all fear laid aside, I began to ordain and command as in my own
house. We made such good cheer, and with such content, that I thought I was
in a Paradise: We wanted not company, for they had invited five or six Women of
their friends. After Dinner we fell to dancing; and, though I was altogether
ignorant therein, they forced me to do the like. It was the best sport in the
world to see me hobble up and down in my Hermits attire. But night being come,
after a good Supper, and better drinking, they carried me into a fair chamber,
where there was a good Bed, and bad me make my self unready, and go to bed
first, whilst my Bride was vndressing. I did so, though contrary to the fashion
of my country, where the woman has that prerogatine. A maid was left to help
me off with my Stockings, who told me, that I must put off my Shirt, for it was
requisite that for some Ceremonies that were yet to be performed, I should be
stark naked. I obeyed her: but I was no sooner in the Bed, but all the Women,
and my Bride among them, rushed into the Chamber; and the first thing they did,
two of them took me by the feet, and two by the arms, and tied instantly
four cords about them, wherewith they bound me to the four Bed-Posts, leaving
me stretched like a S. Andrew upon a Cross; whereupon they all fell a laughing
like mad folks, and I aroaring like a Bull. But they told me, unless I held
my peace, that I was a dead man. Then they took a great Basin of hot Water,
wherein they popped my head. I burned my self, and which was worse, if I
thought to cry out, they so belaced me with stripes, that I was constrained to
let the^ do their pleasure. They scalded off my Beard, hair, eyebrows, and
eyelids, saying, A little more patience, and the Ceremonies will be ended, and
you shall enjoy your desire. I entreated them to let me go, for my itch of
marrying was now cooled. But one of the boldest of them drawing out a Knife,
said to the others, Hold him fast, and I will gold him a little, that his
mortified flesh may not another time be tempted to copulation. The holy Hermit
believed (I think) that all we told him had been Gospel, but y faith it was
not, nor Epistle neither. He would trust to women; he shall see now what will
come on it. When I saw my precious stones in such danger, I strugled in such
manner, as I brake one of the Cords, and withal, one of the Bed-Posts; being
animated by a desire that I had, to keep my Bells for a Morris-dance. They
seeing what I had done, for fear lest I should break all the Bed, unbound me,
and putting me in a Sheet, they tossed me so long, that they left me for dead.
These are, said they, Sir, the ceremonies wherewith our Wedding begins; if it
please you to come again to morrow, we will make an end of the rest: and with
that, four of them took me up, and carried me a good way from their house, and
laid me in the midst of the Street; where the Day found me, and the Boys began
to run after me, and do me a great deal of mischief: so that, to avoid them,
I ran into a Church, close to the High Altar, where they were at Mass. When
the Priests saw such a sight, which questionless resembled the Devil that
Painters use to lay under S. Michaels feet; they all ran away, and I among
them, to free my self from the misdemeanors of those Devils incarnate. The
people that was in the Church, cried out; some, Take heed of the Devil;
others, Beware of the Madman. I cried out as well as they, that I was neither
Devil, nor Madman, but only a poor fellow, whom God for my sins had
visited with that misery. When they perceived, that I was not what they took
me to be, they all were quieted; the Priests returned back again, to make an
end of their Mass; and the Sexton gave me the Cloth of a Tomb, to wrap my
self in. I went into a corner, where I considered the crosses of Fortune, and
how on every side man is beset with misery; and therefore I determined to abide
in that church and there end my days (which, in regard of my former woes,
could not be very long) and save the Priests a labor of fetching me elsewhere,
after my death.

This is in sum (courteous Reader) the second Part of the Life of Lazarillo,
without either adding or diminishing, but even as I have heard my great
Grandmother tell it. If thou do like it, expect the third Part, which shall
no less delight thee.

FINIS.

