Tho. Lupsets works.

Londini. ANNO. M. D. XLVI.

The contents of this book.
A treatise of charity. An exhortacion to young men, perswadyng them to walk
in the pathe way that leads to honestee and goodness. A com^endious treatise,
teaching the way of dieyng well. A sermon of Chrysostom, that, No man is
hurt but of him self. A sweet sermon of.S. Cyprian of the mortalitee of man.
The rules of a Christian life made by John Picus the elder Earl of Mirandula.
Bathered counsels out of Saint Is^dore.
Treatise of Charity.
I Am well minded to stycke to my promise, Haec est e^^ nim char^^tas del, v^
precepta eius serue^^mus. 1. 10. 5.
of charity, by cause you can not mislike my writing how rudely so ever I
write, onles you diminishe your own charity. For charity takes all things
in good worth, and consydereth more the good will of the workman, then the
beauty of the work. Hereupon I am bolded to show my mind in few words,
what is charity and how we may keep charity. A saying much used with every
man and woman, but not so well perceived, as it is commonly spoken. Spekers of
cha^^tie be plenty, kepers of charity be veraie scase, although you would
make search through out all religious cloisters. To be without malice and hate
is not enough, yet veraie few be found so clear: nor it is not enough to love
in a slyght or a common, or in a mean wise. If you keep in you, Charity, ye
bespotles of al grudges, and therewith ye love in the most highest degree of
loving both god and man, god for him self, and man for goddis sake.

But here now me thinks, we be to sodeinly entered with a skyp to the mids
of this matter: let us make some convenient beginning, and thereafter let us
proceed.

For both you shall with the more ease gather the fruit of this lesson, and I
shall the better se what is taught, if the sentences be ^yde in their due order.

And for as much good sister, as this thing that we here take in hand to
treat of, is all holy, all godly, all heavenly, far passing the relyques of
saints, far passing the hallowed chalices. Let us, I pray you, beware of
presumpcyon, Be were of presumcion.
to touch this mattier with foul fingers. It is our part to wasshe our
hands clean, I mean, as the matter is spiritual, so our spirit must be
prepared in a due reverence, according to the high dignity of this virtue.
the water that cleanses our spirit and mind, is mekenes. Mekenes^
Here with I say we must prepare us, both you to here, and I to speak of holy
charity: because Christ says, Matt(...)
that in charity is contained all the law of god: And goddis law does
chiefly enforce.ii. things, one to make us, by thretening of peynes, to flee
from syn: an other, to cause us, promisynge of joys to follow virtue. What
charity causes.
It must needs then be true, that Charity makes men do both these things,
to forsake sin, and to embrace virtue.

This is to say, by Charity we refuse evil, and take good, by charity we
flee doing naughtly, and cleave to doing well, by Charity we escape disprayse,
and deserve praise, by charity we duly both fear and love god, finally by
charity, we be ryd from the bondage of our ennemy the prince of this world,
and be frank in the liberty of goddis kingdom.

In this speaking of charity, there seems to be an other strength in the
word, than comenly we understand in our english tongue: and surely the
truth is so, that far above our common understanding, this word
signifiethe the hole perfection of a christen man: Charity is the ho^e
perfection of a chry^sten man.
It is a word borrowed with us of the latyne called Charitas. If you now will
considre, what is the fountain life and soul of man's virtue, the spacing and
rote of all his good works: you shall see, that it is only the true love of
god.

For who so ever has his mind inwardly ameled, bake^, and through fyred with
the love of god: he is the blessed man, that keeps goddis word, that
fulfylleth all goddis law, that never willethe doing evil, and ever wills
doing well, in the perfecie form, facion, shappe, and kind of well doing.

This love of god, that causethe such perfections in man, (...)
is called Charity. But remember, it may not be taken in the weak common
manner: for all they have not this charity, that say they love God: Nor all
they love not God, that so say. We be not as our seyyng soundethe, but as god
sees our thoughts, so we be^ None of us loves god, that enforcethe to will
any thing besides goddys will. He loves not god perfetly, that thynkethe any
thing beside god: he loves not god perfitely, that does any thing without
god. The perfect love of god can not stand with any care or study for this
life: the perfyte love of god abydethe not the couplyng with any other love:
the perfect love of god knows none affection to kindred, it knows no
difference between poor and rich, it knows not what meneth mine and thyne^
it ^anne not diuyde a foo from a friend. For he that truly and perfectly
loves god, must love god alone, nothing beside god, nor with god: but love
all indifferently in god and for god.

We that say, we love god, when we scant ones in a day remember god, and yet
never remember we God in such a manner, but that more often and more ernestly
we remember other things, in saying we love god, and doing thus, we can not
prove true that we say. For the perfect lover of god is so wedded togod, that
^his thought nothing abides, but the quycke remembrance of god. Our spirits
and senses be occupied with so many other matters, that scante we have leiser
to think on god, so far we be from this charity: the which I say, is a
virtue of that dignity, power, and maiestee, that by it self, it contains
all the precepts of the patriarchs, all the laws of the prophets, all the
doctrine of Christ, all the rules of the apostels, all the inuencions of the
holy church: ye more then all this, charity has a lybertee of power over
both the old and the new testament. For the true lover of god, the which is
the charitable person, is under no rule: but he is a lord above all laws,
all inuencions, all precepts, all commandments, that god has given to man.
For charity has no bond.

But alwaie sister remember, that charity is not perfect, oneles that it be
burning. It is not a quenched love, a cold love, a love growinge in the tethe
or lyppes, that is charity: but the hot feruente burning hertes affecte
toward god, is the love that is understand in the name of charity, the which
(as is said) does not only contein all the doctrine of Christ, but also it is
above all laws, to rule rather then to be ruled.

The end of all the course and walking of the son of god in this world,
was to leave among men this Charity. The mark, whereto our savior in all his
prechyng and teaching looked, was to have men endued with charity. For our
divine master saw, that there neded no rehersall of sins, the which were
to be eschewed, nor yet of virtues, that were to be followed, if man could take
charity, that is by it self suffycyent for all, both to keep men from
stumblyng in the way, from wanderyng out of the way, and finally, to conducte
men to the blessed ways end. Here you se, that the compass and circuit of
charity is large and wide, in as much as it comprehends all that can be
spoken, either ageynste vice, or with virtue.

You paraduenture thought, that charity was nothing else, but to keep patience,
and not to be displesed nor angry. It is truth, this point is one part of
charity: but it is not all. For what so ever the love of god prouokethe us to,
or the fear of god dryuethe us from^ all in one sum is concluded to be
understand in charity.

Whereupon I may, if you keep charity, say, that you be the very daughter of
god, and most dear sister of Christ. But I fear me, you have more often
spoken the word charity, then you have studied to learn, what thing should
be Charytie: and thereby ye say paraduenture of your self, more then you
do. For I have noted your mind to be somewhat troubled with certain
fantasyes, the which could have no place in you, if you were filled with this
charity. For here a little more in few words, what is the plain definicion
of this virtue, as I find it written of a greatte holy man, and a common
doctor.

Charity (saiethe he) is a good and a gracious effect of the soul, whereby
man's heart has no fantasy to esteem, valor, or ponder any thing in this
wide world, beside or before the care and study to know god. For who so ever
is inclined to love these erthly things, it is not possible for him ever to
attain, so long as he so does, to the assured constant and perfect use of
this charity, because his mind has so many and so diverse lettes, that
hyndre and withdraw him from taking the possessyon of this great treasure,
wherein be touched the heaps of all virtues. And a lyttel now to speak of
these impedimentes and lettes, it shall much appertain to our purpose: for we
shall the quycklyer come to charity, if we can know and escape all the
blocks, that lie in our way to let us: not only to let us to come to
charity, but to drive and chase away from us this virtue, that neither we
can come to it, nor that to us.

The perfyte love of god The perfect love of god.
has in it a marvelous quietness and rest, it is never moved, styred, nor
carried away by no storm of worldly troubles, but sytteth fast and sure in a
continual calmnes, against all wedders, al blastes, al storms. No rock is
more stylle, then is the mind of a charitable man, when the world tumbleth,
rolleth, and tosseth it with the vomye wawes of temptacions, the which
drowneth the minds of all us, that be weak or sick in charity. I would
therefore sister, that you diligently learned, what be these blastes, that
turmoylen our minds out of the rest, the which charity requires.

You shall understand, that there be certain mocio^s called passions, that
soore assault our soul, and brings our spiritie to much unquietness, as to
be moved with anger is a great rolling of the mind, to bread envy, to feed
rancour, to nourisshe malice, to be mindeful of any miure, to be studious of
auengynge, to be grieved with ill speaking, to fume at back biting, to grudge
at compleyntes, to frette with chyding, to strive for shame, for sclaunder.
These be the things, that suffer no mind rest, any of these passions
troublethe the mind continually from one fantasy to an other: so that no
quietness can be had.

Again, to study for promocion, to care for marriage, to fyshe for riches, to
be gredie of honor, to be desirous of favor, to couette preferremente, to
gape for praises: these also be sharp spurs, that chasen the mind, and
kepen the mind ever styrrynge and void of quyetnes.

Like wise to ensue a delight of deintye and sweet fedynge, to be taken with
pleasure of the body, to be over thrown with sorrow, to perch up with
gladness, to hold up the chyn to high in prosperity, to hold down the head
to low in advertise, to be in bondage under the fierce rules of censual lust.
Whose cruelty over man has no pytie, measure, nor end. These and such
other be things, that so troublen and disquieten man's mind, that quiet
charity can not abide there. For look a little upon the unmercifully man, that
can not forgive, see how he boyleth in his appetite to be avenged. Look upon
the envious stomach, how he without rest freteth, in couetyng the sight of
his hurt, whom he spyteth. Look upon the glotton, how beastly he purueyeth
bealy cheat, Look upon the lecherer, how busy he is in his ungracious
thought. Look upon the covetous wretch, how without reason he scrapeth and
shrapeth for gaynes.

Look upon the ambicious fellow, how he besturrethe him to get worship.
These men through their corrupt fantasies be no less gredie to satisfy
their desires, than the hungrye and the thurstye bodies through natural
necessity seek to be refresshed. Whereof we may se, that slepyng and wakyng
these men's minds roll without taking rest. Such wrastlynge fantasies,
such inordinate appetites be called passions, the which move and stir the
soul contrary to his nature, either by love without reason, or by hate without
measure, when we wyllyngly consent to the wind of these sensyble things.

The mother of all these passions is a parciall love, Parciall love.
that we bear to our self, that is to say, the love of th^s carcas, and of
this life. To kylle in us this mother to all myschefes, our master Christ
teaches us to hate this life, and to set our bodies at naught: He says, Mat.
16.
it is the next way to find life, Mar. 8.
if we set nothing by the loss of this life: Luc. 9.
he says, Io 12.
the caryng for our body imports and brings with hit a mystruste of gods
providence, Mat. 6.
as though ^od had better, Luc. 12.
provided for the state of birds than for man, whom he has created after his
own image. Now then to get this rest, that thereby we may get charity, we
must cast away the love of this life: the which causes all the said
ruffelynge passions, by the which our soul stands in peril of death. For
learn you, that to the soul it is a soore death, to be separated from god.
And these passions be they, that only pluck the soul from god, and causes
the soul to forgete heaven in the busy occupacions of this world, the which
world swarmeth full of deed souls, that night and day trauelyn, and sweatte
in the works of darkness, from whens they shall depart in to an other
darkness endless, never to se the face of god.

And this is the conclusyon of the passionat soul that lies in the fetters of
filthy ^^^tes without rest drawn now hither now thither in a continual
waueryng of vain fantasies. But on the other side the quycke living soul,
that quietly rests in the love of god, dryueth from him by the power of
grace, wherewith he is endued, all these unquiet passions. If he stand in
fear to be moved with uncomely appetytes, he fasteth, he watches, he
laboreth. The man (I say) or woman does this, in whom such a blessed soul
bears rule.

Like wise against anger, wrath, and vain glory he settethe at naught both
honor and dishonor: shame, sclaunder, and worship in this world be
nothing in his reputacion. Against remembrance of displeasures he prays for
his evil wyllers. Such a manner charity teaches and courageth this blessed
soul to be occupied in the mainteinyng and defendyng the minds quietness,
What charity causes.
a thing above all things in this world to be kept warely.

The rest that angels in heaven have, is none other but this, not to be moved
nor sturred with these passions, of loving, of hating, of being pleased, of
being diseased, of trustyng, of lusting, of abhorring, of couetyng, of
refusyng, of reioysyng, of lamentyng, and of innumerable such other, that
scourges and whippeth man's mind by reason of the corrupt affection and love
that he bears in his ytching body, a love most contrary to charity: the
which has as much ease, as that has trouble. You shall here a lesson of our
master Christ, the auctour and preacher of charity: He aduysethe, Mat. 5.
counsaileth, and commands me, Luc. 6.
if I be his disciple, not to resist against evil, to offer my left cheke to
him that has be blowed me on the right, to leave my gown to him that has
taken from me my cote, to walk two miles with him that has vexed me, and
compelled me to walk one mile.

The form of this lesson that Christ here gives, is to enstructe and warn
all christen men, to regard nothing of the body or of the world, above the
rest and quietness of the mind: but that we should suffer the loss of our
goods, with the hurt, ye with the death of our bodies rather then we should
lose any small portion of charity, to be moved with any passion of mind,
whereby our love toward god, might decaie.

It is not possible, after Christ's doctrine, to take in this world by any
kind of vyolence so greatte damage or hurt in body or goods, as is the
least drope of trouble in the mind, where no tyrant, nor the devil him self
has any dominion. For there only rules our own free will: so that if we
will disordre our mind with any passion, we be to our self more violente and
cruel, than the devil can be. Wherefore my good sister, let us believe our
master Christ, and to the death, let us never break peace with god. For
if we do, fare well all rest. We break peace with god, when we turn us for
any cause to the care of this life.

If you feel your self inordynatly moved with displeasante words, with angry
countenaunces, with evil reports, with dyspraises, with rebukes, with falls
sclander, with untrue complaints: beware sister, for surely you be not in
charity with god. If you mumble upon coniectours, if you feed upon suspicions,
if you gnawe upon shrewde tales, if you delight to give taunte for taunte:
beware again good sister, for without doubt, god and you betwayne.

And if you believe the son of god your self with your own will, do more
then any fierce prince over you could do, all though he brought you to
extreme wretchedness, and at the last to the death tourmented your body. It is
with out comparison worse to be set with these passions, than it is to
suffer the panges of death. But at this point peradventure you will say and
ask me: whether we should forsake all the commodities of this world: whether we
should make no force to get such things, as keeps up the welthe of our
body: whether we should utterly refuse all things ordained for this life:
whether we should be clean careless of good name? No no, sister not so. Holly
scripture forbeadeth us nothing, that is for use or profit: as by Christ's
law it is not forbid to eat, to drink, to have and get, wherewith such
sustinaunce may be mainteyned, to get children, to have money, to have
possessions, to be in honor, to be regarded: but the word of god suffrethe
not glottony, and a delight in the belie cheer, nor lechery, and an unlawful
pleasure in bodylye lusts: nor covetousness, nor a gredye desire to be rich:
not vaynglory and a proud desire to be magnified. Likewise the commandment
of god forbeadeth us not the thinking of these and of such other things: but
it is plain contrary to the will of god, that we should with any great
intencion, solicitude, or carfulness of mind, prosecute these bodyly
necessities. And in the having of the goods, promocions, and honors, we may
not judge to be any higher at all, then is to have things for man's necessity:
So that toward them we may not bear any manner of love or affection, but
only we must with such a mind take them to help forth this life, as the
crafts men take the instruments and toles to help their handye works, that
in the having of riches our mind considre nothing, but a plenty of things
apperteinyng to our use and necessytyes. And thus we may both for our self
and for our neighbors bethynke us well, how we shall live: but it may be no
care nor yet any erneste study, least thereby our charity with god be
dimynysshed. For hold fast my sister in your remembrance, that to have and
keep charity with god, To keep Charity with god.
is to love God with your holle heart, with your hole mind, with your hole
power. If any small part of your heart, or of your mind, or of your wit, be
bestowed in any affection or love toward this life: ye mynishe the perfection
of your charity with god, the which requires of you all and hole, to be
without a fellow by him self alone loved.

You may right well sister put your mind and wit to get these things
that mainteyne this life, but it must be done without all love and affection:
there may be no part of love spente in such matters, for your mind can not
with any love and affect labor to get and to hold this worldly commodities,
but in the mean season your charity with god is greatly decayed and welnyghe
broken.

Also you betray your self, to mystruste the promission of god, with the
which mistruste god is most displeased. For there be three causes noted, that
should chiefly move men's minds to desire these worldelye goods: Three mocions
to desire worldly goods.
One is the love of welthe, case, myrthe, and pleasure: An other love of
worship, honor, and glory: the third the doubtefulnes and mystruste of
living here, the which mystrust I say, is worste of all, and much more to
be blamed then the other two. For a fellow set to his pleasure, loves money
to serve him to make merry, and to make therewith good cheer: the other set
upon honor loves the present goods, because by them he would be regarded.
Both these men spend as fast as they get, and small stoore they put in
the vylenes of money: but he that upon mystrust seeks goods, loves then to
hyde them to keep them as well from him self as from other, being ever in
fear, either of famine, scarcenes, or of old age, or of syckenes, or of
tribulacions: and much better confidence and trust he puts in his own
policy and prouysion, then he does in the goodness of god, that made all, and
that nouryssheth us all, not leaving the smalleste gnatte, the least worm or
fly without dyspensacion to have conuement sust^naunce: and of man he clearly
is myndefull, yet man can not trust him. Wherefore the love of this world
upon a mystruste of living, is a thing in the sight of god most detestable.
Thus I say we may use this world, but we may not abuse hit, when for the
world we break charity with god. And if our heart be not hollye given to love
god, we have not god with perfyte charity: god has not our holle heart, if
the world have any part.

This is the way to come to perfitte Charity, The way to comme to perfytte
Charity.
to keep our heart, our soul, our mind, our wit all hole for god: the which
keeping of our heart and mind holle, is the rest and quietness of the soul
from the said temptacions and passions. And this is the dry^yng away of the
lettes and impedimentes to attain charity, whereof now here a little more.

This perfect love of god, makes, as we have said, the mind strong to
withstand the thursting and shulderyng of sin: and the same brings forth
consequently the joyful rest and quietness from the forsaied passions: which
the corrupt love of this life bredeth. So that this calmnes of mind is a
certain effect and work of charity. And hope in god Hope in god.
makes us fyrmely to awayte for the fulfyllyng of the promise of god in us,
and to us: which hope is gotten by patience, that is constante endurynge of
adversity, the which paciente endurynge is purchased with abstinence, that is
a strong resistyng against evil enticementes. And fear of god Fear of god.
causes courage to fly and to abstain from evil, the which fear of god
grows of an undoubted belefe in our master Christ's teaching. Thus from
faith we come to fear, from fear to fleyng of sin, and in fleing of sin,
we take a paciente mind to suffer, whereby we take hope and trust in god,
through the which Hope our soul sytteth in a sure chair of a certain
expectacion of that which is laid up in stor^ for us in heaven: And thereof
finally comes in us this charity, which causes us to love god for his
infinite goodness in the same promise making, whereof now we wait for the
fulfyllyng: the which is also the thing that inforceth and orders all our
thoughts, in such a dew rule, that our life thereby rendrethe in all his
acts a sweet savor both to god and to man. But again let us ones repete the
effect of this lesson: who so ever believes Believe in Christ.
our master, he fears his punysshement, and he that fears to be punyshed
of Christ, refrayneth him self from sensual lusts, the which be the causes
of punysshmente: he that keeps of such causes, abides well and suffers
tribulacion: he that patiently suffers tribulacion, has a blessed hope and
trust in god, the which drawethe and pluckethe the mind from worldly
affections: and the mind ones freely discharged of all love to this world,
streighte takes the pure burning charity toward god, and that makethe
quietness rest and peace in our conscience. Thus every way we must resolve
ourselfe to rest finally in the possession of charity, or else we neither
can believe nor fear Christ, as we ought to do, nor refrain evil lusts,
as we ought to do, nor suffer tribulacions as we ought to do: nor hope in
god as we ought to do, nor leave the love of these worldely dregs as we
ought to do: but in the fame we shall be drowned boothe ^yght and day
during the space (...) without interrupcion of any let in this world. And
touching charity in god the which is utterly to for sake al love of this
world, that thereby we may clean be rydde from all passions to love and
honor god alone, let this that we have hitherto spoken be inoughe.

Now a little harken, what is this saying, to have and keep charity. What is
to keep charity.
Truly hit is to deryue and to take out from our love in god, an other love
toward man for god. For he that has perfect charity in god, loves for
gods sake all men as him self, by cause in man he knowethe is the image of
god, the which image of god, the charitable heart embraces indifferently in
the holle kind of man, without making excepcyon of friend and no friend, of
well wyllers and ennemies, of kynsfolke and strangers: but as the figure of god
is equalle in all, so he equally favors all. For though with obstynate
sinners and with men wedded to their passions he be displeased, yet his
dyspleasure becomes him as a lover that so^oweth his friends hurt. Wherefore
if he be a sinner amended or converted, he is fulle of gladness, and never
cessethe he laiynge his wait and watch to do man good so that by his charity
toward man for gods sake, he continuallye myndeth man well: and thereof he
never slaketh. In vysytynge the sick, in clothyng the naked, in fedyng the
hungrye, in refreshynge the poor, in comfortyng the miserable, in praying for
sinful, in all works of mercy, pity, and devotion, he labors with
pleasure, by reason of his fast love toward god. He freely and gladlye
forgyueth all manner displeasures, of injuries, of rebukes, of hurtes, and so
deep he is in his love, that nothing can cause him to hate. For it is a true
saying, that who so ever felith in his heart any point of hatred, for any
manner of cause, against any manner a man, this person may be assured, that he
is not in charity with god. For our master Christ says: lo. 14. c^. 15.
He that loves me keeps my commandment: my commandment is, that one of you
love an other. Wherefore he that loves not his neighbor (every man is
neighbor unto other, dwelling in the small compass of this earth) keeps
not our masters commandment: and he that keeps not the commandment, can
not love our master Christ, whom he that loves not: loves not god.
Wherefore he that loves not his neighbor, halteth in his Charity toward God.

Thus we may see, that charity in god teaches what is to be done of us
toward man, and ever we be assured to work well, if we keep in us this holy
charity: the which only can keep and knowethe the way how to keep gods
word. It is our master Christ, Mat. 5.
that byddethe us love our ennemies, to do well with them that haten us, to
pray for them that persecute us. Christ thus commands us, to thentent he
would cleanse and rydde us from hatred, from doing injuries, from being
myndefull of displeasures, to have us pure from hate, rancour, anger and
grudging: he commands us to love without excepcion as well our foo, as our
friend. He would have us of our charity in god, to love man after the
ensaumple of god, the which would have all men indifferently to be saved and
come to the light of truth, like as his son shynethe over the good and
euylle, his rain fallethe as well upon the unjust, as upon the just: Ibidem.
so would Christ have us indifferentely sprede our affections to all men,
after the free lyberalle distribucion of charity. For and if you be in this
case, that some persons ye love, some you hate, some you another love nor hate,
sum you love so so, in a mean facion, sum you love veraie ernestly: by
this inequality of loving learn, that you be fare from perfect charity with
god, the which perfect charity indifferentely louethe all men for gods
sake, the good sort of men as his dear friends, the evil sort, as them of
whom may be made dear friends. In charity is no knowladge of any difference
between rich and poor, between master and servant, between bond and free,
between faithful and untrue, between male and female, between kin and no
kin: the charitable spirit lokethe upon man's simple nature, the which in
all men is like and one thing: whereof he conceiueth in his mind one
indifferente contemplacion of all, and at all seasons he is well minded, ever
well dysposed to do all men good with whom is neither english, nor
scottisshe, aquayntaunce nor stranger: but with him one is all and in all,
Christ Jesus alone, whom and whose cross he knows, and nothing else.

Thus by our Charity with god we learn, what is our dueitie toward man. But
here in loving your neighbors and brethren, look you deceive not your self,
for hit is not inoughe to love your neighbor, but ye must in the order and
rule of charity love him, that is only or chyefely, to love him for gods
sake. There be five ways noted of loving one of us an other, of the which
number one way is praised, three be utterly dispraysed, and one neither praised
nor dispraised. First I may love my neighbor for goddis sake, as every good
virtuous man loves every man. Second I may love my neighbor of a natural
affection, because he is my son, or brother, or kynsman. Thirdly I may love
for vainglorye, as if I look by my neighbor to be worshypped or advanced to
honor. Fourthly I may love for covetousness, as when I cheryshe and flatter a
rich manne for his goods, when I make much of them that have done me
pleasures, and may do me mo. The fifte way, I may love for my sensual lust,
as when I love to fare delicately, or else when I mad or dote upon women.

The first way to love my neighbor, for the love I bear to god, Five manner
of loves.
is only worthy to be praised.

The second way naturally deserves neither praise nor dispraise. The third,
the fourth, and the fyfte to love for glory, advantage, or pleasure all three be
stark naught.

Therefore sister, out with your love, and consydre well, in what way your
heart is given to love pour neighbor. Charity has but one way of loving a
man truly an well, that is only for gods sake.

To conclude now this mattier, the which of him self is in sight, let us
knytte up charity with this general knotte, that man is made absolute and
perfect in all virtues, through this one virtue of Charity. But when I say
all virtues, look that you understand what is meant in the name of virtue: or
else this generalle clause may deceive you. Wherefore you must learn, that
the body has his propre virtues, and the soul like wise has his own aparte
from the other. The virtues of the body Uertues of the body.
be, as to fast, to watch, to goo on pylgremage, to trauaille with hand and
foot, for to help their neighbors, to distribute your goods in alms deeds,
to build up churches, wherein the people may here the word of god, and come
together to prayer, to punyshe the flesh with roughe here, to sleep upon the
hard ground, to socour the nedy, to aid the miserable, and other such acts
bodilye men do for the love and honor of god. The virtues of the soul
Uertues of the soul.
be of a another sort, as mekenes, patience, abstinence, hope, faith,
charity, pitye, mercy, and other like. Now if it so be, that of some
infirmitee I can not fast, nor watch, for lack of money I can not do any
alms, for lack of bodily strength, I can not traueyle, if such necessary
and true consideracions make us want the virtues of the body, we be without
blame, and had excused before god, the which beholdethe the secret and privy
cause of our defaulte. But in the virtues of our soul, we have no manner of
defense, if it be so that we lack any of them. For they have no
necessity, nor constraynte of any thing, but all be freely under the election
and choice of our free will. And when it is generally said, that charity
makes a man absolute and perfect in all virtues, ye must understand in all
the virtues of the soul, the which be very virtues, to speak and to name the
truth.

Whereby the body can have of him self no virtue, nor nothing can be done of
the body worthy of praise, onles the act be coupled and joined with the
virtues of the mind. But contrary, the soul is perfect in his virtues
without all assistence and help of the body.

Then boldelye we may say, that from charity comes all virtues, and none
other work there is of charity, than to make and bring forth in us virtue.
It is holy scriptures testimony, that charity can not be idle. Alwaie than a
charitable spirit is doing, and what so ever he does, hit must needs be a
good work. For what can come from the love of god, but it shall sauer and
smelle of god? the which savor is this only thing, that geuethe to man's
act all the goodness.

Now then my entierly beloved sister, to observe and keep this most
precious and most holy charity with god, you shall in few words have a
short rule. The best way to keep you from falling out of charity with
god, is never to suffer your christen neighbor to sleep in a displeasure with
you, and again that you never sleep in a dyspleasure with your christen
neighbor. Remember, we all be knytte in a fast kynrede under one father in
heaven, the which commaundethe us to love together as brethren and systerne,
without regard of high or low, poor or rich, whether your neighbor be in
defaulte, or you, this is to say: whether he be dyspleased with you, or you
with him, make thereof no question, care not for the beginning of wrath, but
study ever for the aid, and incontinently follow alwaie the counsel of our
most charitable master Christ: labor alwaie to make agremente, that at all
seasons you may be redye to offer up to god your sweet smellyng sacrifice,
the which is in goddis sense the delectable sauer of a charitable brethe^
whose strength is so mighty in his pleasant sent, that hit has his place
among the incomparable savors of heaven, where god with all his saints and
angels smells it.

Do you bear away sister the short lesson, that I have given to you?
SVSTER. Which short lesson mean you brother? for partly in writynge,
partly in communicacion I have had many lessons of you: of the which some
I bear well away, as yet it is out of my mind, how you have proved to me,
that a fool should not live solitarye, that I must forgette displeasures, if
I forgive them, that I should ever enclyne and obey more to reason, then to
any entreaty. BROTHER. It is well good sister that you have of these things
remembrance, but I thought not to ask you this: I would you rehearsed to me,
what you have by me learned of Charity. SVS. Why brother, call ye that the
short lesson when it conteyneth so many lines, that it weryed me three days
to read them over? BRO. I think well, that you were weryed, more peradventure
with my vnfauerye tellyng, than with the length of the tale. For surely the
tale was but short. SIS. If that be a short tale, I confess to you brother,
that I can not tell what is short and what is long. For to me your lesson of
charity seemed veraie long. BRO. It is not sister the number of words or of
lines, that makes a tale or a book to be called long or short: But the
mattier that is entreated makes both: so that of some mattier you may in
veraie few words here a veraie long tale, and again of some mattier a
greatte heap of words makes but a short tale. Like as we say of time, that
it is but a lyttel while ago, sins France was under our rule, and that paper,
printynge of books, and gunnes, be things invented within few years, and
that the.iiii. orders of friars began in christendom within a little time
past: yet in each of these foresaied sayings, we understand more than a
hundred years. Contrary wise ye will say, that my lady princes has lain a
great while at Eltham, and yet her grace has not lien there one year. So
you will say, that it is a long season syns you and I were together: and yet I
was with you within this month. When you knock at a door, and tarry one
hour, you say you have veraie long tarried there. Thus you may see, it is
the dignity and the worthynes of the thing, that causes the time to be named
long or short, and not the time of his own space.

In this manner it is in your lesson of charity, the which is a matter so
plentiful, so copious, so long, so large, so deep, so high, that no tale
thereof can be called long, onles the teller tryfle in vain words, and then
you may say this tale is long, because he tells and shows his
folysshenes: but spekyng dyrectly of charity, he never can say to much. For
when we have said all that we can, yet shall the matter of charity lie in
heaps infinite to be spoken more of. For sister, what tongue or pen of man
can make an end in telling the smallest portion of goddis substance? This
charity is god, and God is this Charity. 1. ^o. 4.
Therefore think not your lesson long of charity. For all that I have said,
is in effect nothing. SIS. You have somewhat made me know, what is a long
tale and what is a short: but yet brother, because the common proverb is
true, that women's wits in deed be short, I pray you, if it be possible,
let my lesson be rehearsed in few words. BRO. It is a thing sister, sone
done, to comprehend in a few lines all that you have hard of me. For the sum
of the hole is: This charity contaynethe all the laws of god, and teaches us
our duty both toward God and man: the which charity requirethe a quiet
spirit, and no spirit is quyete, that is subject to any passion.

Wherefore to have charity we must chase from us all passions to rest so in
our love of god, that nothing withdraw us nor pluck us inordinately to any
thought be side god: whereof should follow that in this world, we would
reken laughing to be weeping, sorrow to be myrthe, riches to be poverty,
misery, to be wealth, wisdom to be folly, honor to be shame, so depely we
should be buried in god that to this life our senses should lie deed, and
quick only in the love of god: from the which true and entier love of god,
we should take a love with all hertes affecte to the hole kind of man, in
whom behold spiritually the image of god: For the which image sake we should
bear no less favor to man than were sufficient to resist and utterly
vanquysshe all hate, without the remembrance of any grudge to be taken with
any manner of occasion, to be ever with all men joined in heart through our
love in god, as fast as kynred joins a few persons through a natural love:
yea faster knytiethe men's hertes togythers charity, than nature can do.

This is the some of our lesson sister. The which you shall have again made
short, if you will. SIS. Nay brother, I pray you let this be no shorter. For
in my mind it is all redye somewhat to short. For I would desire you to let
me in order to ask you a repeticion of mine old lesson, that I may in a
short form learn, what was first, what was second, and so forth to the
conclusion of your tale. BRO. I do not yet well perceive, what you would have
me do^ but ask me what you will, and I shall thereto make answer. SIS. Then
brother tell me, what was the first point, that you told me of Charity.
BRO. First I showed to you the significacion of the word, that charity was
not only taken for peace, (...) this rise.
patience, mercy, and pitye, as in our english tongue commenly we use it for
nothing else, as when I say I will not break charity, I will keep
charity, I will forgive him for charity: troth it is that charity
signifies all these, and as I showed to you, much more: for the word in the
same, that is in latin called Charitas, the which signifiethe an ordynate
love, and a due rule toward god and man, the which ordinate love the soul
has, when he holly with all his power is wedded to god: so that beside, he
neither wyllethe nor desyrethe any thing. By the which fervent love in god,
he exercises among men all the kind of virtue. And thus was the first thing
sister, to have you to know, what the word of charity sygnifieth. SISTER.

Me thought brother, that first of all you showed, that charity conteyneth all
gods laws. BRO. I did in deed, to bring you to the sight of the greatte
compass, that was in the name of Charity. whereby you might the better learn
that in english tongue we conceive but a little portion of this infinite
virtue, when we commenly speak thereof. But how so ever I begone, the first
point of your lesson was to learn the strength of charities name. SIS. I
would now ask you the second, if it came not in my mind to doubt, whether
charity and love be not all one, as in communycacion I have hard some
clerks say they be. BRO. I think well some clerks will so say. For I note
in the last english translacion of the gospels out of latin, the translatour
alwaie for Charitas writes Love: wherein I can not consent with him For after
mine opinion there is as much difference between love and charity, as it is in
your occupacion between threde and twined threde. For you will say, that all
twined threde is threde, but all threde is not twined threde: So this word
Love is more commen and more general then is charity. For troth it is, that
all Charity is love: but it is not truth, that all love is charity. In
greek charity is agape, and love, is eros, as in latin love is amor, and
charity is Charitas. In all these three tongues there is the same difference in
the tone word from the the other, that is a pen and a quylle. All our pens
for the most part be quylles: but all our quylles be not pens: The quylle
is that remains in his nature, without any other facion or form put to it:
the pen is a quille shaped, and formed, and made apt to write. Like wise
love is the common affecte of favor: charity is love reduced in to a due
order toward god and man, as to love god alone for him self, and to love man
for gods sake. Do you perceive sister what I say?

SVS. Me thinks brother, that you mean as I would say, that between
charity and love is a like difference, as is between my perles and wiers. For
I see that my pierles be wiers, but they have a facion by my labor put to,
the which facion wyers have not.

And here may I say as you said of Charity and Love, that al pierles be
wyers but all wyers, be not pierles: But brother, if all charity be love, what
defaulte put you in the translatour, the which writes love for Charitas.
BROTHER.

The same defaulte I put in him, that you would put in one, the which does give
to you wiers for pierles, or quyls for pens. But sister remember, you would
have me be short. SIS. It is truth brother: but the best shortenesse is to
be plain. For when I understand my lesson, I can soon make hit short.
Now then if you will, I pray you tell me the secounde point.

BRO. The second was to show you, that charity could not be had without the
assured minds quyetnes, as an effect following the same, the which steadfast
quietness of mind is not to be inordinatlye styrred or moved with passions.

SIS. Saving your tale brother: I pray you tell me some english word what
you call passion.

For truly I know no another passion but the passion of Christ.

BRO. Than I have lost many words. For I thought I had sufficiently
declared unto you, that any mouynge of the mind in to an ungodly desire, was
called a passion, as malice, rancour, ire, envy, ambicion, couetousenes,
letchery, glottony, pride, hatred, study of praise, study of auengynge, and
such other, which stir up and move the mind out of his natural rest, to
love or to hate without reason and measure: As when our body suffers any
tourment, we say, we be in a passion: so when our mind suffers any such
inordinat desires, we have the minds passion: and every such mocion of mind
out of due course is called a passion. The mind is moved out of his due course,
as often as hit is stirred with these affectes, that be engendered of our
principal love to this life, as to be dispraised with our dispraises or
sclaunders is a thing that ryseth in us from the love of this life, where if
we study to be magnified, we be in a soore passion against reason, the which
teaches us to seek our glory in more stable things, then can be found in
this life. But because you speak of the word, shortly as you say, it is no
veraie english word: how be it when we be driven to speak of things
that lack the names in our tongue, we be also driven to borowe the words,
that we have not, sometime out of latin, sometime out of greek, even as the
latin tongue does in like necessity borowe and take of other. And though
now at the first hering this word stands straungely with you, yet by use
it shall wax famyliar, specially when you have it in this manner expressed unto
you.

Now then to obtain this rest of mind, the chief effect of charity, we
must beware that no passion rule in us, but always in all things we must
order our desires by the draughte and train of this one desire, the which we
have for loving god alone with all our holle hertes, power, wits, and
intellygence, never suffering aduisedlye the corrupt love of this false
flattering life, to have any small place in our soul, whereby we should wax
the weaker in the full vniyng and knittyng of all our intencions to the will
and pleasure of god. And sister, it was the second part of your lesson. SISTER.

Ye brother I would I had learned well, that I might ever be quiet, how so
ever I were handeled, ryghtwisely or vnryghtwisely, well or evil, gentilly or
chorlishly.

It were an angels condition to be nothing changed or moved with well or woo:
but to be continually in one tenure, in one temperature, neither heryng, nor
seeing, nor felyng, nor smelling, nor tastynge, nor wysshynge, nor myndyng any
erthly thing besides god, but having continually a fervent desire to know, to
love, and to honor god. But brother, what mean you by this, to speak thus,
as though it were possible, to make of men aungelles, and more over to make of
this world heaven? as long as man is man, and as long as this world is this
world, I reken hit not possible to keep us thus clean from passions, as you
say the perfect rest of charity requires. BRO. You enter with me now
sister, into a mattier of a long communicacion, but at this time I will make
you thereto a veraie short answer.

Christ would never teach man to pray, and to ask of god things impossible
to be opteined.

He instructed us to say in our prayer, Adueniat regnum tuum. Mat. 6.
O lord god let thy kingdom be here amongst us. Where the kingdom of god
is, there god reygneth over such subjects, as be worthy to have such a
king: and plainly there is heaven, where so ever is the kingdom of god: So
that of this world, there might be made an heaven.

Again our master and savior taught us to pray, Fiat uoluntas tua sicut in
caelo et in terra, Oh good lord grant, that thy will may be fulfilled in
this world, as it is in heaven: that we men may in every thought and act
agree with thy will, as aungelles do: that we in this life make no more
resystence against thy pleasure, then the blessed company of heaven does. This
peticion can not take effect onles man be made like an angel, all pure and
clean from the dreggy appetites of this life: that is to say, utterly rid
from all passions, the which ever strive against the will of god.

Now than in as much as I believe, that Christ byddeth us ask nothing, but
the same may be: I think it possible to make of this world the kingdom of
god, and to make men the kepers of goddis will: The which two things, to live
in the kingdom of god, and to observe and keep gods will, I reckon to be a
perfection of angels life in heaven.

But sister, remember, Christ byddethe us not to attempt to perform this
perfection by our own power: for that were plainly impossible, but it is our
masters instruction, that we should turn us in prayer to god, and of his
infinite goodness crave and ask his grace, whereby we shall be comforted,
sustained, and coraged to say at the last with saint Paul,

We be able to do all in him, that helps us Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 4.
This were to have our spirit holly given to serve god, to know god, to love
god, and nothing else.

And if you would say, that sainct^ Paul came not to this perfection, nor
none of the saints, but the best men were sinners, let it so be: yet be
assured, if man duly apply his will, to be without sin, so that in his will
be no lack nor faynyng, this man before god is an angel. And sister, as he
shoteth nerer the mark, then he does that sees none, and shoteth at all
adventures: so you seeing now and knowing the veraie perfection of charity, you
shall the better enforce toward it, than if you were beset with blind
ingnoraunce. Of all this matter sister, with you I will not reason out of your
Pater noster, the which I think is enough for your requests at this time.
SIS. I hold me contented brother, and pray I will first, that I may think
possible to be thus perfect. Next that I may have grace to enforce
thytherwarde the virtuous power of my heart. BRO. There is no more required of
you, but this appliyng of your will to get grace, but grace shall you never
get, but if you ask it without any doubt or mistruste in the goodness of god,
who is ever redye to give, when he hereth one, that accordyngly asks.

And to show you what prayer is shaped accordyngly to goddis ears, it were a
mattier for no little book. Therefore sister, be contented to leave your
digressions, and return to your purpose. SIS. I have no purpose, but to
learn, and learn I should if you taught me to pray. Ye lest I trouble you
to to much, I will go forth, to require of you what was the third point in
my lesson of charity.

BRO. It was to show, that charity is not like one virtue, Charity is not
like one virtue
but it is such a thing, that by many degres of diverse virtues, it must be
gotten, as a fynalle conclusion of all labor and travail in virtue. As first
we must be endued with a undoubted Faith, to believe perfectely the history
of our savior: whose doctrine brought first into this world this charity
for an absolute conclusion of al laws. After this faith we must enter into a
fear of god Fear of god.
not the fear of vile bondmen, the which have no mind to keep their masters
pleasure, but only look upon the punishment, our fear must be a reverence to
god, like as loving children fear to displease their fathers.

By this reverent and loving fear we must proceed to Abstinence, Abstinence
that is to say, we must bear such fear and reverence to God, as shall cause
us for the honor of god, to refrain the sensual inticementes of sin, the
which bespottethe, deformethe, and defeatethe the image of god in us, the
greattest evil that man has. To keep this abstinence we must gather
Pacyence, Patience.
a virtue that makes strong our soul, to suffer the violence of all
resistance to virtue, by the which patience we shall take an hope to be part
takers of gods mercifulness, and to enjoy a reward, that passes all the
powers of men, to show it. Out of this spryngeth a feruente love to god,
which is called charity, through which the mind shall be seteled in such
a quietness, that all the chaungeable and sundry blastes of this world, shall
nothing move as from our desire to rest in god: And this minds rest and
perfect quietness is the pryncypall effect of charity, the conclusion and
final perfection of all virtue.

I will now end these mattiers, with a wonderful praise, that the chosen
vessel of god saint Paul writes of charity, of the which praise I would
have you sister note and mark diligently, what a dignity is in charity, to
be above all things pondred and regarded of all Christen men: This apostle
says in effect thus. If almighty god the father would give to me all gifts
of his grace, as to endue me with the holy spirit of prophecy, to make me a
privy counsailor of all the secret mysteries in heaven, 1. Col. 13.
to cause by the power and strength of faith to work wonders, to do miracles
in quicknynge the deed, in gyuinge sight to the blind, yet all this not
withstanding, I am not in the way of salvation, if I want charity. How
much then should man bestow, endeavor, enforce, and exercise all his wits
to get and keep the possession of this high virtue, the which (...) the
soul of life, the grace (...) ^aces, the one thing that ^^nethe man in favor
with god, and that god only requires of man for all his goodness toward man:
It is such a thing th^s charity, that by the auctoritee of holy writ, I will
not only call this virtue a godly thing, but I sai it is god him self, that
who so ever keeps him in charity, he has god with him: 1. Io. 4.
and he in god dwells, that dwellethe in charity. For both god is charity
and charity is god: to whom now and evermore be all glory, praise, and
honor.

Amen.
FINIS.
Thus ends this tre^tyse of Charity.
An exhortacion to young men.
IT HAPPENS at this time (my herty beloved Edmond) that I am in such place,
where I have no manner of books with me, to pass the time after my manner and
custom. And though I had here with me plenty of books: yet the place
suffers me not to spend in them any study. For you shall understand, that
I lie waitynge on my lord Cardinal, whose hours I must observe, to be
alwaie at hand, lest I be called, when I am not by: the which should be
straight taken for a fault of greatte negligence. Wherefore, now that I am well
saciated with the beholdynge of these gaie hangynges, that garnyshe here every
wall: I will turn me and talk with you. For you must know, that my mind
has long coueted, to show what affecte I bear toward you: the which
hitherto paraduenture I never uttered unto you so plainly, that you might
take thereof any perfect knoweladge. And that I so did keep in, such outward
tokens, whereof when you were with me, you should have perceived my love: the
cause was none other, but that in deed, I loved you. For long I have been taught
that the master never hurts his scholar more, How masters hurt their
scholars most.
than when he utters and shows by cheryshing and cokeryng, the love that he
bears to his scholars. I think you lacked with me no cherishing, but of
cokering you had veraie little, because I was loathe to hurt you: the which
lothnesse came, I say, of that I loved you. But now in as much you be of age,
and also by the common board of houselynge admitted in to the noumbre of men,
to be no more in the company of children, and specially for as much as my
rule over you is ceased, I will not defer any longer the expressing of mine
heart, that no less loves and favors you, than if nature had made you,
either my son or my brother. For this alwaie is my mind, if I have a friend, in
whom I find such faith, and honestee, that I inwardly joy in heart with him: I
reken straight, that al his be mine without any excepcio^: True frendshyp.
So that in very deed I take to my care, as mine own, all things that be in
my friends care.

This mind had I to my friend Andrewe Smythe, whose son, Christofer your
fellow, I ever took for my son: and now I think plainly, that he is so in
very deed. This strength has true love in frendeshyp, the which has
likewise joined your father in such manner to my heart, that me think you
should be no more his son than you be mine. And though I can suffer your father
to take the rule of you, more then I do: yet I can not suffer, that he should
care more for your profit than I do. For as I desire and wysshe, that you
never have need of me: so surely if you ever should have, it should well
than appear, that as nature has given you one father, so your fathers
frendeship has provided for you an other father. Wherefore good Edmonde, reken
no less affecte in me to do you good, than is in your own father, whose only
study and care is, to se you grow and prosper toward the state of an honest
man: and I to further you to the same, am as desirous as he is. and as much as
I can, I will help you both with my counsel and power, such as I have.

If you will call to your mind all the fraies, that have been between you and me,
or beetwene me and Smith, you shall find, the causes ever depended of a care,
I had for your and his manners, when I saw certain fantasies in you or him,
tha^iarred from true opinions, the which true opinions, True opinions.
above all lernyng, I would have masters ever teach their schoolers. But now
that you be of better habilitee to take counsel, I will begin to show you
my mind, in staiyng you for the hole course of your life, that you may in time
learn, what is to be done, to be a good and an honest man. You be yet in the
first enter of your life, and now is the time to have a guide, that may
faithfully conducte you in the right way. For there be so many paths, and for
the most part all by paths be more worn with the steps of your foregoers,
than is the veraie true pathe of living: that if you go alone you may
paraduenture long wander out of the streighte way. Wherefore as nere as I can,
I will in few words apoynte unto you certain marks, upon the which if you
dilygently look, you can not err nor fail of the way, that leadethe to the
reward of an honest good man, whose virtue sauoureth pleasauntly to heaven,
pleases the world, and nourishethe him self with an incomparable delight and
gladness, that continually reigns in his clean and pure conscience. With
these marks and tokens, the which I would you looked still upon, I will
assign you certain auctors, in whose works I would you should bestow your
lesure, when you may have time to read, that by them you may at the fulle
be instructed in all things apperteinyng to virtue: and in all your life I
would you meddled not greatly with any other books, then with these, that I
shall name unto you: It is not the readyng of many books, that gets increase
of knowladge and judgment: for the most part of them, that redeth all
indifferently, confound their wits and memory without any notable fruit of
their readyng. It must be a dilygente reader, that shall take the profytte of
his labor and dilygence. No man (specially of them that have other
occupacions) can use readyng, but in very few works, the which I would
should be piked out of the best sort: that the fruit of the reders diligence
may be the greatter. I see many lose their time, when they think to bestow
their time best: because they lack judgment or knowladge, to pike out the
books, the which be worthy to be studied. And in every thing, an order well
observed, brings more prof^te than any labor or peme beside. Wherefore my
good withipol, take heed to my lesson. I am in doubt, whether you have any
other lover, that can and will show you a like tale: but well I am assured,
that you have none, that can thus teach you with a better will, to have you
take profytte by him, than I do: and of me how long you shall have this use,
it is in gods will to determyne: As much as lies in me, I will now procure
and provide, that these letters shall keep to your use the su^me of my
counsaille, by the which if you order your will, I put no doubt, but first
the grace of god shall be roted in you, and next you shall live with a merry
heart, and finally never to lack the commodities requisite for the short time
in this world. In the which case you shall opteine the worship and dignitee of
a goodde and an honest man, whose conditions I had rather see you have with
pouertee, than in great abundance to be a man of small honestee. You may be
good, honest, and rich, and so study to be, orels think never of riches: for
otherwise you shall deceive your self, and do contrary to that way, that as
well worldly wisdom, as the truth of our faith shows you. But now here
what I say.

First and last (mine own good withipol) remember earnestely to have in your
mind three certain things, the which be of such valor, that he that
forgets either their dignity and nature, orels the degrees and order of
them: he can not please neither god, nor himself, nor the world. I say,
in all the course of your life, there he three things to be looked so upon,
that the first of them must be first of you regarded: the second next^ after,
and the third in his place after the second. Beware, as of dedely poison, that
you ruffil not than without care, one before the other, as to take the.iii. in
the place of the first, or the secounde after the third, or both the second
and the third before the first. In this conclusion you shall (as I have said)
both offend god and displease your self, and also nothing content the world.
Like as the most part of men now a days treaspasse all for the rechefulnes
and negligence in not keeping these.iii. things, under the dignitee and degree
according as they ought to be observed and kept. And what be we (my good
Edmond) if we be out of god des fauour^ odious to our self, and dispiteful to
men. Therefore again I exhort you, to the entente you may eschew this
abominable condition, and grow to be admitted in the blessed noumbre of them
that rest in the grace of god, in the ^lennes of their conscience, and in the
favor of the world, to be judged a good, a wise, and an honest man. For
this final end mine exhortacion is now, that you in all your acts, in the
hole course of your life, remember these three things, that I will rehearse
unto you. But I say to you, that you must not only remember these three
things, but also specially have in mind the degres of them: so that ever the
first of them be cheifely in your thought above all other: and than in his
place put the second, and let not the third be regarded, but as his place
requires, that is, when you have done with the first, and also with the
secounde. There lies more weighte and valor upon the knoweyng and keeping of
this tale, that I shall tell you: then if I could show you the way within few
months, to be a man of great power, both in excedyng abundaunce of riches,
and also in passing auctortie of rule. Therefore as well for the fruit, that
follows, if you do after mine exhortacion, as for the infinite hurtes, that
you can not escape, if you should forget that I sai: I warn and warn you a
gain, here this lesson with a glad ear, and print the same in your mind, to
execute with lively diligence the effect of this cousail, wherein is contained
your life and death, your joy and sorrow, as well in this world, as in that
shall be hereafter: These.iii. things, be the Soul, Soul.
the Body, and the Substance of this world. The first place has by good reason
the Soul, seeing it is a thing immortal, that is created and made after the
figure and shape of almightye god. The next and second room has the Body,
Body.
as the case and sepulture of the soul, and nereste servant to the secrets
of the spirit. The third room occupiethe the riches and goods of this world,
Goods of this world.
as ye necessary instruments or toles for the body, the which can not want
nor lack such things. Let than the eye of your inward mind first and
chiefly ever behold the first thing in you, y^ is your Soul: Next thereto have
a respect to your body: and thirdly consider y^ world: care for your Soul, as
for your chief jewel and only trea sure. Care for your Body, for the souls
sake. Care for the world, for the bodies sake. Beware above all things, that
you go not back ward, as he does, that cares first to be a rich man, next
to be an helthy man, and thirdely to be a good man: where he should do clean
contrary, first to study for goodness, next for health, and then for welthe.
You see so great blindness among men, that some folk so cares for riches, that
very little they look for the health of the body, and nothing at all they mind
the state of the soul. I say to you, some folks do thus, I would to god I
might not truly report, that for the most part all men in manner now a
days do no notherwise. Look upon either the spiritual sort or the temporal,
and much a do you shall have, in the great swarming multitude of this blind
sort, to find out them that first above all things care for their soul,
next for their body: and thirdly for goods of this world. You shall se
merchants spare no travail nor ieo pardie of the body, to get these goods.
They be (to say the troth) so occupied in the study of this third thing,
that scante they have time to care for the second: and as for the first they
pass nothig thervpo^, it seems a thing lest in their thought, where, of
conuenienci the same care, studi^ and thought, that they give to the opteining
of these worldly goods, they should spend it all in the maintenance of the
first thing, that is the Soul: and the small littel regard, that they take
for the first, should be bestowed for the third: and more than they do, they
should cherisshe the second.

The same confusion is with us scholars, Sholars.
for our first studi is to get promocion, to get these goods, to live
welthily. In this care we busily be occupied continually. Somewhat more we
cherisshe our bodies than does the merchant: but our cherisshing is for the
longer use of these goods, not as it should be for the souls sake. And as for
the soul we have as litel regard as other men have, although we speak thereof
more than paraduenture other men do.

This ouerthwarte confusion of these three things marrethe all. And plainly I
may sai, that al mischeife comes only of this misorder, that we put the
chief care of our study to the third thing, and not to the first, as of
duit^e, we ought to do the contrary. If my purpose were to show you, what
other men do, and not rather what I would have you do: I would further
proceed to express unto you, how far out of square our life is now a days:
and how blessed a life we should have in this transitory world, if the care
of our soul were first and cheifelye in men's minds, like as the care of the
worldely substance occupies our hertes above all other things. If it were
as it ought to be, that in our fantasy reigned the study for the Soul,
thanne should be here that celestial kingdom, the which Christ teaches us
to pray for in our Pater noster, Where we crave of God, that his rule and
reign may come among us. But as I despair, that commonly this study and
care can not be changed from these worldly riches to the soul: so I am full
of good hope, that you will take heed to your life, to order therein your
desires, in this due manner, more re^ar^g^ng what should be done, then what is
done. When you see and know the right pathe, I trust you will not walk in the
crooked h^e way. The troth shall more draw you to love and to follow virtue,
than the common ensaumple shall entice you to follow vice, the which no man can
love, not the s^nner him self. But now my own good Edmond here of these three
things somewhat more you must prynt in your mind, with a perfect persuasion
that your soul is the chief treasure, that you have: whereupon your continual
thought and care must be, to keep it, to defend it, to nourishe it, to
comfort it, by all ways and means possible for you. In this study you must
spend all your wits, night and day you must think on this thing, what so
ever you do, you must dyrecte your act to this thing. If you be occupied in
the state of your body, either to drive away sickness, or to sustain
health, let it be for the service your body owes to the soul. If you
travail for goods of this world, to get your own living, or to help your
friend, or else to provide for your children, when god shall send you them:
let your travail be for the necessities of the body, and so finally for the
soul. Consider what the goods of the world be, how they be but
instruments for the body. Use than the world in his kind. Look again upon
your body, how it is preciouser than the goods: use him than in his
worthynes, and hurt not your body for a thing of less value. And as ye have
nothing, another your body nor your goods, to be compared with the dignitee
of your soul: so my sweet Withipol, let nothing be in your reputacion above
this chief and principal jewel, the which must only for him self be cared
for, and al other things in this life, must be cherisshed for it. I stick
much with you in repetyng one thing, but marvel not though I so do: for I
see us all in this world so blinded, partly by a use and custom from the
cradill, in the magnifiyng of these goods, partly by the insaumple of them,
with whom we be daiely conuersaunt: that scant after long criyng, it can now
be hard, that the Soul must be cheifely cared for. And except grace work
with you, that you your self will consent to the truth, it is not possible
to persuade you, that the vcrie true way of living is this, to care cheifely
for the soul, and to care for all other things only for the souls sake.
This saying though it be true, yet I say, it can not be hard: in as much
the lives of all them, with whom ye shall be continually conuersaunt, shall
cry out clean contrary against my saying. For on all sides you shall see men
sweatyng in a continual work, both of body and of mind, to get these
worldely goods, without any mention made of the Souls state, the which the
veraie friars care little for, as it openly appears. But ever I say to you,
look what christen men should do, and if you se men so do, be glad of that
sight, and follow the same: if you se the contrary, flee from the ensaumple,
and cleave ever fastely to the troth with a sorrowful heart for the loss of
other men that so blyndely rushe forth in the train of a vicious living,
where the Soul, is so lyttel cared for.

That this first thing may be the better in your study, I will briefly
touch somewhat of two things that appertain hereto: to have you know what
nourishes and comforth the Soul, and what hurts and noyeth the same. The
Soul can not but ever live, it has no end of living: yet we may say,
that the soul lives and dies? It lives in the grace of god, and dies in
the malice of the devil. The Souls life is the light of virtue: his death is
the darkness of sin. You have a free will given you, Free will.
whereby you may either quicken or slaie at your own pleasure, your Soul in
the bryghte paradyse of life, and you may set your soul in the black dungeon
of death. Let therefore this will of yours ever study to procure for the
souls life, the which is your own life: and in the same study you shall
deliver the soul from his death, the which is the perpetual pain ordained
for sin, that seperateth the image of god from his patron. I say, sin
plucketh your soul from god, whose image your soul should bear. Therefore in
all your acts so do, that you willingly displease not god: who can not be
pleased but with a pure and clean conscience: pure and clean if you suffer no
sin to remain so long in your desire and mind, that it cankarethe the
thought. Your thought is cankared with the long residence of sin, when
either you be weak in the study of virtue, or else make veraie littell of a
fault, or defend your vice, or nowsel your self in a custom of an inordinate
desire. The frailenes of our flesh is so great, that it can not be, but that
sin shall come to our desire: but it is our blame, if sin tarry and abide
with in us. God has given us a mighty power over our self: we may when we
will correct our desires, and drive out all sin. If you know not what is
Sin, nor what is virtue: by the fear and love of god you shall know both.
The fear of god Fear of god.
will teach you to fle sin, and follow virtue. The love of god Love of god.
will teach you to follow virtue, and slay sin: whereby your preuie and
secret conscience shall better and more clearly perceive, what is to be done,
and what is not, than any diffinicion or descripciou can appoynte out to you.
Therefore my dear Withipol, enwarpe your self fast and sure in the fear and
love of god, from your first rysyng to your rest, draw forth the day in all
your business, as this loving fear and fearful love shall secretly admonish
and warn you: and die rather than you would pursue any lust against your
knowladge of gods pleasure.

What marchandyse so ever you occupy, remember, it is the business of the
third care, for the which you may not leave any point of this first care,
that belongs to the soul. Likewise if ye be occupied about the body,
remember, it is the work of the second care, the which also must be ordered
unto the first, the which first must alwaie stick in your mind, sturred up
and led in all desires and appetites by the said fear and love of god. Do
never that thing, wherein you fear gods displeasure.

More particularly in wrytynges you shall learn this lesson, if you would some
time take in your hands the New testamente, New testament.
and read it with a due reverence. For I would not have you in that book
forget, with whom you talk. It is god that there speaks, it is you a poor
creature of god that readethe. Consider the match, and meke down your
wits. Presume not in no case to think, that there you understand ought:
leave deuisyng thereupon: submit your self to the exposicions of holy doctors:
and ever conform your consent to agree with Christis church. This is the
sureste way that you can take, both before god and man. Your obedience to the
vniuersalle ^aithe shall excuse you before god, although it might be in a
faulse belefe: and the same obedience shall also keep you out of trouble in
this world, where you see, how folisshe medlars be daiely sore punisshed,
both to their own undoing and also to their great sorrow and lamentyng of
their lovers and friends. Surely the troth is, as I have said, that it is
your part to obey, and to follow the church: so that both for your souls
sake, and for your bodily quietness, with the comfort of your friends, I
exhort you to meddle in no point of your faith, otherwise than the church
shall instruct and teach you. In the which obedience read for you increase
in virtue, the story of our master Christ, that lively expresses the hole
course of a virtuous life. And there you shall here the holy ghost command
you, to seek first before al things, Math. 6.
the king dome of heaven, Luc. 12.
and than (says the spirit of god) all other things appertaining to the
body and world, shall by them self follow without your care.

In reading, the gosples, Readyng the gospels.
I would you had at hand Chrysostom Chrisosto^.
and Ierom, Ierom.
by whom you might surely be brought to a perfect understanding of the
text. And hereafter at leisure, I would you read the Ethikes of Aristotell,
Ethica. Arist.
either under some expert philosopher, or else with comment of Futtiracius.
And let Plato Plato.
be familiar with you, speacially in the books that he writes De re pu^ica.
Also you shall find much for your knowladg in the moral philosophy of
Cicero. Cicero.
as in his books De officns, de senectute, de Fato, de Finibus, de Achademicis
question. de Thusse. Speacially read with diligence, the works of Seneca,
Seneca.
of whom ye shall learn as much of virtue, as man's wit can teach you.
These works I think sufficient, to show you what is virtue, and what is
vice: and by readyng of these you shall grow into a high courage, to rise in
a judgment above the common sort, to esteem this world according to his
worthiness, that is far under the dignity of the virtues the which the mind
of man conceiuethe and reioyseth in, these books shall lift you up from the
claie of this earth, and set you in a hill of high contemplacion: from whens
you shall look down, and despise the vanitee, that folysshe men take, in the
deceitful pomp of this short and wretched life. Mo books, I will not advise
you, for your souls study, to read, than these, except it be Enchiridion,
Enchiridion.
that Erasmus writethe, a work doubtless, that in few leaves contains an
infinite knowladge of goodness. Think not my good Edmonde, that I ouercharge
you. For I know, what pleasure you have in readyng: and in better books you
can not bestow your pleasure, than in these, the which be in noumbre but
few, and yet they shall do you more good than the readyng here and there, of
many other. I would to Jesus I had in your age followed like counsel, in
readyng only these works, the which now at last by a great loss of time in
readyng of other, I have chosen out for my purpose, to refresshe with them the
rest of my life. And I counsel you now to begin to do the same, when time
and conueniente leisure shall be given you to read any book.

The second care is for the Body, Bod^y h^lthe.
the which you must cherisshe as much as may stand with the service of
your fourmer thought and study for your chief treasure. Have a respect to
keep your body in good health, the which rests in the air, and in your
diete. Diete.
Abide not where corrupcion Corrupt (...).
or infection is: Eat not, nor drink not out of time or measure: nor yet of
such meats and drinks, as be more delicate and pleasant, than wholesome. Know
the measure of your stomach before you ouerlade your bealy. Choke not your
appetite, but feed your hunger. Drown not your lust, but quench your thirst,
and ever for your souls sake, keep you from gluttony. Fast Fast. Sleep.
sometime, both for devotion and also for your health: Sleep Sleep.
rather to little than to much, as much as you take from sleep, so much you
add to your life. For sleep is death for the time. Exercise Exercise.
you continually: for in labor, your body shall find strength: and lustines
is gotten by the use of your lymmes. Let never the son rise before you: you
shall have to all your affairs the longer day: and ever for your souls sake,
flee from idelnes, Idelnes.
the which is not only in him that does nothing, but also in him that does
not well: and idell you be, when you be not well occupied. Temperans.
Be temperate in your lusts, touching the bodily pleasure: the time shall not
be long, till your friends by goddis grace, will provide you of an honest
mate. In the mean season let the fear and love of god keep you in
chastitee, the which apperteineth to your chief care^ for needs you must so
do, saying that otherwise lechery shall sore defoyle your soul, the which you
must regard before the bodies appetite. For this part I would you read, as
your leisure shall be, a littell work of Galen De bona valetudine tuenda.
Galen. De bona valetud. tuen.
And in the works before named, you shall find many things, that shall
instruct you well for this part also, and like wise for the third, the which
third ever has occupied men's stomachs more than either the first or the
second. Wherefore as well in holy scripture, as in the other philosophers, and
speacially in Seneca, Seneca.
you shall find many lessons, that appertein to the third care. This third
care is for the goods in this world. In this part I can give you small
advise of my self, because I have had but small experience herein: yet ever I
see, that you may not in the study of getting these goods, leave or slack
the chief care, for the first thing, nor yet the secondarie care for the
body. Labor you must for your living in a due order, as in the third degree
of your things, If matens mass or a sermon be to be hard, set your
marchaundise aparte for the season, and prefer the matens of your soul, that
looks to have such goostly fode. If the time require to have you take a mele,
either a diner or a supper for your refection, let not your marchaundise
differ the going thereto in a due time. For remember, that business is one
degree above your merchandise. Alme^ deed.
If you espy a poor man to be in need of your help, have to help him before
any care of making a bargain, for that work of mercy pertemeth to your
chief jewel: and therefore your soul shall grow in the grace of god Brcke not
much, to the hurt of your health, the conuemente time of going to bed for any
occupacions or rekeninges in your study for these goods. For remember, that
rest and sleep. Sleep.
pertain to the second thing, where your countyng books belong to the
third. In making your bargain, Bargain.
keep faith and promise, deceive no man with any guile or false color. For
let it be ever in your fantasy, how the games that you should get with
such untrue dealyng, be contemed under your third, that is to say, under
your lest care, where the breaking of faith and promise, with false deceit
and untrue delyng, sore hurts your soul: in whom restethe your chief
thought. And by false head, you could not get so much of riches, as by the
same you should lose of honestee and goodness.

Wherefore travail ever as the degrees of these three things shall require. If
an infinite hepe of worldly goods might be got with a small hurt and damage
of the soul, forsake rather that greatte heap, than you would suffer this
small hurt. There can be no comparison between the souls health and the
riches: the lest drop that can be of your souls part, must pondre and wey
more in your thought, than all this world beside can do.

Let not any similitude Similitudes.
deceive your judgment. As if par case a man would reason, that the goods of
the soul be all gold, the goods of the world be all lead: although that
gold is ever better than lead, yet there may be a great quantitee of lead,
that shall be valured above the small portion of gold. So in your fantasy
a great gains and lucre of the worldely goods may seem better than a small
point of our souls substance. Wherefore he will conclude, that with a
lyttelle loss of honestee or goodness, we may venture to get a great
advantage in this world: and some littell small portion we may borowe of our
soul, to win by that means a great sum of riches. Beware good Withipol, of
such reasoning, and to the death to gain all the holle royaltee of this hole
world, never trespass against your soul in the smalleste jot that can be
imagined, As if ye might be made a lord of great might and power, with
abundance of possessions and goods, only for the speaking in witness of one
word against the truth, with grudge of your conscience: forsake you all
that offer, rather than you would feale the priuey bit of your offense. For if
you look well, you shall se, that there is a greatter value of gains in the
smallest jot of virtue, than is in the most power of riches: and that the
loss of the smallest mote, perteinyng to your souls state, is more hurt and
damage, than the refusyng or forgoynge of all that is under heaven. So that I
say, it is not like between the souls goods, and the goods of this world,
as it is between gold and lead valured above a penny weight of gold: where
there is no title ^o small of virtue, that is not to be valuted without
comparison above the hole power of the earth and seas, throughout Asia, Africa,
and Europa The proof of my saying depends hereupon, that every jot, every
title, every mote of virtue, wherein is contained the souls welthy state, has
appointed his propre state and place in the heaven and kingdom of god: and all
the spiritual goods, both small and great be under god, of whom virtue
receives her reward: Of the which reward he that leseth any manner portion,
losethe more than the loss of the holle domynion and reule of this world,
whose prince is the devil, Dyuell.
that reigns over all them, as over his bond servants, the which can f^nde
in theyrhertes to forsake ve^tue, to win these faulse and vain goods, that
stand to us in no erthly stead: but for the short time of a few years in
this life, where the possessions of virtue be everlasting. Thus I show you
good Edmonde, that your care to get these worldly goods must be subdued under
dew order, as in this third place. But what be these goods, and what way you
may lawfully get them, I doubt not, but your father will in time conuement
show you. He is of that sort of men, the which has by long approved
honestee, purchased him a good name, and is thereby beloved and regarded of
good men: Whose steps if you follow, you shall by gods grace come to like
worship, and be of like or more habilitee to leave to your children
sufficient to pass this life with. Here remember, the more your father
louethe you, the less is your third care: and the less that your third care
is, the more leisure you have to think upon your chief jewel, the which
god has given you to be ordered after your will, in the which jewel, you
shall after this life well passed, have the fruicion of gods presence, wherein
restethe the joy ineffable of the blessed lammes. The gotes, that is to say,
the gredie souls of this third care, the which never minds, or veraie
littell and weakly minds the first care, shall remain for ever more in the
peinfull darkness, where is nothing but criyng out and lamentyng, with frettyng
of stomachs, and snarring of teth, as the gosple shall teach you? Math. 8.
In the which book of god, Luc. 13.
you shall here what an hard thing it is for a rich man to enter in to
heaven: Math. 19.
because that most commonly rich men spend all their care and thought out of
order, only for this world, and seldom or never they think of theyrsoule:
and when they think thereof, they so think, that they put that care far
under the care of these worldely businesses, doing clean contrary to this
order. The which god would have us to keep. The which order though you
shall see veraie littell regarded of all sorts of men, yet good Edmond regard
you it, and have pity of them that regard it not. It is the son of god, the
which says, Math. 20. and. 22.
Many be called to heaven, but few be chosen. Enforce your self to be
among the few, and forsake the multitude. Be not drawene to an yuell opinion,
neither with the ensaumple of popis cardinals and priests, nor with the
ensaumple of princes lords knights gentilmen and marchantes, nor yet with the
ensaumple of monks, and friars. You may by your self know what is the right
pathe, follow you couragiousely the same, and forsake the common hye way of
sinners.

Yet before I leave this third care, I will show you my mind, what is
cheifely in this part to be cared for: as the best portion of worldely
riches. Surely I reken no possession of lands, nor yet no substance of
marchaundise, nor yet no abundance of money, A good friend.
to be comparable to a good friend. Therefore above al things in this world,
procure to have plenty of friends, and make of them your compte, as of your
best and most precious goods. Always your friend shall be more profitable
to you than any treasure or power beside can be. How you shall know them
that be worthy to be your friends, and by what means, and what way friends,
be both gotten and also kept, ye shall best learn in Ciceros littell book
De amicitia, Cicero de amicicia.
I can not say in this thing any point that is left of him, wherefore I
remit you to that work.

An other point touching this care of worldely goodis, is to use accordyngly
your wife, when the time shall come that you shall have one. For to opteine
substance of goods, it lyethe as much in the wife, to keep that you bring
home, as in your travail to bring home. Houswife.
And surely unless she be the keeper and sparer, the houseband shall littell
goo forward in his labor of gettyng: And the veraie troth is, that there is
no yuell housewife, but for her faults the good man is to be blamed. For I am
utterly of this opinion, that the man may make, shape, and form the woman as
he will. I would good further with you in this thing, and show somewhat of
the way to order your householde, if I saw not this matier so largely
entreated of diverse philosophers, of whom ye shall here as much, as may be
said in this thing. Specially I would you read with most diligence, the
propre book, Xenophon
that Xenophon writethe hereof, it is called oeconomia, Economia
that is to say, the craft to order and keep an house, where this author
gyuethe such counsel, for all the course of an honest man's life in this
world to grow in riches, under the means of discrecion and wisdom, that no
man in my mind can say more therein, or better: the which judgment of mine I
doubt not but you will aproue when you have read the said work: it is
translated out of greek into latin by one Raphael, but in his translacion the
work leseth a great part of the grace, that it has in the greek tongue, and
also his translacion in many places is false: and it plainly appears, that
Raphaell understood not well, what Xenophon wrote in greek. I have therefore,
for diverse of my friends sake, translated the same work out of greek tongue
into english, and you shall have the same with my good will, when your
pleasure is to read it.

I would also for some part of this third care, have you read the vii. and
the.viii. book of Aristotels politikes, Polity. Aristot.
for to here his counsel, concerning the bryngyng up of children, and the use
of other certain things.

This is the effect and sum, mine own good Edmond, of my counsel,
touching the three said things in the which I reken to rest the hole course of
your life: and if you observe and keep them in their degrees and order
accordyngely, you shall surely content god, next please your self, and
thirdely satisfy the world. One the contrary part, misorder these cares, and
you shall run into the vengeance of god, in to the hate of your self, and in
to the indignacion of all men. Behold I pray you these hungry and gredie
wretches, that make of the third thing their first thought and care, what life
lead they in the sclander of all their acquientance? what death have they in
the sight of their privy conscience^ when they remember their faulse
swearinges, their deceitefull bargains, their plain robberies, their
pollynges, their cruel exactions, their oppressynges of the poor men? what
hope have they of goddis favor, when they remember all their care and thought
has been for the welthe of this world? the which when they leave and
forsake, they despeire of all other welthines: in as much their minds never
ernestly cared for that welthe, the which ever endures. This remembrance of
their misorder, is an heavy burden to their conscience. It can not be
otherwise. Consider now again, how clear and light his mind is, that in
all his life has ever cheifely studied for the souls welthe, that remembers
ever how his care has been for the reward of virtue? Of this man how well
does every man speak? what joy and comfort enbraceth the conscience of this
man, when the hand of god calls him from his short life, to that perpetual
life, for the which he has so much labored? The the other be he never so rich,
is called a faulse fellow, a wretched knave. This man, be he never so poor, is
called an honest person, a good man, for whom the heaven gates standethe open,
whilst the the other fallethe to enles tourmentes. This is the end of misorder,
and this is the end of good order, in breaking and keeping the degrees of the
foresaied.iii. things. Wherefore I can not warn you to often to take heed of
this counsel: and you can not to often here the same. The ieopardie is not
small, if you should forget this tale, it is no less peril than utter shame
in this world, with death everlasting. where so ever is sclaunder, there is
shame: greatter sclaunder there can be none, than folowethe on all sides the
unjust rich man. And he ever, where some ever he be, gathers unjustly
riches, that cares cheifely for these wordly promocions: the which man has
(I say) both in his life extreme shame, and also after this life extreme
punishment. You be not forboden to get riches, but the inordinate desire of
getting riches is abominable both in the sight of god and man: your desire
is inordinate, if it be not ordered under the degree of your chief care, as
now often enough has been repeted. I would now leave you and make an end of
these three cares and studies, apperteining to your soul, body, and goods:
saving that because I somewhat know your disposicion, I will particularly
touch on thing or two, that you must most ernestly beware of: because you be
much naturally inclined otherwise to fall into certain points that sore
disquieteth the mind, hurts the body, and hinders the profits of this
life: so that frendely I will admonish you of one or two things, that
pertain to all your three charges.

Take heed my good Withipol, of your passion toward wrath, ire, Wrath, ire,
and anger.
and anger, resist as much as you can the prouocacion of your stomach to
this vehement pange. Be not^ light eared in heryng a word of displeasure:
Consider the kind of life that you take: you must be conversant with many and
diverse merchants, among whom every one thynkethe him self both lord and
master. In such company chanseth to be often disdainful lokes, proud
countenaunces, scorns mockes, scoffs, comparisons, biting tauntes, odiouse
checkes, spiteful reproaches, with frettynge envy, and with many other corrupt
affections, whereby rises much debate, and sometime there folowethe plain
fury, Fury.
that makes men more like wild beasts, for the time of their madness, than
to reasonable creatures. It is a great grace in him that felethe his heart
agreued, and yet shows not outwardely his grief. This prudent dissimulacion
more auengeth his quarrel, than any rendryng of words could do. For it is a
dedly stroke, Patience.
that the paciente man gives, in this soft and mylde sufferyng the rages of
an angrye fool. Look well upon them both, he that suffers, and says
naught, is like a man, the railer or taunter, is like a beast or a fool. The
sufferer alwaie both in his time of suffryng, and also afterward, when all
fumes be ceased, has a gre^^ praise of all that beholdethe him: and ever he
has cause of rejoicing and gladness, where the the other fretteth with him self:
and scant the next day after he can show his face: behynd whose back his
company reports the folly of his hastines, and sore they blame him for his
uncomely behavior. Let the quarrel be what you lust, ever by your patience
and sufferance, you shall have advantage of him that prouokethe you, and
finallye, for your often forbearyng, a name of sobrenesse, wisdom, and
discreacion: whereof shall follow greatte credence, and a love of all honest
persons toward you, where he that will suffer naught, but will case his
stomach, in giving mock for mock, check for check, shall be taken for a
wrangler, a brawler: and few or none honest men will gladly meddle with him.

To rule this passion of ire, you shall be much more stronger than mine
exhortacion can make you, if you will (as I have counseled you before (have
Plato Plato.
your familiare. And Seneca Seneca.
shall be a mete physician for to help your mind against these grievous panges.
The best is, not to be angry, the next is, not to show in words or
counteaunce your anger, but remember, if it chance that you be angered, and
that you have in showing your anger moved and sturred some other to be
displeased: beware that you nourisshe not this grefe, spitte out of your
stomach all peuisshenes, and seek a tonmente as soon as it can be possible. If
the party speak not to you, speak you to him, it is no shame to be agreed, it
is a foul shame to continue in anger: and in the mean season your prayer to
god is void. For out of charitee, out of favor and grace of god. It is the
ground and only stay of our religion, to love together like brethren, all
under one father that looks over us in heaven, for whose sake, see that you
never sleep with grude against any person: in so doing you shall finally
optaine, that no man will bear you grude and for your love you shall have love
plentifully of god and of the world; Begin mine own good withi^ol to
ouerthorw this bestly passion of wroth, before your age make your stomach
stubburn overcome now in time sullines, before men have regard of your
displeasure: accustom your self with mildnes softenes, patience, suffrance,
and specially with gentilnes, that can not abide an heart mindful of any
grefe. To your inferior be piteful buxom and ready in offering your self, both
to take and keep friendship. With your fellow and companion strive not, compare
not: but always study to increase familiaritee by loving manners, and easily
forget injuries. Let no displeasure be taken of you, how many so ever
displeasures be given you. To your better and superior if you obey and give
place, it shall be reputed to your commendacion and praise. There is no man
so vile, but his love may stand instead to you, and of the pooreste man's
hatred, you may have sometime hurt.

Thus I say both for the worldly wisdom, and also for the bonds of your
faith, you must take heed to this warning: and the more ye be inclined, not
only to be quickly angry, but also to nourisshe long your anger, the more
diligence you must betymes take, to correct and amend your nature,
remembrynge always your chief care, that perteinethe to the first thing, the
which is with nothing more hurted and hyndered in his way to grace ward,
than with the brekyng of love and charitee. And as often as you be angry, so
often pluck you your soul from the presence of god, by the same passion.
Also you disquiete your body, and often times follow diseases by the fierce
pursuyng of a grief, and sometime by rages chances plain bataile, and thereof
your body standethe ever in ieopardie. Also nothing more hyndreth the gains of
your third care, than does vnpaciente chiding with other. For it causes
many to forbear company: and by that ever follows loss of occupieng. And
sometime a good word behind your back may advantage you more than a long
failyng into Spain, and an evil word likewise may do you more hurt, than
a loss of a ship. Let no man have cause to be angry with you, and ever you
be sure to be well reported by.

One other thing or two I would warn you of, with as many words as I have
done of the said passion, if I thought not, that by the reading of the said
works, you shall much better than I can show you, not only slay from all
misbehauours, and corrupt uses of ill fantasies, but also follow the clean
piked virtues, and by your own study grow to be a perfitte man, in the
favor of god and all other. No man shall counsel you better, than you shall
do your own self, if in redyng you will examine secretly your conscience,
whether such propreties be in you as you read, or no. If they be in you and
be dispraised, determine with your self to amend them: if they be not in you,
and be good, determyne with your self to get them. As in readyng you shall
here above all other faults dispraised an untrue tongue, Untrue tongue,
which brings a man out of credence, a thing veraie hurtefull for
marchantes, whose craft you be like to exercise: and beside, it sore
offendethe the ears of god, to here his best beloved creatur^ make that noise
against his knowladge and priuic conscience: where nothing garnishethe man's
voice better than truth of his tale.

This thing cheifely apperteineth to the care of the soul that is your first
charge. It makes also for the second and for the third care. For surely when
the mind is disquieted with the remembrance of the offense in liyng, the
body has his part of ill rest: And by the same untrue speaking, much hurt
and damage ensu^th against your credence, a thing I say most necessary to
be kept and maintained of all them, that seek by marchaundise any lucre or
gains. Therefore let your mind my good withipol, never delight to utter any
lie. Either speak not, or speak truly. What fault so ever you may do, let
it not be defended with a faulse tale: for that were to flee out of the smoke
in to the fire, as to dooc a worse fault in clokyng an ill, and in the mean
season your soul suffers a sore stroke. This ever as you read of this
mattier, have mind of your self, to take fruit of your readyng.

In consideracion also of all three parts, that is to say, both for the
defense of your souls state, and for the wealth of your body, and also for the
worldly goods sake, use in all your acts a certain commendable wisdom,
never to be none of these Busi medlars: Leave other men's faults, leave
correctyng, that you have no power in, leave teaching of that you know^ not.
Let the gospel be ordered by them, that be admitted for doctors thereof.
Let the priests be blamed of them, that have the rule of the order. Let
common cerominies, and all old customs alone. Put ever your trust in the
power and will of god, and obey to the consent of the church, without quarellyng
or resisting. Goo you forth your way after the meke steps of a true
christen man. Let the world bluster and blow as it will, be you none of the
blowers.

Scourge who will, be you none of the scourges. For believe me, sooner shall the
rod, than the child that is beaten, be cast into the fire. In eschewyng all
meldlyng, you shall save your goods, you shall keep your body from travail,
and by the same means you shall best provide a sure buckelet for your soul.
For under the cloak of obedience, Obedience
chance what chance shall, your soul is ever sure for taking any hurt: the
justice of god will keep you harmless, how some ever the tempest of
enormyties ouerfloweth this world. If you should be malaperte, Malapert
and presume to be a doer: report me to you, what may in this world happen, to
your undoing both in goods and body: and by the same trouble you shall be
cast from the succoure of god, who abides not any presumpcion. Presumpcion.
You fall into presumpcio^, when you grudg against your rulers, though they be
worthy of all dispraises. You presume, when you meddell with them, that be
not under you. You presume, when you take in hand to amend this or that,
where your part is not to speak. And specially you be presumptuous, when you
dare crake, that you know goddis will. Leave therefore my good Edmonde, all
manner of medlyng, and pray to god to accept your obedience. Pray also
bitterly, that his will may be fulfilled in this world among us, as the
angels fulfill it in heaven. Thus pray, and meddyll no further. For I assure
you, it is so to be done.

Many things might be said for these three cares, but to you I reckon it
enough this much that I have here touched. Yet one word or two more shall not
be superfluous. For I would not have you deceived by any word that I have
here used: As paraduenture you might be, if I should thus leave you. Seeing
that I have bid you first to care for your soul, next to care for your body,
and thirdely to care for the goods of this world. More over I said, there
be goods of the soul, goods of the body, goods of this life. But let
these words be to you as not spoken in their exact and propre significacion.
For to speak truly, there is no care but one, nor there be no goods but of
one. We must have a certain slyghte regard to our body, and a slyghter
regard to the world: but care we may not for neither of these two. You know,
that to care, were to take an inward weyghty thought: the which must not be
taken, but for a thing of great worthynes, and also of more surety, then is
either our body, or the world. Only our soul is the thing to be cared
for: and these small commodities, with certain pratie pleasures of the body,
and of the world, can not truly be named goods: for in very deed they be not
good. For this word Good, includes a dignitee in him that sauoureth of god
and heaven: so that those things be only worthy to be called goods, the
which have a perpetuitee and stedfastenes of godly substance: Other things
variable, chaungeable, flitteryng, such as may be taken from us ma^ger our
head, be not worthy of this high name. Neither the body nor yet fortune has
any goods: our spirit and mind only has things, that truly be called
goods, True goods.
the which be so constantly and surely ours, that ever they remain with us in
spite of al chances, and all our adversaries. Mercy, pi^ee, devotion, mekenes,
sobrenes, patience, faithfulness, charitee, and such other virtues, be the
veraie true goods, the which we may ius^ely reckon ours, and for them we
should continually labor. For these be the substance that our soul must
have, to be with them richely decked and garnis^hed, that we may have our
holy day araie, and our nupciall vesture according, to come to the great
feast, that Christ says we shall ones be called to. All these faulse
goods Faulse goods.
of the bodies lustinges, beauty, fairenes, strength, health: and also the^e
tri^ing goods of fortune, Goods of fortune.
royal houses, large heritaunce, greatte renies, implementes, costely
apparaile, gold, silver, honor, power, frendshyp, nobilitee, and what you
will else in this world: All these vain things, both of body and fortune,
can make but a ragged garmente for our soul, the which shall be with extreme
shame drawn from the said feast, if it come to gods presence with these
beggarly rags. This saying good Withipol, I speak to ease and comfort your
mind: for by this tale that is true, you now learn, that although before I
said you should have three cates in this life, yet in deed you have but one
care, the which is to care for the true goods, that be to be purchased for
the souls welthy state. Wherefore of your three cares, stryke of two, if you
will speak of ernest care. Yet I will stick a littell more with you in this
point: for fame I would you should se a true mark, whereby you may govern
and rule al your fantasies and opinions. If your fantasy be well directed to
the true mark, you can not mysse of the right path to virtue, the which
brings man thither, where he shall receive the inestimable reward for his
travail. I say your soul only must be cared for: and this only care must
be to get and keep the true goods, that be only the goods of the mind.
Other goods be not called proprely goods. You see, how these pratie
commodities of the body, and also these small gifts of fortune, maugre our
head, be taken from us, as I can not escape alwaie sickness, I can not escape
misfortunes: I can not fle from the cruel hands of tyrauntes, I may be cast
into tortures, I may rotte in fetters, I may lose all my substance, by
water, by fire, by thieves, or by other violente robbery. Against these
chances no man can resist, no care nor thought preuailethe to assure us,
either of our bodies, or of such goods. Wherefore learn you, that I say
before god, we have no goods, but only the goods of the spirit and mind,
the which goods (as I have said) be so sure ours, that they can not be taken
from us, but with our own will, consentyng to the loss of them. In this
spiritual possession, every man is an inuinsible emperor. We may despise all
vyolence of princes, all worldely chances, touching the keeping of virtue
ma^ger the hole power of the dyuell, and all his retinue. Hereof learn and
mark mine Edmonde, wherein you may be hurted, that your care may the better
be bestowed. For to care, where you have no hurt, it is nedeles: or not to
care, where you be hurted, is a blind ignorance. We be hurted, when we lose
any part of gods favor: we lose gods favor, wha^ we lose any goods of the
mi^d: we lose the goods of the mind, wha^ we either rejoice of the having
bodili and worldly goods, or make sorrow of the lacking the same. We be not
hurted when god continuethe his favor, when we decaie not in the strengthes of
mind: we decaie not in the strengthes of mind, when we be not overcome,
neither with the gladness of the bodies and worlds prosperitee, nor with
bewaieling of their aduersitee. Thus you se, no^her in the goods of the body,
nor in the goods of the world, you can other take or escape hurt: it is only
the virtue of your mind, wherein you must search, whether you be saufe or
hurted. Now when you know the place of your hurt, know also what may do you
hurt, that you may be more charie of your hurter. You se ones, the place
wherein you may be hurted, is your secret mind, a veraie sure place. For it
is not fire, nor water, nor thief, that can come there, it is no princes
sword, that can perce into this place, it is no mislucke of fortune, that can
light upon your spirit: finally there is no dyuell of hell, that can fasten
a stroke upon you, to do you in this place any hurt. This should be a great
gladness unto you, to consider, in how strong a tower you be from all
hurt: but see than again, who it is that may hurt you. For surely you can
not be hurted but of one, in whom is power to do hurt: this is your own
freewill. This will of yours, and nothing else, has power to hurt you. Se
shortly in ensaumple, how your lands be taken from you, you be spoiled of
your goods, fire burns up your house, you be haled to prison, you be beten,
you be torn with whippes, you be drawn upon the rackes, you lie in chains,
you come forth to open shame, you suffer cold, you be gnawen with hunger and
thirst, finally you be put to death. What of all this: yet I can not say,
that you be hurted: I se, that with all this the favor and grace of god may
continue with you, as it did with the holy martyrs. And also before Christis
passion holly Job suffered all this, and was not hurted. This is a greatte
comfort for you, to se that nothing can hurt you, but only your own self.
This is the high grace of god, that so has made man to be over all a mighty
conqueror, that can take no hurt but of him self Wherefore I trust you will
live ever safe and sound. For I will not think, that ever you will be so mad,
as to hurt your self. Than for these trifles of the body and world, take
no care: it is neither the second thing, nor the third thing, that can be so
unto you, that in either of them you can be hurted.

Marie take heed lest by the displeasures done in the second and in the third,
you of madness take occasion to be hurted, and willingly hurt your self in the
first thing, the which only is the place, where you may be hurted. And none
beside your own will has power to hurt you there: as if in the time of the
loss of worldly goods, you will fret in anger, you will despise god, you will
curs and ban, you will enforce to be avenged, you cry out in fury and madness:
now take you thought and care. for surely you be hurted, and your chief jewel
has a great loss. For god withdraws from your soul a greatte part of his
grace: so that this hurt you do to your own self by this frowardnes.
Likewise whilst your body is tourmented, either with sickness or otherwise: if
you therefore forsake patience, and swell in wroth: you be than hurted in deed,
but of none other person beside your self only. Thus you may take from the
second and (...) third, in the which two you can not be hurted, an occasion
to hurt your self, and to have thereof a great cause of a sore and an earneste
care, for the peril that your soul thereby falls in.

To confirm you the faster in these right opinions, I would you read the
littell book of Epictetus, Epictetus
entitled his Enchiridion, well translated into latin by Angelus Policiane: But
to say the truth, the work is so briefly and darkely written, that without
a comment, or a good master, you shall not perceive the fruit of the text: I
am in mind, if I may have thereto letsure, to translate the comment of
Simplicius upon the said work: and than shall you find such swetnes in that
book, that I beeleue it will rauishe you in to an higher contemplacion, than a
great sort of our religious men come to. And one thing believe me, my good
Withipoll, that in readyng of these old substanciall works, the which I have
named unto you, shall beside the perfection of knowladge, gendre a certain
judgment in you, that you shall never take delight nor pleasure in the trifles
and vain inuencions that men now a days write, to the inquietyng of al good
order: by reason that the most part of men, that read these new flitteryng
works, lack perfect judgment to descriue a weighty sentence from a light
clause, the which judgment can not be gotten, but by a long exercisyng of
our wits with the best sort of writters. And to me it is a pitefull thing,
to behold the folishe dreams of these young clerks in men's hands: and to se
these noble old works of the holy fathers and philosophers lie untouched.
Where if these new writers speak any thing well, it is piked out of these
aunciente books. But what so ever these petie clerks pike out now a days,
for the most part it is defaced and brought out of good facion with their
yuell handelyng.

I will now make an end, it is sufficient to a willing mind, such as I
trust is in you, to have with a friends finger the way appointed, where you
must walk, if you will proceed in virtue: the which is only the thing,
that makethe a man both happy in this world, and also blessed in the world
to come. Believe you my counsel, and use the same, or else hereafter you
will paraduenture bewail your negligence. Fare ye well. It More, a place of
my lord Cardinals, in the feast of saint Bartholomew. 1529.

FINIS.
A compendious treatise teaching the way of diyng well.
THey say, it is a point of a proud vanitee, or a stubburne folly, to keep
sure and certain, what some ever is ones said, always, it seems not to wise
men, that a promise should be sticked by, in as much there may chance
greatter causes to break a promise, than the reasons be, why promise
should be performed. As if I have said, that I will suppe with you: hit is
not enough to bind me against al chances. I may fall sick, I may have at
home some necessary impediment, the wether may so fall, that it is no going
out, many casualties may happen, that were not in mind, when such promysse
was made. Wherefore wise men say, in all making of promise, there be ever
understand some secret excepcions, such as be these: If I can, If I may, If
it be conuement, If no greatter cause happen to let me. By the which
excepcions, a promise never binds a man further, than is according to be
obs^rued and kept.

If I thought (my friend John^ walker) that you would take mine excuse by the
said excepcions, I would rather by them escape my promise, that I have made
to you, than I would fulfill it for when I suddenly agreed to your request, that
was to have me write to you the way of diyng well: I considered not at that
time, what the thing was. After I perceived more difficultee in it, than was
mete for my poor wit specially being (as you may see me) other wise occupied,
in such studies as appertain to my leisure: and of shortly this lesson to
learn the way of diyng well, has need to have a master, the which knowethe
both what our life is, and what the loss of the same is. Nor no man in my
mind can effectuously teach the way to die well, except he be one that
knows the way to live well. And plainly the mattier requires a philosophers
stomach and a sad. For such a one as Marcus Cato was, were a man mete to
entreat this thing: he knew what valor lay in death, the which he sought
both with sword, and his nails, tearyng ^ut his own bowelles.

I would think a Catulus or a Mercula should speak lustely to you of death,
seeing they showed their courageous heart nothing to esteem life, when the time
required, either to die with honor, or to live with shame. These men and such
other would show you the way to go to death, long before death came to
you. But none of all the painymes can either with word or with ensaumples of
their acts declare this thing so truly and effectually, as may he that is
exercised in Christ's philosophy, a Paul, or a Peter, or a Hierom should here
in speak more lively: than all the subtylle clerks of the old greeks. Yet to
me, for my part, it is an hard thing, either to play with you one of this
sort, or of that sort. It passes my power to speak to you either like
Socrates, or like Chrysostom. So that if the said excepcions be with you
admitted in a promise making, I may truly deny you the performaunce of my
grauntyng, in as much when I promised you this thing, there was understood,
if I could, and if it were convenient: I another can well declare this way of
diyng, nor yet me think, it is not convenient for me, living in this common
course of the worldely folk, to speak of death so ernestly, as a monk of the
Charter house should and might do. But because I know your importune
desire, to be so set upon this thing that needs you will have me say somewhat
herein: I will pray you so to read me, as the tale not only to be written
of me for you, but that I my self am also an auditour of the same, and as
much shall I enforce to follow the counsel, that in my saiynge I advise you,
as though the holle work pertained only to my self, wherein take this note
for your comfortes. that I write nothing to you, that I wyshe not were in my
own power to execute. Thus I with you, and you with me both of us fast yoked
to gethers, let us endeavor our selfs to be in deed such men as we commend
and praise. For as it is shame to speak one thing and to think an other, so
it is a more shame to write holyly and to live worldly. And as great a rebuke
there is in him that can here and praise good sayings but do there after he
will not. Now than let us not speak only of the way to die well, but in
effect let us indeuer our minds to have the fruit of this lesson, to make
in deed a good end of our life. And here now without any further process I
will begin to pay you my debt, and shortelye you shall know my mind how
you may die well.

As I was bethynkyng me, to write some thing of this mattier to the satisfiynge
of your desire, I turned a book, where my memory g^ue me, to be a story of
one called Caniu^, that lived under the tyraun: Caligula Caesar. This Canius
beside his hye learning was a man of a greatte spirit, the which he w^ll
declared in the manner of taking his death. It chanced him to fail out for a
certain cause with the said tiraunte, and many sore words were between
them: at the last when the tone was departing from the the other, this emperor
in his fires ^re said: well thou fool, make merry if thou will, for I have
pointed the within few days to be ^^ame. Thereat Canius turned him with low
courtesy and said: My most gentill prince I hertely thank you.

This answer came from a noble stomach, whereby he showed the mad rages of
the cruel tyrant to be so far intolerable, that under him death was to
be reckened for a benefit and a good turn: wherefore he thanked him for his
offer, as for a specially reward. And great marvel men had to behold this
Philosopher, how merry he was after this tyrants thretenyng. There were.x.
days given of respite, before he should die the which time he so passed,
that he never seemed to be in less care, nor to have his mind in better
quietness.

When the day came of execucion, the kings geyler and hangman went about the
town with a great company of them that should suffer death, the which
passinge by this Canius house, they called him to be brought also forth
amongeste the other, at the which time Canius was plaiyng at the chestes with
one of his companyons, and hearing them make have, he rose and telled his men,
saying to his companion: Look now that after my death you lie not, nor make
no faulse crakes, that you have won this game. There with also he bekenyd to
the geyler and said: I pray you bear witness, that I have one man in this
game more than my fellow has.

In this wise this philosopher played with death, and shortly his quiet heart
gave a fouie check mate to the tyrauntes cruelty: he showed him self to be
in spirit as farte above all kings violent power, as these mighty princes
think to have a strong dominyon over all their subjects. The friends and
familiars of this philosopher were veraie sorrowful, bewailyng the loss of
such a man, to whom: what mean you quoth he? why be you sad? why mourn you
for me? Is hit not your study to know, whether the soul of man be mortal or
immortal? The troth of this hard question I now shall learn: and now shall
I see the troth of all our doubts of heaven and of god.

Thus talking with his friends he came to the place of execucion, and there a
little, whyleste other were headded, he stood still in a musyng dumpte. What
think you now good Canius, quoth one of his friends? Where upon now muse
you so ernestly: Mary (quoth he) I have determined with my self to mark well,
whether in this short pange of death my soul shall perceive and feel, that he
goes out of my body. This point I fully entende to take heed of: and if I
can, I will surely bring you and the rest of my fellows word, what I felt,
and what is the state of our souls.

Here was a wonderful caulme stomach in the midst of so stormye a tempest,
this man's mind was worthy of an ever lasting life, that was not only to the
death studious of knowladg, but also in the self death found occasion of
learning. It was not possible for any man's mind to continue his study longer,
or to a further point than this noble philosopher did.

This story and certain other like, maken me often to reason with my self,
what a strength of knowladge is in man's brain, to search and to find by him
self the truth, if he enforce his wits to learn. For this Canius and many
other were not taught of Christ, as we now be, they had not the rules of
faith, the which show the vndoubtfulle way to come to the perfytte knowladge
of all privy mysteries, they were not comforted with the preaching of goddis
son to set little by this life as we now be. They were not plucked to conceive
a love of virtue above nature: as the holy scripture draws us from this world
to the beholding of an other place, where virtue receiuethe hic crown.
Wherefore to me it is no small cause of maruailyng, when I here such
ensaumples of natural men, that by them self could in such a manner rise
above their nature, in setting little by that thing, that naturally every
creature most abhors and fears (for death is the thing that in this
world by nature is made most doubtful, most terrible, most heinous, and
most worthy to be feared, to be eschewed, and by all means, ways, gynnes, or
craft to be escaped) To here than a natural man, without the teaching of god,
to rise up in his fantasy above nature, to judge of death far other wise
then nature teaches him, to despise the duraunce in this life when he knows
no certainetie of none other world, to use the strength and might of the
spirit against the puisant power of all tyrants:

It semethe to me a wonderfulle thing, and more wonderful the same should be,
if I saw not written in holy scripture, how that from the first creacion of
Adam, the goodness of god has been so great toward mankind, that he has
given us alwaie sufficient grace to know the right, to see the hye maiestee
of virtue, to find out the true dignitee of the soul, to perceive the vanite
of this present life, and finally to understand where in standethe the
pleasure of god, and wherein stands his displeasure. Ever by goddis mere
goodness man knew what was well to be done, and what was contrary yuell to be
done. It is a law written in the heart of man with the finger of god in our
creacion, to be enduced by reasonne to praise alwaie virtue, and to think
sin worthy of dispraise. The mind of man has a grace to se further than
the body syghte can attain to, the mind of man feleth more subtly than our
five wits can aproche to, the loss of bloudde or of brethe is a small trifull
in the minds consideracion, when the mind uses his own clear sight, and
is not blinded with the darkness of the body, the which stombleth at every
straw in this world. A worldly man.
Every mote choketh a worldely man. Every littel sound makes a worldly man
trimble and shake. I call a worldely man him that gives al ^is care to use his
wits in this world, that creapeth upon such things as be lene, hard,
felt, tasted, and sinelte, that clymeth not in no consideracion above the mist
of this valey. The most part of men ever have been of this weak sort and
yet still the most part of men is the same. This world ever has his
multitude, that honors, worshyppeth, and magnifieth nothing beside this
short life, and those things that pertain to this life. Yet again ever has
there been some and still there be some, that play the philosophers, the
which studied to know the dignities and woorthynesses of every thing, how
much it should be esteemed, valuied, or regarded of us, the which laboreth to
pick out in every thing what is good and what is naught. Men of this sort
be called spiritual men. Spiritual men.
For you must know, that a taillour, a shomaker, a carpenter, a boat man,
without both lernyng and orders, may be spiritual, when a master of art, a
doctor of diuinitee, a dean^, a bishop both with his cunning and dignities
may be temporal, seeing the true diffinicion of a spiritual man is to be one,
in whom the mind and spirit cheifelye rules. Like wise the temporal man is
he, Temporal men.
in whom this present time of this traunsitorie life has most rome. Thus I
say spiritual men have ever seen the troth, to ponder and valor every thing
in this world accordingly. And as to the temporal mind nothing seems sweter
than to live here, so the spiritual mind fyndeth swetenes in death, by the
which this life ends. For like as the prince of this world never agrees
with god, nor yet the body with the soul, nor the earth with heaven: so he
that studieth for this time, has clean contrary opinions to him that
follows the spirit. And as the temporal man says, it is a pleasant
thing to live here, and a bitter thing it is to die: so the spiritual man
thynkethe it a better time to induce the space of this life, and much joy he
conceiueth by the riddaunce of the soul from the heavy burden of this body.

Of these contrary opinyons you shall less marvel, when we have a littell
considered the thing it self, what should be death, the which one part of
us so much fears, and an other sort sets so littel by the same: and so
by a short process you shall see, whether the said Canius be more worthy of
praise for his littell regardyng the deadly punishment, Frances^ Philippe.
than is frances Philip, that within few years passed was put to execucion
with us for treason, the which died so cowardely, in so great panges of
fear, that he seemed extracte from his wits scant for quakyng and trimbling
the wreche could speak one word. The few words that he could with much
stutterynge sound, were only in the declaracion of his dispraie^ nor nothing
was seen nor hard of him, but we^yng, lamentyng, wryngyng of his hands, with
banninge the hour and day of his birth, continually sighing, as though his
heart should have burste for sorrow. The difference of these affectes will here
after be (I think) plainer to you, when we have a littel more spoken in this
mattier. For now good John^, I will crepe a littel nygher to your desire the
which you have, of learning the way to die well.

THIS DIYNGE well is in effect to die gladly. To die well.
For who so ever dies gladly, he departs from this life in a sure hope to
live again, being now weary of this world: but another this hope of the life
to come, nor this werynes of the life present, can make in any man a glad
heart to die, Oneles he be one that has lived well here. For in death there
can be no gladness, except there be a fulle trust of opteyning the reward of
virtue, partly by the trust and faith of a good mind, partly by the mercy
of god, that fulfilleth ever our insufficiency, if we bring ought with us
worthy of his favor. For goddis grace supplieth, where our power lacks, if
it so be that our souls appear before him in an apparelle mete for his
presence, the which apparel requires a perfect faith, and an ernest will of
doing well, all though we have not alwaie done well. The mercy of god never
failethe him, that fully trusts in it: But a full trust can not be
without the strength of charitee, the which ever burns in the love of
doing good: and faith can not be perfect, oneles there be good works, the
which may stur up and quycken in us faith to take a beeleue, that by
Christis acts our final demerites may grow to be perfect. Thus a cherefull
heart, be set with faith, hope, and charitee, takes no pensifulnes in the
remembrance of death, but rather it reioyseth to remember, that by death it
shall pass to life, never more to die. Wherefore to die well ever, is to die
gladly, either to be rid from the bonds of this prison, or to optaine the
lybertee of heaven: both ways comes from a good life passed: so that surely
no man can die well, that lives not well, for ever death is a sorrowful thing
to the evil liver, because he has nothing to lay before the mercy of god,
whereupon he may take hope and trust to be made worthy of the sure life, in
the which death medleth not. Now than if we can gether, what may let us to
be glad of death, and what will bring us to a desire of diyng gladdely, we
shall by the same pick out the way to die well, For in my mind these.ii. be
alwais one, to die well, and to die gladly.

The glad desire of diyng is let cheifely by two things: Two lett^s to die
gladly.
one by the fear of death, the the other by the love of this life. The tone of
these follows the the other. For he that loves this life, fears to die: and he
that fears to die, loves this life. Yet we may speak of each part by him
self, and first let us assaie the greatteste, the which is the fear of
death: than next after we will come to the the other, the which is the love of
this life. If these two blocks be taken out of our stomachs, we shall find
an easy and a plain wa^ to the end of our purpose. For who someuer another
fears to die, nor loves to tarry in this life, he is ready alwaie to die
gladly. But to perform my promise, let me say some what of the said fear
and love.

First and cheifely the fear of death takes away all gladness of diyng, and
thereby after mine opinion, no man that dies fearfully can die well: so that
to learn the way of diyng well we must learn the way to die without fear.
And yet how I should prove, that death is not to be feared, I can not well tell,
seeing the hole power of nature shows, that of all things death is most
fearful: and to reason against nature, it were paraduenture not so hard as
vain. For what can reason prevail, if nature resist^ It is a thing to far
above man's power to strive or to wrastell with nature, her strength passes
the might of our will, what help some ever we take of reason or of auctoritee:
another counsel nor co^maundment has place, where nature does her utter
most. It is none excu^e to say, that men fear death because they be loath to
leave the commoditees of this life, or because they fear the thretenynges of
purgatory and of hell, or else because they think upon the sore peynefull
panges, the which be in the time of death. Naie these things make not
cheifely the fear of diyng, it may well be that of such things the fear is
increased and made more full, but there is a fear before and beside all these
things, the which fear nature (I say) gives, as it is well seen in young
children, that have no remembrance another of this life, nor of the dedely
panges, nor of heaven, purgatory, or hell. When we in sport threten to cast
them headling out at some hye window, they quake, trimble, and wax pale,
showing plain and evident tokens of a natural fear toward death. And
though by learning, or by a curragious mind, sum few amongst us, seem
little or nothing to be moved with death: yet the ensaumple of these few can
not take away the troth, that nature in all the rest works. For how many
be there that only to eschew death suffer al wretchedness, al beggarie, all
pain, in pycking up crommes of nourisshement, to abide a while in this light:
And the more shamfully, that men for the most part fear to die, the greater
proffe there is, that such extreme points of fear against all shame should
not in so many daiely appear, when death approaches, onles by nature some
just fear were of the same.

For as the exceasse of fear comes by weakness of heart and lack of
stomach, the which is worthy to be rebuked for shameful cowardnes: so there
is a mean measure of fear n^ death, that may be reckened honest and just,
because nature makes it necessary.

Look you how both old and new stories keep in memory their names that
appeared to die without fear: as who say, it is to be written for a wonder and
like to a miracle, being a thing beside the course of nature, to here of a
man that can in death overcome the passion of fear, as we wonder to here of
some that live withou^e sustinaunce of meat or of drink. Because I say it is
a natural thing to fear death, we greatly marvel of them that fear it
not. Yet reason says, we should not fear that thing, the which we know
not, and only evil is worthy to be feared. But seeing we know not death^ we
may well by reion doubt, whether it be evil or good. And now before we speak
any more of fear, let us a littel consider death by it self, what thing it is
of his own nature, and whether by it self it be good or evil.

We call ones death the losyng a sonder and departing of.ii. things, What
death is?
the soul from the body: the which departing no man can escape, but
necessarily die al we must that be borne in this world. When the body by any
violence loses his sensis, and is spoiled from the quick use of his
principal parts, than departs the soul from him: and in manner the body
leueth the soul, before the soul leaves the body. For it is not the soul
by him self that goes from the body, but it is the body by his forsakyng
life, that causethe the soul to depart.

For where life is not, there the soul can not abide: and as the body is
lively before the soul enters, so the same body is deadly before the soul
departs. Blood in his measure and temperaunce between cold and hot, keeps
life in the body: the which blood by innumerable wais of chances may be
altered and constramed to leave his nourishyng whereupon shall ensue the loss of
life, and then straight after follows the souls going away. For well you
know, that the soul is one thing, and life is an other. Where so ever the
soul is, there is life. The soul. The life.
But it is not true, that where some ever life is, there is the soul. For
trees and herbs have a part of life, and a more part of life is in
muskelles, oysters, and worms: yet a more perfect life is in these beasts
and birdes^ the which have amongeste them some more some less of life's
perfectness. But though in them life, the which rests in the use of the
sensis, that be to here, to se, to feel, to smell, to taste, and in swifte
mouynge is a great work of life, the which things I say, though they be in
the perfection amongst these beasts: yet the hand of god has not given to
any creature living in the earth water or air, to have beside life a soul:
the which is a thing formed after his likeness, saving only to man, whom he
hathput here to rule over things created, like as he rules in heaven over
all. It is the creatours will, that no thing in this world shall have a soul,
but man alone: the which soul brings with him the use of reason, a thing
that may teach us both that we have a soul, and that god is he the which
has thus made us to be in this world his chief and most excellent creature.
Reason does thus teach us, yet beside reason we be herein better instructed by
our master the son of god, so that now we can not doubt, that in us is a
thing, the which can not die. But of suietie we evidently se, not only by
reason, but much better by belefe, that the image of god in us is perpetual
and can not feel any corruption, onelesse such as our froward will may give,
whereof grows syn, that is the living death of the soul. But let us come to
our mattier.

To speak of this bodily death we now have a great fordel in comparison of
some old clerks, that were in doubt, whether there was in man any soul
beside life, more than is in an horse or a gose. They were in doubt whether
any thing of man remained after death, that might feel or perceive either joy
or pain. For as to the faynynge poets, that spoke of delicious gardeynes for
good spirits, and of diverse soore turmentes for ungracious sowles after this
life, most part of old clerks, gave no manner of credence: and they that
believed other an heaven or an hell, to be ordained for men's souls, yet they
so believed, that much doubtfulnes was in their belefe, in as much as their
reason suffised not to find out the certaintee of gods works From the which
doubtis the infallible doctrine of Christ has now delivered us all, so that
as many as will give ear to the voice of god, they can not mistrust their
knowladge, but that without ^uestion both we have a soul, and the same soul
is immortal a thing that neither in this world nor out of this world can
perish or feel any point of death, to lack by the same any jot of his
being. I say our souls continuallye without end shall ever more endure, the
which be created and made by god after the form of god. What form that is,
it is as hard to show as it passes our capacity to know what god is, whose
shap and facion our souls bears.

Now than what shall we say of death? the which by him self is not unlike
to an endless sleep of the body, whereof the body lies without power to use
any sense, being after life like to a stone, that never had life. This
change of the bodies state, Whether death by it self be good or evil.
whether by it self it be good or evil, it is an hard^ thing for us to
judge, seeing the troth is, that no man living expertly knows what thing
death is: and to determine of a thing unknown, it semethe a presumpcion full
of folly. Therefore without any certain determinacion we may for our learning
debate with reason the thing, as much as shall be within the bonds of our
capacity, Death is not good.
and first if death were by him self good, it should be no trespass for one
man to kill him self or an other. For in giving to other a good thing or in
taking to our self a good thing, can be no rebuke. Where the deed is good,
there is well doing in the doer: But ever, not only by Christ's teaching, but
also by natural reason manslaughter has been judged an abominable sin.
Wherefore it can not be that by him self death is a good thing. And again an
evil thing it is not. Death is not evil.
For Christ died wyllyngly, the which will in god and goddis son could not
have consented to death, if death had been a thing of his own nature evil.
Nor yet it could not be, that virtue should be praised in the glad suffering of
death as now be crowned in heaven many holy marters, the which couragyously
took upon them not death. And surely it should not be the natural end of
man's course in this life, if it were a thing, by it self naught. For evil
magrie man's head, is never put to him, as it should be if death were evil: the
which necessariely man is constrained to suffer. Therefore it seems true, that
death considered alone by it self, is another good nor evil. Death is another
good nor evil.
But when we here of diyng well or diyng evil, or of a good death or an evil
death: it is not death by it self that is spoken of, but rather the
circumstances, the manner, the facion, the cause of death, or that goes before
death, or that follows death. These be the things that gyuethe and takethe
this name of goodness or euilnes, As to say that death is good, because it
ends this sinful life, and is the mean to pass from this world to
heaven: or else when we say, that Judas died an evil death, it is not meant that
the departing of Judas soul from the body was evil, but the manner of his
diyng, was the evil thing, his cursed desperacion, his dampnable mistrust of
goddis mercy, his dispitful refusing grace, made his death evil. The two
thieves, he at the right hand, and he at the left, both died one kind of
death, both nailed to crosses, both worthy for their trespasses: yet it is
truth, that the tone died well in a good death, the the other died naught in
an evil death, not for the death by it self, wherein was no difference, but
for the diuersitee of their.ii. minds in taking of death. The tone repented
him, and asked mercy, whereof he died graciouslye, the the other continued in his
blaspheming god, the which stubburne stomach in sin caused him to die
ungraciously. It is a thing that follows death, and is not in death it self,
whereupon we look, when we judge to be a good end or an evil. For by the manner
of him that dies, we conjecture the state and condition of the soul: the
which if we find in our fantasy to be in an evil case, as in the danger of
gods curse, we call death evil, whereby the soul passed to com to such
sorrow. And contrary, if we think the soul to be in the favor of god, or to
be ready to take mercy we call death good, the which conveyed the soul to
his blys. So that by it self death remains indifferent to be judged of diverse
consideracions, other a good end or an evil end.

Now than we may here say, he that fears death, To fear death.
shewethe him self to be in doubt of his souls state, or else to be certain
that his soul is in goddis curse. The which fearful mind is in them that
have so passed this present life, that either they have done nothing, whereby
they may hope to be rewarded in heaven: or else they have done so ungraciously,
that they can have no trust of escaping damnable punishment, specially if he
be a christened man. For if he be not christened, and fears to die, he
declares him self to have none higher thought of life, than the dumb
beasts have, the which make by the law of nature so much of their life's,
that they can mind nothing beside, and the loss of their blood makes with
them an hole conclusion of their being. Wherefore beasts may justly fle and
fear death, as the worste thing that can happen to their state: but a man
does him self to much wrong, if he think him self in no better condition
than be these beasts, It is not in the devils power to do man so great hurt
as this false imaginacion does. And surely unworthy he is to have in him the
power of understanding, of thinking, of providing, of learning, of teaching, of
diuisyng, of remembrynge, of loving, of hatyng of reasoning, of counsailing, of
infinite mo gifts, who some ever judges him self to have no more than a
swyne or an ape has: Look as by the five wits the body knows this or
that: so by these powers of mind, the soul walks to his understanding, and
of an heavenly mattier is made this maruailous thing, that dwells in man's
body for a time, to be made worthy other of everlasting life, or of
everlasting death, for the damned soul lives in death without end.

But yet what shall we say to the place we left before, that naturally death
is feared. Death is not to be feared.
Let it be the woorkyng of nature, yet I see not but the strength of man's
mind fully fastened in faith, may victoriously over come all this fear, as
we find many ensamples of men that so have done, not only of them that have
been helped with faith, but also of many paynymes, the which took a courage to
dispyse death, only of a mighty and valiant mind to have reason subdue in
them the power of all affectes.

I find, a learned painime wrote that we should another care for life by it
self, nor yet for death by it self. He says that we should care to live
well and to die well, and let life and death pass without care. For life is
not good, but to live well is good.

If painymes have this right consideracion of life and of death, what shame is
it for Christened me^ to care for death? seeing Christ whose words can not
but be true, so vehemently forbyddeth us the same, that painimes saw by
reason to be done. Again, seeing this death is so common a thing daiely in our
sight, why should we fear it. Things that sildome chance may stur up by
their ra^enes great fere: things that be ever at hand should by their
familiaritee and custom nousell us to set littell by them. Furthermore he
that fears death coming to him, would fear by lykelyhode death, if it could
be with him, when death is such a thing, that other it is not yet come, or
else it is paste. For no man can say, that death is present. So this fear can
never be joined with the thing that is feared. Again that thing that every man
may do, no man lightly does, that thing that no man can help him self in,
that for the most part all men do. No man almost studieth or cares how well
he may live, but how long he may live every man musethe, when the truth
is, that it might of all men be optained to live well, and no man can further
him self to live long. A like frowardenes is in our remembrance of death,
we busilye labor and enforce to dream of death, the which thing we can not
do: we might find the way to die well, and this thing we will not do. This
madness John^ I trust, you will put of, and fear not death, the which you can
not escape: But fear an evil death, the which you may flee.

Among many commoditees of death I reken one cheifely to be set by, that it is
good to die well, to escape thereby the occasion of living evil, and surely he
dies well, that for such an intent takes death gladdely.

More over consider you well, and you shall see, that in him the which is
curious to live, fortune has a great rule, but in him that can die gladdely,
fortune has no power. And what a wretchedness it is to be under fortunes
vanitee, I report me to them, whom we behold daiely diversely vexed as well
with immoderate lusts of to much wealth, as with passing sorrows of to much
trouble. Therefore to be out of fortunes thraldom set littell by this life,
that is to say, fear not death.

It pleased me to read a painimes opinion, that said. He is as foolish that
fears death, as he that fears to be old. For as after young age follows
the old: so after old age streighte folowethe death. And a mad man's point
it is to fear death, seeing things uncertain, the which may chance and may
not chance, be only worthy of fear, but thing certain without doubt coming,
must be looked for, not feared. The necessitee of deaths coming is equalle
and without remedy, so that other to complain, or to flee at death it is a
plain maddenes. For who can complain to be in the condition, in the which
indifferently all men of this word be?

And again if the pain of dyyng were a thing to make death fearful,
first it should be a comfort to remember, that after the pain of death,
there shall be no more pain, and as Epicure says, If it be an extreme sore
pain, it is short. For no vehement pain can be long. This were enoughe to
make death not much to be cared for. Every way death is a thing never to
be feared of a wise man, and never to be out of mind both with good men and
wise men. And as for the fear of death were not he (I pray you) a stark
fool, that would weep and wail because he was not borne to this life a
thousand years ago (no less a fool is he who so ever soroweth because he can
not live a thousand years to come. For these.ii. sayings be even and equallye
true: you were not, you shall not be. So that one mind should be in us, as well
to remember we shall not be, as to remember we ones were not. It is no new
thing to die, our fathers, our graundfathers, our great forsiers be gone the
way that both we shall goo, and all that follow us must come the same.

More over in as much no labor, wit, craft, nor diligence prevails to
escape death, no power, no tyches, no auctoritee helpethe, but all
indifferentely be called of death, all without choice must follow the train
of death, no corner can hide us, no walls can defend us, no way nor mean,
no entreaty, no prayer, no suite, nothing under heaven can keep us from
deaths hand. Let us than take a lusty courage of this desperacion, seeing
there is no remedy: let us man fully go to it.

The most fearful and coward beasts, that of nature be made to flee, when
they be driven in to such straites, that they can run no further, they turn
theim^ and with the power of their might they enforce to escape. And surely it
is ever seen that those ennemies be ever most terrible, the which be driven
by extreme force to fight. For necessitee Necessitee
correctethe and chastises our hertes much more sharply, than virtue can do.
Whereof a desperate mind shall do greatter acts, or at the least no less than
a valiant stomach can do. In this necessitee of death we now be al, it is
vain for us to flee or to ren away, our fear can find no place of flighte.
Let us imagine the truth as in deed it is, that we be all betrayed to die.
It is so John^, that without doubt we be all kept in a streite corner to be
rid of this life. There is no hope of remedy. All this people that you se,
how long think you shall be. It shall not be long, but all shall by the
course of Nature be called hens to death and there hid. It makes no force
neither of the day nor of the place. There needs no question to be asked
either where or when, al must come to one end, other sooner or later, other
before or after? What now John^? does not he seem unto you a shameful cowarde,
and a fearful wretch, a plain kikkes without an heart, that with much
intercession, with many prayers desires a littel delay of death? If you saw
one stand in the number of many that should be headeded, making most instant
suite to the hangman, that he might be the last that should put his head to the
block, would you not say, fie upon such a wretched knave, that so much
fears death, being now at the point to die, whether he will or no? and
yet this manner now is with us all. For the most part it is greattely valured
with us to die some what behind other, none is so nighe death by age, that
desires not to differ from this day until to morrow, when in troth such a
weak mind is in effect dead and buried long before the body fails. Lift
up therefore your heart only because there is no remedy, desire not to flee
when there is no place to ren to, let necessitee give you a courage, if al
other strength decaieth. What a stomach was in the said Canius? of the which
sort the stories make mention to have been many amongst the painimes.

A tirant fiersly thretened Theodore the philosopher, that he should die, and
that his body should lie to crows unburied: worshippefully said, answered
this Theodore to the tiraunt: Thou may be proud of thy power. Because one
ounce or two of blood is in thy hands. And as for the burial of my body. O
how folishe thou art, if thou reken it to be any difference, whether I rot
under or above the ground.

Of such courageous aunsweres the stories of pa^unes be full. But much more the
books of Christened men be full of such ensamples.

Christ's faith made innumerable strong champions, invincible stomachs, not
only toward death but against all the cruel devises that could be found to
make death more painful than death. The holy martires were so far from all
points of fear, that they seemed to enforce and to strive to have death given
them. Their mirthe was to suffer the horrible persecucion of tirauntes. No
reason nor learning could work such strengthnes of hertes in men's minds,
as the faith of Christ brought.

Look how saint Paul reioyseth in his troubles, how he glories in his
scourginges, whyppinges, in his prisonment, in his fetters, all his life seemed
to be a continual death, yet his heart never gave over, but vexed by the
pains daily stronger and stronger, to suffer a fresh. Fear of death was so
far from his mind, that he was glad to remember how ones he should die,
and thereby pass to Christ's presence whose quarrel he defended in this world
with all his might and power.

Look upon saint Laurence liyng broyling upon the burninge cooles, as merry
and as quiet as though he lay upon sweet reed roses: When the turmentours
turned his body upon the fiery grediernes, he bad the cruel tiraunt eat of
his burned side, whiles the the other part was a rostyng. This saying declared
that this holy marter feared no death.

How many thousand marters suffered incredible pains of flaiyng with hokes
their skin from the flesh, of scrapyng with tile stones the flesh from the
bones, of rentyng and tearing membre from membre with horses, with bowed
branches of trees, of beatyng with whippes till the bowelles fall out, of
hangyng, of burning, of Crucifiyng, of infinite strange and new devises for
pain? How many I say, suffered all that cruel tirauntes could imagine either
with hand, fire, or iron, rather than they would ones deny them self to be of
Christ's profession? When it was proclaimed, that who so ever would say he was
Christened, he should cruelly be put to death. There passed no day, without a
greatte number of them that boldly spoke tho words, of the which should
follow so blouddie a slaughter. This was a manifest token, that fear of death
had no manner of place with our blessed martiers, the which with a constant
boldness defied and despised the mighty, cruel, and fierce emperors, their
courage to die ouerthrewe the ragynge madness of tyrauntes. The cause of this
mirthe in so pitious martirdomes was, that this blessed men knew, how Christ
another could nor would deceive them, but that for their littell regardyng of
this life, they should optaine an other life, where their joy should never have
another chang, nor decrease, nor end. Therefore my good Walker, mistrust you
not Christ, whose doctrine the heaven and the earth has by innumerable
miracles, this many hundredth years approved and confirmed to be true, the blood
of so many saints have witnessed the same: and the devils with all the damned
spirits, so surely believe the truth of Christ's teaching, that they trimble
and quake there. Be not moved with the common ensample of the hole world,
though both spiritual and temporal men, though the pope with all his
cardinals bishops and priests, though the princes with all their gentilme^
and subjects magnify, esteem, love, norishe, and by all means cherish this
life, yet believe you the troth, and think all the world faulse, where
Christ's saying agrees not with that the world does. If it were possible,
that you saw the angels of heaven live contrary to the preaching of Christ,
yet against them all believe the son of god, and love not to abide in this
life, when Christ callethe you hense, make a final valor of this present
pleasures, when Christ says all be vanitees, and may be turned to endless
sorrows: Regard no honor, no promocion here, when Christ says, the place
of honor is in heaven, and here is none advancement, that is not both shame,
and also may be cause of a perpetual wretchedness. Despise the ease and rest
that theie riches brings, in as much Christ says, that of them be taken
many impedimentes and le^s to enter into the sure quietness of blessed souls.
Think no place to be for your abiding in this world, when Christ says, here
is not your country, but your father and your dwelling place is in heaven.
Have therefore hense. This is to say be willinge to forsake this strange
country. And seeing the way to your homewarde lies by death, take a
courageous stomach to die, and die gladly, that you may die well. Believe I
say Christ^ and you shall think it painful to be in this life. Believe
Christ and you shall be gredie to be partaker of the heavenly joys, whereupon
will follow a pleasant remembrance of death, by the which you shall depart
from your pain to that joy, the which you desire. And hereof is made a glad
diyng, the which I still name a good diyng. Thus if we can take this fear a
way, we be well forward, and hereof will easily ensue the rest, that is to
die gladdely. It is a true saying, that who so ever fears death, he shall
never do a deed worthy for a living man. Therefore if it were but only for
life's sake it is our part to despise the fear of death.

Beside this fear of death, Love of this life.
the love (I say) of this life sore hinders the gladness of diyng, no man
dies gladly, that estemeth much this life. He that rekeneth in this world
him self happy, when he has gotten riches, possessions, auctoritee,
promocion a roial state, a prince like court, abundaunce of welthie fare, a
rule and power both to auaunce his friend, and to undo his foo: this man I
say that gloriethe in his fantasye for these and such other things, can not
but with much sorrow depart hense. To this man's heart the remembrance of death
is a ever grievous thought, his mind can not but lament when he sees the
necessitee to be pluckid and drawn from these commoditees, in the which
rests the joy, pleasure and gladness of his mind, he has so steadfastly
accustomed him self to take this world for heaven, that it will not synke in
his brain, to hope of an other heaven: he has so corrupted his taste with
thinking this life to be sweet, that needs it must be a bitter thing to make an
end of all his pleasures, and in this case be not only they that have this
world at their will, but also they be in the same case that have naught, and
be gredie of having. As much loves he this world that would feign be rich,
as he that is rich. It is not the having nor the lacking of abundance in
goods, that makes a sorrowful heart in the remembrance of death, but it is the
mind that valureth and pondreth these present goods to be of a greatte
price, and worthy to be tarried for. This mind I say as well in a communer, as
in a king, as well in a yoman as in a lord, as well in an hermit, monk, or
friar, as in a merchant plowman or vacabund, as well in beggars, as in rich
me^, is the thing that causes sorrow in diyng. And gladly no man dies, that
loves the welthe of this life. Wherefore the learning to die well requires
necessary a lesson, how much the goods of this world be worthy to be
regarded. And let the truth have in your stomach his place, so that if it be
true, that the things of this life be worthy to be loved and to be cared for:
thanne love you them and care for them. If the truth be other wise, change
your mind, and another love these said things, nor care for them. Of the
truth in this matter no man can doubt, that believes Christ, whom if you
think to be god, you must also think it all troth that he says. It can
not be otherwise than Christ testifies, whose preaching ever exhorts us to
wilful pouertee, the which is another to love y^ goods of this world though we
have them nor to care for them, though we have them not: only by Christ's
teaching we should care for the kingdom of heaven, the which standethe in the
cleanes of conscience, where ever is a place and a seat for the hie maiestee
of the holy trinitee. All other things necessary for this life be not to be
cared for, nor yet to be valured more than their dignitees requires: that is
to say, no more than is conueniente for instruments and tools to the
pylgrimage and passage of this strange country. For in this world we have
no home, our father dwellethe not in this region we be in this life out of our
propre country, we should have homewarde to the joyful presence of our own
father, that abidethe us in heaven, the which has a greatter charge over us
his children here, than he has over the beasts or birds, the which by his
only provision without their care, lacks nothing for their necessity. Much
more (says our master Christ) if we turned al our care to godward, we
should not be destitute of such things as necessarily this present life
nedethe. And where Christ so straightly commands alms deeds, saying, that
who soever helps not a poor man in his need, he will not help him nor yet
know him at the fearful day of dome, in so much that it pleases Christ to
say, that every poor man represents the person of gods son, so that he
that regards not a poor man, dispiseth the son of god. In this doctrine what
think you? Whether does Christ command alms deades for the poor man's sake,
that should take alms, or for the rich man's sake, that should give alms? In
taking alms I find no virtue and needs it is a thing partainyng to virtue,
that Christ would have done. Therefore surely it is for the rich man's sake. For
it is Christ's lesson, that teaches us to have no inward love to these
casual good^s, the which we must put from us, where we se them that want
such things. And a proof of a perfect stomach is taken in him, that utterly
leauethe and forsakes all this world to follow Christ: the which byddeth the
rich man, that will be perfect, to go and sell all that he has, and deal all
to poor men. For as hard a thing it is to pluck through the small nedles e^e
a greatte caboull rope, as to bring a rich man in at heavens wycket: not that
it is impossible for a rich man to be saved, but because it is hard for a man
in a welthy state to keep his mind in a due order to godwarde, without being
drowned or infected by the contagious lusts and corrupted pleasures, the
which follows the fortunate life of this world. And nothing is more in a
rich man to be feared, than lest he set his mind to love his riches, the
which love can never stand with the pleasure of god. Remember the saying of
the apostell saint Paul: The love of riches is the rote of all sin. Therefore
let not this love grow in your heart, from whense should spring the fruit of
damnacion. Here of my friend Walker, I trust you se, that without question it
is Christ's will to have us littell regard this life, and much less to
regard all the commoditees appertaynninge to this life. It is god that says,
The losing of life in this world, is the findyng of life in a another world:
and that weeping, sorrow, peine, tribulacion, pouertee, shame, persecucion, and
finally death in this life, is laughing, joy, pleasure, ease, riches honor,
quietness, and finally life, in the kingdom of god.

Contrary the same master testifies, that mirthe, welthe, rest, glory,
abundaunce, strength, libertee, rule, and finally life in this world, is
lamentyng, grefe, trouble, slander, misery, weakness, thraldom, bondage, and
finally death in gods reign. In this tenor and key sowneth al our holy
scripture. Wherefore me think it is enough to prove to a Christened man, that
the welthye state of this world is vain and ieoperdous, because Christ so
teachethe and precheth, and surely a greater proof by reason for this matter
with you I will not use at this time. Let Christ be believed, that biddethe
you gether a treasure in heaven, where your riches shall be sure from mothes,
worms, and rusting, from thieves, fire, and water. If your treasure be ones
couched in heaven, streighte your heart shall also be there: and so shall you
take no pleasure of tariyng in this life, but rather it shall be werines and
tediousnes to you to be here absente from your hertes desire, the which
alwaie sticks and cleaves to your treasure in heaven, If it so be that after
Christ's counsel you have there put all your goods and substance. If another
we fear death nor love this life. I think the chief impedimentes and lettes
of our purpose to die well, be taken away, and now we may a littell devise,
what thing may help us in our journey after these stones and blocks be gone.

In my mind nothing shall further us more to a glad death, What furdreth most
glad death.
than shall an ordinate life, that is to live in a just and due manner after
one rule and one form, ever awake in a quick remembrance of death, as though
every hour were our last space of induraunce in this world. When you rise in
the morning, determine so to pass the day following as though at night a
grave should be your bed. Let every day be reckened with you as your last.

This mind shall make you bestow well your life, the which is to you
uncertain, how long it shall continue: ye rather in doubt you be, how sone
or how shortly life shall be taken from you. What so ever you take in hand
be think you, that before you end it, death may oppress you workyng. This
is the thing that Christ would have us do, when he so often warns and
admonishes us to take heed and to look about us, because another the day nor
the hour of our calling is certain to us. Therefore it is our part, of a
time so much uncertain to make a time sure, certain, and present, that we
never be taken unawares: by the which means we shall gladdely suffer death
seeing it is a thing so long before prepared. For why should it be a strange
thing to reken every day to be the last? I see not but that thing, that
happens and chanseth to some of us, might come to any of us, and like wise
all might have that that a few has. There is no cause to deny, but as well
this day you or I might die, as we se this day some other deed: and though
we be not deed this day, yet it is troth that this day we die, and daiely
sithen our first birth we have died, in as much that daiely some part of
our life, has been diminisshed, and ever as we have grown, so ever life has
decresed. We were babes, we were children, we were boys, we were young men,
all these ages be lost, and till yesterdaie all time past is gone and lost.
This same self da^e that we now live, is divided and parted with death. Still
without ceassing we approach to death by the expense and wast of life. Thus
diyng we alwaie be, though death ^e not alwaie upon us. Conceive tha^ this
ordinate life in your mind, and bestow your time whilst you have the time.
Above all things flee idelnes, the which is a thing both to the body and to
the soul, like a kankeryng rustines, and as an eating consumpcion, it wastes
to naught both virtue and strength. A man the which is in the life that you
be, may sone be corrupted with this contagion of idelnes, if he be not well
ware, and diligentely enforce him self to the contrary. For I se you have a
master so affectionate and given to you, that he will another suffer you lack
any thing mete for your health or q^etnes, but also he had rather for^ere his
own commoditees, than for his service you should be disquietted: So tender he
is in all points over you, that if you po^der well his state and your own
condition you shall find your life better defended from all storms against
the minds rest, than your masters condition is. He is in such a sight of
the world, tha^ necessarily his study and care must move him to satisfy the
great expectacion, that his hole country has of his towardenes. And fortune
one the the other side, is so contrary to him, that needs he must by wisdom
procure, with no small thought, how he may in penury maintain the outward
face of his reputacion: so that for your quietness his mind often labourethe,
where you may do what you will without fear of the worlds displeasure,
without fear of lackyng or not having enough for your necessaries, and much
more than necessitee requirethe. Labor have you none, but that may be rather
taken for a pastyme, thought to please your master you need not take, in as
much you may be assured, that he can not nor will not for the time of his life
change his affection toward you. Therefore I say it may be feared in one of
your state lest idelnes should bread a foul slouens neste, the which were
enoughe to distroye all lustines of virtue, and to make you long deed and
buried in this world, before life forsakethe you. For my good John^, I will
have you know and remember, that idelnes is called the grave of living men:
it is the thing, wherein life dies, and thereby your soul is twyse buried in
you, ones in your body, next in your sloth. The which vice in serving men
most reighneth, and the same is root of many vnthryftie thoughts, whereupon
follows a worse idelnes than the the other is. For it is an evil idelnes to do
no thing, but a worse idelnes it is to do not well. Such an evil fellow
saint Chrisostomus calls a dissolatyng, or a boide baiting place, where
into the devil entreath, as in to his own house by good right. For where
virtue is not exercised, there the ennemy of grace claims his rule, it is not
now my purpose to show what you should do, that you might not only f^e
idelnes, but also be well occupied. This were a matter enough for a another
work. I have my entente at this time, if you see that death is not to be
feared, and that by continual remembrance of death, you shall prepaire your
selfto die gladly with a good will: the which you can not do, oneles you be in
hope of the eu^rlastyng life, and this hope requires some trust in the clenes
of a good conscience, the which ever follows a gracious enten^e of living
well So that if you live well, you shall die well. And of the way to live well
you can not miss, if you arm your mind to be strong against all suddennes
of death. Pray ever continually without cessinge you must: but what is this
continual prayer I would you learned. For of prayer it is but one final
portion, the saying of psalms or axyng with words of god his grace, the
b^raie prayer is to be ever well minded, to be ever in charitee, to have ever
the honor of god in remembrance to suffer no rancore, none ire, no wrath, no
malice, no sin to abide in your delight, but to be in a continual good
thought, the which you may keep whether you sleep or wake, whether you eat
or drink, whether you feast or fast, whether you rest or labor, and never
paraduenture you can pray better, than when you must give your self to serve
your master, to whom the course of your life is due and bounden specially when
god has given you such a master, whom your service can not please without
you be studious to please god. For well you se, that without virtue your
service weere to your master an unsavory thing but (as I have said) it is not
now my purpose to apoynte you the way of living well: if you have hard
enoughe to die well, I have for my part now said enough, and shortly by the
same you shall of yourself without further help find the way to live well.
Now that by this I think my promise fulfilled, I will at this point bed you
farewell. And I pray god give you a strong courage to pass valiantly through
death, to come from thense to everlasting life, by the help and grace of our
master and savior Christ, to whom let us for ever more render al glory
praise, and honor. Amen. At Paris the.x. day of January.

FINIS.
A sermon of saint Chrysostom, that no man is hurt, but only of him self.
I Know well that all men of a gross judgment, and given to the pleasures
of this present life, drouned in worldelines, bound seruanies to their own
lusts, that regard not the spiritual sense, shall think my tale marvelous
and new, and paraduenture will monk me, as though in the first enter and
title of our sermon, we purpose a thing both folishe, and that to no man's
ears can seem true. But this not withstanding we wol prosecute our entente,
and by this frowardness we shall be more sturred to approve the said sentence:
so that they the which seem agreued with our speaking, will in the beginning
have a littell patience, nor will not at the first hearing interrupt my tale,
but be content to abide the end and conclusion of this mattier. For plainly
if they so do, I am persuaded, that they shall utterly change their minds
herein, and cleave to our partee, deniyng their own opinion, and rebukynge
them self for their error, that they have hitherto defended: and further
more thankyng me, as sick men thank phisicions, when they have recovered
their health. So now I would not have the bring forth thine old rooted opinion,
but a littel tarry and consider the reasons of my tale, whereby thou may
justly judge of this mattier, and specially when thou haste lopped and cut
away thine own crooked fantasi that thou now art in, and may se the right
and streighte way of judgment. For the judges of these worldely causes,
though they have diligently hard the first partee, to declare and pleite his
action, with strong and plain reasons: yet this not withstanding they look
what the contrary party will answer, whom pac^entlie they also here, and be
not m^ued to give sentence, although the former person brought forth never so
true and just reasons. For alwaie there is in their court a place reserved to
the second party: Seeyn^e it is an ordinate rule among these judges, first
well to perceive the controversy and cause of both partees, and than
afterward to give sentence according. In like manner therefore I require the
secounde place and audience of my tale, for the first partee has long
heretofore prosecuted his cause. This adversary of mine is the roted opinion
of long time with many men, that wandereth through the world, and
confirms, that al things be confused and troubled, so that amongst men
nothing can be justly and well kept, nothing in right order. Daily we se many
men hurted troubled and oppressed with all sorts of wrongs and injuries:
Feeble and weak persons be overthrown by the strong and mighty: the simple and
poor folk be undone by the richer: and as possible it is to tell the waves
of the sea, as to rehearse al them that suffer wrong and be offended, whom no
laws no fere of judges does help. This noyful pestilence no power can
resist, but rather daiely the tears, the sighs, the lamenting of men,
bewailing their wrongs and hurtes, grow more and more. For the judges, to
whom is given auctoritee to redress and amend these wrongs, be they that
cause mo greues they that stir up greatter mischeues. And now this fault is
so far passed and grown, that many unfortunate persons and vain fools
break out into such madness, that they blame for this disorder the Providence
and wisdom of god, specially when they behold a man that liuethe an honest
and quiet life, to be drawn to the law, to be cast in prison, to be vexed and
troubled, and to suffer the extreme rigor and crueltee: on the contrary part
they see a froward person, an ungracious liver, a man set upon mischeife to be
at ease, to wax rich, to come to high promocion, high dignitees, greatte
honor, in so much that he is made fearful and terrible to all other, and
innumerable ways he vexes, troubles, renteth, teareth, and as you would
say, stampeth under foot the honest good and innocent persons. This unjust
iniquitee, these shamful wrongs be used and continually exercised in cities,
towns, boroughes, villages, in every place by sea and by land. Seeing than in
many men's minds this old opinion reignethe, necessarily our course now
comes in, to declare the contrary part, that shall overthrow the old
buildinge of this foresaied faulse persuasion. Therefore as I said before,
though it seem new and marvelous: yet I promise you, if you will diligently
with patience here me, my saieyng shall be found true. But I say, ye may not at
the first hearing be therewith offended: I promise you, to declare and show,
how that not withstandyng men think the contrary, yet it is surely true, that
no person can be hurted, but only by him selfe^ but that this sentence may be
more manyfeast and plainer, let us first boult out, what betokens this
word, To be hurted, and in what mattier, thing, or substance it chances any
person to be hurted, the which self thing shall be opener, if we first of
all seek out, what is the excellency and virtue of man, and where it rests.
For though it shall appear, whereof and in what wise it hapnethe to a man, to be
hurted: and more over it shall than be seen, in what thing a man seems to be
hurted, and yet has no hurt, and this also by examples we shall show the
plainer.

Every thing in this world has somewhat, whereby it may be corrupted and
hurted, as in example: Rustinesse hurtethe iron, mothes hurt wolle, sheep be
hurted by wolves, the changing into vynegre corruptethe wine, the swetenes of
hunney is corrupted by bytternes, worms noyen corn, hail hurtet^ the vines,
and least in rehersing^ I be to long, to every thing ^uers kinds brings
corrupcion, so that the hurt alwaie rests ^ that part, wherein stands the
sau^nes and health of the same, and t^ ^ is hur^e, whereby the welthie e^^ of any
thing is diminished and corrupted. Let us now search out, what thing that
is, whereby the virtue of man's mind may be noyed or hurted. Diverse men herein
have diverse minds. We must bring forth also fauls opinions, and destroy the
same, that by such means the veraie troth may appear: whereof we entende to
prove, that of none other person nor thing we can be hurted in veraie deed but
only of our own self. Some there be, the which think, that pouertee hurts
a man, some sai the loss of goods or sclaunder, some bring forth death. In
these and such like things, men weep and bewail their wretchedness and
misfortune: and great pitee is taken of them that be in such case, and with
much lamentacion they complain, saieyng amongst them self: O what an hurt or
loss has he suffered^ al his substance and goods were sodemly taken away.
Of some other is said: He is extremely sick, phisicions have given him over,
there is no hope in him of life. For some other that lie in prison is greatte
^one made: for other that be outlawed and banisshed their countrey^ for other
that be plucked into bondage from their fredome: for other that be spoiled of
their ennemies, that be in thra^do^e, that be through sea wrackes distroied,
through fire burned, through ruins squashed. All this sort is lamented
bewailed mourned for of all men. They that do naught, and live vngracioussy, be
of no man piteed or weped for, but rather oftentimes they be of all men
praised, and be called fortunate, and had in great honor, and this truly is
the cause of all evil and mischeife. But now, so that (as I said in the
beginning) no man interrupte my tale, let us show how that none of the
foresaid evils and misfortunes can hurt a wise man, nor yet corrupt the
virtue of this mind. For tell me, he that by thieves is spoiled of all his
goods, what hurt has he in the virtue of his mind? But (if you will) let us
first, as we purposed, describe what is the virtue of the mind, and that this
invisible virtue may the better be known, let us make a conjecture and take a
likelihode of sensible and bodilye things: and for exaumple let us see, what
is the excellency and virtue of an horse. I pray you, will ye say it is in
the gaie trapper, in the silver bridell, in the harneis beset with preciouse
stone and perle, begardedde with golden fringes, with rich tassels, shall the
virtue and noblenes of an horse be in these things? Goodness of an horse
or else rather in the swiftnes of renninge, in the stedfastnes of foot, in the
assurednes of pace, and lustye courage of stomach, and such other points
apt and mete either to make a journey, or to use in war, as to be an horse,
that nothing amassed nor afraid, rusheth against our ennemies: or when need
shall be, can deliver his master by swift flight from slaughter. Is it not
clere^ that the virtue of an horse restethe rather in these things, than in
the other foresaid^ In like manner what shall we say of other beasts? Is not
the goodness of them in their strength and their propretee mete for our use?
Goodness of an ox.
For he that would praise an ox, will he consider the stal, where the ox
stands, or any thing cast upon the beast, or else only behold the bigness of
his body, the strength of his limbs, the surenesse of his hooffe? Goodness of a
vine.
And he that would praise a vine, will he not consider the largenes of the
leaves, the length of the wrinkled spurges, or else rather look how thick
the clusters be, how big the grapes grow? and other fruits and trees in
the same manner. Wherefore let us also of this facion speak of men, boulting
out in them, what is the veraie virtue of a man: and than let us reckon the
man to be hurted, when he is hurted in that virtue. What now is the
excellency and virtue of a man, The excellency of man.
it is not richenes, fear not pouertee: nor it is not bodily health, fear no
sickness, nor it is not renown and fame, let no evil tongue fear the, nor it
is not th^s common life, thou nedest not fear death: nor it is not libertee
nor noblenes, least thou be afraid of bondage, or of that we call churles blood
but yet what is this virtue of man's mind? It is to think right of god, and to
do right amongst men. For all the foresaied vanitees may be taken from man
against his will: but this said virtue, he that has it, cannot lose it by no
man's violence, nor yet by the devils, except he him self destroy it. Our
adversary the devil knew well this order and degree of things, and therefore
when he assauted the blessed man Job, he destroyed all his substance, not to
make him poor, but that he agreued with so great loss, should speak some
words of blasphemy against god, and for the same self cause the devil finally
vexed and turmoiled the hole body of this pacient saint, not that he should be
sick, whereof rose none hurt to Job, but the diuelles intent was, to move him
through the panges of sickness, if perchance he might forget his constaunt will
toward god, and so be priuated of that virtue, that his mind alwaie kept.
For this only purpose the find slew all his children: for this intent he
turmented Jobs body with more cruelle and grievous peines than though he had
been rent with the violente hands of hangmen, or of turmentours. For no nails
nor fleshehokes could so have torn the sides of that holy man, as the find
dug in them with worms, to hurt him was the devils purpose: and therefore
all these peinfull sorrows he cast upon Job, to make him think somewhat
amiss of god, without the which point Job could not be hurted. To this
purpose Jobs friends that came to comfort him, were by the find picked to
provoke greuouslye Job, and they said to him, O Job, thou art not yet punished
according to the greattenesse of thy trespasses and weighte of thy sins. And
many such words they spoke and accused him. But the blessed Job, priuated and
spoiled of city, of house, of goods, of servants, of children, had for his
palaice a dunge hill, for his bed the ground, for his clothes rotten and
stinkynge straw. Yet all this not withstanding the blessed man Job is not only
by these means nothing hurted, but also by this persecucion he is made better,
more noble, and of higher dignitee. For where the find had spoiled him of all
his goods, and also of al bodily case and health there blessed Job, through his
patience, gathered infinite riches of virtue. Nor he was not with god in so
great hope and trust before he swette and labored in this cruel bataile.
Than of this let us consider, if this holy man Job that suffered so much and
so intolerable things, and suffered of him that far passethe all manner of
men in all kinds of crueltee, and of ungraciousness: yet if he could not be
hurted in the virtue strength and power of his mind, who now than is there,
whose excuse shall appear right and just, when he says: That person let me,
that man offended me, that man hurted me, that person did me great wrong. For
if the devil, that is full of all mischeife, with his holle power and all his
might setting upon the house substance and body of so just and holy a man,
with all his darts, all his ingins, and all his artillery, yet could not
hurt him, but as I said made him hereby more glorious, and more worthy to be
looked upon: how than (I pray the) can any person blame an other, as though
he might be by an other man hurted or noyed? Here thou ob^ectest and say,
what, was not Adam hurted of the devil, was not he deceived and driven out of
Paradise? To this I tell the, The devil hurted not Adam, but his own frailnes
and sluggishenes hurted him whilst he regaded not the keeping of gods
commandment. For this find that came so armed with so many weapons and
deceites against the said blessed man Job, yet was not able to conquer and
overcome him. How could he by any means have deceived Adam, except Adam by
his own propre negligence willingly had hurted and destroyed him self? But
again thou say. what than? A man betrayed and accused of backbiters loses
all his substance and goods, is not he hurted? when he is spoiled of all his
patrimony, of al his heritage, and brought to extreme wretchedness, is soore
vexed and troubled? I say no. Ye not only he is not hurted, but he shall
have here of great advantage and gains, if he be diligent and take good head.
For I pray the tell me, in what point did the pouertee of Christ hurt the
apostles? Lived not they in hunger, in thrist, poor and naked? and yet hereby
they grew more noble, and were more glorious, and optemed a greatte hope and
trust in god by their misery. Did not syckenes, scabbes, extreme
wretchedenes, need, and poverty bring Lazar to the blessed life: and for his
vexacion and troubles in this world, was not he crowned in the everlasting
joy: What shall we say of Joseph? was not he continually sclandered and
rebuked, both at home in his own country and forth: in so much that he was
punished for an aduoutrer, and driven from his kynne, house, and all
acquaintance: is not he for these things in great honor with all men, and with
god in great glory? But why do we rehearse, that by banishementes, by rebukes,
by bondages, by prisonmentes, holy men came to great glory? I pray the show
me, death it self, what hurt did it to the most just and blessed Abell? I
say, that bitter and cruel death, committed of no stranger but of his own
natural brother? Is not Abel for this thing celebrated and worshipped through
all this world? Thou seeste how my process declares more than I promissed,
for it does not only open, that no man is hurted of an other beside him self,
but also that holy men take infinite gains and profits in these things, by
the which they seem to be evil handled. Here thou saiste, what needs so
many peines, so many punishments? What needs hell, and so many thretninges,
if it be true, that no man hurts, nor no man is hurted? Here me to this,
peruerte not, nor mingle not my tale. For I said not, that no man hurts: but
I said, that no man is hurted of an other. Again thou say, how can this
be, that some shall hurt, and yet no man be hurted? It may be as I have
showed, for his own brethren hurted Joseph, and did wickedly against him: but
Iosephe him self was not hurted. And Caine did wickedly against Abell, when he
laid in wait to slaie him: yet Abell him self was not hurted nor suffered no
part of evil. To this purpose seruethe peines and punishementes. For the
virtue of patience in them that suffer, does not take away the trespass of
them that with an ungracious entente set upon other, and do wrongfully. For all
be it that they by their patience be made more glorious: yet the other be
not redeemed of their miscsheife in their malicious purpose. And therefore the
virtue and noblenes of mind auaunceth the sufferer to honor, and the
malicious stomach drowneth the doers in deep peines. Thus the rightous judge
almighty god, to them that constauntly continue in a virtuous life, and come
to receive the reward of victory, preparethe a kingdom in heaven, and for
them that without repentance, persecute ever their sinful purpose, hell is
ordained. Therefore if thy goods be taken from the, say with holy Job: Job. 1.
I came naked out of my mothers womb, and naked I shall depart hense. Put
hereto the apostels saying: 1. Tim. 6.
We brought nothing in to this world, nor we can not take hense with us any
thing.

Thou have heard thy self to be evil spoken by, to be infamed and
sclaundered with men: remember thou, and put before thine eyes the words of
our master, where he says: Lu^. 6.
Woe be ye when ye be of al me^ praised. And in an other place: Be ye merry and
rejoice, wha^ men revile your name as naught for my sake. Thou art cast out of
thy country, and driven from thy house and possessions: remember that we have
not here our dwelling country, but that we seek the world to come. Why then
do thou think, that thou have lost thy countreye when in this whole world
thou art a stranger, an alien, and a pilgrim? Thou art fallen into a grievous
and ieoperdous sycknes: use and exercise the apostles saying, 2. Cor. 6.
that is this: Although our body the outward man be infected and sick, yet
our soul the inward man is thereby renewed and refreshed day by day. Thou art
closed and shette in prison, and some cruel death hangethe over thine head:
Look upon S. John^ beheaded in prison, and there fastely behold so great a
prophets head granted and given to a tumbling wench in the reward of bodily
pleasure. These things when they chance to the wrongefully: look thou regard
not the iniurye and malice of them that do hurt, but ponder and way thou, the
reward and glory that shall be given the for these wrongs. For he that
willingly and pacientelye sufferethe all such troubles, is not only forgiven
of his trespasses and sins, but also he opteynethe thereby the merytes and
the rewards due to virtue and goodness: so high and great a thing it is to keep
steadfastly an assured and full faith in god. Than seeing that another the loss
of goods and substance, nor sclander, nor defyaunce, nor banysshement, nor
sickness, nor torments, nor death it self, that semethe the most grievous
thing of all the forsaid, can hurt men, but more rather help and do good to
men, in making us better and worthy of so great reward, how and whereof shall
we prove any man to be hurted, when of none of these said greues a man can be
hurted? But I will now assay to lay plainly before thine eyes, that they only
be hurted, the which do hurt, and that the hurt, the which they do, noieth
not, nor touches not none other person, but only them self that inforceth to
hurt. For tell me, what can now be more unhappy than Caine? The death, by the
which he with his own hands slew his propre brother, has made Abell for
evermore a saint and gloriouse martyr, and has caused the slear for
evermore to be taken for a wicked mankyller, and that against his own blood.
Also what is more wretched than that Herodis wife? the which desired to have S.
John^s head in a dishe, that her own head should be drowned in the everlasting
flames of burning hell. What is in worse case then the dyuell him self the
which by his malice made the holly Job waxed nobler, so much grew and
increased the devils peine. I think thou now see, that my tale has showed
much more tha^ I promised. For it is open and plain, not only how no man is
hurted of them that do wrong, but also that the hurters and none else be
hurted and suffer evil. For another riches, nor libertee, nor noblenes, nor
health, nor life, nor such other things be the propre goods and substance
of man, that has nothing proprely his own, but only the virtue of mind.
And therefore when in these outward things, other hurt or loss, or trouble
happens, man is not hurted, seeing all his treasure is in the said virtue of
mind. Here thou ask, what if a man be hurted in the said virtue? It can not
be but thus. If any be hurted therein, he is hurted of none other person, but
only of himself. Thou desire to here how a man is hurted of him self. Wha^
he is beaten of sum other, or robbed and spoiled of his goods, or by any
means troubled, if than he speak any opprobrious word, any impatient sentence,
he is hurted, yea and soore hurted: and yet (I say) not of an other, but of
himself, through his own lack of patience. For as it is said before, Behold
what the blessed Job suffered, not of any man, but of him that passed the al
men in mischefe and crueltee. That if he, that blouddie tourmentour the devil,
that haynouse kaitife, with so many ingins, so many crafts, so many peines,
culd nothing prevail in co^straining Job to trespass with his tongue before the
face of God, specially when Job had never heard the law of God, nor had not
part of the redemption of the glorious resurrection of our savior Christ: If
the blessed Job I say, lackyng this aid of Christ's passion, was able to
resist all the finds malice: how much more thou christen man art able to
withstand al storms. If thou will use and exercise thy power, and take aid
and succor of thy faith, it is not possible for the to be overcome. For
behold S. Paul how much he suffered, his peines can scant be told, the
prisons, the bonds, the scurges, the whippes, the strokes, the blows, the
torments, bestoned he was of the Jews, with roddis all beaten, cast down
headlyng, in the hands of thieves, he suffered of his enemies, of his false
brethren continual reason, in his mind he suffered fear outward he suffered
strives, batailes, hunger, thrist, nakedness, defaming, tribulacion, beasts,
and what need I speak more, he daily died, and yet all this not withstanding,
not one small vnpaciente word escaped his lips, but he in these things
glories and rejoices, and with mirth says: I take pleasure in my passions
and tribulacions. If than S. Paul suffering so great vexacions, was glad and
joyful, and gloried in the same, what excuse shall they have, that for every
trifle and small wrong, or beating or other trouble, far unlike to these
foresaied, ask a vengeance, cry out and make a sorowfulle a do? Here thou
come again and say, If I without resisting suffer, my goods shall be taken
from me, and thereby I shall be made unmeet to do any work of mercy. This is an
evasion nothing laudable. For y^ thou desire to work mercy, and to do almese
deeds, here what I say: Poverty lets not a man to exercise merciful acts,
I say it lets not a man that is merciful. For though thou be poor, thou
shalt have. ii. mytes, or one fardyng, the which when thou haste offered, it
shall be reckened to the above all the treasure of rich men. Though thou be
poor, thou haste anne handful of meal, that suffices to feed a prophet:
that if thou be so poor, that thou lackest these said littell and small
things, yet believe me, thou shall never lack a cup of cold water, whereby
thou may pass all manner of richesse, largely bestowed in merciful works.
For god requires a merciful mind, not the quantity of money, nor the hepe
of goods. Do thou now se, that thou suffer none hurt when thou loseste
all thy goods, ye thou have a great gains and va^tage. For thou have with two
mites, or for the price of a cup of cold water, bought the croune of
everlasting life, y^ which other scante with their infinyte expenses opteine.
I doubt not, but this tale is plain to them that be studious of the troth,
and have care for their spiritual health and salvation: but to them that lie
in the bonds of their pleasures, in the prison of their lusts, that wast
their holle life in the course of syn, to them this tale is vain and
foolyshe, because their mind and study enbraceth nothing but shadows and
wyndes. For these things that seem to them the goods of this world, shall
slyppe out of their hands, flee from them like as shadows and the wynd.
Wherefore it is well, that we open to this sort the privy causes of these
fantasies: and let us take away the image that deceiuethe them, and show to
them the veraie plain face of this filthy and sluttish harlotte, the which
they love and enbrace. For surely I call this present life an harlot, an
hoorishe woman, the which life is spent in the plesures, and the vanity of
riches, in the delites and the power of this world, And I do not only call this
life an harlot, but a foul stinking. sluttishe and beastly harlot, whose face
is so far out of shape and facion, so bitter, so crooked, and cruel a look,
that there is none excuse for them that be deceived by her love. And yet this
not withstanding we see many, ye the most part of this world, to be drowned in
the pleasure of her, and though they se that in this life, all things be
cruel and bloody, full of ieoperdyes, full of dethes, of misfortunes. And
where men see her beset with most unhappy naughtye packis, with sclanders,
rebukes, hatred, envy, deceytes, treasons, complaaintes, thoughts, extreme
cares, continual fear, and with a thousand such other ungracious gosseppes
and handmaides be compassed round about, as with a guard of serpents,
amongst whom is no comfort nor fruit, but only cruel slaughter, death,
pestilence, and perpetual pain: yet how many be there that love her, and that
busily follow hir^. The folishnes of them is so great, so stockisshe, that no
reason can pluck them from this destruction, no euidente exaumple of
innumerable other, that continuallye and hourly perish. Shall not I reken
these fools more blockisshe, more rude, more childishe than littell babes^ the
which be holly given to sportes and plays, and so busily drive about a round
houpe, so busily scourge a top through the long cloisters, or about the
streets, that they can not be plucked from their game, being utterly
ignorant and without knowladge, that in such plays is no profit, nothing
of valor, yet the folly of these young babes is excused by their few years
and tender age, but these other, in their perfect age, old in the number of
years, what excuse shall they bring forth, for defending and keeping a mind much
folisher and weaker than any childs.

Now than tell me I pray the, why seems riches worthy to be desired. For me
think I must of riches begin with the. Thou answerest, because it apereth to
many men, that riches for our health, life, name, and fame, and the state of our
country, be more commodious than other friends, kinsmen, ye than all other
things that be. This goodly and semely sentence is not only observed both by
the sea and land, but is now mounted up above the clouds to the sterres. I
know well that this reason is not so much a sound of words, as it is a
bourninge flame and fire, that distroieth the hole world, and no man there is,
that gothe about to quench it, but many there be that blow to it, and more and
more kend^e it. For all sorts of men favor this mischeife and praise of
riches, not only they that be partakers thereof, but they also that yet be not
come thereto. Thou may se every kind of men, whether it be man or woman,
servant or master, rich or poor, to the vttermoste that he can, helpethe to
increase this fire, and cast some mattier thereupon, laboring in it both by
day and night: all I say, bring to this fire plenty of mattier, plenty of
faggottes, not of wod, nor straw, nor hey: for this kind of fire consumes no
such mattier, but they cast upon it heaps of evil works and ungracious
deeds, both of their body and soul, wherewith this sore fire is kendled and
fed. For these covetous rich men, though it were possible for each of them
to have in possession the hole earth, yet nevertheless they would bourne in
their desire and appetite to have more. And poor men likewise, whileste they
couete to be equal with rich men, they be tourmoyled with an incurable
fury, they be mad, they be wode, they rage, they rave: and thus one
syckenes, and one disease, gendreth ^^^he of them a diverse kind of fra^^sie.
The love of money so rules and cleaves in every man's mind and heart, that it
passes the love of frendeship, of kinreade, ye sometime of wife and children,
the which seems the greattest affection amongst men: yet the love of money
overthrows to the ground all these loves, and trampeth them under foot as
a wild beast, like a fierce and cruel maistres she possessethe and holds
all men's hertes, and as a tyran subduethe them to all uncomely bondages. This
love of riches rages furieth like a hornewode and mad tyran, and plays ever
a shameless part like an harlot, she never takes pity, never abasheth in
every place she comes forth proud disdainefull, stubborn, terrible, cruel,
churlyshe, wicked: and though she more furiously rages than either bear,
wolf, or lion: yet she seems to men plesaunt and amiable: what said I more
pleasant, yea sweter than sugar or hunnye. And where as she sharpethe swords to
her lovers, and daily prepares for them snares, pynfalles to the death, and
with many thousand sea wrackes hurlethe and tossethe them, to this rock, to
that rock: yet she is still loved, still embraced, still desired and sought
for of them: and by their own innumerable slaughters and dethes they be glad,
that at the last sometime they may approach nere, though it be but to the
utter gate of this strumpet and harlot. For as swine they rejoice to tumble and
walowe in her dounghill, and as blind betils they delight to stur and to wrappe
togithers her filthy and stinkynge mucke. All they in manner, that defoyle
their hands with the shameful couetousenes, be more unhappy, more filthy than
be the said most vile beastis. And in this part their misbehauour is more
for this point to be noted, that the more they be rolled in these filthes,
the greatter pleasure they take of the same: The which vice and fault
chauncethe not to theyin thorough the nature of the thing self, but of their
own corrupted will. How now may we heal their minds oppressed with such
diseases, except they will a littell give us the hering, and take good head,
and also give place too reason i^ grauntyng our sayings. For the said
unreasonable vile and brute beasts, that tumble and walow in like filthes, can
not be plucked from their filthy appetite?, because they want perceiuance
wit and reason: but we now have a do with men, to whom the goodness of god
has given understanding and the use of reason: so that they will here, they
may easily without great peine or labor, be delivered from the stynche and
filthe of this worldly mire. Now than harken, and as men should answer me,
tell me, why semethe riches worthy to be loved and followed? There is no doubt,
your answer is, that riches be coueted, first for the pleasure of life and
wealth of body: secondarily for the honor that is in this life. And for offices,
dignities, promotions that be given to men for their riches. Ferthermore,
thirdly because the rich man may sone be avenged, may sone bewreke his anger
upon them that do him any wrong or displeasure, and that he may be feared of
other, as a man of power. I think thou have no cause to allege beside these
foresaid, that is to say, beside pleasure, honor, offices fear and
auengeance. For riches can not make a man another better nor soberer, nor more
merciful, nor wiser, nor yet make a man soft, quiet, and gentill, nor finally
riches never teachethe an hastye man patience, an outrageous, man continency, a
drunkarde sobrenes, a shamlesse person shamefastnes, nor none other kind of
virtue is opteined by richesse, no vice nor sin is turned into the better by
riches. So than if riches preuail nothing to the gettyng, or to the increasing
of the goodness in the soul and mind, nor they make not a man in virtue
better, tell me I pray the, for what cause should riches be desired? Ye
contrary wise this is truth, that riches does not only nothing prevail for
virtue, but also when they ones come into the mind, if they find any thing
toward goodness, and mete for virtue, they utterly distroy and corrupt the
same, and in the stead and place of virtue, they bring in vice and syn. For the
handemaides and folowers of riches be bodily lusts, sensual appetues,
lechery, anger, gluttonye, intempetancy, fury, wrong, pride, bostinges, and
all beastly and unreasonable mocion. But let us defer the speaking of these
enormityes to an another place. For these men that have their minds sick in
the desire of richesse, will not gladly here communicacion of virtue or of
syn. For they defend lusts and pleasure, and they will not suffer any thing
to be said herein against them. Therefore we will now move this question,
whether there be any thing in richesse, that may delight and please men: or
whether there be any honor in the same. And here, if it please you, let us
begin from feasts, from the great aboundauce of meats. For in this thing
chiefly is praised the magnificence and glory of riches. Let us in this place
compare togithers the table of a rich man, and of a mean person, and let us
boult out the gestes of either party, whether of them take of their chere more
pleasure. They that sit eating in festis till their arms be weary, and join
their supper to their dinner, and in manner stretch their bealies till they
burst, ouerladed with the bourdein of meat and drink, in whose body the soul
swymmethe, drowned in the fluds as in a sea wrack, of ale biere and wine:
whose another eyes nor tongue, nor foot can do his duty, but all their members
lie more greuouser fetered with the bonds of drink, than men that lie in
cheines, to whom sleep brings no rest nor health, but with mad furious
dreams they be feared and made worse, and in manner willingly they bring into
their souls and fantasies evil spirits, being mocked and scorned of all
that se them, ye of their own servants: They remember nothing that they
see, they perceive nothing, they feel nothing, they know nothing, they can
not here nor speak, but finally with shame they be borne from the table to
bed. Is there than more pleasure in such feasts than in other, where is as
much of meat and drink, as is sufficient to drive away hunger and thirste?
the which moderat diete Nature taught: the other superfluous manner was brought
in by corrupt lusts and bestly pleasures, and therefore also health abides in
the said temperate diete, and Honestee with sobrenes contynueth in the same:
and risynge fro the table, the body is not euercharged or oppressed, but rather
amended and eased, and incresed in strength and lustines. That if thou will not
believe my tale, consider thou the minds and bodies of both partees, and thou
shalt find them stronger lustier, and of better courage, that use this
moderate and mean diete. Nor thou nedest not to lay to me, that of these also
some be now and than sick: as for that chances of an another cause, the
which we will at an other season speak of. But these that live in their
lusts, delites, in superfluousnes of metes and drinks, have their bodies
loused slaked and made softer than wax, and in manner filled with an host and
multitude of diseases and syckenesses, whom follows to increase the hepes of
their peines, the gout, the paulsey, and feeble old age long before his time:
their life ever has a do with phisicions, with medcines: their five wi^tes
and senses be dull, slow, heavy, dead, half buried in them. And if there be
any joy, any pleasure or myrthe in their life: who is there that can set by it,
specially if he be one that knows, what is the very joy and pleasure? For of
wise men pleasure Pleasure.
is thus defined and called. That there is only pleasure, where a man has
the frank use of his desires. For where a man can not use of his desires,
whilst that either sickness lets him or else is so full, that he has no
desire: without dout there all pleasure and swetenes is lost and gone. For look
upon these sick men, how they loath all things: and although there be never so
delicate and sweet meats put before them, yet they take them rather with
tediousenes, than any lust or pleasure to eat. In likewise, when by to much
abundance the lust and desire is quenched, there also the pleasure and swetnes
is lost. For the delicatenes of meats gendreth not sweetness and pleasure, so
much as the fulfillynge of our appetite and desire does. Whereof a certain
philosopher, well expert in this mattier, says: When the mind is full and
saciated, he mocketh and dispiseth the sweet hunnie combs. Declaryng that
pleasure rests not in the nature of meats, but only in the strength of our
desire and lust.

Wherefore the prophet, rehersyng the meruayles that were done in Aegypte and
in the wilderness, amongst the rest he reherseth also this thing: how
hunnie renning out of the stones satisfied and filled them. For we never find
that hunnye sprange out of stones: What than meanethe this prophets saying?
that after their labors and werynes in the long journey, having great thyrst,
they drank the sweet cold water that ran out of the stones: and of that water
with a great lust and desire they tasted. And therefore because their desire and
appetite of drinking was most swetly saciated and filled, the prophet called
those waters hunnye: not that the nature of water was turned or changed, but
that the swetenes of drink was in so thirstye a desire like hunnie. Seeing than
it is so, nor of these foresaied things there can be no doubt, except the
hearer be either folisshe, or given to strife, is it not now plain, that the
simple and mean diete has much pleasure, and keeps us in health: where
contrary wise these abominable feasts be full of diseases, full of corrupcion,
and as a wise doctoure says: The dishes that seem to bring in delight and
pleasure, be full of sickenesses, fulle of grieves and peines. But Riches Riches.
they say, gets honor, and gives abilitee to be revenged of our enemies.
Shall we herefore think, that richesse be necessary, because they healpe vice
and sin, and makes that anger shall have his effect and purpose: and
stereth up vain blastes to ge^ honor and promocion, and increseth the deuilly
she sin of pride: yet to say the truth, for such causes chiefly riches
were to be eschewed and fled? For in this wise men should willyngly nourishe
in their hertes wild and furious beasts. More over, richesse entice men to
forsake the very true and gostely honor, and makes them seek the faulfe
fained honor and glory, that in veraie deed is no honor, but only has
the color and utter face like unto honor. As often time these harlots being
foul of nature, deceive men with peynted faces, and under fair white and
ruddy colors, they hyd their shameful and filthy visages. In like manner does
riches, with whom flatterye and femed curtesye is rekened to be honor. For
these preises and homages of the people be not in ded true: but they be
rekened under the false name of honor and worship. For if thou myghtest see the
consciences, the hertes and inward thoughts of the preisers thou should
find in every one man's heart a thousand curses and defiaunces of thy manners.
Finally when thy authoritee cessethe, when thou art Jack out of office, than
shalt thou here innumerable defamers, compleyners, dispreysers of thy life:
And all these shall be the same self persons, that before magnified and
worshipped the Call thou this honor? and think thou this worthy to be
gotten by riches, that brings ever, more of hatred than of love? So that if
they came to us without seking, yet they were to be refused, and to be case
away, for the vngraciousenesse that ever folowethe them. But now if thou wi^t
here me, I shall show the, what is the very true glory and honor. The true
worship and honor is the virtue of the mind, the which honor no king can give
the, nor no flattering nor money can get the.

This honor has in him nothing feined nothing peinted, nothing hid. Of this
honor there is no successor, none accuser, nor defoyler. This honor is not
varied or changed by no time, it fears no tyran nor it esteems another
favor nor displeasure of princis. But again thou saiste without richesse thou
can not be revenged of thine ennennes, ye for this cause riches be chiefly
worthy to be rehated and cursed, and pouertee is to be loved and cherys^^ed.
For riches by this way sharpethe for the, thine own swerd, seeing they make the
a transgressour of the commandment, where our lord said: Leave to me thy
bewreakyng and reuengeance, and I will requyte thy quarrel, for wylt thou see,
how much hurt is contained in the sinful appetite of reuengeance? It takes
from man the mercy of god, and destroyethe and quenches the grace that god had
given. For it is written in the gospel of him that was in many thousand
pounds detter, and asked remission and pardon of his det his master and lord
granted thereto. Afterward the same person turned him to one of his own
servants, that ought a very sinal th^n^, and punysshed without mercy his said
servant and detter, not being able to repaye him: by the which act he
condemned him self, not to be worthy to have for his greatter det the grace
and favor that his lord had before granted him so that he had no
remission of his infinite bondage, and was delivered to the hands of
tourmentors, to be constrained by sore peines, to repay every small jot of his
det. Thus the abominable fool, through his immoderate desire to be revenged,
lost the pardon of god. would thou than have riches that by them thou
mighteste have an easier way to thy destruction? should thou not rather fie
and eschew them in this behalf, as thy deadly enemies, and causer of al
mischief: Now against this thou speak of Poverty, as of a thing that is
peinfull, and that often times causethe men for need to ban, to curse, to do
many points, uncomely, dishonest, and full of shame. It is not pouertee that
does this, it is the weakness and feebleness of mind. For Lazar was poor and
veraye poor: whose pouertee also was increased with sickness, and very
peinefull sickness, that caused his pouertee to be far greuouser seeing the
peines of his disease required many things of comfort and refreshynge, where
his pouertee could give no healpe. Either of these two, sickness or poverty
alone by him self, is peinfull and grievous: but when these two, poverty and
sickness, be joined in one, and have no succor nor easement, there rises an
intolerable grief, a fire not able to be quenched, a sorrow without remedy, a
tempest full of wrackes, a burning flame both of body and soul. Yet beside
this, the said blessed Lazar had a more grief, that was a neighbor very
rich, that lived in all ease and pleasure, and fared delicately: yet much more
his peynes were heaped, in that he lay at the gate of this rich neighbor,
seeing before his eyes the superfluous, expenses and waste of meats. For much
greatter grief it was to be constrained to want the help and succor of
things, that he presently sees, than it was to lack that he saw not. But all
this not withstandyng, this cruel rich man is nothing moved, but he
continues in his accustomated pleasures, in roialtie of feasts, in noumbre of
servants, of cooks, of mynstrels, of gesters, not diminishing his lusts and
pleasure in any small point: in the mean season, hunger, thirst and sickness
sore vexethe the said blessed Lazar, no servant no comfort comes to him no
gobbet, no morsel from that rich man's table that fedeth a sort of crauyng
knaves and lurdeines till they vomit and burst again, not so much as the
crummes that were cast away, were given to succor this poor Lazar being in
peril to die for hunger: and yet he suffered this most peinfull pouertee in
such manner, that he never spoke injurious or angry word: but as gold by fire
is made purer and cleaner, so he thus examined by passions and peines was made
through patience more noble and glorious. For if it be truth, that many poor
men only seeing other rich men, be vexed and grieved with envy, and have thereby
a more painful life, though that they want not as much as is for their
life necessary, and have meanly enough of healpe and ease^ what did than Lazar
suffer, that was poorer than any other, and not only pore, but also sick,
that no man could be more sick, and was in the mids of the city as clean
without al succor and help as though he had lived in a wildrenesse, suffering
extreme hungre and lack of all things, and most of all suffering hungre in
the superfluous tea string of his neighbor, he saw the rich man swimming in
over much substance, as in fountains of goods, and fluddes of riches: but he
saw him self have no earthly aid nor healpe, only, piteed of dogs, being
so weak, that he was not able to drive them from him. This blessed Lazar, if
he had not learned the veraie true and most perfect philosophy and learning
of god, how could he have suffered so patiently, so assured y all these
grieves? See thou ^ot, that he that hurts not him self, could of no man be
hurted? I will renew and repete my promise aforesaied. Look upon this Lazar,
what could bodily sickness? what could the lack of al things, what could
the dogs rubbing upon his sores? what could the neighbor head of that
covetous rich and proud manne hurt this noble and glorious champion of god?
In what littell point was he for all this hurted or discouraged in the virtue of
his mind? Surely not one jot, but by these tribulacions he was more confirmed
in the love and faith of god: and hereof the glorious crown and reward of
everlasting joy was prepared for him. Whereof he was reputed most unhappy, of
the self same he was glorified: and whereof his sorrows his peines and passions
were heaped, of the self same he was rewarded with perpetualle life: His
hungre prepared abundaunce and plentee of the goods that were to come, his
sickness prepared the life of heaven: his scabbes that the dogs licked, brought
him the glorious service of angels, the despite of that proud and cruel rich
man, that vile canell at his gate, opteined the most holy company and blessed
embrasing of Abraham. What did the apostle Paul (for we may ones again
speak of him) was not he assaied with innumerable storms of tribulacion? And
yet in what point was he for all that hurted? Was he not thereby made more
glorious? Where in did hungre or cold hurt him? what did whippes, strokes, or
stones to him? what hurt suffered he in the sea wrackes, in the bottom of the
seas? Did he not alwaie remain the same self Paul and the same self chosen
apostle of God? Of the other part, Judas also was one of the twelve, and chosen
apostle of Christ, but it prevailed him nothing, another that he was one of the
twelve, nor yet that he was called an apostle, seeing his mind was not set to
virtue and goodness.

But Paul with pouertee and strokes, has ren the course that ledeth to
heaven. Judas that was called to be an apostle before Paul that was endued
with like grace that the other had, that had learned the heavenly doctrine,
that was partaker of the holy sacrament and bourd of Christ, that had the gift
also of the holy ghost, so that he revived the dead, he healed the lepers, he
drove out the euille spirits, that was thought to despise the goods of this
world, that might cleau^ to the side of Christ, that had the cure and rule
of all Christis expenses, whereby his privy syn of covetousness might have been
amended, for he was a thief: yet not withstandyng all these foresaied gifts,
all these provisions of our savior, he could not wax better. Christ knew
well that Judas was covetous, and that for the love of money, he should be
damned. And therefore Christ not only rebuked him for this sin, but also by
secreat and privy means, would have holped this fault, gyuing to him the rule
and order of money, that he having in his hands the thing he desired to
have, might be saciated and leave that sinful appetite, nor should not fall
into the pyt of death, but with less evil should repress the greatter. So
in all things he that hurts not him self, can not be hurted of an other.
And again, he that will not amend and correct him self, as much as is in his
power and will to do, can not be healped of any other.

Finallye besides this, the holly scripture, as it were done in a large image
and picture, has peinted to the many lives of the old fathers, from Adam to
the time of our master Christ, that thereby thou might se the sins and
fautes of some, and also the rewards of some other: and by both examples thou
might be instructed and taught, that except a man hurts him self, he can
not be hurted of any other, although the hole universal world would conspire
and agree against him, although there should be a chaung of all times and of
al things, although the fury of kings and princes should rage against
him, and as well friends as foes should wait to betraie him, other by deceit
or by force, yet all this can not move or stur in any small jot, the constant
stomach and waking mind in virtue. Likewise of the other part, the sluggard,
the negligente body, he that betraieth and distroieth him self, can not be
made better, nor be amended, although thou lay to him a thousand medicines
and get for him a thousand bulworkes and defenses: except he first put forth
his own strength, and exercise all the power and will that is in him. The same
lesson we may learn of the similitude and parable, that Christ makes of
diverse builders, one that buildethe his house upon a sure stone: an other that
builds upon the sand, not that we should of these words understand, other
sand or stone, nor any building of timber: nor yet ye we should ima^in fluds,
showers, or winds, that assaie our houses, but that by the similitude we should
remember other the virtue of mind, or the negligence of the same: and that we
should hereby perceive, how except he hurts him self, no man can be hurted of
an other, so that another stormy raines, nor violente renning fluddes, nor the
great blasting winds could shake an house that is builded upon a sure stone.
Whereby Christ teaches the, that a man, the which betraieth not him self, nor
is not of him self sturred or troubled, no temptacion can move or overthrow
him. But the other buildyng is sone cast down, not for the violence of
temptacion, but for the weakness of the foundation, that is the feebleness of man's
mind and purpose. For sand is a lose thing and fletinge: the which without
doubt signifiethe the unstableness and inconstancy of mind. Wherefore the cause
of the houses ruin, is not temptacion, but the negligence and the wavering of
the mind, the which sometime without any blaste of temptacion is overthrown,
as a buildyng that is set upon the soft sand, though there rise no wind,
nor russh forth no fluddes: yet the fletynge sand causethe the holle house to
overthrow. For by it self sand will break and flitte: but the hard
adamante stone can not be broken with hammers. So than he that is not of him
self hurted, can not be hurted, of other, although he be by many ways
violentely assaied, but he that by his own minds slouthfulnes and negligence
is betrayed, though no man touch him: yet by him self he falls and is
overthrown: As that synful Judas fell not only without al constraint but also
being help with many stays and remedies, he could not stand. This thing I
shall show you to be true, not only in private men, but also in hole nations.
For consider thou what a care and providence God had toward the nation of the
Jews. Were not all other creatures in manner ordained and made to serve them?
was there not given to them above all other men certain new and exquisite laws
to live by? Was not a dry way made for them through the mids of the sea? and
in the same place where they were in safetee, their ennemies and persecutours
were distroyed. They lived fortee years in wilderness without plowyng or sowing.
They knew not nor felt not the labor of harvest, they had no pein in baking or
brewing their wives did another card nor spin, there was no necessitee of
merchandise, no man there to by his meat looked for a market place: but all
these commoditees the word of god gave them, and fed them in the wilderness,
without their labor or peine. For this was the nature of Manna, it seemed
daiely a new meat: and as every man's appetite was, so it had his taste. Also
by the provision of god they lacked not clothes, hose, or shoes. For during all
the said yers their clothes continued in one case, nothing worn out: no
person among them was diseased, or sick, nor had need of physic, no man
sought for medicines. The prophet David says: Psalm. 104,
God brought them forth in silver and gold, and in all their Tribus none was
sick. But as though they had left this present world, and had gone into an
another better and more happy place: so all things necessary without their
care was given them by the word of god. And beside all this the greatest
miracle of al, least the heat of the bourning son should noye and hurt them,
they were in the day time covered with clouds, and where so ever they
removed, this heavenly ruff and coueryng followed them. In the night also they
were not without solace and comfort. For a lamp set a fire by the word of
God shyned before them: the which did not only give them comfortable
light, but also showed them the right way in that desert wilderness. What
should I speak of the stone, that followed them with abundaunt issue of water?
What should I speak of the multitude of byrds, the which with their clusteryng
covered the holle earth? And other meruailes that were showed to them in
Egypt what should I rehearse? Or what should I repete the great virtues and
nobleness performed in the wilderness? the battailles done by prayers, the
great victories gotten only by the calling of God? For they not like men
fightyng, but as though they had been in a dance continually triumphed. And
how can it be told, that as they passed Aegypte, where the seas fight for
them, so with the sound of their songs and trumpettes they ouerthrewe the
walls of Hiericho, in such facion that they seemed rather to be a company
and a quiere of singing men, than an hooste of adversaries or enemies: and they
seemed men rather to execute mysteries than war. All these wonderful signs
and tokens, all these miracles were done, not so much for the pleasure and
safegarde of that nation, as that the doctrine and knowladge of God, the which
they learned of Moses, might the faster stick in their minds. For these
marvelous acts were certain voices, that declared and preached to them the
knowladge of God, lord of heaven, of earth, of all the world. The seas that
they with dry feet passed over, cried upon them to know God, and the
drowning of their enemies cried the same. The same also showed to them the
waters turned into blood, the same the rainie storm of toodis taught the^: and
finallye all the wonders that were done other in Aegypte, or in the wilderness,
signified the same. These infinite miracles weere to them as a book and
writing, that could never be blotted nor put out, nor turn from their
conscience: This book they might alwaie read, and have ever in their hertes.
Yet all this not withstandyng, so evident tokens of the power and virtue of
almighty god: And not with standing the honor and glory that god gave to
them above all other: yet they were unkind, and remained infidels, having no
steadfast faith in god. For the^ worshipped the head of a calfe, and would have
other gods made for them, although they had in their sight and memory so
many manifeaste signs of the infinite power of god. But look upon the people
of Ninevites, that was barbarous and aliens, not accustomed with no benefits
of the providence of god, not instructed with no laws, not sturred up with no
miracles, no commandementes, rude and ignorant, they saw a poor man Jonas,
as he came from the fea wrack a stranger never before seen or known of
them, that said at his first entry into their city: Within these three
days this city Niniue shall be distroied. Of the which only saieyng they
were converted and brought to the fear of God, and streighte they forsook
their sinfulle life, and by penance they gave them self to virtue and
goodness, with so sted fast a faith, that they revoked the terrible sentence of
god, that was given of their destruction, and reserved their city being at the
point to be destroyed. For the text says thus: God saw that every man had
left his most ungracious life. Tell me, how left they their life so sinful:
for their abhominacion was great, and extended up to heaven, their iniquitee,
was infinite, their wounds were incurable. For that meanethe the prophet
when he says, Their malice and sin mounted up to heaven: by the which
infinite space he signifies the greatness of their trespasses. Yet all this not
withstanding, their terrible sins that stretched unto the heaven, they being
warned with few words, and a littel communicacion of a stranger unknown,
never before in that country seen, a man to behold wretched coming from the
fea wrack: in a short space of three days, were so quenched and put out,
that they deserved to here this gracious sentence of god, saieyng: And when god
saw that every one of them had left their ungracious living, he changed his
angry mind, and revoked the blouddie sentence that he had purposed against
them. Do thou not here evidently se, how that he that has his mind ready
and bente to resist sin, and well remembers him self, can not only take
none hurt of men, but also tourneth from him the anger and vengeance of god,
being at the point to punish him? Contrary wise he that betraiethe and
hurts him self, although he have an hundred thousand graces and helps of
almighty god to his outward furtherance and staiyng up: yet all suffices him
not for his salvation. For as ye see in the foresaied exaumples, all the
wonderfulle miracles and providence of god, helped nothing the obstinate Jews:
nor the Ninevites being strangers were not hindered for the lack of such
aides and succor as the Jews had: but in as much they gave them self to god
with hole heart and mind, they greatly prevailed by a litel occacion, to
optaine the mercy and grace of god. And thus they did being rude, vntaughte
strangers, and men set a part from the learning of god, lackyng both
laws and teachers to be instructed by.

What may we now speak of the three childerne? against whom although so
great and so many tourmentes were devised: yet there could no cruel peine
either hurt or decaie the noble virtue of their minds. Were they not three
childerne of tender age? that in the first entry of their life were brought in
to thraldom, and subdued under the rule of a fierce master, being from their
country outlawes, driven from their house, church, and all acqueintance,
disused from the laws of their countreye, plucked from the accustomated
sacrifices and ceremonies of God, drawn from the sound of the holly psalms,
and brought to a strange order, where was nothing like, under an heynouse and
terrible lord, that they seemed rather to be among wild beasts, than among
men, hearing no voice like their fathers and mothers tongue, hearing no
communicacion nor teaching of prophets: they had no comfort other of priests
or shepherdes, that they were wont to have. For these words they say them
self, complaynyng that in that time and place they lacked a ruler, prophets,
capitains, a convenient place to make their sacrifice before God, to ask and
optaine his mercy. Furthermore besides all this they were in a straiter
ieoperdie, in that they were continuallye kept in the kings court: where
seemed to be a sea alwaie ragyng and troublous with storms, with tempests,
with waves, with rorynge flouddes, with blustering winds: and here they were
constrained to ieoparde their life without shipmaister, without mariners,
without sail, without ^ores. Nevertheless because their hertes and minds
were fast set in the knowladge of god, and had their inward eyes lift up to
heaven, and could well remember, that this princes power, his regal pomp, his
fasing pride, all his hole glory of richesse were frail, vile, unworthy to
be regarded: They thus helped and stayed up with the feathers and wings of
faith, fleyng to heaven, regarded and compted the kings court for a stinkyng
dongion and prison, full of proud glorious stately persons: yet the king
commanded them to be set down at his own bourde, that pompous table beset
with all the show and muster of gluttony and bealy fare.

They took this princes company for none honor, but for an abominable
sclander and shame to the^, and weere like lambs set in the mids of
wolves, and were by necessitee driven other to die for hungre, or to eat of
those meats, that were be cursed and forbed of god: What did than these
young children? this tender age bound in this thraldom? They sought none
excuse in that god knew their necessitee, and might see how they were
constrained, being in the hands of a tiranne, kept in bondage, having no
power to resist their cruel lord and proud conqueror: they imagyned none of
these excuses, but determined utterly with them selves to forbear to the
death, only that they would not offend nor displease God, or do that thing
that was not lefull for them to do. Thus they were on all sides beset with
things clean resistyng and contrary against their desire. They were bare and
naked of all money, whereby they might have somewhat swaged the fiersenesse of
their rulers and kepers: nor yet they could have no sure trust in any man's
frendeship, seeing they were aliens and strangers, and authoritee they had none,
being bond prisoners, nor in number they could not prevail, being but three
alone, what do they than? Surely that thing that only seemed to be in their
power. With fair words they entreat their keeper, whom they found full of
fear, least he should be put to death, if he favored and applied to their
desires, and so this keeper said to them, I sore fear my lord the king,
least he look upon you, and se your faces paler and leaner than be the other
young men, and upon that blame me, and put me for your sake to death. But
they of the other part, with wise aunsweres took from him al his fear, and
caused him to bear them favor. Thus when they had done as much as lay in
them, and as much as was possible for them to do, streighte the aid and
succor of god was at hand and did for them his part. Than I say this
work is not the work of god alone, but the beginnynge thereof comes of
their purpose and ready mind. For they were fully determined with them self,
not to taste of the unlawful meats. And when they had constantely and strongly
kept this mind, straight the beck of almightee god confirmed them in the
same, and brought their purpose to a glorious end. See thou now in this
place, that who so ever hurts not him self, he can not be hurted of an
another? For I pray the, look with me upon the case of these three children,
young they were, in bondage, in thraldom, al alone, there hanged over them a
strong and mightee power, cruel co^mandmentes, fear of death, compulsion of
the tiran, and fierce thretninges. One the other side help and succor was
there none, another of kinseman, nor of neighbor, nor of c^^esen,
acquaintance, none that could counsel them to follow the best, no earthely
comfort: yet in all this heap was there nothing that could hurt them,
seeing their own mind and purpose hurted them not. But contrary on the
other side, the chosen people of god the Jews, having on all sides so many
aides (as I before rehearsed) so great succor and help of god: yet they
prevailed nothing in the health of their mind, only because their own propre
sluggisshenesse, their own frowardenes betrayed and distroyed them selves.
But let us return to our three children. They first opteined this glorious
victory, that they were not defoyled with foul and vnlefulle meats. And when
the tiran was in this point overthrown and cast under their fete, they were
brought to great enterprises and battles of more honor. For a much more
cruel constreinment, a far greater mischief and heynouse condition was put
before them. A furneys was set on fire, the fierce and cruel people of the
Persis clusterethe about them, the tiranne rages, all that country is set to
disceiue and peruerte these simple and innocent childrene, there is ordered
diverse and sundry sorts of instruments to sound after the sweet consent
of music. O a new kind of crueltee, fire and music is coupled together, the
threttenynges of tourmentes and fear of death is mingled with pleasure. And
yet all not withstanding, he that does his endeavor and vttermoste power, can
not be hurted of an another, yea by the inforcementes of his ennemies, he shall
increase in glory and honor: as by these foresaied means these children came
to an higher victory than they had before. For the tiranne Nabugodonosor
bound them and cast them in the said fourneis of fire: but he could nothing
hurt them, but did them passing good, in that his fiercenes and crueltee
got them a greatter crown, and an higher reward.

For they in the mids of the bournyng furnace, in the mids of the ragyng
Persis that bourned more than the very fire in furiouse madness, had a noble and
glorious victory over their ennemies: and being but three selly children and
prisoners, overcame that hole nation with their tirannye: whose noble acts and
honor is song and shall be song for evermore. Thus than he that hurts not
him self, an other person can not hurt him. I will not cease often to
repete the title of my Sermon and sum of my purpose. For if (as we have
before touched) another imprisonment, nor bondage, nor thraldom, nor the loss
of country, of all friends and acquaintance, nor an holle host of enemies,
nor the fire, nor the cruel tiranne was not of sufficient power to hurt three
young children, being left of all aid, being strangers, and brought into the
hands of their ennemies, what thing is there able to break the virtue and
courage of the mind? But thou say to me, God helped and was with them, and
delivered them out of the fire. In likewise thou ought, if thou fulfill
thine vttermoste endeavor, to hope and trust to have the aid and grace of god.
For doubtelesse God will be with the, if thou leave not before thy self. How
be it I do not count the said children happy and blessed, because they
trampilled and walked upon the fire without hurt, but because they would be
bound, and would be cast into the fourneis for the laws of their country and
of god, the which thing contemeth their virtue, praise, and glory. For by and
by when they were thrown in the fire, began their victory, and in that
instaunt momente they had deserved their reward, by their assured faith and
answer, saying unto the king: We need not answer the to this question: for
our god is in heaven, whom we honor and serve, that may deliver us out of
this bourninge oven, and shall deliver us O thou tyranne out of thy hands,
that if god will not deliver us, thou shalt well know, that to thy gods we
will never bow: nor this image of gold, that thou set up, we never will
worship. Of these words they were crouned, and in this testimony and faith
they had their reward and thank of god, in this rested their course, the
which they ended in the martyrdom of their confession: But as touching that
the fire was a shamed to touch their bodies, and loused their bonds, and
forsaking his own nature, refresshed them with the dew of heaven in the
mids of the hot fourneis: This was a point of the grace of god, whose
pleasure was to make his power be known by the wounder and meruaille of so
strange a thing: but the children in this had no vauntage, their victory was
in their own steadfast confession, in their own constaunt and assured faith,
whereby they opteined the glory of so noble a martyrdom. What now can thou
creke against this? although thou art banisshed thy countreye, driven from
thine acqueintaunce and friends, brought to thraldom, to be bound in the
service of cruel masters? All this happened to the said children: thou live
without teaching, without instruction, without comfort, the said children were in
the same case. Thou art bound, thou art spoiled, thou art constrained to die:
all this passed the said childrene, that ever by their passions waxed more
glorious. And the Jews having their temple, their sacrifices, the book written
with the hand of god, having also Cherubin, their holy and secreate place of
prayers, and al other things mete for their daily sacrifices, and having the
prophets, some departed, some yet alive, the which in structed them in their
present manners, and showed what god did continually for them, and what he had
in times past done: what he did for them in Egipte, what in the wilderness: and
what also god did for the^ when they came into the place promissed to them. Yet
all this not with standing, they not only nothing proceeded in grace and virtue,
but also in appetual witness of their own mischief and ungraciousness, they set
up in their church ydols and images of faulse gods, sacrifyynge to the same
both their own sons and daughters. Thus they did in their temple, and also in
other places in woddes and mountains, but these said three children, in a
strange country, in the hands of their ennemies, under the power of a cruel
tiranne, thrown into the fire, be nothing hurted, and not only that, but
also take thereof great honor and glory. Now than to make an end, we
knowing and gathering these manner of exaumples out of the hollye scripture,
where be many mo, that make to this purpose, if a man will seek there: so that
diversely we may see, some without all constrainte, without all necessitee,
without any cause, to be against them self, and take sore hurt: some other
having all the world against them, to be steadfast in their right way, and
not able to be never so littel removed from their virtue. Thus when we
evidently know and see, we should without all doubting conclude with our
self, that if any man be hurted, he is hurted of him self although the number
of them that do hurt, be infinite, although all in a plumpe that dwell other
in the earth or in the sea, would agree to hurt: yet they can not in no small
point hurt him, that is not hurted of him self. With this we began, and with
this we make here an end.

FINIS.
The preface.
To my right worshipful suster dame Suzan Kyngestone.
THe circumspecte person, which is accustomed one time in the year, to be
vexed with fever, Catarre, or like syckenes, preuenteth that time by expulsing
the matter, which moughte be occasion of such disseases, and studiethe to
reduce the body into such temperaunce, and so to preserve it as the said
mattier shall not be augmented, whereby moughte ensue any detriment: Like
industry, or rather much more, ought to be used, good Suster, of every
reasonable creature, as well against the most certain sickness and final
dissolucion of nature called corporal death, as also against all worldly
vexacions and troubles, called the toys of fortune, or the crankes of the
world: considering that of any of them neither the time can be known, when
they shall happen, nor assured remedy may be founden for to repel them,
only a pure and constaunte faith, having thereto joined wisdom and patience,
may sustain their assaults, and strongly resist them. As it is excellently
declared and taught by the holly doctor and martyr saint Cyprian, in a
sermon which he made to the people of Africa, where he was Bishop, in the
time when there was continual persecucion of painims, and also mortalitee by
generalle pestilence. Which sermon when I had ones perused in readyng, I
liked so well, that I desired that all other persons might understand it.
Remembering that many there be (which I doubt not) are as neigligent as I in
considering those sondrie calamitees, not withstanding that they have beholden
men and women of every astate, which have died either before that they looked
for death, or in some other wise than they vouched saulfe, orels for saken of
fortune have lived in poverty, Wherefore as well for their instruction as mine,
how we may be alwaie prepared against those natural and worldly
afflictions, I have traunslated this littell book: not supersticiously following
the letter, which is verily elegant, and therefore the harder to traunslate in
to our langage, but keeping the sentence and intent of the Auctour I have
attemted (not with litel study) to reduce into english the right phrase or
form of speaking, used in this treatise, which I have dedycate and sent unto
you for a taken: that ye shall perceive, that I do not forget you: and that I
do unfeignedly love you, not only for our alliance, but also much more for
your perseueraunce in virtue and works of true faith, praiyng you to
communicate it with our two susters religious Dorothe and Alianour, and to
join in your prayers to god for me, that I may be constant in his service,
and perform well such other works as been in my hands only to his honour^
and glory.

I have added hereto a litel treatise, but wonderful fruitful, made by the
virtuous and noble prince John^ Picus Earl of Mirandula, who in abundaunce of
learning and grace incomparably excelled all other in his time and sens.
Whose picture I would to god were in all noble men's Chambers, and his grace and
virtues in their souls and manners. Hertely fare ye well. It London the first
day of July, the year of our lord god. 1534.

The sermon of holy saint Cyprian, of mortalitee of man.
Right well beloved friends, all be it that many of you, have your minds
entier and perfect, the faith stable, and the soul devout: not being meued
with the hugenes of this present mortalitee, but like to a puissant and
steadfast rock rather do break the troublous assaults of this world, and
the violente floudes of this present time, the soul her self not being broken
ne overcome with any temptacions, but only proved. Nevertheless for as much
as I do consider to be in the multitude diverse which either be weakness of
courage, or by smalnes of faith, or by swetenes of the life of this world, or
by the delicatenes of their kind, or (that which is a more heuie thing) being
deceived in the opinion of truth, do not stand fast ne set forth the divine
and invincible might of their stomachs. I might no longer dissemble that
matter, ne retain it in silence, but that as far forth as the means of my
learning or wit moughte extend I would declare the doctrine of Christ by a
sermon conceived and lifelye expressed, to the intent that the slouthe and
dulnes of delicate minds moughte be reformed. And also that he, which has
all ready professed to be the seruante of Christ, may hereafter be demed
worthy of Christ, and thereto accepted. Uerely good friends, he that fyghteth
for god, and being in the celestial camp, does hope on things that be
Godly, ought to know well him self, to the intent that in the tempests and
storms of this world, there be in us no dred or fearefulnes, sens almightee
god has before warned, that such things should happen. Instructyng and
teaching us by his own mouth with a provident exhortacion, and therewith
preparynge and comfortynge the people of his church to the paciente
sufferaunce of things to come, wherein he prophesed and declared unto us, that
battaill, famine, erthquakes, and pestilence should arise in sundry countries
and places. And to the intent that no sudden dread, or fear of strange
things anoyyng us, should in any wise oppress or abashe us, he told us
before, that toward the end of the world, aduersitees and troubles should
more and more be increased. Now behold, all that which he spoke of has
hapened, and is come among us. And since that is now happened, which was before
spoken of, there shall also now ensue all that which was promised our lord
him self promisyng and saying: Luc. 22.
What time ye shall see all these things come to pass, than be you sure that
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. The kyngedome of heaven good friends
beginnynethe now to approach. The reward of life, and the comfort of health
everlasting, perpetual gladness, and the possession of Paradise, which before
we had lost, now the world passing away, become and at hand: even now
after things erthely do succeed that which is heavenly, after small things,
great things and precious: after things transitory, things eternal or
everlasting.

What time is it now to be sad: Or who among these troubles will be timorus or
sorrowful: but only he in whom lacks both faith and hope: for he only
fears death, which will not go unto Christ, and he which will not go unto
Christ, is he which does not believe, that he now beginnethe to reign with
Christ. To. 1.
It is written, The just man lives by faith: If thou be a just man, thou
live by faith. If thou beleueste truly in god, coming to Christ, and
being sure of his promise, why doesre not thou ren and embrace Christ now
thou art called: Why do not thou thank god and rejoice, that thou art out
of the diuilles danger.

The just man Symeon, who verily was a good and a just man, and kept the
commaundemences of god full of faith when answer was made unto him from
almightee god, that he should not die until he had seen Christ: when Christ
being a babe came with his mother into the Temple, he in spirit knew, that
Christ was now borne, of whose coming he was before warned. And when he
beheld him, he knew that he him self, should shortly after depart from
this world: Wherefore being joyful of death that approached, and being sure of
his sone sending for, he took the blessed babe in his arms, and with praises
and thanks unto god, he said with a loud voice, Luc. 2.
Now good lord thou will license thy servant to depart from this mortal
life in peace according to the word that thou sendest me. For now mine eyes
have behold thy provision of remedy that thou have prepared in the sight of
all people. As who says proving and witnessynge also, that thanne peace was
come to the servants of god^ and that than was a peasible quietness. When we
being drawn out of the storms of this world desire to come to the heaven of
perpetualle suretee, and also when death being from us excluded, we attain to
immortalitee or life everlasting. That is our peace, that is our sure
tranquillitee, that is our steadfast, our fyrme, and perpetual suretee.
Furthermore wha^ (...) we in this world: but fight against the devil daiely
in battle, and against his waypon and ordinance make resistance with
continual con^^ictes. Ennemies of man.
We strive daily with avarice, with lechery, with wrath, with ambicion. We have
a busy and painful wrastlyng, with carnal vices and worldely delectacions.
The mind of man is besiged, and all about compassed and assaulted with sin,
and hardly is matched on al parts, and may uneath resist and defend him from
all. For if he overthrow Avarice, than stertethe up lechery: If lechery be
oppressed, ambicion comes in her place: and although ambicion be neglected^
yet wrath will exasperate, Pride inflatith, drunkenness allureth, envy breaks
concord, and by the same is frendshyp dissolved. Thou art constrained to
curse, which the law of god does prohibit: Thou art compelled to swear,
which is unlawful. These persecucions thy mind daily does suffer, with these
many perils thy stomach is vexed: And yet doeste thou delight to tarry long
here among the swords of people malicious, when rather thou shouldeste
coueite and desire (death setting the forward) to haste the toward Christ,
Joan. 16.
he saying to us in his doctrine: I tell you verelye, Ion. 16.
ye shall both weep and wail, but the world shall rejoice and be merry: ye
shall be heavy and sorrowful, but your heaviness shall be turned into mirthe.
Now who will not make haste to come where he shall be merry: who will not wish to
lack alwaie heaviness: But at what time our sorrow shall be turned myrthe, our
lord him self declares, Ion. 16.
saieyng: I shall se you again, and your hertes shall rejoice, and that gladness
shall no man take from you. Wherefore sith to see Christ is perfect
reioysynge: and our gladness may not be without beholding of him, what
blyndnes of mind yea what madness were it to love the vexacions, pains, and
continual sorrows of this present world: And not rather to make all spedy
deligence to come to the iois, which may never be taken from the: This does
happen dear friends because that faith lacks: for no man does believe that
such things shall come, which almightee god, who ever is true, has all ready
promised, whose word is eternal, and to them that beeleue, alwaie sure and
constaunt.

If an honorable man and of great grauitee did promise the any thing, thou
wouldeste trust him, and would not think to be deceived of him, whom
thou know to be as well in word as in deed substancial and steadfast. But now
almightee god talks with the in his scripture, and thou as false and disloial
do flitter in a mind mistrustfull and wavering. God has promissed to the
when thou shalt depart from this world, immortalitee and life everlasting.
And yet not withstandyng thou doubteste: that is as much to say, as thou
knoweste not god. And also thou willingly offendest Christ the master of al
them that believe, with the sin of incredulitee or lack of believe, and that
thou being constitute and admitted into the church of god, haste not faith in
the house of faith. How much the departing from this world shall be to
thy profit, Christ him self master of our profit and health does declare,
where he says to his disciples, which sorowed because he told them that he
would depart. Io. 14.
If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, for as much as I go to my father. Thereby
teaching and declarynge unto us, that when they whom we do most favor or
love, do depart out of this world, we should rather be glad than sorry.
Which thing the blessed apostle remembryng says in his Epistole: Phil. 4.
My living is Christ, and death is to me gain and advantage. Accomptinge the
greattest gain not to be ta^gled in the snares of this world, not to be
subject to sin or carnal vices: And being delivered from troublous
vexacions, and from the venomous teeth of the devil, to depart (Christ
calling us) to the joy of health everlasting.

But there be some men, which be grieved for as much as this trouble vexes us,
equally as much as the infidels, As it were that a christen man believes, to
that entente only, that he would be fre from the touch of all grefe and
disease, and inioye this world prosperously.

Some be offended for as much as mortalitee is to us with other in commune.
What thing, I pray you, have not we with other in commune, as long as this
commune carnalitee remains according to the ordinance of our first
natiuitee: As long as we be here in this world, we be joined together with all
man kind in equalitee of fleshely substance: but in spirit we be separate.
Therefore until this corruptible mattier be with incorrupcion endued, and this
mortal substance do receive immortality, and this spirit do bring us unto
god our father, what so ever incommoditees do belong to this carnal body, they
be to us with mankind in commune. For like as when wi^h cold blastes (which
do cause the barennes) the earth is (as it were) fasting and without fode,
hungre does except no man. And when a city is won with enemies, by
captiuitee all thing is wasted. And when fair wether restrainethe showers,
it is but one drowthe unto all men. And when a ship is all to rent one a
rock, the wrecke is commune to all them, which be in it: Also the pain of
the eien, violence of fevers, and disseasis of all other me^bres be to us with all other in commune, as long as this commune body is borne about in the
world. More over a christen man beleuinge by any law or condition, let him
know and remember that he must trauaill more in this world than any other,
for as much as it partaineth to him to wrestle with the devil, with greatter
resystaunce. And that to do he is warned and taught by holy scripture, Eccl.
2.
saying: My son which ghost to the service of god, stand fast in justice and
dread, and prepare thy soul to receive temptacion. And in an other place.
Suffer both in grefe and in fear, and have patience in thine humilite, for as
well gold as silver be tried with fire. In this wise Job, Job. 1.
after the loss of his goods, and death of his children, being tourmented
with pa^nefulle sores and biting of worms, was not vanquished, but only
proved: who in his pains and affliccions, declaring the patience of his devout
mind, said as follows: Job. 1.
Naked I came from the womb of my mother, and naked I shall return to the
earth, our lord gave it to me, and our lord has taken it from me, as to our
lord it best seems, so is it happened: blessed be the name of our lord. And
when his wife would have persuaded him, that as if he were by the violence of
pain out of patience, he should with a grudginge and disdainous voice speak
some thing against almighty god, he answered unto her and said: Thou
speak like one of the lewd or folishe women. Job. 2.
If we have received goods of the hands of our lord, why shall not we than
suffer euilles patiently? In all those things which happed to Job, he never
offended with his lips in the sight of our lord. And therefore our lord
does witness thus of him saiynge to Satan: Have thou taken good heed of my
servant Job? there is none in the world like to him: A man without
grutching, the veraie true worshyppar of god almightee.

Also Toby after his honorable works, and the manifold and famous
comme^dacions of his deeds of mercy, he was stricken with blindness, and not
withstanding he dreadyng and blessyng almightee god in all aduersitees,
finally by that bodily detriment he increaced to parpetuall praise: not
withstandyng that his wife, willing to abuse him, tempted him, in this wise
saying: Tob. 2.
Where been thy works of mercy be come? Loo now what thou suffrest. But
Thobias being constaunt and steadfast, and also armed with true faith, whereby he
suffered vexacions and grefes, yielded not to the temptacion of his frail wife,
but much rather with greatter patience deserved the favor of god. And
therefore he was afterward of Raphaell the angel commended, who said to him
these words. To publys^he and confess the works of almightee god it is
honorable. For when thou and Sare thy sons wife prai^^ I offered the
remembrance of your prayer in the presence of the clearenesst of almightee
god, sens thou have buried them, which died openly, and has not forborne to
rise and leave thy diner, and gone thy way and buried the deed: I am sent to
prove the. And in an other place the same angel says: God sent me to heal
the and Sara thy sons wife, I am Raphaell one of the seven angels, which be
present and conuersaunte before the clearenes of god almightee.

This manner of sufferance is alwaie in good men. This lesson the holy apostoles
kept acoordyng to gods commandment, not to murmoure in aduersitee, but
what so ever happens in this world, ^o take it patiently, considering that the
Jews offended by murmouryng often times against god, as our lord him self
wytnessethe in the book named Numeri, Nu. ^0.
saying: Let them leave their murmouring, and they shall not die. Truly
dear brethren we ought not to murmoure or grudge in aduersitees, but to
suffer strongly and patiently all that shall happen unto us, Psalm. 50.
sens it is written: The spirit that is troubled is a sacryfyce to god. For the
heart which is contrite and made humble, god never dispisethe. Also the holly
ghost by Moses in the book of Deutromy warnith the saying: Deuteronomy. 8.
Thy lord god shall vex the, and send to the scarsite: And than it shall be
known in thy heart, if thou shall keep well his commaundmentes or no. And
again, your lord god temptethe you, that he may know if ye do love your
lord god with all your heart and with all your soul. For so was god pleased
with Abraham, Genesis 2^.
who to please god neither feared to lose his son, nor yet refused to slay
him. But thou what so ever thou art, that maiste not suffer the loss of thy
son taken from the, either by the law, or by chance of mortalitee: What
would thou do if thou were commanded to sle him? The fear of god and
faith should make the ready to sustain all thing. Admit that thou have
loss of thy goods, or that thou be cruelly vexed with sickness of thy members
continually: or that thou be despoyled by the death of thy wife, thy
childrene, or thy most dear friends and companions.

Let not these be to the any displeasures, but rather battle against
worldely affections, ne let them not break or make waiker the faith of
Christ, but rather let them declare in that debate thy virtue or puissaunce:
sens all violence of euilles, which be present are to be had in contempt
upon trust of good things, which shall happen hereafter. For except war
goo before, there may be no victory. But when after battle joined there
ensues victory, than to the vainquishours is given the garlande. Semblably
in a tempest a good master is known, and the soudiour in bataile is proved.
Bostyng out of peril is pleasant, but resistaunce in aduersitee is the trial
of truth. The tree which with a deep root standethe fast in the ground, is
not meued with every puff of wind that blows. Also the ship which is well
couched together with a strong frame, though she be often hitte with the wawes,
yet is she not bouged. And when the corn is thresshed in the barn, the sound
and strong grain continues the winds, while the chafe is blown about
with every light blaste. So the Apostle Paul after this wrecke on the sea,
after his whippinges, after sondrie and greuouse tournementes sustained in his
body, he does not say, that he was vexed or tourbled, but that by those
aduersitees he was amended: as he would say, that the more gruously that he
was troubled, the more surely was he than proved. 2. Cor. 12.
There is given to me (says he) a prick in my flesh, a messenger of the
devil, which continually strikes me to the entente that I shall not be
extolled in mind. Wherefore thryse I desired god, that I might be thereof
delivered. And he answered me: Content the with my grace. For in infirmitee
virtue is tried. Therefore when we be vexed either with infirmitee, feebleness, or
any aduersitee, than is our virtue proved: than our faith, if it abide and be
constant, is crowned, according as it is written: Eccl. 27.
The fourneis tries the pottars vessel, and temptacion of trouble tries men
that be good. Between us christen men and other, the only diuersitee is, that
they in aduersitee do grutche and complain. And us Christen people aduersitee
may not call a way from the truth of virtue and faith: but does corroborat
or strenghte us in the grefe, that we suffer. That the bealye resolved with
fluxes expulseth by the bowelles bodiely strength: or that the superfluous heat
engendered in the marowe of our bones, inflamethe out by blisters in our chekes:
that our bowels be shaken with continual vomittes: that with abundaunce of
blood our eien do burn in our heades^ that some men's feet and other members
putrifyed be cut of or rotted: that by loss of members or other harm taken
by sickness either our going is febled, or our hearing is stopped, or our sight
is perished, all this profits to the doctrine of faith. And to resist with
the powers of an immonable mind against so many assaults of destruction and
death, what valiantnes of courage is it, ye and what honor to stand bolt up
right among the ruins of mankind, and not to lie prostrat with them, which
hope not in god? We therefore must rather rejoice, and take in good worth the
reward of the time: that while we do constantely declare our faith, and by
sustainyng of labor do approach unto Christ: by Christ's strait passage, we
may receive by his judgment the reward of life, which faith does require.
Let him hardiely fear, that not being regenerate by water and the hollye
ghost, is committed to the terrible fires of hell: Let him fear that is
rekened no partener of the cross and passion of Christ: Let him also fear
which from this carnal death, shall pass to the secounde death: and let
him fear, home ones departed out of this world, everlasting fire shall
tourmente with pains continual: Finally let him be a ferde, unto whom by
long tariynge here this one thing avails, that his tourmentes and waillynges
be in the mean time put of or differred. Many of our number do die in this
mortalytee, that is as who says, many of our number be out of this world
delivered. Forsooth this mortalitee likewise as to the Jews and paynims it is a
pestilence: so to the servants of god it is a wholesome departing. What if good
men without any diversity do die with the evil men: there is no cause, that
ye should therefore think that death is commune to good men with them that be
ill. For good men be called to joy: the evil men be drawn into pain, so
surety to them that believe well, and pain to myscreauntes the sooner does
happen Uerely good brethrene we be vncurtayse and neglygent having regard to
gods benefits: ne we do recognize what is offered unto us. Behold how
virgins be departed saulfe and in peace, with their glory and praise, not
fearing the thretnynges, corruptions, nor bordell houses of Antichrist, who is
now coming. Childrene are eskaped the peril of their slypper age, and have
atteyned happylye to the reward of innocence and pure continence. The
delicate matrone now fears no tourmentes, sens with spedye death she has
prevented the fear of persecucion, and the hands and tourmentes of cruel
tyrants. More over by fear of mortalytee and troubles of this time, they
which were late cold in faith, be now chaused and warm: they which were
remysse or louse, be knitte together and made substanciall: they that were
cowardes, be quickened in courage. The forsakers of their faith be compelled
to return: The paynims constrained to believe: The old faithful people be
called to quiet: And a fresh and great host of them, which became
soldiers of Christ in the time of mortalitee, is assembled with a more
puissaunce to fight without dread, when the batailes is joined. What a thing is
this good friends, how conueniente and necessary is this pestilence and
moraine, which seming to be monstrous and horrible, triethe out the goodness
of diverse men, and examineth the minds of all men? that is to say whether the
hole men do aid them that be sick: If kinsmen be kind one to an other: If
the masters do pitee their frail and weke servants: If phisicions do not
abando^ their pacientes: If they which be cruel will withdraw their
violence. If the oppressors and robbers (at the lest for fear of death) will
assuage the insaciable appetite of furiouse avarice: If proud men will stoop,
or unthrifts auale their lewd courage? If they that be rich and shall die
without heirs of their bodies, will any thing distribute among their nedie
neighbors. And surely although this mortalitee were to nothing else
profitable, yet in this it has been advantage to christen men, and them which
be gods servants, that in learning not to fear death, we the more
willyngely desire martyrdom. This to us is no death, but an exercise, which
bryngethe to the mind renoume of valiaunte courage, and by dispising of death
prepares to receive the garland of victory. But parchaunce some man will
reply and say: yet not withstanding this greauethe me in this present
mortalitee that where I had prepared my self to confess my faith, and had
disposed me with all my hole heart and full power to the surferaunce of passion,
now prevented by death I am dissapoynted of martyrdom.

First to be a martyr it is not in thine own power, but in gods will and
election. Ne thou may not say, that thou haste lost that thing, which
thou know not, whether thou were ever worthy to have it. Moreover, god the
sercher of hertes, and beholder and judge of seacret thoughts, does see the,
and does commend and allow the. And he which perceives to be in the, virtue
prepared, for thy virtue shall yield unto the a sufficient reward. Supposeste
thou, had Came slain his brother Abell at what time he offered the sacryfice
unto almighty god? well and yet god being ware of his purpose condemned the
murder conceived in the mind, which Caine did afterward execute: So like as
in Caine a malicious thought and a mischeuous imaginacyon was before seen by
gods providence, likewise in the servants of god, which confessing faith in
their thoughts, and in their ententes conceyuing martyrdom, their souls
being given to that good purpose be crowned of god their judge, which knows
all thing. It is not one thing to lack a will to be martired, and to lack
martyrdom to a good will. Such as god finds the to be when he calls the,
so does he judge the, according as he him self witnesses saying: Apoc. 2.
And all congregacions shall know that I am the serchour of man's heart and his
reins.

Nor god lokethe for you blood, but for your faith, For neither Abraham nor
Isaac nor Jacob were slain. And yet not withstanding they deserved to be
honored for their faith and Justice: and to be the chief of all
patriarchs: unto whose feast is called every man that is found faithefull,
just, and commendable. We must remember to do not as we our self will, but
according to gods will. And so god commands us every day to pray. How
over the warte and perverse a thing is it that where we desire that the will
of god be done when he calls and sends for us out of this world, we do
not forth with obey his commaundment and pleasure, but against that we
murmoure and strive, and be brought like froward servants with heavy and
sower countenance to our masters presence: departing hense with the bo^de
of necessity, not with a willing obedyence: and yet will we be honored with
heavenly rewards of him, unto whom we come not willyngely, but by
constrainte only. Wherefore than do we ask and desire, that the kingedome of
heaven may come unto us, if worldly captiuitee so much does delight us? Wherefore
do we ask and desire in our prayers so often rehearsed, that the time of the
reign, which is promised should come spedily, if our desires and wishes to
serve the devil are more to be set by than to reign with our Savior?

More over for the plainer declaracion of gods providence, and that our
lord, which before seethe all things to come, will give to us counsel
concerning our veraie health, it happened late, that one of our company and a
preiste, being attainted with sickness, and loking for death, which approached,
desired leave to depart: as he was praiyng and in point of death, there
stood hard by him a goodly yongman of an honorable port and maiestee, high
of sta^ure and fair, whom the sight of man moughte uneath behold with
carnal eien saving that he which was departing out of the world with eien more
spiritual might look one such one, and the same person so appering, not
without indignacion, as well in countenance as speech, groudchingly spoke in
this wise: ye fear to suffer, and ye will not go forth, what shall I do to
you? Which was the speaking of one that blamed and also exhorted: who allowed
not them, which for the time present where careful of persecucion, and yet
sure of their departing, but gave counsel for the time coming. Our said
brother heard, when he was diyng, what he should tell unto other. For he heard
when he should die, that which he should report unto other, and he heard not
for him self but for us. For what should he learn, which was than in
departing: In deed he learned for us, which remained, to the intent that in
hearing the preiste of god blamed, which asked his rightes, we should know
what was to all men expedient.

More over to us of all other most simple, how often has it ben showed by
reuelacion? how sundry times have I ben plainly commanded of the goodness of
god, that I should alwaie affirm and openly preach, that our brethren
delivered from this world by the calling of god, should not be bewailed and
sorowed for, sens I knew well that they where not lost but sent only before
us, and so departing proceeded: And therefore as men being in journey or viage
to be desired, but in no wise lamented. Ne we should put on us black
gowns for them, which now have received and put on white garments: Ne we
ought to give occasion to infidels to reprove us lefully and with good reason,
for as much as we do mourn for them, as they were dead and lost for
ever, which we say do live ever with god, and so with the witness of our own
hertes and stomachs reprove the faith, which in word and sentence we have
confessed. Surely we be the deceiuours of our own faith and hope, if that,
that we say apert to be faulse and dissembled It profits nothing to show in
words virtue, 1. These. 4.
and in deeds to distroie veritee. The apostolle Paul rebukes, chideth, and
blames such as be heavy or sorrowful for the death of their friends: We will
not (says he) good brethern, that ye should be ignorant in that which
concerns them that do sleep in natural death, to the entente ye should not
be sorrowful, like as they be, which are without hope. If we beeleue that Jesus
Christ died and roose again afterward: In like wise god almyghtee shall
finally bring with him those that slept in Christ. Also he says, that they
which do lack hope, be heavy when their friends do depart. But we which
live in hope, and believe in god, and do verily trust that Christ suffered for
us, and did ef^sons rise. We I say, which dwell in Christ, and do arise by
him and in him, why refuse we to depart hens? or wailen and lament for them
that be gone? Christ him self our god warns us, Io. 11.
saying: I am the resurrection and life, he that believes in me, although that
he dies, he shall live: and all that lives, and believes in me, shall never
die. If we believe Christ, let us have faith in his words and promises,
and we shall never die. Let us come therefore with a sure gladness unto Christ,
with whom we shall live and reign ever. For by that, that we die, we pass from
death to immortalitee: in as much as life everlasting may not succeed, without
departing from hens. All be it, it is no clear departing, but rather a
passage, and change of this life for the life eternal, the temporal journey
performed. Who will not hye him from the warse to the better? Who will not
coueite to be reformed and changed to the figure of Christ? or will not
desire to come shortly to the dignitee celestial grace?

Paul the apostle preaching: Phil. 3.
our abiding (says he) is in heaven, from whens we abide the coming of
Christ Jesus, who shall transform our simple body in semblable figure to the
body of his clearenes. And Christ our lord promissed, that we shall be such
when he prayed to his father, that we moughte be with him, and live with him in
eternal places, and be joyful and merry in the kingdom of heaven, saying:
Joan. 17^
Father I will that such as thou haste given to me^ that they be with me where
so ever I be, and that they se the clearenes that thou gave to me before that
the world was create. Wherefore he that entendeth to come to the place, where
Christ is, to the brightness of the Realms celestial, ought not wail or
lamente, but according to the hope, which he has in the promise of god, and
trust that he has in truth, be joyful and glad in his departing or
translacion from hence: For as much as we read, that Enoch was translated or
taken out of this world, because he pleased god, ^en. 5.
as holy scripture witnesses in the book of Genesis, in this wise: Enoch
pleased god, and was not afterward founden, for god translated him from hence.
That thing wherewith he pleased in the sight of god, was that he deserved to be
taken from the perils of this present world. More over the holy ghost
teachethe by Salamon, Sap. 4.
that they, with whom god is pleased, be the sooner taken away and delivered
from hence, lest if they should abide longer, they should be polluted with
worldely infections. Therefore Enoch was rapte and taken away suddenly, least
sensual appetite should corrupt his understanding. For his soul was unto god
pleasynge, and therefore he hastened to bring him out of the mids of
iniquitee. Semblably in the psalms the devout soul hastes spedily toward
her god, Psalm. 83.
with a singular faith as it is written: O thou god of virtues and puissance,
how wonderfulle delectable be thine habitacions, my soul desires and
hastes to come to thy plaices? Uerely he only should have will to abide in
this world, whom the world deliteth, whom flatering and deceptful time
inuiteth with vain delectacions of worldely pleasures. Now sens the world
hates a true christen man, why do thou love that thing, whereof thou art
hated: and foloweste not rather Christ, who has redeemed the and also loves
the.

Saint John^ in his Epistolle speaks and cries unto us, 1. Joan. 2.
exhorting us not to love this world in following our appetites: Love not the
world (says he) ne the things which be in it. For who so ever loves the
world, the charitee of the father of heaven is not in him: sens all that is in
the world is inordinate appetite of the flesh, inordinate appetite of the
eien, and desire of worldely honor, which do not proceed of our father, but
of worldly appetite. And yet the world and his vain appetite shall wanishe
away, but he which shall fulfill the pleasure of god, shall abide everlasting,
like as god is ever eternal. Therefore good friends let us alwaie be bound
and ready to perform all thing that god wills with a perfect mind, a
faith stable and constant, with virtue puissant and strong, all fear of
death utterly excluded, and only thinking on the immortalitee, which
immediately follows. Let us declare, that to be the thing that we do
believe in: and not lamente the departing of them, whom we do favor. And when
the day of our sending for shall approach, let us willingely and without any
stickkyng, come unto god when he calls, which sens it ought to be done of
them, which be the servants of god, much rather now the world decaiyng, and
in point to f^l, and also compassed with tempests of evils continually
assaultyng it. Also we perceive that great mischeife is all ready begone, and
we know that much greatter is coming: Let us reken the greattest advantage
to depart shortly from hens, which shall be for our special commoditee. If the
walls in thy house should shake for age, and the roufe should trimble, and all
the holle house werie of rockyng of the beams and rafters, should thrette to
fall shortly in ruin, would thou not depart thense in all the haste
possible: If when thou art on the sea, the waw^s being driven up with a
sturdie wind, a troublous and stormy tempeste would warn the that thy ship
were in danger of losing: would thou not make haste to come to some haven:
Loo behold the world rocketh, and is now in falling: and declares his
imminente ruin not for age or feebleness of things, but only for that his
end now approaches: and yet thou tha^kest not god, nor do not rejoice in
thy self, that being taking away with a more ready, and (as I might say) a
more riper departing, thou maiste escape the ruins, wreckes, and plages,
which now thou see coming. We must consider good friends, and often times
think, that we have renounced this world, and that we dwell here but as
pylgrimes and gestes. Therefore let us embrace ioyfullye the day which
doethe appoynte every man to his habitacyon, and deliuerynge us hens, escaped
from the snares of this world, restores us unto Paradise, and the kyngedome
of heaven. Who being I pray you, in a far journey, will not make haste to
return home to his country?

Who being on the sea sailing homewarde, would not desire to have a
prosperouse wind, that he may the sooner salute and embrace his good friends?
Let us account Paradise to be our very country. For there have we the
blessed Patriarchs our veraie auncetours. Why make we not have, ye why do not
we ren a pase to see our country, that we may salute our good Auncetours?
There does abide and look for us a great number of our dear friends, our
Auncetours, our fathers and mothers, our brethren and children. A plentuous
and great multitude, which now be sure of their immortalitee, and yet do
care for our suretee, do desire to have us in their company. To come to
behold and embrace them, lord god what a joy and comfort shall it be both
to them and to us? What an imcomparable dilectacion of the heavenly Regeons,
without fear to die, and with assured eternitee to live ever: O with how
perfect and eternal felicitee? There is the most glorious quiere of the
blessed apostles: There is the college of the glad prophets: There is people
innumerable of hollye martirs adourned with crowns of victory for their
vexacions and sundry passions: there be the tender and pure virgins
triumphyng, which with continence of soul and body, did subdue the puissaunce
of carnal appetites: There be they which being merciful in giving sustinance
to the nedy persons, did thereby fulfill the works of Justice: There also be
they, which obseruyng diligently the commandetes of god, did transpose
worldely possessions unto the heavenly treasure. To those let us hye us a
peace good friends, that we may shortly be with them, let us desire fervently
to come unto Christ. That thought let god almightee see in us: That intent of
our mind and faith, let our lord Christ perceive, and behold, sens unto
the, them which toward him have most affection, his goodness will give his
rewards most abundaunt and plentuous.

Amen.
The rules of a Christian life made by John^ Picus the elder Earl of Mirandula.
FIrst if to man or woman the way of virtue does seem hard or painful,
because we must needs fight against the flesh, devil, and the world, let
him or her call to remembrance, that what so ever life they will chose
according to the world, many aduersitees incommodities, much heaviness and
labor are to be suffered.

More over let them have in remembrance, that in wealth and worldely
possessions is much and long contencion labourious also, and therewith
unfruitful, wherein travail is the conclusion or end that he, which was god,
Mar. 14.
and of all men the most just or rightwise, Luc 22.
when he beheld him self mocked, Joan. 13.
spitte on, scourged, and punished with all dispites and rebukes, and set on
the cross among errant thieves, as if he him self were a false harlot, he not
withstandyng showed never token of indignacion, or that he were grieved, but
suffering all things with wonderful patience, answered all men most
gentilly. In this wise, if thou peruse al things one after an other, thou
majesty find, that there is no passion or trouble, that shall not make the in
some part conformable or like unto Christ.

Also put not thy trust in man's help, but in the only virtue of Christ
Jesus, Joan. 16.
which said: Trust well, for I have vainquished the world. And in an other
place he says: Joan. 13.
The prince of this world is cast out thereof. Wherefore let us trust by his
only virtue, to vainquishe the world, and to subdue the devil. And therefore
ought we to ask his help by the prayers of us and of his saints.

Remember also, that as soon as thou have vainquished one temptacion, alwaie an
other is to be looked for: 1. Pet. 5.
The devil goes alwaie about and seeks for him whom he would devour. Wherefore
we ought to serve diligently and be ever in fere, and to say with the
prophet: I will stand alwaie at my defense.

Take heed more over, that not only thou be not vainquished of the devil,
that tempts the, but also that thou vainquishe and overcome him. And that is
not only when thou do no sin, but also when of that thing wherein he
tempted the, thou take occasion for to do good. As if he offreth to the
some good act to be done to the intent that thereby thou may fall into
vainglorie: forth with thou thinking it, not to be thy deed or work, but the
benefit or reward of god, humble thou thy self, and judge the to be unkind
unto god in respect of his manyfolde benefits.

As often as thou dooest fight, fight as in hope to vainquishe, and to have at
the last perpetual peace. For that paraduenture god of his abundaunt grace
shall give unto the, and the devil being confused of thy vyctorie, shall
return no more again. But yet when thou haste vainquished, bear thy self
so as if thou should fight again shortly. Thus alwaie in bataile, thou
must think on victory: and after victory, thou must prepare the to bataile
immediately.

All though thou felest thy self well armed and ready, yet flee, not
withstanding, all occasions to sin. For as the wise man says: Eccl. 3.
Who loves perille, shall therein perish.

In all temptacions resist the beginning, and beat the Childrene of Babylon
again the stone, which stone is Christ, and the children, be evil thoughts
and imaginacions. For in long continuyng of sin, seldom works any
medicine or remedy.

Remember, that all though in the said conflict of temptacion the bataile
seems to be very dangerous: yet consider how much sweter it is to vainquishe
temptacion, than to follow sin, whereto she inclines the, whereof the end is
repentance. And here in many be foul deceived, which compare not the swetnes
of victory to the swetnes of sin, but only compares bataile to pleasure.
Notwithstanding a man or woman, which has a thousand times known what it
is to give place to temptacion, should ones assaie, what it is to vainquishe
temptacion.

If thou be tempted^ think thou not therefore that god has forsaken the, or
that he sets but littel by the, or that thou art not in the sight of god,
good or perfect: but remember, that after saint Paul had seen god, as he was
in his diuinitee, and such secreate mysteries as be not lefull for any man to
speak or reherce, he for all that suffered temptacion of the flesh, wherewith
god suffered him to be tempted, least he should be assaulted with pride. Wherein
a man ought to consider, 2. Cor. 2.
that saint Paule^ which was the pure vessel of election, and rapt into the
third heaven, was not withstandyng in peril to be proud of his virtues, as he
says, of him self. Wherefore above all temptacions man or woman ought to arm
the^ most strongly against the temptacion of pride, sens pride is the rote of
all mischief, against the which the only remedy to think alwaie that god
humbled him self for us unto the cross. Eccle. 1.
And moreover that death has so humbled us whether we will or no, that our
bodies shall be the meat of worms lothesome and venimouse.

FINIS.
Gathered counsels Consideracion of man him self.
O Man know thy self, know what thou art, know thy beginning, why thou
were borne, unto what use or end thou were gotten, Eccle. 12.
why thou weere made, of whose making thou were made, to what thing in this
world thou were fourmed: have mind of thy making, be such as thou were
made, yea such as thy maker fourmed the. Every day rensake thine heart, every
day examine thine heart: keep thy soul from sinful thought, let not foul
thought overthrow thy mind. When a shrewde thought touches the, consent not
to it. Kill the serpent, when he first appears, tread down the serpents
head. Cast under fo^e the beginning of evil suggestion or stirringe to sin.
Amend sin there, where it is known. In the beginning withstand a shrewde
thought, and thou shalt escape well the remenaunte.

Against lechery.
BE thou not defouled with any uncleanness, Gal. 5.
be thou not spotted through any foul lust: Let lechery grow no more in
the, Chastitee ioynethe a man to god. To chastitee is behyght the kingdom of
heaven. If thou yet feel the stirring of thy flesh, if thou be touched with
prickynges of the ^leshe, if thou yet be stirred with the suggestion of lust,
if the mind of lechery yet tickle thy will, if thy flesh (...) of flesh.
Behold not a woman for to desire her. Eccl. 25.
Do away the cause of sinning. Lay besides the, the mattier of trespassing. If
thou will be sure from lechery, be thou disceuered from woman in body and in
sight.

Fellowship of women.
IF thou be departed in body from women, thou shall fall from the intent of sin.
If thou sit besides a serpent, thou shall not long be unhurt. If you be long
before a fire, although thou were made of it on, sometime thou shall melt. If
thou abide right nigh peril, thou shall not long be ^ekyr: often times leisure
has overcome, whom will might not.

Travail.
LEchery ouertournethe soon a man given to idelnesse. Lust brenneth
grievously, whom she findethe idle. Lust geuethe place to travail, to work,
to business, and labor. Therefore beware of ydlenes, spend thy good in labor,
use some manner of business, seek unto the a profitable work: whereupon the
intent of thy soul may be set.

Reading of holy scripture.
Give the much to reading take heed in meditacion of scripture, buisy the in
the law of god, have a customable use in divine books. reading declarethe
truly, what thou shalt shonne. Reading shewethe, what thou oughteste to
dread. Reading tells whether thou go. In reading wit and understanding
increases. Thou shalt much profytte in readyng, if thou do as thou read.

Mekenes.
BE thou meke, be thou grounded in mekenes, be thou leasie and loweste of all.
By meekness make thy self least. Set thy self tofore no man. Auant not thy
self, bost not thy self wantonly. Stretche not forth thy wings of pride. So
much thou shalt be the more precious before god, that thou set littell
price by thy self. Bear therefore shamefastnes in chere, by minding of thy
defaltes For shame of thy sin be dismayed to look proudly. Walk with allow
chere, with a meke mouth, and asad visage. In high worship have great mekenes.
Although thou be high of power, restreine highness in thy self. Let not
worship make the proud. The higher thou art in dignitee, the lower by mekenes
make thou the.

Sickness and disease.
BE not sorry in thy diseases. In thy sickness thank thou god.

Be busy rather to be holle in thy soul, than in body. If prosperitee
come, be thou not proud: if aduersitee fall, be thou not heavy. Know thy
self, that god has proved the in sorrow, for thou should not be proud, Be
even therefore in all things. For joy ne for s^row, change never thy mind.
Understand well, there is nothing, but it may fall as god will. And if those
things be thought on before, they been the easier when the^ fall. And what so
ever therefore happethe, suffer it mekely with f^e will.

Sufferaunce.
BE more ready to suffer disease than to do it. Be paciente, be meke, be
soft, be busy. Keep patience in all things: Keep softenes: Keep meknes. Set
before a sharp word, the shield of Sufferaunce. Though any ma^stire the to
wrath, though he whet the, though he blame the, though he repreue the,
though he chyde the, though he do wrong to the: be thou still, hold thy
peace, set not thereby, speak not a word, strive not there against, by
silence thou shalt the sooner overcome. Learn at Christ manlines, take heed
at Christ, and be not heavy: he suffering wrongs left to us ensaumple, Mat.
26. Luc. 22.
he was bobbed and buffetted, spit upon, and scorned, nailed hand and foot,
crouned with thorns, dampened to the cross, and ever more held his peace.

Therefore what disease that fallethe to the, wit it well, it comes to the
for sin and for thy best. And so temper thy disease by consideraon of
rightousnes, And thou shall suffer it the lightlyer, if thou take heed,
wherefore it comes.

Love peace.
Love peace without forth, love peace within forth, keep peace with all men,
withholde all men in mildenes, beclip Charitee. Prove more thy self to love
then to be loved. Make peace there hate is.

Have stablenes of mind. Have goodness of will. Be ready in good desire. Eccl.
28.
Speak gladly to all men: Flee chidyng. Beware of strives. Do away the
occasion of strive, despise strive, and live alwaie in peace, strive not in any
wise.

Compassion.
BE not glad upon the death of thine enemy, Eccl. 8.
least paraduenture upon the, fall the same, least god turn his wrath from
him to the. For who so ever ioyeth in the fall of his enemy, he shall sone
fall in the same. Be glad to sorrow upon him that is diseased. In other men's
miseases be not hard herted: and for other men's mischeiues mourn as thine
own.

Following of goodness.
IN all thy business, in all thy works, in all thy living follow good men,
follow holy men, have before thine eien the ensample of saints, take heed to
work well after y^ virtues of holy men, learn to live well by the teaching of
righteousness.

Despisyng of praisyng.
DEspise thou praisynge, cherisynge and favor of people. Study rather to be
good, than to seem good. Take none heed who praises the, or who dispraiseth
the, least praisynge deceive the, or blaming let the. If thou set naught by
praisyng, lightly thou shalt set besides the blaminge. Therefore suppose not
thy self good, though thou be hold good in other men's tongues, ask thine own
conscience, deem thy self by thine own dome, and not by other men's speech, but
in thine own mind inserche thy self. There may no man know better what thou
art, tha^ thou that know est thy self. What profits the sithe^ thou art
wicked, to behold good?

Honest conversation.
FLee thou simulac^on, feine not holiness in dark clothing Such as thou
would ben hold, such be thou in deed. Show thy profession in living and
not in tokens. In clothyng, and in going, have with the simplenes: in thy ga^e
and in thy moving cleannes, in thy bearyng sadness, in thy wa^kynge honestee,
nothing of vilanie, nothing of uncleanness, nothing of wildenes.

Be ware in thy governance, that there appear nothing of beastlynes. Give not
to other cause for to scorn the, give thou not to any man cause to backebite
the.

Good fellowship.
SHone evil men, Nu. 16.
beware of wicked men, flee shrewes, dele not with brothels, flee the companyes
of those men, which been ever ready to vices. Join the to good me^: Desire
the fellowship of discreate men: Seek the company of virtuous men. Who so
gothe with wise men, he shall be wise: and who so draws to fools, shall be like
to the^. For like to like is wont to be joined.

The hearing.
SHut thine ears, Eccl. 28.
that thou here none evil. Forsake unchaste speches. Flee dishonest words. For a
vain word sone defouleth the soul: and that that is light done, that is
gladly herd sone.

The mouth.
Let nothing pass out of thy mouth, that might let virtue. Let the sound
of thy voice break forth nothing, but that needs. Let that proceed from thy
lips, that fouleth not the ears of the herers. Uaine word is token of a void
conscience. The tongue of man shows his manners: and such as the word is such
is the soul. Mat. 12. Luc. 6.
For the mouth speaks of abundance of the heart. Refrain thy tongue from evil
speech and idel. For an idel word shall not pass unpunished. Who so will not
refrain his tongue from idel words, he shall fall lightly into sinful words.
Let thy word be without reprefe. Let it be profitable to the help of the
hearers. Busy the not to speak that that likes, but that that needs. Take heed what thou speak not. And both in speaking and not speking be right well
ware, take good aduisemente what thou say: lest thou may not call again,
that thou saidest. Fle thou the chances of tongue. Let not thy tongue lose the.
Have ever more silence to thy friend. Speak when time is, be still when time is.
Speak y^ not ere thou here. Let asking open thy mouth.

Against the sin of backebityng.
BAckebite not the sinner, but be sorry for him. Kit from thy tongue the syne of
back biting. Here not an other man's life. Defoule not thy mouth with an other
man's sin. That thou backebitest in an other, dread it in thy self. When thou
blamed an other repriue thine own sins If thou will backebite, think^ on
thine own sins. Look not on other men's defaultes, but see thine own. Thou
shall never backebite if thou well behold thy self. Here no backebiters:
Listen not to tale tellers. For like gilty ben the backebiters and the hearers.
Desire not to wit that that pertains not to the. That that men speak
between them self, busy the not to know. Ask thou never what any man
speaks, says, or does: be not to busy, leave business that perteinethe not to
the. By as great business amend thine own sins, by how much thou beholdest
other men's.

Of liyng.
FLee busilye all manner of liynge and neither by hap, Eccl. 7.
nor by auisemente say thou not faulse. Sapi. 1.
The mouth forsooth that lies, sleeth the soul. Therefore fle desceit, Avoid
liyng, beware of falsnes, speak clenly, be true of word, Deceive no^ man to
misweninge. Speak not one thing and do an other. Say not one thing and
mean an other.

Of swearyng.
PUt fro the swearing^ Do away the use of swearing. Iac. 5.
It is perilous sothely for to swear. For often swearing makes custom of
swearing. Eccl. 23.
And a man, much swearing, shall be fulfilled with wickedness, and the plage
shall not depart from his house. Troth needs none oath. A faithful speech
holds the place of sacrament: as who says, a faithful word is as much as
all the swearing of the world.

A vow made.
DO the good that thou have be hot. Deuteronomy. 23. Eccl 5. Baiuc. 6.
Be not light in word and hard in deed. Thou shalt be much gilty to god,
if thou yield not that thou haste a vowed. They displeasen god, that fulfill not
their vows. They ben accounted among heathen men, that perform not their
vows, I say not vows that been evil, but good. For if thou through thy folly
haste made a fond vow: through the dome of a discrete man be it wisely
turned into good.

To god all thing is open.
Say not one evil word in thine heart. An evil word may not be hyd in
silence, that thou dooeste or say within thy self. Believe thou that it is
open before god. Sapl. 1.
If men ben still, beasts speaken. Therefore fle sin, as though thou might
not keep it privy. Sin thou there, where thou knoweste god is not.

There is nothing hid from god, thou shall be found gilty in the iugementes of
god, though thou be hid to men's judgments. For he beholds the heart, that
is withinforth. He sees and knows, that man him self knows not. Turn thy
counsel and thy work ever more to god. In every deed ask gods help. Arect
all things to gods grace, and to gods gift. Trust not in thine own
deserts: in thine own virtue presume nothing.

Good conscience.
THere may no man fle from him self: and though an open fame harm the not, yet
thine own conscience dampneth the. For there is no peine greatter then pricking
of conscience. If thou will never be sorry, live well. A sicker conscience
suffers easily heuines. A good liver is ever mo^e in io^e: the conscience of a
sinful man is evermore in peine. A gilty soul is never more licker. Another
wound needs shall fear the, if thou live well and truly.

Hioc virtue.
IF thou will multiply thy virtues, show them not. By thy will, hide thy
virtues privily for dread of pride and vaineglory. Fle to be seen, and thanne
thou deserueste mede. That thou majesty lose by showing, keep it by hidyng.

Confession.
Show the sins of thine heart, make open thy shrewd thoughts. A sin showed
is sone healed: a default forsothe hide, is made more sin, by silence it
encre^eth more and more. Truly than it behooves to show evil to amend it.

Fore thinking.
BE think the long before the deed: Auise the long before the work. That
thou will do, inserche it long, prove it long: and so do it, wha^ thou have
long bethought the. Do than as thou haste proved, in things that been
certain. Of well doing tarry not ne put it not over till to morrow. In good
things tariynge harmeth, and lets tho things that been needful.

Wisdom.
THere is nothing better than wisdom, nothing better then coning, nothing
lustier then know lage: nothing wors than leudnes. It it is an high conning to
know what thou shall fle: and it is an high wretchedness, not to know whither
thou go. Therefore love wisdo^e, and it shall be showed ^o the: go to it, and
it shall come to the, be busy there about and it shall learn the.

Teaching.
Learn that thou can not, lest thou be found an unprofitable teacher the
good that thou have hard, say i^: the good that y^ have learned, teach it. The
more that is youe^, the more it waxes: but yet let deeds go before the
word. The which thou show with thy mouth, fulfill it with work: that
thou teach by words, show it in ensample. For if thou teach and do it, than
shalt thou behold glorious. In thy teaching keep the from ma^s praising. So
inform other, that thou keep thy self. So teach, that thou lose not the
grace of mekenes. Beware, lest while thou reisist other by teaching, thou fall
not thy self by praising. When thou teach, use not darkness of words: sai so
that thou be understood. The diversity of persons is to be seen: And when and
how you teach, be advised. Speak common things to al men: And to few men
show that is hid. Be not a shamed to speak, that thou can well defend, that
thou want of cunning, ask of other men. By coning truly showed, hid
things ben opened, and hard things made light.

Curiositee.
BE not busy to know: that is hid, coueit not to know. In disputing do away
strife: do away frowardnes, and assent sone to troth Say not against
righteousness. Strive not to avoid that is right. Love more to here than to
sai. Here in the beginning, and speak last of al, the last speech is better
the^ the first.

Obedience.
VUorship every man for the merit of holiness. After their worthiness give to
every man worship. Suppose not thy self even to thy so^eraigne. Give obeisa^ce
to thine elders. Serve their biddynges: bow to their authority: follow their
will. Obey to all men in good biddinges: yet so obey the to man, that thou
offend not y^ will of god. Therefore fulfill mekely the charges that thou have
take upon the, be obeidient to gods ordinance: be no^ ^ardy die to do against
his will. Dispose all things not with a sturdy, but with an easy heart. Beware
of worshippes, which thou majesty not have without sin.

Soueraignetee.
BUsy the rather to be loved of thy subjects then to be dread. Let thy
subjects rather worship and serve the for love, than for dread or for need.
Quite the such to thy subjects, that thou be more loved tha^drad. With a
sovereign goodness govern thy subjects. Be not fere full to thy subjects: be
such lord to them, that they be glad to serve the. Both in punishing and
cherishing, keep a mean: be not to strait, ne forgive not to sone. Keep manner
in all thy work. It longs to a wise man ^o measure all things, lest of good
be made evil. Behold certainly, what is couenable for the time, where, when,
how, and wherefore thou biddest any thing to be done. That thou wolt to be
done to the, do thou to an other. Be such to other me^, as thou desire other
men to be to the. Hinder no man with thy witness. Do no man harm, lest thou
suffer the same. Keep manlynes, keep rightousnes, defend no man against
truth. When thou demest, be he poor, be he rich, behold the cause and not
the person. Keep troth in all things. Sit never in dome without mercy. Be as
meke in others men's defaultes as in thine own. So deem other men, as thou
desireste to be demed thy self. While thou art merciful in other men's gilt,
thou have mercy on thy self. The dome that thou put upon an other, thou
shall bear thy self. In what mesure that thou measurest, shall be measured to
the. Deem no man by suspection: first prove and so deem: Mar. 7.
In domes reserve the sentence to gods judgment. Mar. 4.
And that that thou know, to thine own dome: and that that thou know
not, to gods dome.

Despite of the world.
If thou will be in rest, desire nothing of the world. Thou shall have rest
of soul, if thou put fr^ the, the business of the world. Cast fro the all that
may let a good purpose, be mesured to the world, and the world to the as
though thou were ded. Behold not the glory of this world. Set not by that
while thou live, yt thou may not have when thou art dead. What so ever
thou geueste, give it with a good will. Do mercy without gift: g^ue alms
without heuines. The good will is more than that is given. That that is given
with good will, Eccl.^
that god accepts: 2, Cor. 9.
but he that gives with heaviness, shall lose his mede. There is no mercy,
where is no good will Do nothing for praising, nothing for worldely opinion, but
only for life everlasting.

Amen.
LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Berthele^typis impress. Cum priuil^g^o ad
imprimendum sol^m.

ANNO. M. D. XLVI.

^^terpritation.

They use psidia for sydia, which signifies the tyndes of a poinegranade.

Psillium.
Psillium has his name of psille, which signifies a fl^^. For the seed of
this herb is like a fley, and is used in medicines to cool. The latins also
(...) pu^ica^^s of fleyes. I (...) the sea, and also in other ^^tylled, and
baren places.

Pthisis.
Phthisis in Greek signifies wastyng, a consumynge sycknesse, a consumption as
we call it.

Pulsatiue. Pulsatiue. Beatynge. Pruna.
Pruna: a fyrye cool. Resort to anthrax.

Pustles.
There ben two kinds of pustle^, or ^usches. For some pusches are

Now that we have spoken suffycyently of the anatomy of the heed, we will
also speak somewhat of the other principal members, and f^^^e of the heart.

The heart.
The heart on both sides, about the fundam^nt of it, ^ath (as it (...)) eats.
The right (...) a (...) branch is joined (...) vein, and unto the right
(...) of the heart. The left ear is (...) y^ mouth of the veynie arte^^
(Called de nos^ arteria) and to the left (...) of the heart. For the heart has
two (...) tricles, or tha^bres a right, and a (...) cham^re, and they been
divided (...) parted (...), through which (...)tion there ben holes, by which,
(...) is conveyed into the left ventricle. In ^the of the ventricles, there are
two vessels. For a noble vein entr^th into the right ventricle, which (...)

Howbeit in some it has but two, in some four in some none, but is al
to^^ther round. From the hollow part (...) the (...) lap, a little pype
deriethe, (...), (...) a bladder, called cistis (...), which hangs by the
^yde (...). From the bunchie part (...) the greatest (...), and it is called
(...).

The stomach.
^he inner skin of the stomak (...) thy^^^ has streygth filmes, y^ (...)
which is grosser. has (...) filmes. First, than the (...) aweth meat,
stretchyng (...) (...) ^ght fylmes. Secondlye it re^^^^^, and imbraieth the
mea^e be ^rawen in, with the ouert whart (...). And it retayneth the meat so
long, till by the altera^iue power it is turned into good juice. Tha^ the
stomach reserueth the best for his though it be some what removed.

Pilosella.
Pilosella is found in no learned au^ctour. Howbeit the later wryter^ de^scrybe
it to be an herb, that growe^^ in stony and dry^ places, with a re^floure,
and with leaves spredde upon the ground, in which leaves there b^ as it were
he^res, and therefore the^ have barbarously called it pilosell^ of pilus an
here. The description a^ greeth with mous^ar^, saving in y^ f^^u^ It is
Englyshed in an old writ book, hertwort. Where this herb i^ not found, some
think it good to v^ mous^^are.

Philomu^.
Philomu^ is a confection so called of Philon the inuentoure of it, o^ as some
say, of philos, which sygn^ fyeth a friend, because it is friendly to him that
receives it.

Policariam.



