A TREATISE OF CHARITY
I Am well minded to stycke to my promise, of Charity, by cause you can not
myslyke my writing, how rude ly so ever I write, oneles you diminisshe your
own charity. For charity takes al things in good worth, and considers
more the good will of the werkeman, then the beauty of the work. Herevppon I
am bolded to show my mind in few words, what is charity, and how we may
keep charity. A saying much used with every man and woman, but not so well
perceived, as it is commonly spoken. Spekers of charity be plenty, kepers of
charity be very scase, al though you would make search through out all
religious cloisters. To be without malice and hate is not enough, yet very
few be found so clean: nor it is not enough to love in a slight or a common,
or in a mean wise. If you keep in you Charity, ye be spotles of all gruges,
and therewith ye love in the most highest degree of loving both god and man,
god for him self, and man for goddis sake.

But here now me thinks we be to sodemely entered with a skyp to the mids
of this matter: let us make some convenient beginning, and thereafter let us
proceed. For both you shall with the more ease gather the fruit of this
lesson, and I shall the better se what is taught, if the sentences be laid in
their due order.

And for as much good sister as this thing that we here take in hand to
treat of, is all holy, all godly, all heavenly, far passinge the relics of
sayntis, far passing the hallowed chalices: Let us I pray you, beware of
presumption, Beware of presumption.
to touch this matter with foul fingers. It is our part to wasshe our hands
clean, I mean as the matter is spiritual, so our spirit must be prepared in
a due reverence, according to the high dignity of this virtue, the water that
cle^seth our spirit and mind, is mekenes. Herewith I Mekenes.
say we must prepare us, both you to here, and I to speak of holy cha ritie:
because Christ says, that in charity is contained all the law of god: And
goddis law does chiefly enforce. ii. things, one to make us, by thretenyng
of peynes to flee from syn, an other to cause us, by promysinge of joys to
follow virtue. It must needs then What cha rite causes.
be true, that Charity makes men do both these things, to forsake sin, and
to embrace virtue. This is to sey, by Charity we refuse evil, and take good,
by charity we flee doing noughtly, and cleue to doing well, by charity we
escape disprayse, and deserve praise, by charity we duly both fear and love
god, finally by cha ritie, we be ryd from the bondage of our ennemy the prince
of this world, and be frank in the liberty of goddis kingedome.

In this speaking of charity, there semith to be an other strength in the
word, than comenly we understand in our english tongue: and surely the truth
is so, that far above our comen vnderston dynge, this word sygnifieth the
hole perfection of a christian man. Charity is the hol perfection of a christen
man.
It is a word borrowed with us of the latyne called Charitas. If you now will
considre, what is the founteyne life and soul of man's virtue, the spacinge and
rote of al his good works: you shall see, that it is only the true love of god.
For who so ever has his mind inwardly ameled, bake^, and through fyred with
the love of god: he is the blessed man, that keeps goddis word, that
fulfylleth al goddis law, that never wylleth doing evil, and ever wills
doing well, in the perfect form, fashon, shappe, and kind of well doing. What
is charity.


This love of god, that causethe such perfections in man, is called Charity.
But remember, it may not be taken in the weak common manner: for all they have
not this charity, that sey they love God: nor all they love not God, that so
sey. We be not as our seyinge sounds, but as god sees our thoughts, so we
be. None of us loves god, that enforces to will any thing besides goddis
will. He loves not god perfetly, that thinks any thing beside god: he
loves not god perfitely, that does any thing without god. The perfect love of
god can not stand with any care or study for this life: the perfyte love of
god abides not the couplynge with any other love: the perfect love of god
knows none affection to kin red, it knows no difference between pore and
rich, it knows not what meneth mine and thine, it can not diuyde a foo from
a friend. For he that truly and perfectly loves god, must love god alone,
nothing beside god, nor with god: but love al indifferently in god and for god.

We that say we love god, when we scant ones in a day remember god, and yet
never remember we God in such a manner, but that more often and more ernestly
we remember other things, in saying we love god, and doing thus, we can not
prove true that we sey. For the perfect lover of god is so wedded to god, that
i^ his thought nothing abides, but the quick remembrance of god. Our
spirits and sensis be occupied with so many other matters, that scante we have
leyser to think on god, so far we be from this charity: the which I seye, is
a virtue of that dignity, power, and majesty, that by it self, it conteyneth
all the precepts of the patriarchs, all the laws of the prophets, all the
doctrine of Christ, all the rules of the apostles, all the inventions of the
holy church: ye more then all this, charity has a liberty of power over
both the old and the new testament. For the true lover of god, the which is
the charitable person, is under no reule: but he is a lord above all laws,
all inventions, all preceptis, all commandementis, that god has given to man.
For charity has no bond.

But alwey sister remember, that charity is not perfect, oneles that it be
burninge. It is not a quenched love, a cold love, a love growinge in the tethe
or lyppes, that is charity: but the hot feruente burning hearts affect
toward god, is the love that is understand in the name of charity, the which
(as is said) does not only conteyn all the doctrine of Christ, but also it is
above all laws, to rule rather than to be ruled.

The end of all the course and walking of the son of god in this world,
was to leave among men this charity. The mark, whereto our savior in all his
prechynge and teaching looked, was to have men endued with charity. For our
divine master saw, that there neded no rehearsal of sins, the which were to
be eschewed, nor yet of virtues, that were to be followed, if man could take cha
ritie, that is by it self sufficient for all, both to keep men from
stumbling in the wey, from wandering out of the wey, and finallye to conducte
men to the blessed ways end. Here you se, that the compass and circuit of
charity is large and wide, in as much as it comprehends all that can be spo
ken, either against vice, or with virtue.

You peradventure thought, that charity was nothing else, but to keep patience,
and not to be disple sed nor angry. It is truth, this point is one part of
charity: but it is not all. For what so ever the love of god prouokethe us to,
or the fear of god dryueth us from, all in one sum is concluded to be
understand in charity.

Whereupon I may, if you keep charity say, that you be the very daughter of
god, and most dear sister of Christ. But I fear me, you have more often
spoken the word charity, then you have studied to learn, what thing should
be Charity: and thereby ye say peradventure of your self more then you do.
For I have noted your mind to be somewhat troubled with certain fantasies, the
which could have no place in you if you were filled with this charity. For
here a little more in few words, what is the plain defini tion of this
virtue, as I find it written of a greatte holy man, and a commen doctor.

Charity (says he) is a good and a gracious affect of the soul, whereby man's
heart has no fantasye to esteem, valor, or pondre any thing in this wide
world, beside or before the care and study to know god. For who so ever is
inclyned to love these erthly things, it is not possible for him ever to
atteyne (so long as he so does) to the assurid constant and perfect use of this
charity: because his mind has so many and so diverse lettes, that hyndre and
withdraw him from taking the possession of this great treasure, wherein be
couched the heaps of al virtues. And a little now to speak of these
impedimentes and lettes, it shall much apperteyn to our purpose: for we shall
the quycklyer come to charity, if we can know and escape all the blocks,
that lie in our way to let us: not only to let us to come to charity, but
to drive and chase away from us this virtue, that neither we can come to
it, nor that to us.

The perfyte love of god has in The perfect love of god.
it a meruaylous quietness and rest, it is never moved, styred, nor carried away
by no storm of worldly troubles: but sytteth fast and sure in a continual
calmnes, against al wedders, al blastes, al storms. No rock is more stylle,
then is the mind of a charitable man, when the world tu^bleth, rolleth, and
tosseth it with the fomy wawes of temptations, the which drowneth the minds of
all us, that be weke or sick in charity. I would therefore sister, that you
diligently learned, what be these blastes, that turmoylen our minds out of the
rest, the which charity requires.

You shall understand, that there be certain motions called passions, that
soore assault our soul, and brings our spirit to much unquietness: as to
be moved with an ger is a great roling of the mind, to bread envy, to feed
rancour, to norishe malice, to be myndefull of any injury, to be studious of
aue^ginge, to be grieved with evil spekinge, to fume at backebyting, to grudge
at compleyntes, to frette with chyding, to strive for shame, for sclaunder.
These be the things, that suffer no mind rest, any of these passions
troubles the mind continually from one fantasy to an other: so that no
quietness can be had.

Again to study for promotion, to care for marriage, to fish for riches, to
be gredie of honor, to be desirous of favor, to couette pre ferremente, to
gape for praises: these also be sharp spurs, that chasen the mind, and
kepen the mind ever styrrynge and void of quietness.

Likewise to ensu a delight of dein ty and sweet fedynge, to be taken with
pleasure of the body, to be over thrown with sorrow, to perch up with
gladness, to hold up the chyn to high in prosperity, to hold down the heed to
low in ad uersite, to be in bondage under the fierce rules of ce^sual lusts,
whose cruelty over man has no pity, measure, nor end. These and such other
be things, that so troublen and disquieten ma^s mind, y^ quiet charity can
not abide there. For look a little upon the unmerciful man, that can not
forgive, see how he boyleth in his appetite to be avenged. Look upon the
envious stomach, how he without rest freteth, in couetyng the syghte of his
hurt, whom he spyteth. Look upon the glotton, how beastly he purueyeth
bealy chere. Look upon the lecherer, how busy he is in his ungracious
thoughts. Look upon the covetous wretch, how without reason he scrapeth and
shrapeth for gains. Look upon the ambitious fellow, how he besturreth him to
get worship. These men through their corrupt fantasies, be no less gredie
to satisfye their desires, then the hungry and the thursty bodies, through
natural necessity seek to be refresshed. Whereof we may se, that slepyng and
wakyng these men's minds roll without taking rest. Such wrastlynge
phantasyes, such inordinate appetites be called passions, the whi che move and
stir the soul contrary to his nature, either by love without reason, or by
hate without measure, when we wyllyngly consent to the wind of these sensible
things.

The mother of al these passions is a parciall love, that we bear to our
self, that is to sey the love of this carcas, and of this life. To kylle in us
this mother of all mischefes, our master Christ techeth us to hate this life,
and to set our body at naught: He says, it is Mat. 16. Mar. 8.
the next way to find life, if we set nothing by the loss of this life:
he says, the caring for our bo die imports and brings with it a mistruste
of gods providence, as though god had better provided for the state of
birds, than for man, whom he has created after his own image. Now then to
get this rest, that thereby we may get charity, we must cast aweye the
love of this life: the which causes all the said ruffelynge passions, by the
which our soul stands in peril of death. For learn you, that to the soul
it is a soore death, to be separated from god. And these passions be they,
that only pluck the soul from god, and causes the soul to forgette heaven
in the busy occupations of this world, the which world swarmeth full of deed
souls, that night and day trauelyn and sweatte in the works of darkness, from
whens they shall depart into an other darkness endless, never to se the face
of god. And this is the conclusion of the passionat soul, that lies in the
fet ters of filthy lusts without rest, drawn now hither now thither in a
continual waueryng of vain fantasies. But on the other side the quick
lyuinge soul, that quietly rests in the love of god, dryuethe from him by
the power of grace, wherewith he is endued, all these unquiet passions. If he
stand in fear to be moved with uncomely appetites, he fastethe, he watches,
he laboreth. The man (I say) or woman does this, in whom such a blessed soul
bears rule.

Likewise against anger, wrath, and vain glory, he sets at naught both
honor and dishonor, shame, sclaunder, and worship in this world be nothing
in his reputation. Ageynste remembrance of displesures he prays for his
evil wyllers. Such a manner charity teaches and courageth this blessed soul
to be occupied in meynteynynge and defending the minds quietness, a thing
above all things in this world to be kept warely.

The rest that angels in heaven have is none other but this, not to be mouid
nor sturrid with these passions, of loving, of hating, of be ing plesed, of
being disesed, of true sting, of lustyng, of abhorryng, of coveting, of
refusing, of rejoicing of lamenting, of innumerable such other, that
scourgethe and whippeth man's mind by reason of the corrupt affection and love
that he bears in his ytchyng body, a love most contrary to charity: the
which has as much ease, as that has trouble. You shall here a lesson of
our master Christ, the author and preacher of Mat. 5.
charity: He aduysethe, counsayleth, and commands me, if I be his disciple,
not to resist against evil, to offer my left cheke to him, that has be blowed
me on the right, to leave my gown to him that has taken from me my cote, to
walk two miles with him that has vexed me, and compelled me to walk one mile.

The form of this lesson, that Christ here gives, is to enstruct and warn
all christen men, to regard nothing of the body or of the world, above the
rest and quietness of the mind: but that we should suffer the loss of our
goods, with the hurt, ye with the death of our bodies, rather then we should
lose any small portion of charity, to be moved with any passion of mind,
whereby our love toward god, might decay.

It is not possible, after Christ's doctrine, to take in this world by any
kind of violence so great damage or hurt in body or goods, as is the leest
drop of trou ble in the mind, where no tyrant nor the devil him self has
any dominion. For there only rules our own free will: so that if we will
disordre our mind with any passion, we be to our self more violent and
cruel, than the deuylle can be. Wherefore my good sister, let us believe our
master Christ, and to the death, let us never break peace with god. For
if we do, fare well all rest. We break peace with god, when we turn us for
any cause to the care of this life.

If you feel your self inordinatlye moved with displeasant words, with angry
countenances, with evil reports, with dispray ses, with rebukes, with false
sclan der, with untrue compleyntes: beware sister, for surely you be not in
charity with god. If you mumble upon conjectures, if you feed upon suspicions,
if you gnawe upon shrewed tales, if ye delight to give taunt for taunte: beware
again good sister, for without doubt, god and you be tweyne. And if you
believe the son of god, your self with your own will, do more then any fierce
prince over you could do, all though he brought you to extreme wretchedness,
and at the last to the death tourmented your body. It is with out comparison
worse, to be beset with these passions, than it is to suffer the panges of
death. But at this point peradventure you will say and ask me: whether we
should forsake all the commodities of this world: whether we should make no
force to get such things, as keeps up the welthe of our body: whether we
should utterly refuse all things ordained for this life: whether we should be
clean careless of good name? No no, sister not so. Holy scripture forbedeth us
nothing, that is for use or profytte: as by Christ's law it is not forbed to
eat, to drink, to have and get, wherewith such sustinance may be
maynteyned, to get children, to have money, to have possessiones, to be in
honor, to be regarded: but the word of god suffers not glottony, and a
delight in the belly chere, nor lechery, and an unlawful pleasure in bodyly
lusts: nor covetousness, nor a gredy desire to be rich: nor vayneglory and a
proud desire tobe magnified. Like wise the commandment of god forbeadethe us
not the thinking of these and of such other things: but it is plain
contrary to the will of god, that we should with any great intention,
solicitude, or carefulnes of mind, prosecute these bodylye necessities. And in
the having of the goods, promotions, and honors, we may not judge to be any
higher at all, then is to have things for man's necessity: So that toward
them we may not bear any manner of love or affection, but only we must with
such a mind take them to help forth this life, as the crafts men take the
instruments and toles to help their handye works, that in the having of
riches, our mind considre nothing, but a plenty of things apperteinynge to
our use and necessitees, both for our self and for our neighbors. And thus we
may bethynke us well, how we shall live: but it may be no care nor yet any
erneste study, leest thereby our charity with god be diminis^hed. For hold
fast my sister To keep Charity with god.
in your remembrance, that to have and keep charity with god, is to love god
with your hole heart, with your hole mind, with your hole power. If any
small part of your heart, or of your mind, or of your wit, be bestowed in
any affection or love toward this life: ye mynishe the perfection of your
charity with god, the which requires of you all and hole, to be without a
fellow by him self alone loved.

You may right well sister put your mind and wit to get these things,
that meinteine this life, but it must be done without all love and affection:
there may be no part of love spent in such matters, for your mind can not
with any love and affect labor to get and to hold this worldly commodities,
but in the mean seson your charity with god is greatly decayed and welnyghe
broken: Also you betray your self, to mystrust the promission of god, with the
which mistruste god is most displeased. For there be three causes noted, that
should chiefly move men's minds to desire these worldely goods: One is the love
of welthe, ease, myrthe, and pleasure: an other love of worship, honor, and
glory: the third the doubtefulnes and mistruste of living here, the which
mistrust I say, is worste of all, and much more to be blamed then the other
two. For a fellow set to his pleasure, loves money to serve him to make merye,
and to make therewith good chere: the other set upon honor louith the present
goods, because by them he would be regarded. Both these men spend as fast as
they get, and small store they put in the vylenes of money: but he that
upon mistrust seeks goods, loves the^ to hyde them, to kept them as well
from him self as from other, being ever in fere, either of famine, scarce
nes, or of old age, or of sikenes, or of tribulations: and much better
confidence and trust he puts in his own policy and provision, then he does
in the goodness of god, that made all, and that norissheth us all, not
leaving the smallest gnatte, the least worm or fly without dispensacion to
have convenient sustenance: and of man he clearly is myndefull, yet man can
not trust him. wherefore the love of this world upon a mystruste of living, is
a thing in the sight of god most detestable. This I say we may use this
world, but we may not abuse it, when for the world we break charity with
god. And if our heart be not holly given to love god, we have not god with
perfyte charity: god has not our holle heart, if the world have any part.

This is the wey to come to perfect Charity, to keep our heart, our soul,
our mind, our wit all holle for god: the which keeping of our heart and
mind hole, is the rest and quietness of the soul from the said temptations
and passions. And this is the driving awey of the lettes and unpedimen tes, to
atteine charity, whereof now here a little more.

This perfect love of god makes (as we have said) the mind strong to
withstond the thrusting and shulderyng of sin, and the same brings forth
consequently the joyful rest and quietness from the forsayde passions: which
the corrupt love of this life bredeth. So that this calmenes of mind is a
certain effect and work of charity. And hope in god makes us fyrmely to
awayte for the fulfillynge of the promise of god in us, and to us: which hope
is gote^ by patience, that is a constant endurynge of adversity, the which
paciente endurynge is purchased with abstinence, that is a strong resistinge
against evil enticementis. And fear of god causes courage to fly and to
absteyn from evil, the which fear of god grows of an undoubted believe in
our ma ster Christ's techyng. Thus from faith we come to fere, from fear to
fleinge of sin: and in fleinge of sin we take a pacient mind to suffer,
whereby we take hope and trust in god, through the which Hope our soul
syttethe in a sure ^hayre of a certain expectacion of that, which is laid up
in stoore for us in heaven: And thereof finally comes in us this charity, which
causes us to love god for his infinite goodness in the same promise making,
whereof now we wait for the fulfyllynge: the which is also the thing that
enforces and ordreth all our thoughts, in such a due rule, that our life
thereby renders in all his actis a sweet savor both to god and to man. But
again let us ones repete the effect of this lesson: who so ever believes our
master, he fereth his punysshment, and he that fears to be punisshed of
Christ, refreyneth him self from sensual lusts, the which be the causes of
punysshement: he that keeps of such causes: abydth well and suffers
tribulation: he that patiently suffrith tribulation, has a blessed hope and
trust in god, the whi che drawethe and pluckethe the mind from worldly
affections: and the mind ones freely discharged of all love to this world,
straight takes the pure burning charity toward god, and that makes quietness
rest and peace in our consciences. Thus every way we must resolve our self
to rest finally in the possession of charity, or else we neither can believe
nor fear Christ as we ought to do, nor refrain evil lusts, as we ought to
do, nor suffer tribulatio^s as we ought to do: nor hope in god as we ought to
do, nor leave the love of these worldly dregs as we ought to do: but in the
same we shall be drowned both night and day during the space of this life,
from whens we shall pass into miserable condition of body and of soul, to
endure without end the indignation of god, whom after this life we never se,
oneles we can now for his sake despise this world: the which thing passes
the power of man's feebleness to do, except he use the puisaunt might of
Charity, the which brings so fervent a desire to love god, that nothing
beside is regarded: and such a swetenes feleth the charitable mind in his
desire, that he will not forgo or diminish any part thereof, although he should
suffer a thousand hurtes and injuries.

Here the loui^g disciple of Christ, saint Stephan, how he inflamed Saynete
Stephan.
with charity prays aloude for his tourmentours, and craves of god remission
of their sins, alledgynge their ignorance for their excuse.

The bearing of Christ's cross is made by this Charity a sweet yocke and and
an easy bourden. For he that with god is locked in charity, says in all
tribulations, with the prophet Hieremy: Non sum turbatus domine sequens te
pastore^, Oh lord in following the my ruler I can not be discomforted. For as
our eien see not nor persceyue not any sterres in the broad sky, when the son
is up, in like manner if the mind be set with charity in god, it neither
feleth him self, nor utterly sees any thing else in this world besides god,
in whom and for whom al his thoughts be consumed. I say in god and for god,
charity keeps his hole course without interruption of any let in this world.
And touching charity in god, the which is utter ly to forsake al love of this
world, that thereby we may clean be ryd from all passions to love and honor
god alone, let this that we have hitherto spoken be moughe.

Now a little harken, what is what is to keep charity.
this saying to have and keep cha ritie. Cruely it is to derive and to take
out from our love in god, an other love toward man for god. For he that has
perfect charity in god, loves for gods sake all men as him self, by cause
in man he knows is the image of god, the which image of god the charitable
heart embraces indiffe rently in the hole kind of man, without making
exception of friend and no friend, of well willers and enemies, of kynsfolke
and strangers: but as the figure of god is equalle in all, so he equally
favors all. For though with obstinate sinners and with men wedded to their
passions he be displeased, yet his displeasure be comes him as a lover that
soroweth his friends hurt. Wherefore if he be a sinner amended or converted, he
is full of gladness, and never cesseth he layenge his wait and watch to do man
good, so that by his charity toward man for goddis sake, he continuallye
myndeth man well: and thereof he never s^aketh. In visytynge the sick, in
clothing the naked, in feding the hungry, in refresshyng the pore, in
comfortinge the miserable, in prayinge for synfulle, in all works of mercy,
pity, and devotion, he labors with pleasure, by reason of his fast love
toward god. He freely and gladly forgyueth all manner displeasures, of in
iuries, of rebukes, of hurtes, and so deep he is in love, that nothig can cause
him to hate. For it is a true saying, that who so ever felith in his heart any
point of hatred, for any manner of cause, ageynste any manner a man, this person
may be assured, that he is not in charity with god. For our maystre Christ
says: He that loves me, keeps Io. 14. and. 15.
my commaundmente: my commandment is, that one of you love another. Wherefore
he that loves not his neighbor (every manne is neighbor unto other,
dwelling in the small compass of this earth) keeps not our masters
commandment: and he that keeps not the commandment, can not love our
master Christ, whom he that loves not: loves not god. Wherefore he that
loves not his neighbor, halteth in his charity toward God.

Thus we may see, that charity in god techeth what is to be done of us toward
man, and ever we be assured to work well, if we keep in us this holy charity:
the which only can keep, and knows the way how to keep gods word. It
is our master Christ, Mat. 5.
that byddeth us love our ennemies, to do well with them that haten us, to
pray for them that persecute us. Christ thus commands us, to thentent he
would cleanse and rydde us from hatred, from doing injuries, from being
myndeful of displeasures, to have us pure from hate, rancour, anger and
grudgynge: he commands us to love without exception as well our fo, as our
friend. He would have us of our charity in god, to love man after the
ensaumple of god, the which would have al men indifferently to be saved and
come to the light of truth, like as his son shyneth over the good and
euylle, his rain fallethe as well upon the unjust, as upon the Ibidem.
just: so would Christ have us in differentely sprede our affections to all
men, after the free liberalle distribution of charity. For and if you be in
this case, that some persons ye love, some you hate, some you another love nor
hate, sum you love so so, in a mean facion, some you love very ernestly: by
this inequality of loving, learn, that you be far from perfect cha ritie
with god, the which perfect charity indifferentely loves all me^ for gods
sake, the good sort of men as his dear friends, the evil sort, as them, of
whom may be made dear friends. In charity is no knowledge of any difference
between rich and poor, between master and servant, between bond and free,
between faithful and untrue, between male and female, be twene kynne and no
kynne: the charitable spiritie looks upon man's simple nature, the which in
all men is like and one thing: whereof he conceiueth in his mind one
indifferent conte^plation of al, and at all seasons he is well minded, ever
well disposed to do all men good, with whom is neither english, nor
scottisshe, aquayntaunce nor stranger: but with him one is all and in all,
Christ Jesus alone, whom and whose cross he knowethe, and nothing else.

Thus by our Charity with god, we learn what is our duty toward man. But
here in loving your neighbors and brethren, look you deceive not your self,
for hit is not inoughe to love your neighbor, but ye must in the order and
rule of charity love him, that is only or chefely, to love him for gods
sake. There be five ways noted of loving one of us an other, of the which
number bre one way is praised, three be utterly dispraysed, and one neither praised
nor dispraised. First I may love my neighbor for goddis sake, as every good
vertuons man loves every man. Second I may love my neighbor of a natural
affection, because he is my son, or brother, or kynsman. Thirdly I may love for
vayn glo rye, as if I look by my neighbor to be worshypped or auaunced to
honor. Fourthly I may love for covetousness, as when I cheryshe and flatter a
rich manne for his goods, when I make much of them that have done me
pleasures and may do me mo. The fifte way, I may love for my sensual lust,
as when I love to fare delicately, or else when I mad or dote upon women.

The first way to love my neigh Five manner of loves.
bour, for the love I have to god, is only worthy to be praised.

The second way naturally deserves neither praise nor disprayse. The third,
the fourth, and the fyft to love for glory, advantage, or pleasure, al three be
stark naught. Therefore sister, out with your love, and considre well, in what
way your heart is given to love your neighbor. Charity has but one way of
loving a man truly and well, that is only for gods sake.

To conclude now this matter, the which of him self is in sight, let us
knytte up Charity with this general knotte, that man is made absolute and
perfect in all virtues, through this one virtue of Charity. But when I say
all virtues, look that you understood what is meant in the name of virtue:
orelles this generalle clause may deceive you. Wherefore you must learn, that
the body has his propre virtues, and the soul like wise has his own a part
from the other. The virtues of the Virtues of the body.
body be, as to fast, to watch, to goo on pylgremage, to traueylle with hand
and foot, for to help their neighbors, to distribute your goods in alms
deeds, to build up churches, wherein the people may here the word of god, and
com to gether to prayer, to pu nysshe the flesh with rough here, to sleep
upon the hard ground to socour the nedy, to aid the miserable, and other
such acts bodi lie men do for the love and honor of god. The virtues of the
Virtues of the soul.
soul be of an other sort, as mekenes, patience, abstinence, hope, faith,
charity, pity, mercy, and other like. Now if it so be, that of some
infirmite I can not fast, nor watch, for lack of money I can not do any
alms, for lack of bodily strength, I can not traueyle, if such necessary
and true considerations make us want the virtues of the body, we be without
blame, and had excused before god, the which beholds the secret and privy
cause of our default. But in the virtues of the soul, we have no manner of
defense, if it be so that we lake any of them. For they have no necessity,
nor constraynt of any thing, but all be freely under the election and choice of
our free will. And when it is generally said, that charity makes a man
absolute and perfect in all virtues, ye must understand in all the virtues
of the soul: the which be very virtues, to speak and to name the truth.
Whereby the body can have of him self no virtue, nor nothing can be done of
the body worthy of praise, onles the act be coupled and ioinid with the
virtues of the mind. But contrary, the soul is perfect in his virtues
without all assistence and help of the body. Then boldly we may say, that from
charity comes all virtues, and none other work there is of charity, then to
make and bring forth in us virtue. It is holy scriptures testimony, that
charity can not be idle. Always than a charitable spirit is doing, and what so
ever he doethe, it must needs be a good work. For what can com from the love
of god, but it shall sauer and smelle of god? the which savor is the only
thing, that gives to man's act all the goodness.

Now then my entierly beloved sister, to observe and keep this most precious
and most holy charity with god, you shall in few words have a short reule.
The A ru^e to keep charity.
best way to keep you from falling out of charity with god, is never to
suffer your christian neighbor to sleep in a displeasure with you, and again
that you never sleep in a displeasure with your christen neighbor. Remember,
we all be knytte in a fast kynrede under one father in heaven, the which
commands us to love together as brotherne and systerne, without regard of
high or low, pore, or rich, whether your neigh bour be in defaulte, or you,
this is to seye, whether he be displeased with you, or you with him, make
thereof no question, care not for the beginning of wrath, but study ever for
the aid, and incontinently follow always the counsel of our most charitable
master Christ: labor always to make agreement, that at all seasons you may
be ready to offer up to god your sweet smelling sacrifice, the which is in
goddis sense the delectable sauer of a charitable brethe: whose strength is so
mighty in his pleasant sent, that it has his place among the incomparable
savors of heaven, where god with all his saints and angels smells it.

Do you bear away sister the short lesson, that I have given to you?

SVSTER. Which short lesson mean you brother? For partly in writing,
partly in communication I have had many lessons of you: of the which some I
bear well away, as yet it is out of my mind, how you have proved to me,
that a fool should not live solitary, that I must forgette displeasures, if
I forgive them: that I should ever enclyne and obey more to rea son, then to
any entreaty.


BROTHER. It is well good sister, that you have of these things remembrance,
but I thought not to ask you this: I would you reher sed to me, what you have
by me learned of Charity.


SVS. Why brother, call ye that the short lesson, when it conteyneth so many
lines, that it weryed me three days to read them over?


BRO. I think well, that you were weryed, more peradventure with my unsavory
telling, then with the length of the tale. For surely the tale was but short.


SIS. If that be a short tale, I confess to you brother, that I can not tell
what is short and what is long. For to me your lesson of charity seemed very
long.


BRO. It is not sister, the number of words or of lines, that ma keth a tale
or a book to be called long or short. But the matter that is entreated makes
both: so that of some matter you may in very few words here a very long
tale, and ageyn of some matter a great heap of words makes but a short tale.
Like as we say of time, that it is but a littell while ago, sins France was
under our rule, and that paper, printynge of books, gunnes, be things invented
within few years, and that the. iiii. orders of freres began in christendom
within a little time paste: yet in each of these forsaide sayings, we
understand more then a hundred years. Contrary wise ye will say that my lady
princes has lain a great while at Eltham, and yet her grace has not lien
there one year. So you will say, that it is a long season syns you and I were
to gither: and yet I was with you with in this month. When you knok at a
door, and tarry one hour, you say you have very long tarried there. Thus you
may see, it is the dignite and the worthynes of the thing, that causes the
time to be named long or short, and not the time of his own space.

In this manner it is in your lesson of charity, the which is a matter so
plentiful, so copious, so long, so large, so deep, so high, that no tale
thereof can be called long, onles the teller tryfle in vain words, and then
you may say his tale is long, because he tells and shows his folysshenes:
but speaking directly of charity, he never can say to much. For when we have
said all that we can, yet shall the matter of charity lie in hepes infinite to
be spoken more of. For sister, what tongue or pen of man can make an end in
tellinge the smallest portion of goddis sub stance? this charity is god, and
God is this charity. Therefore think not your lesson long of charity. For all that I have said, is in effect nothing.


SIS. You have somewhat made me know, what is a long tale and what is a
short: but yet brother, by cause the common proverb is true, that women's
wits in deed be short, I pray you, if it be possible, let my lesson be
rehearsed in few words.


BRO. It is a thing sister, sone done, to comprehend in a few lines all that you
have hard of me. For the su^me of the hole is: This charity conteyneth all the
laws of god, and techeth us our duty both toward god and man: the which
charity requires a quyete spirit, and no spirit is quiet, that is subject
to any passion. Wherefore to have charity we must chase from us al passions, to
rest so in our love of god, that nothing withdraw us nor pluck us inordinately
to any thought beside god: whereof should follow, that in this world, we would
reke^ laughyng to be wepinge, sorrow to be myrthe, riches to be poverty,
misery to be welthe, wisdom to be folly, honor to be shame, so depely we
should be buried in god, that to this life our senses should lie deed, and
quycke only in the love of god. From the which true and entier love of god,
we should take a love with all hertes affecte to the hole kind of man, in whom
behold spiritually the image of god: For the which image sake we should bear
no less favor to man, than were sufficient to resist and utterly vaynquishe
all hate, without the remembrance of any grudge to be taken with any manner of
occasion, to be ever with all men joined in heart through our love in god, as
fast as kynred joins a few persons through a naturalle love: yea faster
knytteth men's hearts to gethers charity, than nature can do.

This is the some of our lesson sister. The which you shall have again made
short, if you will.


SIS. Nay brother, I pray you let this be no shorter. For in my mind it is all
ready somewhat to short. For I would disire you to let me in order to ask
you a repetition of mine hole lesson, that I may in a short form learn, what
was first, what was second, and so forth to the conclusion of your tale.


BRO. I do not yet well perceive, what you would have me do, but ask me what
you will, and I shall thereto make answer.


SIS. Then brother tell me, what was the first point, that you told me of
Charity.


BRO. First I showed to you the signification of the The repe tition of this
treatise.
word, that Charity was not only taken for peace, patience, mercy, and pity,
as in our english tongue commenly we use it for nothing else, as when I say
I will not break charity, I will keep charity, I will forgive him for
charity, troth it is that charity signi fieth all these, and as I showed to
you, much more: for the word is the same, that is in latin called Charitas,
the which signifies an ordynate love, and a due rule toward god and man, the
which ordinat love the soul has, when he holly with all his power is wed ded
to god: so that beside he neither wyllethe nor desyrethe any thing. By the
which fervent love in god, he exercises among men all the kind of virtue.
And this was the first thing suster, to have you to know, whatte the word
of charity signifies.


SIS. Me thought brother, that first of all you showed, that charity
conteyneth all gods laws.


BRO. I did so in deed, to bring you to the sight of the greatte compass,
that was in the name of Charity: whereby you might the better learn, that in
english tongue we conceive but a lyttelle portion of this infinite virtue,
when we commonly speak thereof. But how so ever I begone, the first point of
your lesson was to learn the strength of charities name.


SYS. I would now ask you the second, if it came not in my mind to doubt,
whether charity and love be not all one, as in communication I have hard some
clerks say they be.


BRO. I think well some clerks will so say. For I note in the last englysh
translation of the gospels out of laten, the translatour always for Charitas
writes Love: wherein I can not consent with him. For after mine opinion there
is as much difference between love and charity, as is in your occupation
between threde and twined threde. For you will say, that all twined threde is
threde, but al threde is not twyned threde: So this word Love is more common
and more general then is charity. For truth it is, that all Charity is love:
but it is not troth, that all love is charity. In greek charity is agape, and
love is eros, as in latin love is amor, and charity Chae ritas. In all these
three tongues there is the same difference in the tone word from the the other,
that is a pen and a quylle. All our pens, for the most part be quilles:
but al our quilles be not pens: The quille is that remains in his nature,
without any other facion or form put to it: the pen is a quyll shaped and
formed, and made apt to write. Likewise love is the common affecte of favor:
charity is love reduced into a due order toward god and man, as to love god
alone for him self, and to love man for gods sake. Do you perceive sister
what I say?


SIS. Me thinks brother, that you mean as I would say, that between charity
and love is a like difference, as is between my pereles and wyres. For I see
that my pereles be wyres, but they have a facion by my labor put to, the
which facion wyers have not. And here may I say as you said of Charity and
Love, that all peerles be wyers, but all wyers be not peerles. But brother, if
all charity be love, what defaulte put you in the translator, the which
writes love for Charitas?


BRO. The same defaulte I put in him, yt you would put in one, the which does
give to you wiers for perles, or quilles for pe^nes. But sister, re membre, you
would have me be short.


SIS. It is troth brother: but the best shortenesse is to be plain. For when
I understand my lesson, I can soon make it short. Now then if you will,
I preye you tell me the second point.


BRO. The second was to show How charity i^ had.
you, that charity could not be had without the assured minds quietness, as an
effect following the same, the which steadfast quietness of mind is not to be
inordinatly styred or moved with passions.


SIS. Saving your tale brother, I pray you tell me some english word, what
you call passion. For truly I know none other passion, but the passion of
Christ.


BRO. Then I have lost many words. For I thought I had sufficiently
declared unto you, that any mouynge of the mind in to an ungodly desire, was
called a passion, as malice, rancour, ire, envy, ambition, covetousness,
lechery, glottony, pride, hatred, study of praise, study of auengyng, and such
other which stir up and move the mind out of his naturalle rest, to love
or to hate without reason and mesure: As when our body suffers any torment,
we sey, we be in a passion: so when our mind suffers any such inordinat
desires, we have the minds passion: and every such motion of mind out of due
course is called a passion. The mind is moved out of his due corse, as often as
it is stirred with these affectes, that be engendered of our principal love to
this life, as to be dispraised with our disprayses or sclanders, is a thing
that rysethe in us from the love of this life: where if we study to be
magnified, we be in a sore passion against reason, the which teaches us to
seek our glory in more stable things, then can be found in this life. But
because you speak of the word, shortly as you say, it is no very english
word: how be it when we be driven to speak of things that lack the names in
our tongue, we be also driven to borowe the words, that we have not, sometime
out of latin, sometime out of greek, even as the latin tongue does in like
necessity borowe and take of other. And though now at the first heryng, this
word stondethe straungelye with you, yet by use it shall wax familiar,
specially when you have it in this manner expressed unto you.

Now than to opteyne this rest To op^ein re^e of mind.
of mind, the chief effect of charity, we must beware that no passion rule in
us, but always in all things we must order our desires by the draught and
train of this one desire, the which we have of loving god alone with all our
holle hearts, power, wits, and intelligence, never suffering advisedly the
corrupt love of this false flaterynge life, to have any small place in our
soul, whereby we should wax the weker in the fulle vnyenge and knittinge of
all our intentions to the will and pleasure of god. And sister, it was the
second part of your lesson.


SIS. Ye brother I would I had learned well, that I might ever be quiet, how
so ever I were handeled, rightwisely or vnrightwisely, well or evil, gentily or
chorlysshely. It were an angels condition to be nothing changed or moved with
well or woo: but to be continually none tenure, in one temperature, neither
hering, nor saying, nor feeling, nor smellyng, nor tastinge, nor wysshynge, nor
myndyng any erthely thing besides god, but having continually a fervent desire
to know, to love, and to honor god. But brother, what mean you by this, to
speak thus, as though it were possible, to make of men angels, and more over
to make of this world heaven? as long as man is man, and as long as this world
is this world, I reken hit not possible to keep us thus clean from passions,
as you sey the perfect rest of charity requires.


BRO. You enter with me now sister, into a matter of a long communication,
but at this time I will make you thereto a very short answer.

Christ would never teach man to pray, and to ask of god things impossible
to be opteyned: He instructed us to sey in our prayer, Adueniat regnum tuum, Oh
lord god let thy kyngedome be here amongst us. Where the king dome of god
is, there god reignethe over such subjects as be worthy to have such a king:
and pleinly there is heaven, where so ever is the kingdom of god: So that of
this world, there might be made an heaven.

Ageyn our master and savior taught us to pray, Fiat uoluntas tua sicut in
coelo et in terra, Oh good lord grant, that thy will may be fulfilled in
this world, as it is in heaven: that we men may in every thought and act agree
with thy will, as angels do: that we in this life make no moore resistance
against thy pleasure, then the blessed company of heaven does. This petition
can not take effect onles man be made like an angel, all pure and clean from
the dreggy appetites of this life: that is to say, utterly rydde from all
passions, the which ever strive against the will of god.

Now then in as much as I believe, that Christ bids us ask nothing, but
the same may be: I think it possible to make of this world the kingdom of
god, and to make men the kepers of goddis will: The which two things, to live
in the kyngedome of god, and to observe and keep gods will, I reckon to be a
perfection of angels life in heaven. But sister, remember, Christ biddethe us
not to attempt to perform this perfection by our own power: for that were
plainly impossible, but it is our masters instruction, that we should turn us
in prayer to god, and of his infinite goodness crave and ask his grace, whereby
we shall be comforted, sustained, and coraged to say at the last with saint
Paul. We be able to do all in him, that helps us Jesus Christ. This were to
have our spirit holly given to serve god, to know god, to love god, and
nothing else. And if you would say, that saint Paul came not to this
perfection, nor none of the saints, but the best men were sinners, let it
so be: yet be assured if man duly apply his will, to be without sin, so that
in his will be no lack, nor faynynge, this man before god is an angel. And
sister, as he shoteth nerer the mark, than he does that sees none, and
shoteth at all adventures: so you saying now and knowing the very perfection
of charity, you shall the better enforce toward it, then if you were beset
with blind ignorance. Of all this matter sister, with you I will not reason out of
your Pater noster, y^ which I think is enough for your requests at this time.


SIS. I hold me contented brother, and pray I will first, that I may think
possible to be thus perfect. Next that I may have grace to enforce thitherward
the virtuous power of my heart.


BRO. There is no more required of you, but this applienge of your will to get
grace, but grace shall you never get, but if you ask it without any doubt
or mystrust in the good nes of god, who is ever redye to give, when he hereth
one that accordyngly asks.

And to show you what prayer is shaped accordyngly to goddis ears, it were a
matter for no little book. Therefore sister, be contented to leave your
digressions, and return to your purpose.


SIS. I have no purpose, but to learn, and learn I should, if you taught me to
pray. Yet lest I trouble you to much, I will goo forth, to require of you
what was the third point in my lesson of charity. Charity is not like one
virtue.



BRO. It was to show, that charity is not like one virtue, but it is such a
thing, that by many degres of diverse virtues, it must be gotten, as a final
conclusion of all labor and trauaille in virtue. As first we must be endued
with an undoubted Feyth, to believe perfectlye the history of our savior: whose
doctrine brought first into this world this charity for an absolute
conclusion of all laws. After this faith we must enter Fear of god.
into a fere of god, not the fear of vile bo^dmen, the which have no mind to
keep their masters pleasure but only look upon the punish meant, our fear
must be a reverence to god, like as loving children fear to displese their
fathers. By this reverent and loving fear we must proceed to Abstinence,
Abstine^ce.
that is to sey we must bear such fear and reverence to god, as shall cause
us for the honor of god, to refreyne the sensual inticementes of sin, the
which bespotteth, deformethe, and defeateth the image of god in us, the
greattest evil that man has. To keep this abstinence we must gather pacyence,
Patience.
a virtue that makes strong our soul, to suffer the violence of al
resistance to virtue, by the which patience we shall take an hope to be part
takers of gods mercyfulnes, and to enjoy a reward, that passes all the
powers of men, to show it. Out of this springs a feruente love to god,
which is called charity, through which the mind shall be setteled in such a
qui etnes, that all the chaungeable and sundry blastes of this world, shall
nothing move us from our desire to rest in god: And this min des rest and
perfect quietness is the princypall effect of charity, the conclusion and
finalle perfection of all virtue.

I will now end these matters, with a wonderful praise, that the chosen
vessel of god saint Paul writes of charity, of the which praise I would
have you sister note and mark diligently, what a dignite is in charity, to be
above al things pondred and regarded of al Christen men: This apostle says in
effect thus. If al mighty god, the father, would give to me all gifts of his
grace, as to endue me with the holy spirit of prophe cy, to make me a privy
counseilor of all the secret mysteries in heaven, to cause by the power and
strength of faith to work wonders, to do miracles, in quickenyng the deed, in
geuinge sight to the blind: yet all this not withstondynge I am not in the way
of salvation, If I want charity. How much then should man bestow, endeavor,
enforce and exercise all his wits to get and to keep the possession of this
high virtue, the which is the soul of life, the grace of graces, the one thing
that joins man in favor with god, and that god only requires of man for all
his goodness toward man? It is such a thing this charity, that by
thauctoritie of holy writ I will not only call this virtue a godly thing, but I
say it is god him self, that who so ever keeps in him charity, he has god
with him, and he in god dwells, that dwells in charity. For both is
charity and charity is god: to whom now and evermore be all glory, praise,
and honor. Amen.


FINIS.
Thus ends this treatise of Charity.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M. D. XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


