A PARADISE of prayers, CONTAINING the purity of devotion, and meditation.

Gathered out of all the spiritual exercises of JEWS of Granado.

AND Englished for the benefit of the Christian Reader.

Ascendat oration, descendat gratia.

LONDON. Printed by R. Field for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard near unto S. Austines gate. 1614.

At our vprising.
GOd the Father, that said in the beginning, Let light be made, and it was
made: lighten my eyes, Psalm. 12.
that I sleep not in death, lest at any time mine enemy say unto me, I have
prevailed against him.

God the son, light of light, the great and truest light, from whence this
light both of sun and day arises, thou light shining in darkness, and
illuminating every one John 1.
that comes into this world: drive from me all darkness of ignorance: and
give me understanding, that in thee, and by thee I may know the Father: to know
whom, is to live: and to serve whom, is to reign.

God the holy Ghost, thou fire both illuminating, and warming, kindle in me thy
light, that I may know the deceitful delights of this world, and the true joys
of heaven: Enlighten my mind, that I may see how great a good our enemy
soliciteth us to change for a light shadow. Grant that I may only see those
things yt are thine, and be blind to the rest: infuse also into my mind the
gift of thy charity, that forsaking those transitory things, I may with a
fervent zeal and continuel desire, endeavor to attain those things, which are
eternal.

Holy Trinity, one God, defend me this day from all the assaults of the devil:
keep me this day from all sin and defend me this day from sudden and
unexpected death. Be thou unto me solace in tribulation, assistance in
temptation, and in death a pleasant refuge.

Thou hest raised my body (O Lord) which was drowned in sleep, I beseech thee
that thou will deliver my soul likewise from the sleep of sins, and the
darkness of this world: and that which thou have recalled from sleep unto
waking, may it please thee after death to restore to the same life: for sleep
is to thee, as death to us. To thee be praise and cleernes, wildome,
thanksgiving, Apoc. 7.
honor, virtue, and fortitude, for ever and-euer. Amen.

When we rise.
RIse, O my soul that sleep, arise from death, and Christ shall Ephe. 5.
shine unto thee: Arise O thou daughter of Sion, O my soul redeemed by Christ's
blood, shake off the dust of sins, and set in thee the Esaias 52.
peace of Christ, purchased for thee by his merits.

Christ, thou merciful advocate of mankind, as thou releeuest this grievous
burden of my body by thy benefit, so lift up our minds to the knowledge and
love of thy Majesty: and grant that the body may be a companion and Minister of
piety to the soul in this life, to the end that in the life to come, it may
be partaker of that eternal blessedness, where thou live and reignest, with
God the Father, and the holy Ghost, world without end

Amen.
A thanksgiving for our preservation the night past, together with a prayer
wherein we beseech almighty God to take the like care of us this day.
OMnipotent and eternal Lord, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: I praise
thee. I bless thee, and with my whole heart give thee thanks, that according
to thy unmeasurable goodness, thou have by thy fatherly providence, preserved me
this night: that it has pleased thee to be present with me, so that the devil
durst not draw near to assail me: that thou have protected me from all
evil, both of soul and body; that thou have defended me (being drowned in
profound sleep) by the assistance of thy holy Angels, as it were with an
impregnable wall against the deceits and snares of the old adversary, who never
lets slip any opportunity to hurt us: Finally, for that thou have sweetly
raised me from sleep, (the true image of death) lest I should be choked in
the darkness of my sins, to the end I might have space and time (yet at the
length) to recollect, and earnestly repent my self.

Now likewise (O father of mercy and God of all consolation) 2 Cor. 1.
I beseech thee (and from the bottom of my heart entreat thee) that this day
thou will take me also into thy fatherly protection, and behold me with thy
merciful eyes, direct me in the way of thy commaundments, and give me those
gifts of thy holy spirit, by whose means I may begin, continue, and end this
day likewise to the praise and glory of thy holy name, to the profit of my
neighbors, and the salvation of my soul: endeavoring my self every where and
in all things, without neglect of my duty, to discharge every way that vocation
to which I am called.

Keep me (O Lord) from all sin; restrain my flesh and blood prone to all
iniquity, and friend and minister to that old Adam: cool, by the dew of thy
spirit, the heat of concupiscence, that reigns in my members, lest this day
at any time I fall into any sin, and provoke thy wrath and indignation
against me. Grant O merciful father, and vouch safe (O dear Lord) that I may
lead the remnant of my life in thy fear and love.

Direct this day my heart and my body, my senses, speeches, and my actions in
thy law, and in the works of thy commandments. Turn my heart from all
transitory things and convert it to eternal: that forsaking the riches and
delights of this world, I may always thirst after thy kingdom.

Curb and restrain the power of the devil, our old and sworn enemy, that
although he rangeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, he
may not yet hurt, or any ways hinder me. But because my merits are none at al
for which I deserve to be heard, behold I bring with me thy only begotten Son,
who is the propitiation for my sins: behold him O merciful father, and for the
justice sake of thy Son, forgive the sins of thy servant: grant me that by thy
mercy, which is not my due in justice: who live and reignest God for ever and
ever.

Amen.
Morning exercises.
1. The commemoration of benefits received.
O God my God, early do I Psalm. 66.
wake unto thee, ^aith y^ thy holy Prophet. And a little after he adds: so I
was mindful of thee on my bed: early in the morning will I think on thee,
because thou were mine helper. And I my Lord God with that holy king desire to
watch. Let this be the beginning of my occupations: let the day begin with
this thought of mine. For heereunto the duties drive me whereby I am bound unto
thee: this is the end of my creation: for I was therefore made to the end I
should praise thee, and glorify, magnify, and sanctify thy name. For thou
art the beginning and the end of all things: I say the beginning without
beginning: and the end without end. For even as no man might ever create any
thing without thee: so could not any thing be created by any other but by thee:
to the end that all things might serve thee, praise thee, and publish thy glory.

Thou art the universal dispenser of good things, so that there is no benefit
to be found either of nature or grace, body or soul, which takes not his
original from thee, who art the fountain of all goodness. Thou art the maine
of all perfection, the Abyss of all greatness, the D^ean of infinite mercy
and goodness, the image of incomparable beauty, Thou art the God of Gods, the
holy of holiest, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, the cause of causes,
the being of beings, the life of the living, the order of the Uniuers, the
beauty of the world, the glory of the heavens.

Thou art my Creator, that made me of nothing to thine own Image and
similitude: Thou art my conseruer, who by thy providence maintainest me, lest I
should become nothing Thou art my sanctifier, who by thy grace extollest me
unto things which are divine.

Thou art my glorifier, who have made me to enjoy the glory everlasting. Thou
art my defender, helper, pastor, and benefactor. Thou art my King, my Lord, my
father, my spouse. Thou art the center of my soul; my last end, in whom alone
consists all my felicity, happiness, and the last perfection of my life:
what need many words? Thou art to me all in all, in as much as thou art God.

But in as much as thou art man, thou art my redeemer, my savior, and
deliverer: Thou art (as the Apostle testifies) my wisdom, my 1. Cor. 1.
justice, my sanctification, my redemption, my sacrifice, my Lamb, my priest,
my advocate, my intercessor, my doctor, my example, my fortitude, my
consolation. Thou art the general physician of all my wounds and infirmities.
Thou have healed my pride by thy humility: my avarice, by thy poverty; my
pleasures by thy dolors; my wrath, by thy meeknes: my envy by thy charity: my
excess by the gall and vinegar which thou tastedst for my sake: my sloth by
thy diligence, and unmeasurable labors undertaken for my sake.

For my sake thou did fast, wander hither and thither, sweat, watch, pray,
weep: for me thou were banished, persecuted, de^ded, mocked, spit upon, whipped,
crowned with thorns, crucified, and more afflicted than all other men of this
world, and at length put to death.

2. A thanksgiving.
ALL these are thy benefits, O Lord, for which I ought to yield thee thanks nay
rather they are most just causes for which I am indebted unto thee and bonds,
by which thou hold me captive and bound unto thee. What shall I give unto
our Lord, for all the benefits Psalm. 115.
he has bestowed on me? by what duty, or what humble service shall I
recompense so many graces bestowed upon me? Uerily I believe, that although I
only had all men's hearts, and with all them did only love thee: yet might I
not in the least sort yield thee that which belongs unto thee. How then for
many and so great benefits shall I yield thee satisfaction? How can I deny thee
that one heart which I have for all, when I owe thee so much, for all thy
benefits toward me? What shall I say my God? what shall I do? for I alone am
not sufficient to yield thee condign thanks for such a multitude of blessings.
But I know what I shall do: I will call upon all creatures that are in heaven
and on earth, and I will desire them to assist me, and vouch safe with me to
sing thy praises, and glorify with me the Lord of all glory. Let us
therefore sing the song which the three children sang in the burning Furnace in
Babylon, saying:

O bless ye, all the works of the Lord God, praise ye and magnify him for
ever.

O ye angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye heavens, bless the Lord, praise ye and magnify him for ever.

O ye waters that are above the firmament, bless ye our Lord, praise him and
magnify him for ever. etc.

3. The oblation of a man's self.
ALL these praises and blessings do I owe thee (O father) yea, and far more
greater belong unto thee. For if I shall more nearly examine the matter, I not
only owe thee mine, but my self also. For if in India, a man buy another man
for a red cap, and he that is bought at so slight a rate, is in such sort
wholly obliged and subject to the buier, as that he is neither master of a
moment of time, or of a farthing, but is very often cast into fetters by his
Lord, beaten with clubs, and handled according to the humor of him that bought
him: what shall become of me O Lord? I am thine, yea truly wholly thine, not
tied unto thee under one name and title, but by infinite respects. Thou have
created me, thou have bought me, not with a red cap, but with thy precious
blood: thou have conserved me in all and every moment of my life. For without
thee I can nether stir hand or foot: without thy providence I can neither
breath nor respire or act any thing: with what color the^ can I cast off thy
dominion over me? How an I deny thee that which is thine? By what right can I
challenge liberty to my self? Or with what impudence (shaking off the yoke of
my Lord) can I wish to live according to my wicked desires, when by so many
reasons, I am thine, and ought so wholly to be dedicated unto thee?

Most humbly therefore acknowledging thy dominion over me, behold I dedicate my
self wholly unto thee, and entirely submit my self to thy perpetual service
and subjection. Neither do I only offer my self unto thee, but also all that
which is mine, what soever this day, or in the rest of my life, I shall think,
speak, or do: with all those things which at any time for thy sake shall be
offered me to admit or further (...) so that henceforward I will neither eat,
nor drink, nor sleep, nor do any such like thing, whose end shall not be the
honor and glory of thy most holy name.

Once more I say, O Lord I sacrifice my self unto thee, lest hereafter I be
mine own and not thine: I will live no more according to mine own will, I
will not labor for my self, I will not seek my self; but in all things, and
every way will I seek thee, obey thy will, and be diligent in thy service: and
if at any time I shall do the contrary, I will call my self a thief and
rauisher of an other man's right; for that duty and obedience which under so
many titles, and by so much right appertains unto thee, deniing and stealing
the same from thee, I shall usurp unto my self.

4. A petition for new benefits.
BUt because without thy grace I cannot yield thee that duty, I pray thee (O
Lord) that thou will assist me herein, and create in me a new heart that shall
not judge himself to be his own, no, not for (...) moment of time, but shall
think (...) lost whatsoever is not employed in thy honor and service: give me
a will, that may desire nothing more than to keep thy commandments and obey
thy will: give me an understanding, that may meditate on thy law day and night,
and such a memory as may never be forgetful of thee.

Furthermore (O Lord) give a bridle to my tongue, and set a watch before mine
eyes. Grant me the purity of heart, the austerity of the f^esh, the
mortification of all appe^es and perturbations of the mind. Finally, give me a
grounded humility of heart, and with it patience, obedience, meekness,
chastity, true discretion: with these poverty of spirit, fervent zeal of thine
honor, the love of my neighbor, and sincere compassion of an other man's
tribulations. Who live and reignest world without end.

Amen.
A Co^mendatory morning prayer, wherein, together with our selves we commend all
faithful Christians unto God.
I Adore, bless, and glorify thee (...) holy Trinity, omnipotent God Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. Behold I offer up my self to thy divine majesty, and
yield me tributary to thy most holy and irreuocable will. I pray thee (O Lord)
take from me, and from all faithful christians whatsoever is displeasant unto
thee: and give whatsoever is grateful in thine eyes, and cause us become such
as thou command us to be. I commend unto thee my father, my mother,
brothers, sisters, sons, cousins, benefactors, friends, familiars, and
neighbors, and all those that have reco^mended themselves to our prayers, or
for who^ I ought to pray. I commend unto thee, thy holy catholic Church: bring
to pass (O Lord) that all and every one may know thee: all may honor thee:
all may love thee, and may likewise be beloved by thee. Reduce the ignorant
into the right way: destroy heresies, let all those be converted to the true
and sincere faith, who have no knowledge of thy most holy name. Give us peace,
and conserve us in the same: yet in all things, let thy will, not our will, be
fulfilled: Comfort and help all those that are in tribulation, and such as
lead their lives in miseries, temptations, perturbations, and afflictions, as
well of the body as the soul. Finally, I commend all creatures to thy
protection, that to the living thou m^est give grace, and to the dead et^nall
rest.

Amen.
A prayer before we go out of doors.
OMnipotent and eternal God, who art the way the life, and the truth, behold I
am to walk amidst the snares of the devil, the world his minister, laid in
wait for me: I bear likewise about me the temptations of my frail flesh, so
that it cannot be that I shall walk without harm, tither of body or soul,
amongst so many gulfs and dangerous heaps of temptations, which that cursed
enemy has beset us with, being swallowed in sin, except thou stretch thy right
hand to assist us. Lead me therefore, thou most assured and faithful guide:
open mine eyes, and conduct me in the high way, that I Psalm. 24.
may neither turn on the right nor on the left hand: Show me thy Prou. 4.
paths, and teach me thy ways: make my path straight, and direct my iournies
in peace. O Lord, in thy righteousness Psalm. 5.
lead me because of mine enemies: direct thou my ways in thy sight: Thou that
to holy men sendedst thine Angels for guardians, by whom as the weaker sons
they should be directed as by their elder and more stronger brothers: Thou that
to To^y, the modest son of an honest father, sendedst Raphael thy minister, to
accompany him on the way in his intended journey: send me, being sarre
inferior to Tobias in virtue, but confident in thy goodness, thy holy Angel,
who may now lead me in these paths that are most pleasant in thy sight, and
at length bring me to the haven of eternal life: In the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and the holy Ghost,

Amen.
When you enter any journey.
O God that broughtest Abraham thy servant from Vr of the Chaldees and keptst
him in safety in the whole course of his pilgrimage: we beseech thee vouchsafe
to keep us thy servants. Be unto us, O Lord, in our setting out, our succor:
in our way our solace: in heat, a shelter: in rain and cold, a garment: in
wearines, a wagon: in adversity, a helper: in the slippery way, a staff: in
shipwreck a haven: that by thy conduct we may attain thither with happiness
whither we travel, and at last return in safety to our own households,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer before the Sermon.
O Lord Jesus Christ, that d^scendedst from the bosom of thy father into this
world (...) our teacher, y^ thou might show the will of thy Father to
wretched mortal men, and teach them in the way of ^aluation: Behold I come to
hear thy word, and have many years since repaired to the same: (but alas)
with small fruit of my soul: I came unto the light, and I am not illuminated:
to the bread of life, and behold I die for hunger: to the fire, and I starve
for cold: to the medicine, and (...) am oppressed with diverse infirmities of
sin. The dew of divine doctrine falls without intermissio^ upon my earth,
and yet hitherto has it brought forth nothing but thorns and thistles: what
need more? days, mo^ths and years are past, and I remain in the same state of
sin.

It is a great benefit O Lord, that thou have left us the seed of thy divine
word, otherwise we had been like Sodom and Gomorra. It is likewise a great
benefit that thou sendest laborers into thy vineyard, that thou leauest us
Doctors and Catholic preachers: but in vain teach they outwardly, except
thou move inwardly. I beseech thee therefore (O good Jesus) open the ears of
my heart, that that which is instilled by the ear of my flesh, may penetrate
even unto the marrow of my spirit, and there work such wholesome effects, that
thy word return not again in vain.

Uouchsafe, I say, O Lord, y^ this seed which at this time falls on me, be
not choked with the thornie cares of this world, neither wither through drought
and defect of the deaw of the holy Ghost, in the time of tribulation, neither
be devoured by the birds of the air: but warmed by the heat and operation of
the holy Spirit, may flourish in a fruitful mould, and bring forth the fruits
of eternal life: that I may know thee, love thee, and laud thee with perpetual
praise, who art laudable and glorious for ever.

Amen.
A prayer after the Sermon.
LOrd Jesus Christ, eternal Savior, I give thee thanks for that thou have fed
me wi^h the food of thy word, (...) abundantly nourished me: I beseech thee yt
the understanding of thy word be effectual and healthful to me, that the
same celestial seed do not perish in me without fruit. Keep my heart, and
enclose it with the sense of thy grace, and prohibit that the infernal foul
do not pluck it out of my heart, but prepare it unto thee, that it may keep
thy word, and as a new thing, be infixed in my memory. Thou art he that said
by thy Prophet, The word that shall issue from my mouth, shall Esaias 55.
not return to me in vain, but shall prosper in that for which I send it. Go
to Lord, and let thy word heard by me, from the mouth of thy minister, prosper
in me: give me strength, y^ my life may be answerable to the doctrine I have
received. Give increase to thy word, O thou celestial husbandman, that it may
augment and increase in me, that by thy holy word it may not only bring me to
the knowledge of thy will, but also that I may fulfill and execute that which
thou biddest and wilt, and so I may persevere unto the end, until I may attain
to thy celestial and everlasting kingdom.

Amen.
When we go about any work.
WE, that are thrust into the most obscurest darkness through the fall of our
first parents, O thou fountain of eternal wisdom, know not what is pleasing
or displeasant to thee, and what is expedient or hurtful for us:
notwithstanding, O bountiful and merciful Lord, I, notwithstanding y^ labor
be great, if I respect my strength: light and easy, if I regard thy
assistance, do now undertake the same, not knowing whether thou will that the
same should be done by me, or likewise whether it shall be profitable or
hurtful unto me: O thou light of divine majesty, O beauty of the glory of the
Father, O giver of gifts, I beseech thee, let the drops of thy grace fall upon
me, that herein I may know thy will.

To thee therefore, O thou that dwell in the highest, God and Father
omnipotent, with humble heart, godly affection, and devout prayer, do I fly,
craving thy help and assistance in beginning this work For thou understand
the depth of my ignorance, my poverty in virtues, my sluggishnesse in weldoing,
and the great deformity of my manners: all which make me unworthy to finish such
a wor^e: give me therefore wisdom, that assisteth thy seat: send her from thy
holy heavens, that she may be with me, and labor with me. Strengthen me, O
Lord God of Israel, and at this hour behold y^ works of my hands: Give me
strength, assist and help me, that the evil spirit do not hinder me in
atchieuing this work, or the detractious of wicked men revoke me from the
same: let me fail other ways, or let me fall before the end of the work,
but under such a moderator and rector, let me institute and end all things
orderly, namely Jesus Christ the mediator, who is God to be praised for ever.

Amen.
A thanksgiving when the work is finished.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, thou redeemer of mankind, who art Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and end, by whom al things are made, and without whom
nothing is done, who weighest vows, crownest merits, and give rewards: I
give thee thanks, that I have ended the work begun by thy providence, and ended
by thy assistance. Thine it is, O good Jesus, at this present, to weigh the
value thereof: If I have any ways defaulted therein, all that is mine: and if
any thing has been gracious in the eyes of thy Majesty, all yt do I ascribe
unto thee. For being conceived in sin, borne in sin, and bred up in sin, what
other thing can we do but sin? And how can we perform any good thing,
except thou give it, O Lord? It remains now, O God, that by the same mercy
wherewith thou wroughtest this work with me, by the same now thou will direct
it to a wished scope and end, lest the fruits thereof do perish, either to my
self, or to my neighbor.

And if for all those benefits which thou have bestowed on us, we should give
thee thanks, most bountiful Jesus, all our whole life should be spent in that
one thing; so that it behooued us to think on no other thing but the same. But
now our duty calls us henceforth to another thing: our vocation exacteth
another thing at our hands: yet are thy new benefits always to be received
with a new giving of thanks. For which cause I also, for that it has pleased
thee so faithfully to finish this work in me, and by me, although thy vile and
unworthy instrument, I bless thee and praise thee, and glorify thee.

But grant me also (O Lord) not only to give thee thanks, but also to have
them, that is, to remember continually thy bounties, employed on me; that when
as thou find me not ungrateful, thou may continue the increase of thy
gifts in me, until by these of thine I may attain the perpetual fountain of
all goodness and blessedness.

Amen
When we prepare ourselves to study.
WE, whatsoever we be, by a hidden instinct of nature, desire knowledge; but
in so palpable darkness are we conversant, that not only we are ignorant
of those things which we ought to know, but also how we ought to know. For it
is the punishment of the first sin, that this natural light, wherewith in
the state of innocence our understanding was illuminate, is now extinct, and
we, as it were blind, grope for the wall, and as it were without eyes, handle
it.

To thee therefore, O Wisdom, dwelling in the highest heavens and reside^t in
the fathers bosom, make I recourse: enlighten (I beseech thee) my nunde, and
give me an understanding heart, y^ I may know the truth, which thou thy self
art, follow and take hold of it. Uerily I desire to know, because I have read,
that thou repulsest those that repine at Sciences: I have read that they that
are learned shall shine like the brightness of the firmament, and they that
instruct many in the ways of justice, shall be as a star in the perpetuities
of eternities.

But because I know not how I ought to know, I beseech thee show me the means
and order: grant that I may first learn y^ which is most convenient to
salvation, and that most ardently, that urges most vehemently to love. Grant
that I may not desire to know for vain glory sake, not for curiosity, nor in
respect of profit, but only for the edification both of my self and of my
neighbor.

O thou Creator of all things, thou meridian light, O the reward of the elect,
thou know the depth of mine ignorance, my unpolished speech, my defect of
virtues, and my fluggishnesse in apprehending good and ghostly things, is not
hidden from thee. Notwithstanding, O uncreated Wisdom, which at thine own
pleasure, of the wicked make just, and of the ignorant, suddenly and without
delay learned: send from the seat of thy Majesty, thy light and thy truth,
that may illuminate my darkness, and give me (the unworthy) the understanding
of thy chaste and holy word. Make me wiser and better, that I may impart to
others likewise, part of that light which thou impartest unto me.

I atribute nothing to mine industry, cunning, or wit, (for I know that all
those who are rightly wise, are wise by thy teaching) but from thee I expect
that thou should open unto me the treasures of thy wisdom.

Be assistant, be assistant therefore, O thou brightness of divine Majesty,
O beauty of thy Fathers glory, O giver of rewards, be assistant I beseech thee,
unto me, and from the height of thy throne, power the sparkling light of thy
grace into the heart of thy servant, that being solely taught inwardly by thee,
I may understand not that which the prudence of the flesh persuades, but that
which thy celestial wisdom does allow: that I may understand also with
sobriety, and not whilst I persuade others to goodness, make my self
arrogant and evil: but that I may first of all convert to mine own profit,
whatsoever is given me by thee: then from me let it redound to my neighbor,
that by ye benefit of this imperfect science, I may at last come to the
contemplation of the most perfect wisdom, which thou thy self art: Who
live and reignest GOD world without end.

Amen.
When the clock strikes.
BLessed be the hour in which my Lord Jesus Christ was borne and died for us:
O Lord have me in remembrance at the hour of my death.

A prayer before repast.
IT is y^ admirable mystery of thy work, O thou Maker and ruler of the world,
that thou sustainest by these meats the lives of men and of beasts: Truly that
power is neither in the bread nor meat, but it is in thy will and word, by
which all things live and have their being. And how great is that likewise
that every year thou so prouidest, whereby so many sorts of living creatures
are sufficiently satisfied? Which thy holy Prophet testified in the publishing
of thy praises: That all things look up Psalm. 145.
unto thee, that thou might give the^ meat in due season. Thou openest thy
hand, and fillest with thy blessing every living creature. These are the
wonderful works of thy omnipotency; we beseech thee thou Prince and
magnificent father, that as thou ministrest life unto our bodies, by meats,
and by thy word: so also it might please thee to quicken our souls with grace,
by the same word. Grant that thy help may be present with us, lest we
wickedly abuse those things which thou have created for our good uses: let us
not love thee because thou give those things, but let us love those things
because they come from thee, and for a time are necessary unto us, returning
unto thee.

Let us converse soberly, purely, moderately, holily amongst thy gifts which
thou give us, lest wre convert those things which thou give us, as a
medicine of our life, to the venom and death of our souls. But rather duly
and thankefully receiving them, they may become wholesome both to our souls and
bodies, that we may be worthy that thou like a good Father should deservedly
nourish us like thy dear children with wholesome nourishment, till we obtain to
that perfection of thy Son Jesus Christ, in which this mortal shall out on
immortality: neither any more want nouriture, being made one with thy self:
who art blessed for ever and ever.

Amen.
A prayer after meat.
WE feel a double eating (O bou^tiful and liberal Father) in our members: by
this the natural heat daily consumes somewhat of the substance of our
bodies: by that, not the natural, but the noxious concupiscence consumes
somewhat of that justice which by thy larges is infused into our souls. If you
repairest not, and daily strengthenest not our body with corporal meats, it
dies: and that natural life which is in it is extinguished: and except thou
daily nourish our soul by thy grace, it is first weakened, and at length dies,
not a temporal, but an eternal death.

For as we consist of twofold substance, so have we need of a double
aliment. We pray thee therefore (O Lord God) to give our bodies our daily bread;
we beseech thee also impart to our souls thy continual grace: by the one the
body is strengthened: by the other the soul is enriched: by this we live, by
that we live happily. Now have thou nourished (O most gracious father) the
corporal life of thy children with corporal meats: we pray thee that with
the same beneficence, thou will now also nourish in us the spiritual life with
the crummes of thy mercy falling from thy table, that by thy grace thou may
drive away the death of our souls. Truly we are much indebted unto thee for
this present life: and because thou prolongest the same by thy bounty, we give
and yield thee most humble thanks: but this now is the way to that eternal
life, which we beseech thee by the death of thine only begotten Son, to
bestow upon us by thy bounty and immortal blessedness. Here, but for a
temporal life we give thee thanks, but temporary, and such as we may: there,
for eternal graces shall we give thee eternal thanksgiving. For there shall
we truly be satisfied when thy glory Psalm. 36.
shall appear, which thou shall give us through Jesus Christ thy Son: who
with thee and the holy Ghost lives and reigns world without end.

Amen.
A prayer to almighty God about Sun setting.
O Lord, the way of the just shines like a clear light, and increases Prou.
4.
even unto the perfect day of eternity, but the wicked knew not, neither
understood: they walk Psalm. 81.
in darkness, they shall descend from the interior darkness of the mind to the
exterior darkness of hell. O therefore most miserable are they, and
foure-times more miserable are they to whom that thy sun does set, that sun I
say, yt to thy saints never sets, but is always meridian, clear and
shining. A grievous night also in the noonestead attends their minds, who
depart from thee. They expect the light, and behold Esaias, 59.
darkness: the light, and they walk in darkness: they feel like the blind
for the wall, and grope as it were without eyes: they stumble at noone day as
it were in the dark, and in obscurity like the dead: but they that are
conversant with thee, the day is never darkness unto them, but shines
clearly. Here the etheriall Sun keeps his course, arises, sets, draws
near us, and departs from us: But thou (O Lord) if we truly love thee, have
no changes: thou risest always, and set never: thou come to us, and
remainest with us to the Math, 28.
worlds end. O thou that risest from the highest, lighten me that fit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death: O light of the Father, Luke 1.
O eternal Son, illumine my inward darkness, lest after this life, I be
drawn to the exterior. O merciful, and sweet Jesus, remain with me,
because it wareth dark, and the day is already at an end: for as long as we
enjoy thy presence, we abide in light and clearenes, but if thou shall depart
from us, what thing can be pleasant, nay, what not heavy and dolesome unto us?
When we have thee present we are fed by thy sweetness, we enjoy thy
familiarity, we rest in thine arms, we are delighted by thy inward
conference, we are freed from earthly cares and desires, we esteem thee for
our chiefest good, with thee we dwell, with thee we live. All these benefits
die unto us, if thou, O eternal light, be hidden from us. Abide therefore
with us, O Lord, and remove from us the weight of our sins, to the end that
perpetual day may shine in our hearts: stay with us, O Lord.

Amen.
An Evening confession.
I Confess my sins unto thee eternal Bishop, minister of the Saints, and
the Priest of the true taberna^le, who ence in the year of this world, have
entered into the sacred Secret, and given the holy and immaculate Lamb of thy
body for a sacrifice for our sins: To thee I confess, that I am inindebted,
not only in ten thousand talents of my sins, but that I am bound to yield thee
account of my whole life. Because I know that there is not one Commandment of
thine, in my whole life that I have perfectly observed, wherein either in word,
sight, hearing, taste, work, thought, persuasion, or consent, I have not
offended. But now (O Lord) I come before thy face in confession, and in the
presence of all thine Angels and holy Saints: I (...) unto thee all my sins,
wherewith this day I have offended thee: Here if there be any more grievous
sins, let them be repeated. Neither these alone do I confess, but also all
other my misdeeds, whatsoever I have committed from my infancy hitherto, even
unto this present hour either wittingly or ignorantly, in deeds, in words, in
thoughts, and in omissions, discovering also in particular the euilltree of my
heart, with all his roots, twigs, leaves, fruits, and with all his deformities,
swellings, rottennes, all which are very well known unto thee: for thou
beholdest not only the interior desires, doubts, and denials of thy
providence, but also these gross external offenses, which we wretchedly
commit in our words and deeds.

Wherefore (O most merciful Father) according to the measure of my weakness,
I beseech thee (although I am altogether unapt to pray) forgive my offenses,
pardon my sins, and forget all the multitude of my misdeeds, as well those
that I have committed this day, as also those which thou know me guilty of
from my infancy hitherto. Circumcise likewise, for thy goodness sake, my very
stony heart: for this old one, create in me a new, and endue it with a new
spirit: water it with the juice of celestial grace, and the spiritual
fountain of waters, whereby the internal venom, and corrupt juice of the
flesh may be dried up, the custom of the old man may be changed, and my
heart may not hereafter bring forth brambles and thorns, as fuel to the
fire, but spiritual fruits in justice and holiness.

Amen.
A thanksgiving in the evening.
BEhold (O Lord) so many and so mighty are my sins whereby I have this day
offended thy divine Majesty: and that time thou gave me to show the fruits of
repentance in, I have consumed so unprofitably, forgetting that this day might
have been the very last day of my life: heaping new sins upon old, and
walking in thy sight (who continually see all things) without any fear, no
otherwise than if it were in the presence of some idol: for which cause I
deserved that the earth should gape, and hell should swallow me up: but for
that this most fatal punishment does not affect me, both with lips, and heart,
and all the members about me, and the power that is in me, I give thanks to
thine infinite mercy.

For thou (O Lord) have kept me this day by thy ciemency from all misfortune of
body and soul: for there is no evil in the world, either corporal, or
spiritual, that this day might not have happened unto me. For that which
might befall another man, why might it not light upon me? For if he be the
son of Adam, why, so am I: If he be subject to actual sin, so am I: If
his body be formed of humors, and contrary elements, so is mine. If
therefore he be this day made blind, why might not I also have been blinded?
If another man this day become lame, be consumed, fall sick of the p^sicke,
be distraught, get the ^ixe, labor of the spleen, tremble with the pals^e,
why am not I partner of the same misery? If this man has perished by water,
that by fire, he be extinguished by sudden and unexpected death, why am not
I also, who am in the same state of damnation with him? Why, O Lord? why (I
say?) but for that thy grace (O most pitiful Lord) has conserved me, and thy
mercy protected me, that therefore I am in safety; that I am whole and strong
in body, I only ascribe it to thee, and to thee give I most entire thanks. The
like, or rather more greater thanks offer I up unto thee (O Father) ye thou
have no less protected my soul from sins, then my body from sicknesses and
misfortunes of this day: that being blind, thou have lightened her, and guided
her in this way of thy commandments: that falling, thou have raised her: that
standing, thou have sustained her from falling. For that thy mercy has preue
nied me, delivering me from all evils, saving me from those that are past,
raising me from the present, and defending me from the future: taking away also
the nets of my sins from before me, and cutting off their occasions and
causes. For except thou had done this, and that for me, I had done all the
sins of the world, because I know (O Lord) that there is no sin that ever man
did, that another man might not have done, if the Creator be wanting, by whom
man is made. But that I did not offend, (...) was thy favor: yt I abstained,
it was thy command: and that I believed thee, it was thy grace inspired into
me. For thou (O Lord) did rule me to thy self: and kepst me for thee and my
self and that I should not commit adultery, or any other sin, thou gave
me that grace and light through Jesus Christ thy son. To thee be praise, to
thee grace, to thee glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A prayer wherein thou commendest thy self to God upon the entrance of thy bed.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my God and Redeemer, in as much as thou have made and
ordained the pleasing time of night, for the rest and refection of the weak
bodies of miserable mortal men, I beseech thee that this night thou will keep
my soul (ouer-burdened with sin) defensed with true peace in thee: O God,
who art the true and eternal rest, preserve it from all the assaults of the
devil, and from all his dangerous incursions: defend my senses and cogitations,
and ordain and direct all that which I do, and wherein I end according to thy
will, lest engaged in the depraved darkness of this world and being overcome
by the Prince of the same the devil, I be brought into temptation, and
pernicious snares: but perfect in me true tranquillity, and constant purity
in my conscience. Give unto my body also (O most sweet Jesus) contaminate with
many crime^, this night, and al other times, suc^ rest, that I may never depart
from thee, who art eternal tranquillity, neither at any time forsake the^, or
through the dullness and sluggishnesse of my slothful flesh, be^ forgetful of
thee, and thereby be^ thrust into the perpetual agitat^ on and damnation of
incessa^ trouble.

For which cause (O eternal an) most merciful Lord) I comment my spirit into
thy hands for tho^ our most merciful Savior, ha^ redeemed us on the wood of
the cross: suffer not my spirit O Lord to sleep in sin, and saint therein,
lest I be buried in eternal death: ^ut watch over me, and intend ^y safety:
O most faithful shepherd, suffer me not, being desti^ute of thy help, to be
swallowed (...) the gulf of my sins.

Protect me under the shadow of ^hy wings, and suffer me not to be Psalm. 16.
^ntangled with extraordinary and ^nnecessary sleep: but raise me ^n due
time: that wakened in that sort, I may cheerfully endeavor my self to sing
thy praises, and intend thy service, that I may think of thee: and being
raised by ^hy power, I may perform the ^orks of justice, and seek thy
hea^enly kingdom with my whole ^eart: that at length by thee, with ^hee, and
in thee, I may obtain eter^all light, and celestial rest.

Amen.
Another prayer before sleep.
GRant unto me (O my God) ye watching, I may vigilantlie ^and in thy presence:
and as often as (...) shall fortune me to sleep, let my sleep be without
sin, and if in my waking I should commit any misdeed, grant me (O Lord)
pardon for thy mercy sake: and if; sin in my sleep, let thy clemency pardon
me; and by the memory of thy martyrdom give me a quiet time of sleep, and
deliver me from evil dreams, and filthy imaginations: and for the whole
night, bouchsafe me a sleep full of tranquillity, lest wickedness have the
power over me, and evil cogitations full of perverseness seduce me. Give me
thine Angel of light, that may keep all the members of my body: and deliver
me from cursed concupiscence, by that living body that was cru^ified for me.
Let me lay me down to rest, and sleep in peace, and let thy blood be the
keeper of me and my soul, which is thine image. Give liberty to thy
handiworke, and let thy right hand defend the body which thou have fashioned
with thine own hands: and enuiron me with the wall of thy mercies, as it were
an acceptable fortress and bulwark, that when the body shall rest and sleep,
it may be defended by thy virtue: and let my sleep be as a sweet sinelling
incense before thy majesty: neither let the enemy approach my bed, for thy
mercy sake. I will hear and execute thy will (O my God) who lodest the night
with the tranquillity of the justice of our redeemer Jesus Christ. For thou
art the true light, and thy glory dwells in the light: and the children of
light adore thee, dwelling in the light. Jesus, the Word of the Father unto
life, have mertie on me for thy mercy sake: to whom with the Father that sent
thee, and the holy Ghost, be all praise for ever.

Amen.
Iaculatorie prayers to be had always in memory.
When any sudden fear assaileth thee.
BE unto me (O Lord a tower Psalm. 60.
of strength against the face of mine enemy.

If the corrupt flesh provoke thee.
PIerce my flesh with thy fear: Psalm. 118.
for I have trembled at thy judgments.

If an ill suspicion overtake thee.
CReate in me (O Lord) a new heart, and give me a new spirit Psalm. 50.


If indecent sadness ouer-hale thee.
Give me the joy of thy salvation, and confirm me with a Psalm. 50.
principal spirit.

If vain glory seduce thee.
NOt unto us (O Lord) not unto us, but to thy ^ame give Psalm. 113.
the glory.

If desperation molest thee.
GOd is my hope from my youth: from the womb of my mother Psalm. 70.
thou art my protector.

If thou be afflicted in mind.
Help me, and I shall be safe, and I will meditate always upon Psalm. 118.
thy iustifications.

If sloth assail thee,
EXcite thy power (O Lord) and come: conu^rme me in thy Psalm. 79.
words, lest I fail in the way.

If labor tire thee.
BEhold my humility, and my labor, Psalm. 24.
and forgive me all my sins.

If wrath disturb thee.
Give me patience (O Lord) and peace to thy servant, lest I lose the crown of
my soul in heaven. For thou have said, In your patience Luke 21.
you shall possess your souls.

If desire of honor and promotion tempt thee.
INcline my heart (O Lord) to thy Psalm. 118
testimonies, and not unto covetousness: turn away mine eyes, lest I see
vanity: and quicken me in thy way.

If gluttony solicit thee.
THe kingdom of heaven is not meat and drink, but peace and Romans 14
joy in the holy Ghost: It is the Spirit that quickneth, the fiesh profits
nothing. John 6.


Is evil (...) thee.
Whose tinage and superscription is this? And hearing that it is Ce^ars, that
is, the Matthew. 21. Act. 8.
devil of this world, say, let thy money be with thee to thy perdition: now
the door is shut, and our Lord cares his passe-ouer here, I have no leisure
to open unto thee.

If any blessing of God happen to thee.
What shall I yield unto our Lord for all the benefits he has bestowed upon
me? How Psalm. 115.
much ^west thou, m^ soul? And tur^g to the angels, lay, Come and hear, and I
will show you, all y^e that ^are God, what he has (...) to my soul. And
turning thine eyes unto God himself, it (...) shall thou say, O Lord, thy
mercy is great toward me. Psalm. 85.


I^ (...) persecution
Judge them (O Lord) that hurt Psalm. 34.
me, overthrow them that fight against me: Take the sword and shield, and
arise to do me help.

When thou see thou art (...) by God.
Wherefore (O Lord) art (...) departed far from me Psalm 9.
Do thou turn thine eyes aside in opportunities, in tribulation? Stay with
us, O Lord, for it waxes Luke 2.
night.

Against detractors,
Save me (O God) for the righteous Psalm. 11.
fail, and truth fails amongst the children of men: Let the Lord confound
all deceitfuil lips, and the tongue that speaks great things.

For our enemies.
O Lord, lay not this sin to their Act. 7.
charge, because they know not what thy do.

When we address^ our selves to study.
BLessed art you (O Lord) teach Psalm. 118.
me to do thy will: open mine eyes that I may consider the wonderful works of
thy Law.

A man may sometimes lift up his heart by affection of repentance in these
words.
Turn thy face from my sins, O Lord, and blot out all my offenses. Create in
me (O Lord) a new heart.

Sometimes with an affection of gratitude.
Bless the Lord (O my soul) Psalm. 102.
and forget not his benefits.

Sometime with an affection of love.
I Will love thee, O Lord my strength, God is my foundation, Psalm. 17.
my refuge, and my deliverer: God is my helper, and I will hope in him. Even as
the Heart desires the fountains, so longs my soul Psalm 40.
after thee, O God. My soul has thirsted after the living fountain God: When
shall I come and appear before the face of my God? My tears were bread unto
me day and night, whilst they daily said unto me, Where is thy God?

Then inflamed with the love of eternal beatitude, let him say:
OHow amiable are thy dwelling places, thou Lord of hosts my Psalm. 83.
soul thirsts and longs after the dwelling place of my God.

This that felloweth was familiar to the Fathers in Egypt.
Who shall give me wings like Psalm. 54.
a Dove, and I will fly and take rest?

Three most devout prayers to excite the soul to contrition and grief sor
sin.
The first Prayer.
OOnly begotten Son of God, great and unspeakable are y^ benefits, O Lord,
which I have received at thy hands: thou framedst me of the dust and dirt of
the earth, and createdst my soul of nothing, to thy image and similitude, and
made it capable of thy glory: thou gave me understanding, memo will,
election, with all my members and senses, and with them the knowledge and love
of thee. Thou keptst me in the secret celles of my mothers womb, lest in them
I should be choked without baptism. Thou sustainedst me patiently after so
many sins, even unto this present day, where in the mean space there are many
others who have less offended than (...) and yet because you would not
hitherto expect them, they are now perhaps tormented in hell. But besides all
this, it was thy pleasure to take flesh upon thee and to converse amongst men
for my sake, to be afflicted and troubled for me; to be bedewed with bloody
sweat; to be taken, bound, buffeted, spit upon, mocked, blasphemed; to be
clothed in a white and purple garment like a fool: to be strooken with a
reed, to be blinded, condemned to death, and led to the place of execution,
having on thy shoulders the crou^e to which thou were affixed with nails, and
hanged betwixt two thieves, and adjudged for a malefactor: thou did drink
gall and vinegar: finally, thou were slain with most cruel death. By so many
labors and dolors (O my God) thou did redeem me, and yet I most vile and
perverse sinner, ungrateful for so many benefits, have so oftentimes newly
strooken thee again, and nailed thee to the cross by my sins: for which cause
I am worthy that all creatures should rise up against me, and take revenge of
this my so great injury.

What should I say of y^ abuse of thy sacraments and medicines, which by thy
precious blood, thou institutedst and obtainedst for me? Thou tookest me for
thine in the sacrament of baptism, there thou adoptedst me for thy son, and
consecratedst me as it were thy temple, there did thou anoint me for thy
Priest, King, and Champion, who was to wage combat with the enemy: there
did thou espouse my soul, and gave me all the honors which were
answerable to this dig nity. But how have I used al these benefits and
ornaments which I have received from thee? what cogitatio^s had I of keeping
these riches? Thou tookest me for thy son, and I may become the servant of
sin. Thou sanctifiedst me for thy temple, and I made my self the habitation
of devils. Thou armedst me like a generous soldier, and I revolted and fled
unto thine enemies. Thou made me a king, and I waxed proud in the kingdom
which thou gave me. Thou espousedst my soul to thee in perpetual charity,
and I more loved vanity than verity: more the creatures, than my Creator. Truly
it were rightful, yea most just, (O Lord) that yet now at length I should
begin to weep, complain, and lament, when I have committed so many and so
enormous sins.

This is it that so long time thou expectedst from me, as thou have given me
life: For so oftentimes have thou called me, and so long have thou sustained
me, struck me, and again flattered me, and have sought all ways and
means that thou might reclaim me unto thee: thou have expected me, and I
have abused thy patience: thou have called me, and I have stopped mine ears
against thy counsels. Thou gave me time for repentance, and I consumed y^
same in my pride: thou strookest me, and I felt it not: thou afflictedst me,
and I would not take thy correction: thou sweatedst that thou might cleanse
me, and I am not washed: thou prouedst me by fire, and the rust of my sins is
not cleansed away. I am hardened as well by thy scourges, as thy allurements:
ingratful to these: rebellious against those. Notwithstanding (O Lord God)
though thou have suffered so many and so great things for me, thou have
commanded me that I should not despair, nor distrust in thy mercy: I convert
my self therefore wholly unto thy mercy, and beseech thee to give me grace,
that I may amend my self, whereby I may so hereafter please thee and serve
thee, that I never hereafter revolt from thee, but cleave always to thee for
ever and ever.

Amen.
For contrition. The second prayer.
O Supreme Maker of al living creatures, when I bethink my self how greatly I
have offended thy divine majesty by my sins, I quake for fear, and detest my
indecent madness: considering how bountiful and reverend a Father I have
forsook: I curse my ingratitude, when I consider from how noble a liberty I am
fallen, into most miserable servitude: I accuse my inconstancy, and know not
what to set before mine eyes, but judgment and hell: for thy justice from
which I cannot fly, terrifieth my conscience.

On y^ other side, when I behold thy unmeasurable mercy, which according to the
testimony of thy Psalm. 144.
Prophet surpasses al thy works, presently a pleasing breath of hope does
refresh me, and strengthens my too feeble mind. For as before I despaired, so
here do I find remission of my sins in him, who by the writing of his
Prophets so oftentimes inuiteth sinners to repentance, saying, I will not y^
death Ezech. 18.
of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live. Thy only begotten Son
likewise declares by many similitudes how ready thou art to pardon those that
are penitent. That expressed he by the lost penny, by the lost sheep, brought
home on the shoulders of his pastor: but especially by the prodigal son,
Luke 15.
whose image I acknowledge in my self. For I am he that have indeed forsaken my
most loving Father: I have spent all my substance: and obeying the appetites of
my flesh, have fled the obedience of thy commandments, and have fallen into
the most filthy captivity of sin: now am I traveled with extreme necessity,
from which who shall deliver me, I truly know not, except it be he whom I have
forsaken.

Receive me therefore (O Lord) thy most humble servant, submissiuely seeking
pardon at thy hands, into thy favor. But whereas (though in vain) thou have
even unto this hour so bountifully expected me, I confess that I am not
worthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven, or to call thee Father: yet because thou
art my true Father, vouchsaf with thy fatherly eyes to behold me: for thy
aspect alone quickens the dead, and draws all such as run astray, unto
thee. For this, whatsoever repentance which I now have, I could not have had,
except thou had beheld me.

When as wandering I forsook thee, thou lookedst upon me from the highest
heavens, where I was furthest from thee: and did open mine eyes that I might
behold thee and search my conscience, and behold my self overwhelmed with so
much wickedness. Come therefore (O Lord) to receive me: give me the knowledge
and memory of my lost innocence: I require not thy imbracings, nor thy kisses:
I pray thee not to give me that goodly garment y^ I was wont to wear, nor the
ring of my ancient dignity: I require not that thou should receive me into
the state and dignity of thy children: but it shall suffice me if I may be
numbered amongst the mercenary servants of thy house, sealed with thy mark, and
tied with thy bonds, lest ever hereafter I run away from thee: It shall not
grieve me, although in this life I be one of the most contemptible slaves of
thy house, so that thou separate me not for ever from thee.

Hear me therefore, most merciful Father, and give me the grace of thy only
begotten Son: and communicate with me the merits of his passion. Give me thy
Spirit that it may purify my heart, and strengthen it in thy grace, lest
hereafter I return again, through ignorance, into that exile, from whence thy
grace has recalled me: who live and reignest world without end.

Amen.
For contrition. The third most zealous prayer.
Who shall give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, that
night and day I may bewail my sins, and lament my ingratitude against God my
Creator? There are many things (O omnipotent Lord) that incite the hearts of
men, and draw them to the knowledge of then sins: but there is none so
effectual, as the consideration of the greatness of thy bounty, and the
multitude of thy benefits: yea, eue^ to those sinners, which are most reprobate
and wretched. That therefore my most miserable soul may by that means be
confounded and ashamed, I will begin (O Lord) to reckon up some of thy mercies
an^ my mischiefs, that but in this I may manifestly understand wh^ thou art,
and who I am: what tho^ were toward me: and what I a^ toward thee.

The time was once (my God when I was not: and thou gave (...) being, and
tookest me out of (...) dust of the earth, creating me a^ cording to thine
own image a^ similitude: then from my motherwombe thou becamest my God: f^
from the first moment wherein I began to be, even unto this present hour, thou
art my Father, my redeemer, my defender, and all my good. Thou createdst my
body, with all my members and senses: thou createdst my soul, with all her
powers: and hitherto have thou preserved my life, by the benefit of thy
providence.

All these (although in themselves they be great, yea weiny al) yet are they
little in respect of thy greatness. But because thou had these things gratis,
and bought by no great price, thou would give me another thing which cost
thee more decre, that I might thereby be the more indebted unto thee. Thou
descendedst from heaven upon the earth, that thou might find me, seeking me
in all my ways in which I had lost my self. Thou did ennoble my humanity by
thy nature by thy thr^dome thou deliueredst me from captivity: thou freedst
me from the power of the devil, delivering thy self into sinners hands, and
destroying my sin by assuming the shape of a sinner: thou would bind me
unto thee by so much grace: thou would a^^ure me by this benefit,
strengthen my hope by so many merits, and beget in me the detestation of sin,
showing unto me how many things thou have both done and suffered, to overthrow
the kingdom of sin. Thou kindlest living fire upon the dead coals of my
heart, that being overwhelmed with such a multitude of benefit^, which in this
one are contained, I might love him that did so great things for me, and
bestowed so much love on me.

Behold (O Lord) thou redeemedst me: but what had that profited me, except I
had been baptized? Amongst such a multitude of infidels, scattered upon the
face of the whole earth, it pleased thee to reckon me among the number of thy
faithful: and of those to who^ so happy a lot befell, as to be thy children,
regenerated by the water of holy baptism: there was I taken for thine: there
was that famous and admirable contract or covenant concluded, namely that I
should be thine, and thou should be mine: thou my Lord, and I thy servant:
thou my Father, and I thy son: where we meet together, you to perform toward
me the office of a Father, and I to serve thee with the duty of a son. What
shall I say of the other Sacrament, which thou institutedst as a remedy for my
sins, making thy precious blood a medicine for my wounds?

Having all these helps and furtherances, as yet I continued not in goodness,
but such was my malice, that notwithstanding these I lost once more my first
innocence: and so great again was thy mercy, y^ have hitherto patiently
suffered me in my sins O my hope and my redeemer, how ca^ I without tears
remember how often thou might have slain me, and no evil happened unto me?
how many thousand of souls happily do now burn in hell, which have sinned
less then I have sind, and yet burn not? what had become of me if at that
time thou tookest them away, thou had likewise taken me? how strict a
judgment had been prepared for me, if justice had apprehended me being
guilty of so many grievous sins? Who then (O Lord) bound the hands of thy
justice? Who prayed for me when I slept? who stayed y^ scourge of thy wrath,
when I provoked the same by my sins? What was there pleasing in me, why you
should deal more favorably with me than with them, who in y^ midst of
their perils, yea in the very heat of their youth, were taken hence? My sins
cried unto thee, and thou stoppedst thine ears lest thou should hear them:
my malice against thee increased daily, and thy mercy likewise toward me
increased daily: I sinned, and thou did expect me: I fled thee, and thou
followedst me: I was wearied in offending thee, thou were not weary in
expecting me, in no other sort, than if my sins had been favors, and no
offenses. In the midst of my sins, I received many good inspirations, and
many holy reprehensions from thee, which did cenuict and condemn the
dissoluteness of my life. How often did thou call me, and inwardly inuit me,
saying, Thou have committed Hierem.
fornication with many lovers, yet return unto me, and I will receive thee? How
often have thou called me in these or such like loving words? How often have
thou terrified me with fear and threatenings, reducing to my memory the peril
of my death, and the rigor of thy divine justice? How many orders of Preachers
and Confessors have thou appointed, that by their words and counsels might
incite me and help me (O Lord) walking in thy way? How often have thou followed
me by thy words, inuiting me by thy benefits, and chastising me with thy
scourges, stopping up all the ways after the manner of a hunter, that I might
no way fly or escape from thee? What shall I the^ at this time render unto thee
(O Lord) for all those things which thou have bestowed upon me? Because thou
have created me, I owe ^hee all that which I am: for thou ^dest all things.
Because thou ^st conserved me, I ow unto thee ^ll that I am, and live: for thou
con^uest all things: and because thou ^auest thy self as a reward unto me what
shall I restore thee? If I had all the lives of Angels and men, and should offer
them for a sacrifice unto thee, what were this oblation, if it should be
compared only to the blood which so abundantly thou sheddest for my sake?

Who therefore shall give me tears for mine eyes, that I may bewail^ my
ingratitude, and my negligent retribution, for so many benefits? Give me
therefore thy help (O Lord) give me thy grace, that in due manner I may
confess my sins unto thee. I unhappy that I (...) I (although I have demeaned
(...) self far otherwise) am thy creature made according to thy Image and
likeness: acknowledg^ this similitude, for it is thine. Take from me that
which I have made, and thou shall find the which thou by thy holy hand have
made. I have employed all my forces and powers to injury thee; and have
offended thee in y^ very work^ of my hands. My feet were swif^ to do evil,
my hands ready t^ act any wickedness, mine eie^ dissolute to all vanity, and
mi^ ears open to all follies and falsehoods. I have diuerted the most noble
part of my soul, which had eyes to behold thee, from thy beauty, and converted
them to the flourishes of this miserable life: the soul, that day and night
should have meditated on thy commandments, now night and day studieth in what
manner it may offend thee. The understanding so depraved, what should the will
do? Thou, my God, had invited it to celestial delights: but she preferred
earth before heaven, stretching her arms, to thee (O Lord) consecrated, to the
filthy affection of Creatures. This is y^ recompense (O God) this the fruit
which my senses (which thou createdst) brought forth. Ah wretch that I am,
what can I answer, if thou enterest into judgment with me, and say unto me,
I have planted thee an elected (...), all true seed?

And if I cannot give answer to this first question, how shall I answer thee in
the second, for my benefit of conservation? Thou, my Lord, thy providence has
conserved him that meditated on nothing else but how he might transgress thy
commandments: how persecute thy servants: how offend thy Church: and how to
strengthen the kingdom of sin against thee. Thou moouedst the tongue that
biasphemed thee: thou ruledst the members which offended thee: and gave them
sustenance, who lay in wait for thy servants: so that I have not only been
ungrateful for thy benefits, but also have converted the benefits themselves
into arms, with which I impugned thee. Thou had made all Creatures for my
use, that I, allured by that benefit, should love thee: and I have adulterated
them, in that I have so often time offended thee by them. I rather made choice
of the gift, than the giver: and from whom the occasion of knowing thy bounty
was to be taken, from them I was blinded: neither lifted I up mine eyes, yt I
might see how far more fair the Creator was tha^ the creature. Thou gave
me all things, that I might give my self unto thee, and all things might serve
me, but I never either gave thee glory, or the tribute which is due unto thee.
Thy creatures were always ready at my command (for so thou ordainedst them:)
but I have always studied to offend thee: and to this end have used and abused
all things. Thou gave me health, and the devil has gathered the fruit
thereof: thou gave me strength, and I have employed the same in the service
of thine enemy. What shall I say? why were not so many kinds of calamities and
miseries, which every where I beheld in other men, sufficient that but in them
I might understand, but that all other men's evils were my benefits? for from
all them have thou delivered me. Shall it therefore be lawful for any man to
show himself ungrateful for a benefit received? and who is he that owes
not thanks for a benefit received? If the rage of Lions and Serpents be
lenified by gifts, why (O Lord,) shall not thine be sufficient to mortify and
mollify me? that yet at the least sometime I may say, Let us (care our Lord
God, that gives us tunely and evening rame in due time, and pientie of annual
increase to those that love him.

It was enough for me (O Lord) to know that it was thou that ^o long time
sustainedst me, although I had not any other demonstration or testimony of thy
bounty: and if yt account shall be so strict for these things which cost thee
little, what shall that be which thou shall exact for those which thou have
purchased with thy precious blood? How I have perverted thy commandments? how
I have violated the mystery of thy incarnation? Thou becamest man, that thou
might make me God: and I, besotted with mine own abiectnesse, made my self
a beast, and the son of the devil. Thou descendedst on the earth, that thou
might bring me to heaven: and I unworthy such a vocation, as one that
deserved it not, knew not the same, and perseuered in the dirt of my
abiectnesse. Thou did deliver me, and I cast my self head long again, into
my former captivity: ^hou raisedst me up, and I re-embraced death: thou had
incorporated me in thy self, and I again took party with the devil. So many
and so great blessings had not that power over me, to make me acknowledge
thee: neither so many arguments of love to make me love thee again: neither so
many merits to make me hope in thee: neither such a justice which shined in
thy passion, to make me fear thee: thou have humbled me even unto the dust
of the earth, and I swel with pride: thou hangedst naked on the Cross: and the
whole world satisfies not my Avarice: They buffeted thee upon the face, who
art God: if any man touch my garment, I am angry: and notwithstanding, am but a
base and vile worm. What shall I say, my Savior? Behold how great thy mercy
and charity is toward me. Thou would die, to kill my sin and I, confident in
the same mercy, bounty, and love, am not afraid to sin against thee. Alas, what
greater blasphemy may there be? I of thy bounty took occasion of my malice:
from the very same means which thou use to kill sin. I took occasion to
quicken sin in my self. So, so O Lord, I have perverted thy counsels: from
thy mercy picked out the method and means of my malignity. Because y^ were so
good, I thought it was lawful for me to be evil: and because thou had
bestowed so many benefits on me, I supposed it lawful for me to do thee so
many offenses and injuries: so that I converted the very medicines themselves,
which thou institutedst against sin, to occasions of sin: and the sword which
thou gave me to defend my self with, and fight against mine enemies, the
same have I whet against my self to endanger my own life. Finally, thou, to
the end that thou might rule the living and the dead, would die, as the
Apostle witnesses, to the ^2 Cor. 5.
end that they which now live should not live to themselves, but to thee who
dai^edst to die for them: and I like some Iesabel, took the same death as a
means whereby I might bereave my self of thy benefits, flying from thy service,
and making my self the bondslaue of thine enemies. O what deserved he that did
those things? If the dogs eat the flesh of that Iesabel for her sin, 4. Reg. 9.
how may mine remain untouched that have altogether done the like?

And if the Apostle so much exaggerateth the malice of man's heart, because that
from the law he took Romans 7.
occasion to break the law: how much more greater shall the malice be of
grace, if any man take occasion thereby to offend grace it self?

O most patient Lord that sufferedst strokes for sinners, but more patie^t,
that sufferedst sinners themselves: but shall that thy patience continue for
ever? I remember what thou said by thy Prophet; I held my peace, I was
always Esaias 42.
sile^t, I was patient, I will speak like a woman with ^hild. I see y^ earth yt
yields no fruit, after it has bin moistened with the rain, to be reproved
and accursed: the vine that after it had been well trimmed and yielded no grapes
but briers, by thy commandment cut down and laid waste: Therefore O
unprofitable and unfruitful branch, why fear thou not the voice of that
husbandman or Uine-heard, that takes away y^ branches that bear no fruit,
and casts them into the fire? Every tree that bears not fruit (says he) my
Father will cut down, and cast it in the fire. Will he ever fear, that
fears not such a judgment? How deaf is he that hears not such a voice?
How profoundly sleeps he that is not wakened with such a th^der? This earthly
habitation delighted me: I took pleasure to walk among these thorns: The
fire of my passions b^ned me: the thorns of my concupiscence pricked me: the
distractions of my thoughts ^d me; the wor^e of my conscience bit me: and al
these, thought I to be liberty and sola^e: so many and so great e^is did I ca^
pea^e. O how ignorant and rude was I in the knowledge of my self: and how hard
and vn^actable to obey and serve thee!

What shall I do, my God, what shall I do (...) co^sesse I am unworthy to
appear before thy present, unworthy to lift up mine eyes to behold thee:
whither shall I go? whither shall I fly from thy presence? Art thou not my
Father? yea, and the Father of mercies, which neither have end or measure? for
although I have already desisted to be thy son, yet thou hitherto ceasest not
to be my Father: and though I have done many things for which thou might
worthily condemn me, yet have thou not lost the means whereby thou may save
me. What therefore shall I do but cast my self prostrate before thy feet, and
ask mercy? Whom shall I call upon? who shall help me but thou? Art not thou my
Creator? my maker? my governor? my redeemer? my king? my shepherd? my Priest?
and my sacri^? Whither therefore shall I go? to whom shall I fly but unto thee?
if thou repulse me, who shall relieve me? if thou reject me, who shall rescue
me? Acknowledge (O Lord) this lost sheep: behold I come unto thee altogether
wounded, and thou can heal me: altogether blind, and thou can give me
sight: altogether dead, and thou can revive me, altogether leprous, and thou
can cleanse me. Sprinkle me (O Lord) Psalm. 50.
with hysope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Greater is thy mercy than my iniquity; greater thy clemency than my malice:
and thou can remit more than I can sin. Repulse me not therefore (O Lord)
repulse me not: look not upon the multitude of my sins, but on thine infinite
mercy: who live and reignest, world without end.

Amen.
An oblation of all the labors and passions of Christ, for our sins.
WHat shall I render unto thee (O Lord) for all the benefits thou have bestowed
upon me? with what signification of gratuity shall I recompense so many
benefits? what shall I give thee for that thy so great mercy? alas how
slenderly do I requite the merits of so liberal and favorable a benefactor?
I was always ungrateful for thy benefits, always rebellious against thy
commandments: I always shut up my soul against thy inspirations, heaping
offense upon offense, and adding sin to sin. I confess (O Lord) that I am
not worthy to be called thy son: although I acknowledge thee to be my
Father. For thou art truly my Father, thou art my hope thou art the fountain
of mercy, that repulsest not sinners that fly unto thee, but receiuest them,
washest them, and feedest them. Behold therefore, my helper: see how I (the
poorest of al thy creatures) come unto thee, bringing no other thing with me,
but the grievous burden of my sins.

I prostrate my self before the feet of thy mercy, humbly asking pardon.
Forgive me I beseech thee (O my firm hope) save me for thy infinite mercy
sake. O sweet Jesus, in remission of my sins I offer unto thee thy
immeasurable charity, wherewith thou being God of infinite majesty, were moved
not to refuse for my sake to be incarnate: to be made man: and to be conversant
in this world thirty three years in many tribulations, persecutions, pains,
vexations, and labors, (...) offer unto thee that thy deadly affliction, y^
bloody sweat and that agony which afflicted and pierced thy hear^ when praying
in the garden, and pr^ating thy self on the ground, thou besoughtest the
Father: I offer up unto thee yt a^^^nt charity, whereby thou desiredst to
suffer for us, when as of thine own accord thou offeredst thy self into the
hands of thine (...), as a well pleasing sacrifice to thy Father for our sins.
(...) offer up unto thee al (...) injuries, blasphemies, buffetings, beatings,
spitt^s and al other those torments which in that miserable night thou
sustainedst in the hou^e of Ann^s and (...) offer unto thee O good (...) al
these things, beseeching thine (...) goodness, that by the merits thereof tho^
w^t pardon me all my sins thou will as well remit the penalty as the crime, and
purify my soul from all relics of sin, and at length bring me to eternal
life. I offer up unto thee that thy inestimable humility, obedience, and
patience, which thou shewedst when they whipped thee, being bound to, a hard
pillar, and after crowned thee with thorns; thy meeknes, when as those
assista^ts of satan, and perpetual torme^tors of hell, in way of disgrace
a^tired thee in a purple raiment: when as mocking, they saluted thee and spit
in thy face, and with a reed which thou barest in thy hand in steed of a
septer, struck thy wounded and bruised head. I offer unto thee wearines of thy
afflicted body, thy bloody steps the grievous burden of thy cross, which thou
barest on thy delicate shoulders miserably martyred with whipping. I offer unto
thee that thirst wherewith in thy passion thou were afflicted, and al those
other torments which thou sustainedst for us with a meek heart All these with
thanksgiving, do I offer unto thee, beseeching thy immeasurable mercy, that for
the merits hereof, thou will wipe away my sins, you wilt remit the penalty and
crime, and purify my soul from the relics of sin, and bring the same at
length to eternal life, Sweet Jesus in satisfaction for my sins, I offer up
unto thee thy most cruel dolors which thou sufferedst, when as the soldiers
cruelly haled from thy body thy garment, sticking with clotted blood unto thy
flesh and bones, and renewed again al those wounds which thou had received in
thy scourging: when as cast upon the cross, thou sufferedst thy hands and
feet to be fastened with sharp nails to y^ holy cross, with so much
violence, that all the articles and members of thy ioints were removed from
their natural places: when as thy precious blood flowed from all thy members
in no other sort than the springs from the ouerflowing fountains. I offer up
unto thee all and every drop of thy precious blood, and beseech thy mercy that
for the merits thereof, thou will blot out my sins: remit both the penalty and
y^ crime, and purify my soul from the relikes of sin, and bring the same at
length to everlasting life.

Most merciful Jesus, I offer up unto thee, thy bounty and meeknes, wherewith
thou sustainedst the reproaches and slanders of the reprobate, who wagging their
heads scorned and mocked thee whilst thou praiedst for the^ to thy Father. I
offer up unto thee those horrible torments which you sufferedst, when as thou
were altogether given over as a prey to al afflictions, torments and dolors:
destitute of al internal or external consolation, and forsaken of God and man:
and miserably affixed to a cross betwixt heaven and earth, did hang in y^
midst of two most notorious thieves.

I offer up unto thee thy intolerable thirst, wherewith you were afflicted on
the cross: and that humility and reverence of thine, wherewith in hanging
down thy head, thou commendedst thy spirit to thy Father. I offer unto thee
that most wholesome blood flowing from thy side, and enforced by ye soldiers
lance. Al these things do I offer up unto thee, and for them give thee most
hearty thanks, humbly beseeching thee to forgive me my sins, and to purify my
soul from al reliks of unrighteousness, and bring the same at length to
eternal rest: where thou live and reignest with the Father and the holy
ghost, world without end.

Another prayer for remission of sins
O Omnipotent and eternal Father, God almighty, all merciful: behold, I the
most wretched amongst sinners, lying lowly, prostrate on y^ ground before thy
feet, confess my most grievous and many sins, wherein al my lifetime I have
hitherto offended thee, most merciful Father. I acknowledge my great
ingratitude, in yt (...) have so lightly set by thy infinite and inestimable
benefits hitherto bestowed upon me: as that amongst the rest thou have showed
me so much love and bounty, as to expect me so long time, that converting unto
thee, I might repent, and escape my damnation and punishment in the bottomless
pit of hell, as heretofore my sins have often times deserved: nay, rather for
that thou have invited me so many ways to follow justice: and that to the end
I might follow thee, thou have offered me thy grace and assistance.

How often (my most sweet lord) have thou stood before the door of my heart,
and knocked thereat by manifold inspirations, desiring that I would open the
same unto thee? How often have thou provoked me by thy benefits? How often
allured me by thy bounties? How often enforced me by calamities and
tribulations? Notwithstanding, I have always repulsed thee from me, I have
resisted thee, I have turned my back against thee, yet thou of thy infinite
goodness and patience, have sustained me.

I confess (O Lord) that justly and deservedly thou might have cast me into
the depth of hell: but for thy mercy sake, thou restrainest the force of thine
ire, which after so many ways (...) had increased against my self. Truly it
is to be ad^red (O father) yea it is very admirable, that my heart is not
broken with grief, as often as I weigh these things with my self: I am
unworthy to be called thy creature, unworthy that the earth should any longer
sustain me, unworthy that ye earth should afford me either succor or
sustenance.

It is infinitely to be admired at, that the elements and all creatures do not
at once rise up against me, and revenge the injury I have offered to the
universal Lord of all things. Yet vouchsafe, O you most merciful Father, to be
favorable unto me, and open the bowels of thine infinite pity, and pardon
me, in that I have so long time deferred my conversion unto thee. Open unto me
thy most benign and Fatherly bosom, and give me that nutriment which thou
were wont to give unto thy Children. Humbly I beseech thee (O Lord) now at
length, effect that in me for which thou have hitherto so long tune expected
me.

I confess unto thee (O Lord) with my whole heart and soul, yt of all the
sinners that are in the world at this present, I am ye most grievous: yet
distrust I not thy goodness: for although my sins be many, yet thy mercies may
not be numbered. O most loving Father, if thou will thou can make M^h. 8
me clean: heal me (O Lord) and I shall be healed because I confess my sins
unto thee. Remember thee of thy promises, which are sweeter then the honey and
the honey comb, than which, nothing can be more comfortable unto a sinner: For
thou say by the mouth of thy Prophet, thou have committed fornication with
many lovers, yet return Jeremy 3.
thou unto me, and I will receive thee.

Wherefore (O most merciful Father) cleaving and depending on this thy
promise, I return unto thee with my whole heart, in such sort as by thy word
thou had only called me, and invited me alone unto thy mercy. I know (O
Lord) and I confess my self to be the wretchedest creature of thy creatures:
for I am that prodigal son, that departed from thee the Father of light, from
whom all goodness proceeded: I, like the lost sheep wandered far astray from
the fold, who lewdly consumed that grace which thou so liberally had imparted
to me. I left thee the Fountain of living water, and dug me Ceste^ns, and
drunk of troubled water, full of bitter consolations, and such as in short
time are dried up. For all consolations and all the pleasures of this world,
vanish away like smoke.

I left the tree of life, and fed on mast and cods, which were spurned and
trodden down by the hogs, following the passions and inordinate affections of
my mind, and my beastly appetites: I departed from thee the chiefest good, and
followed those earthly and transitory pleasures, which overthrew me: But now,
O father, I beseech thee, forget thou these injuries which I have committed
against thy majesty: which I crave not for, in respect of the multitude of my
merits, but by beholding the labors and dolours of thy only begotten Son,
which he suffered for my sake.

And thou the only begotten S^nne of the eternal Father, my Lord God and
Savior, have mercy upon me: I cast all mine iniquities, all my injury,
ignom^e, ire, pride, avarice disobedience, impudency, presumption, with all my
other sins, whereby I have provoked thy wrath, into thy lenity, clemency, and
sacred wounds, wide open to yield me refuge. I give my self wholly unto thee,
and commend my self wholly to thy grace: for thou art my hope, my help and my
strength. As much as my sins trouble and confound me, so much does thy
goodness, and the infinite merits of thy passion rei^yce and comfort me.

My sins although in themselves they be grievous in weight, and infinite in
number, yet in comparison of thy mercies, they are light and few. Under this
confidence I come unto thee, and confess my sins unto thee, hoping that thou will not destroy him, whom thou have created according to thine own image and
similitude, and for whose love, thou made thy self partaker of our nature,
blood and flesh. I trust I shall not be condemned by thee, whom thou have
redeemed as it were with so incomparable a price, with so many labors and
dolors: To thee be all honor and dominion for ever and ever.

Amen.
Another most devout prayer for remission of sins.
O My best beloved Jesus, I a^ that wretched and unhappy sin ner, yt has
inflicted thee so many woun^s, and crucified thee a^ew by my sins, ahlas too
many and too mighty. Behold yet how I pre sent my self before thee my father
and judge, being guilty of so m^ crimes, and accountable for so man sins,
beseeching thee through the bowels of thy mercy, that all thy wounds may once
more be opened in the sight of the Father, and may flow into my miserable and
unclean soul, soiled and infected with so many sins: not suffering them to
be closed before they have thoroughly washed and perfectly cleansed me. O sweet
Jesus, turn not thy face from me, but ouerflow me with thine infinite mercy,
and behold me with the eyes of thy pity, wherewith thou beheldst Mary Luke 7.
Luke 22.
Magdalen at the feast time, Peter in the Bishops palace, and the thief on the
Cross. Give me the true Luke 23.
knowledge of my sins: give me the just grief: receive me into the paradise
of thy grace: wash me in thy reaking blood, and quicken me by thy precious
death: pardon me, and take from me, whatsoever my heart wrongfully possesses:
because thou thy self have said, if I be exalted from the earth, I will John
12.
draw all things to me.

For which cause I pray thee, O thou redeemer of my soul, draw me unto thee,
and cleanse me from Psalm. 18.
my hidden sins. O true light, illumine the darkness of my mind. O consuming
fire, burn in me all my sins and iniquities. Come and vi^t my sick soul:
cleanse my conscience, and make me thy grateful Tabernacle. O dearest beeloued
Lord, spread for my sake on the tree of the Cross, draw me out of the suds of
my sins: embrace me, kiss me being cleansed from all s^aine of my
wickedness. O noble cluster of grapes, pressed in the wine press of the
Cross, hug my soul with thy naked, but fair arms distained with blood. Grant
also that thou may be embrac^ in like sort by the same, and (...) a handful
of Mirrhe thou man rest between her teates. O the nailed and pierced soldier,
ho^ cruelly were thou wounded in t^ war undertaken in my behalf How strongly
did thou fight fo me, thou triumpher over the wor^ and the devil, who by thy
death did conquer death, and by t^ precious blood, did expiate f^ all the
sins of mankind? O^ what shall I give thee for all the which thou have
bestowed vp^ me? All that little that I have, I offer it wholly unto thee,
name^ my spirit, that thou may rest (...) the same: my soul, that it m^ ^oue
thee: my body, that it m^ serve thee.

O noble Pelican, that nou^ shest thy young ones with thy hea^ blood, so feed
my soul, faint^ for hunger and spiritual thirst, nothing else may be sauourie
vn^ the same: neither that she may d^ sire to take any thing, but to ea^ thy
flesh, and drink thy blood O mellifluous river of celes^ delights, ouerflow
all my inward parts, make me drink, and grant that I may be dead to all other
creatures, and alive to thee only. O glorious myrrour of the incomprehensible
Trinity, on which all the Angels and Saints desire to contemplate, alas how
cruelly were thou entreated for my sake? There is neither form nor beauty
Esaias, 53.
in thee; thou becamest a byword of men, and the scorn of Psalm. 21.
the multitude. O make me partaker of that incomparable treasure of thy
precious ransom wherewith thou redeemedst me: open the treasury of thy
merits, and pay all my debt: make me such a one in this world, as thou
woulddest have me in the world to come, where thou reignest with the Father and
the holy Spirit God, world without end.

Amen
A most godly prayer and oblation, wherein man offers himself up unto God,
requiring, that the tyranny of his vices expelled, God hereafter may reign in
his soul, and dwell therein, and so work in it those fruits which pertain to
newness of life.
O My God, O my love, O my hope, O all my refuge, and all my desire, O Father
of mercy and God of al consolation, as often as I consider with my self in what
state I was sometime in how many dangers of perdition I have escaped, from how
many evils thou have delivered me, when I was dead in my sins, and lay buried
and covered with the stone of my inueterate custom of offending: such a hope
is quickened in me, that I cannot choose but ask at thine hands (O Lord) all
such things as are necessary for my salvation.

For I am thy workmanship: thy hands have fashioned me, O Lord despise not
therefore the work of thy hands. For why should I doubt that thou will give
me all thy goods, that have daigned to take on thee all my evils? I will
therefore say with the Prophet: I will Psalm. 30.
trust in thee, O Lord, I will rejoice and be glad in thy mercy.

But because hope is not secure without obedience, as one of thy friends says,
Offer the sacrifice of justice, and trust in our Lord: I Psalm. 4.
beseech thee O most dear God, grant me that the hope of thy mercies may
strengthen me in the obedience of thy commandments, for no less is this
obedience due unto thee, than hope, than love, and the other rest. Thou art my
Emperor, my King, and my God, to whom Heaven, and earth, the Sea, and all that
is therein do observance: which have never broken thy laws, but always
observed thy commandments.

Grant me (O Lord) that with no less duty than all other creatures, I may
be obedient to thy holy will, by reason I am bound unto thee in more offices
of duty than they are: vouchsafe, O King of Kings, that I may obey thee: and
may never decline from the prescript of thy law. Reign in me, O Lord, and
suffer not the world, neither the Prince thereof to govern in me any longer:
let not the flesh hold me captive, neither mine own will, but thine. Let all
these tyrants, intruders upon thy possession, thieves of thy glory, and
wret^hed subuerters of thy justice fly and forsake me. Govern thou only in
me, O Lord, that I also may reign with thee whose Kingdom shall have no end.
Come O thou merciful Father, take away the scandalles of thy Kingdom; drive
away sin from my soul, that thou may reign therein, who ought to
govern the same: For avarice comes and challenges to himself an
inheritan^e therein: boast desires to rule therein: pride will be my King:
lech^ says, (...) will reign: ambition, detraction, envy, wrath strive in
me, for me, which of them seems to have the chiefest title and prerogative
over me But I (as much as in me lies) resist them, I impugn as much as I am
helped I surrender to thee my God: I defend my self for thee, because I
acknowledge my self to be thine own, I esteem thee for my God, and my Lord,
saying, I have no other King but my God. Come therefore (O Lord) destroy them in
thy strength: thou shall rule in me, for y^ art my very King and my God, who
sendest salvation to Jacob. No other laws, no other prescripts shall have
place in me, but thine: no other name, no other Scepter except thine shall be
adored in me, that thy will may be done in earth as it is in heaven.

O Lord when shall that day be, when I shall be freed and delivered from these
tyrants? what? no other voice but thine, shall be heard in me. When shall my
heart be cleansed? When shall the forces of mine enemies be so defeated, yt no
contradiction may hinder me in the observation of thy commandments? When
shall the force of mine enemies be so broken, that no force may be found in me
contrary to thy law? when shall this sea be calm? when shall this heaven wax
clear? when shall my affections be so bridled, and my passions so subdued, so
that no floods, no clouds, no troubles may be found in me that may disturb
thy kingdom in me: but yt I may every way enjoy happy peace, secure
tranquillity, and observance of thy laws?

Give me (O Lord) this obedien^e, or (to speak more aptly) give me that
authority and emperie over my heart, that upon my beck it may never rebel
against thee, but in all things be subject unto thee. But even as I am always
bound to observe and obey thee, so also both profit does persuade, and equ^ty
require that I offer my self wholly unto thee, and sacrifice my self unto thee:
for whatsoever I am I am all thine. Thine I say am I, upon most just titles:
thine, becaue thou did create me, and gave me that being which I enjoy:
thine because in this being thou have conserved me, and plentifully furnished
me with the benefits and offices of thy providence: thine, because from
thraldom thou have set me at liberty, not with gold or silver, but redeeming
me with the ransom of thy most precious blood. Finally I am thine, because
thou have so often bought me, as thou have delivered me from any sin.

If therefore upon so many grounds I am thine, and thou likewise art my King, my
Redeemer and deliverer: Behold I turn unto thee, that I may yield thee that
which is thine own: that is, I yield my self up unto thee as a perpetual
bondma^ and slave. Behold I give thee the keys of my liberty, the dominion
over my will, that hereafter I neither be mine own, neither any other man's,
but altogether thine: that I may not live to my self, but to thee: not serve
my self but thee, so that whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, I may
refer al things to the glory of thy name. I stay my self for thee, I deliver
my self unto thee, that thou may dispose of me as of thine own, and that
according to thy good liking and pleasure: whether it please thee yt I live, or
y^ I die: whether I be whole, or sick: whether rich or poor: whether praised
or reproved: in all things I offer and deuote my self unto thee: I resign my
self into thy hands: I renou^e the right and possession of my self, that
hereafter I be not mine own but thine, until that which is thine by right, may
be made thine by my will, and that not once nor one day, but always and every
where.

Amen.
The second prayer of the penitent.
O Lord, thou that createdst me, my only God, my only Lord, thou art my
creator and my redeemer, in whom I hope, from whom I expect al those things
which are requisite for my soul. Thou forsakest not those yt trust in thee:
thou art my sweetest, my bountifullest, my liberalest God: thou art the father
of light, from whom all good things proceed, and every perfect gift desce^deth
from above unto me. Thou createdst me when I was no thing: thou redeemedst me
when I was created and lost: thou restoredst unto me the Seal of innocence
which I lost, in my first baptisine: Thou sauedst me after I had received the
knowledge of the truth, voluntarily sinning again, and almost shipwrackt in
the seas of this world, by the sacred anchor of true repentance: and all this
of thine own will and mere grace: for if by my good deeds I had prevented
thee, where is that which thy Prophet says, his justice prevented Psalm. 58.
me? If I had done any good work whereby I might deserve thy mercy, where is
that of thine Apostle: Through grace you are Ephesians. 2.
saved by faith, and not of your selves, for it is the gift of GOD? If my love
prevented thee, how is that true, Not because we loved him, but for that he
first loved us? 1. John 4.
If without thy help, and by our own virtue we follow thee where is it that
thine only begotten Son says, Without me can you do nothing? and no man
can come John 15. John 6.
unto me except my Father draw him? All that therefore which I have, all that
which I am, it is of thy grace, thy gift, thy liberality and mercy, so that
but in thinking I could not prevent the gifts of thy good works by my virtue:
For we are not sufficient, to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves,
but all our sufficiency is 2. Cor. 3.
from thee.

What therefore shall I do, wretched, naked and poor, that I am? I am weak and
lame, but by thy gifts and benefits, rich and wealthy: I sailed by the sea, but
a tempest arising, my ship was drowned, m^ riches perished, my wares at one
misfortune l^st. By thy bounty (although I suffered ship wrack) I my self
escaped, my soul being saved by the help of one planke, swam to land. But
what now shall I do? I have not whereon to live: and through infirmity I can
get nothing. The only remedy yt is lest me, is to beg: but who is so liberal
that he will, or so rich that he can help a caitife so miserably poor, but
thou only (O God) ^enigne and merciful, rich and omnipotent? To thee
therefore, do I cry, to thee do I call: at thy gate, without ^rmission, will I
beg.

But here once again my conscience terrifieth me, shame and modesty
reclaimeth: for what soever I possessed before, and now have lost, all that was
thine, that thou have trusted me with, for all that as yet I stand indebted
unto thee: moreover I offended thee, I did thee wrong, (...) abused thy
blessings to thy dishonor. What impudency shall it therefore be in me, to ask
new favors at thy hands? shall I therefore despair? shall I therefore say
with Came, my iniquity Genesis 4.
is more than may be remitted? shall I therefore be a vagabond and an outcast
from the land of the living? nothing less: for I know that my God and my Lord
is merciful and compassionate, long suffering and of great mercy. I know that
my Lord is bountiful and of Exodus 34. Joel 2.
much mercy, and favorable to such as offend. I kn^w that after he had seen
his servant that ought him ten thousand talents, humbling himself, he forgave
him the whole debt. I will therefore say in like sort with that servant: Lord
have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

But how shall I restore unto thee, O Lord, except thou first give me? and to
whom shall thou give but to him that beggeth at thy hands? and who dare not
ask, when as thou so liberally inuitest all men saying, Come unto me all
Math. 11.
you that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you: come all ye that
thirst unto the waters: and those that want money, hasten, Esaias, 55.
buy and eat: Come buy without money, and without any exchange, Wine and
milk. Incited by this so bountiful provocation of thine, behold I come unto
thee, and beseech thee, that thou will give me the means to satisfy all that
which I ow thee: and namely give me thy grace, duly to adore thee, serve
thee, praise thee, and yield thee that due reverence and honor that belongs
unto thee: that I may give thee thanks for thy benefits, love thee with all
my heart, put all my trust in thee, obey thy commandments, offer my self
wholly unto thee, commend my self into thy hands, and that I may learn to
ask these or such like graces from thee: that outwardly before mine eyes, and
inwardly within my heart, the glory of thy Name, and the salvation of my
soul, like a white or mark, may continually be prefixed before me.

I beseech thee also (O Lord) to grant me the remission of my sins, true
contrition and penance: give me grace, that I never hereafter offend thee,
either in those sins, which were hitherto familiar unto me, or any other
whatsoever. But especially (O LORD) I require the grace and strength at thy
hands, that I may chastise my flesh, refrain my tongue, mortify the
inordinate appetites of my heart, and recollect the dispersed and wandering
thoughts of my imagination: that so reformed both inwardly and outwardly, and
made a new Creature, I may deserve to be a living and grateful Temple, in the
which thou may rest and make thy biding place.

Give me those virtues also, wherewith that thy habitatio^ may not only be
purged, but also beautified, such as are the holy fear of thy name, firm
hope, perfect humility, entire patience, prudent discretion, poverty of
spirit, exact obedience, continual fortitude, and diligent alacrity in all
those things, which appertain to thy service and honor: and above all, ardent
charity, as well toward thee as toward my neighbor.

But because I know my self unworthy of all these, and undeserving any of them,
remember I pray thee, O Lord, thy old mercies: remember that thou desire not
the death of a sinner (as thou thy self testifiest) but that he be converted
and live: remember ^zech. 18.
that thine only begotten Son, came not into this world to call the Math 9.
just, but sinners: remember what he did, and how much he suffered from the
day of his Nativity, till the time he died upon the Cross. Al which I offer
unto thee O most merciful Father, that they may be a sweet smelling sacrifice
for my sins, and not for my sins only, but for all other my necessities
also. For whatsoever, I pray, and whatsoeur I plead for, that do I ask in
his, not in mine own name: for it is said of thee, that thou honor the
fathers in their children, and sparest one for another: even as David in times
past honored Mephiboseth for his Father Ionathans sake. Honor thou 2. Reg. 9.
thy only begotten Son in like manner in me, doing good unto me for his
sake, because he is my Father, and my second Adam, and I his son although
disobedient and ill-nurtured. Look upon me, O Lord, because I fly unto thee,
come to the gate of thy mercy: to thee do I lay open my poverty, to thee show
I my wounds, because you art my true Physician, I power out my soul before
thee, and inflamed with the spirit of David, I cry unto thee saying:

Incline thine ears, O Lord, unto Psalm. 86.
me, and hear me, because I am poor and in necessity: Keep my soul,
because I am holy: save thy servant O my God, that puts his trust in thee,
have mercy upon me, O Lord because all the day long I cry unto thee: glad y^
soul of thy servant, because unto thee, O Lord lift I up my soul: for y^ O
Lord art sweet and merciful, and many are thy mercies to those that call upon
thee. Open thine ears, O Lord, unto my prayer, and hear the voice of my cry:
In the day of tribulation I cried unto thee, and thou did hear me: lead me
(O Lord) in the way, and direct me in thy truth: let my heart rejoice, yt I
may fear thy name. I will confess unto thee (O Lord my God) with my whole
heart, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Amen.
A most devout meditation, and most profitable before the Communion, whereby
the soul is excited to the fear and love of God.
Who art thou my Lord, and who am I, that I dare ap proch thee? What is man
that he can receive God unto him, his maker and Redeemer? What is man in his
nature, but the vessel of corruption, and rottennes: the son of the devil:
the heir of hell? the worker of iniquity? the contemner of God? and a
Creature unfit for all goodness: and apt and prompt to all wickedness?

What is man but a creature miserable in all things? in his counsel blind; in
his actions inco^stant: in his appetites unclean: in his desires unconstant:
in every work of his, little: in his own eyes, great: see Lord, see what I am.

But thou my God, who and what a one art thou? Thou art great, with out
quantity: good, without quality: wise, without measure: and eternal without
time: Thou art omnipotent in virtue: infinite in wisdom: admirable in
counsels: terrible in judgments, perfect and absolute in all virtue.

How therefore dare so vile and unclean a creature as I am, approach and touch
a GOD of so great majesty? Behold the moon also shines not, and the stars
are Ioh, 25
unclean in thy sight. The pillars of heaven tremble and quake at thy beck:
Those celestial Seraphins clo^ke their wings, and in thy presence confess
themselves to be butterflies, and most abject worms. What boldness
therefore, and what rashness is it for a most vile man, the abiectest creature
upon earth, to dare so much, as but to look upon such a Lord?

Holy Saint John Baptist, sanctified in his mothers womb, durst not Luke, 3.
when he baptized our Lord, touch the crown of his head: yea he professed
himself to be unworthy to unloose the latchet of his shoe? The John 1.
Prince of the Apostles, exclaimed saying: Depart from me (O Lord) for I am a
sinful man: and shall I yt am the notorious sinner of all men not fear to
approach thee? If it were unlawful for any man to eat the Bread of proposition
(which were only but a shadow of this 1. Reg. 21.
profou^d mystery) except him that was clean and sanctified: how can I be
secure who eat the bread of Angels, where notwithstanding I am so far off
from all sanctite?

That pascall Lamb which was Exodus 12.
a type and figure of this sacrament, according to the commandment of God, was
to be eaten with unleavened bread, and wild Lettuice, and they that did eat
the same, ought to have their loins girt, and their shoes upon their feet.

Ah, how shall I dare to come to this true Pascal Lamb, who have none of these
preparations? For what thing else is the unleavened bread, than Purity without
the leven of malice? And what the bitter Lettuice, but vehement contrition?
Where is the purity of my reins? where of my feet? that is, the cleanness
of my holy desires?

I fear (O Lord) and vehemently suspect, lest I should be excluded from this
table if any of those preparations should be wanting in me.

From this table was he rejected Math. 22.
or rather repulsed who came without his wedding garment, that is, without
charity: and being bound hand and foot, he was cast into exterior darkness:
what other thing expect I now, if I shall intrude my self to this banquet
without this vesture?

O divine eyes, to whom all the cranies and corners of my soul are open and
manifest, what shall become of me, if I present my self naked and boide
before thy presence?

To touch the Arc (which was only but a figure of this sacrament) 2. Reg. 6.
it was so great an offense, that Oza the priest stretching out his hand to
uphold the same, being ready to fall, and supporting it, was strooken with
sudden death: how can I the^ choose but fear, and suspect the like penalty,
if unworthily I shall receive that, of which the Arc was only but a figure?

The Bethsam^tes offended in no other thing than for that they had too
curiously beheld the Arc of the covenant, when as it was carried through the
confines of the country: and yet God was so displeased, that, for that only
cause of the people he slew seventy men, and of the common sort fifty
thousand. But O most merciful Lord, how much more worthy is this sacrament tha^
the Arc of ye Covenant: and how much more dangerous is it to receive thee,
than to see thee?

Not without reason therefore ought I to be afraid and tremble as often as I
come to receive a Lord of so great majesty and justice. And if there be so many
causes why I ought to fear thy greatness: how many reasons should there be of
fear, if I weigh the mu^itude of my sins? For I call to remembrance O Lord
many grievous sins of mine, whereby I have in this world offended thy divine
majesty. The time was, sometime there was a time (thanks be given to God that
the time is not now) when I loved not that thine infinite beuty, but buried it
in deepest oblivion: when the dust of thy creatures was more estimate with me,
than the treasures of thy graces, and y^ hope of thy eternal glory. The Laws
and rules of my life were my desires and inordinate appetites, I had no care of
thee: I showed thee no reverence, because I knew thee not.

I am that fool that said in my heart there is no God: for so dissolutely for
a time did I live, that in my matters I did profess that I believed thee
either to be nothing, or to be of power to do nothing. I did not labor to
insinuate my self into thy-loue: I feared not thy justice: I set light by the
breach of thy laws: I yielded not that thanks which I ought although I knew
thou were present in all places, yet was I not ashamed securely in thy sight to
commit sin, yea and that very grievously.

Whatsoever mine eyes desired, that made I lawful unto them: neither did I
restrain my heart (...) crossing the incontinent delights thereof: and what
kind of wickedness is there, wherewith my soul is not distained? what else
was my whole life, but a continual war against thee? what else but a receiving
of torments and passions of my whole life? How often have I for a mome^tany
pleasure, or a trifling gain, like a second Iuda^, so^ thee? And now coming to
receive thee, what else do I, but prepare thee a kiss, with Judas, by which I
may betray thee, whom I have already sold? What else have I done, when other
ways I com^icated, but that with the soldiers I have mocked thee, and
insulted over thee, here bowing my knee and adoring thee, there beating thy
blessed head with a reed.

How shall I therefore dare to receive thee (O my Lord) in an estate so
unclean and wicked? How can I be so rash to enclose thy most sacred body in
the den of dragons and the nest of vipers? What other thing else is the soul
of a sinner, than a dwelling place of devils, a ^est of beasts, a hog-stie and
a sink of all iniquity?

How can thou rest here, O Lord, who art purity of the purest? and thou that
art the fountain of all beauty, how can thou dwell in a place so abominable?

What participatio^ is there between justice and iniquity? or what society
between light and darkness? or what conuention between Christ and Beliall? O
flower 2. Cor. 6.
of the field! O Lilly of the vall^s! O bread of Angels? how art thou now
become the fodder of beasts? Why give y^ this divine meat unto dogs? and
castest these precious pearls before swine? O lover of pure and clean souls,
who feedest among the lillies, till the day spring, and the shadows depart
Cantic. 1.
what food may I give thee in this my heart, where nothing grows but thorns
and briers? Thy bed is of the wood of Lib^, the pillars thereof are gilded,
the pillow is of gold, and thy foot^pace of purple: in the bed of my heart
there are none of these to be found: what seat therefore shall I prepare for
thee there when the enterest? what bed shall I man*

Thy most holy body taken fr^ the cross, was wrapped in a clean and fair
sheet, and put into a new Sepulcher, in which no man had been before times
buried: but what part of my soul is clean? what no^e is there that is new,
when I may bury thee? what is my mouth others than an open Sepulcher, from
whence there ^ueth nothing but the stinkes and impurities of my sins? What is
my heart: but (...) fountain of most evil appetites and desires? What is my
will, but a house and resting place of the Devil?

How therefore shall I dare to approach thee, receive thee, or kiss thee with my
impure lips? There is not one corner in my soul which is clean and pure, and
which has not too often times been profaned by diverse kinds of sins. I have
not a clean and new Sepulcher in which I may hide thee. O thou my redeemer and
Savior, I am ashamed as often as I see my self in this estate: I blush when I
consider in what sort I come to this thy worthy and royal banquet, in what
manner I intrude my self to embrace my celestial spouse, who again stands
ready to receive me favorably.

Another part of this Meditation.
I Acknowledge (O Lord) I acknowledge my great unworthiness, and yet thy most
great mercy is not hidden from me: this it is that makes me bold and
confident to come unto thee, howsoever I am. For the more unworthy I come unto
thee, by so much the more art thou glorified, if thou repulse me or persecute
a creature so unclean with thy displeasure. O Lord, thou art not wont to shake
off sinners, but to call them, and convert them unto thee: Thou art he that
say, Come unto me all ye Math. 11.
that labor and are laden, and I will refresh you: And in another place, The
whole have no need of a Physician, Math. 9.
but such as are sick. Of thee is it publikly said, that thou entertainedst
Publicans and sinners, and did eat with them. O my God thou have not changed
thy nature, which then thou had: for which cause I firmly believe that thou
as yet do call them from heaven, whom then thou did call upon the earth.

For which cause I likewise allured by that thy fatherly summons, come unto
thee, groaning under the burden of my sins, and thou shall unload me: I come
laboring and ouer-charged, and thou shall refresh me: I come like a patient to
my Physician, and thou shall heal me: like a sinner to the fountain of
justice, and thou shall justify me: Thou receiuedst sinners, and eatest with
them, and thy meat is to converse with them: and thy delight is to be with men.

If thou take so much delight, O Lord, in such banquets, behold thou have here
a grievous sinner, with whom thou may eat thy bread. I verily believe, O my
Redeemer, that thou tookest more delight in the tears of that public
penitent, tha^ in ye sumptuous feast of that proud Pharisee, for which cause
thou neither despisedst her, Luke, 7.
neither reiectedst her from thee as an adultresse, but rather most bountifully
receiuedst her, forgauest her sins, defendedst her against the reproaches of
her calumners, and for a few drops of tears, pardonedst her many sins.
Behold O Lord, here is a new matter of greater glory offered unto thee, a new
occasion: behold here lies a sinner who has far more sins, and yet fewer
tears: she neither was the first nor the last, whom thy mercy suffered: many
such like things have thou done, O Lord, and many the like as yet remain for
thee to do. Enter now, O Lord the number of them that begin thy work receive
him into favor, who has more grievously offended thee, and that lamenteth his
offenses. This penitent has not so many tears as may wash thy feet, but thou
have shed so much blood as suffices not only to cleanse mine, but also the
sins of the whole world. Be not displeased, O my God, that being such a one as
thou see I am, I dare preas^e into thy presence. Remember that thou were not
displeased with y^ poor woman which traveled with a flux of blood, and
secretly came unto thee, seeking remedy of her infirmity, and taking thee by
the hemme of thy Uesture; but rather did praise her, and comfort her, saying:
Daughter be comforted, Math. 9.
thy faith has made thee whole. Behold I y^ have a greater and more perilous
flux of blood, and am less curable, what shall I do? whither shall I turn
me, to whom shall I go, but unto thee (O LORD) that I may obtain the benefit
of health?

My Lord, thou have neither changed thine office, neither that custom and
nature which thou were wont to have, when thou werst co^uersant with us upon
the earth, although now thou art ascended into heaven, and seem to be far
distant from us. For if thou had been changed, we had need of another
Scripture and Gospel that might teach us now what we should believe of thee,
and what to hope from thee being now res^ant in heaven.

I read in the holy Gospels, that such as were sick flocked unto thee and that
the whole multitude sought to touch thee, because a virtue came from thee that
healed all men: Leapers came unto thee, and thou stretchedst thy blessed hands,
and clensedst them. The blind came Luke, 6.
unto thee, the deaf, the sick of the palsy, they that were possessed by
devils. Finally, all the monsters of this world ran unto thee, and to none of
these did thou deny thy help. In thee only is salvation, in thee is the
medicine, and remedy of all evils. Thou art more ready to give salvation, than
they to ask it.

Whither therefore shall we go (O Lord) in our necessities but unto thee? for
I know my God, yt this Sacrament is not only their food that are whole, but
their medicine also that are sick and weak: not only the strength of the
living but the resurrection of the dead: it not only recreateth and delights
the just, but heals also, and purifieth sinners,

Let every one come hither and take part of that which he thinks most wholesome
for himself: let the just come and eat, and rejoice in this table, and let
the voice of their confesson and praise sound in this wholesome challice.

I can no ways be without this mystery: I can no ways live without the same:
and whatsoever I am, I cannot be excused, if I receive it not: for in every
place and in every thing, it is necessary for me. If I be sick, here shall I
be healed: if alive, here shall I be comforted: if dead, here raised again: if
I burn with divine love: here shall I be more inflamed: if I be but luke
warm, here shall I be set on fire. I will not fear, although my LORD shall
find me blind, because he gives sight unto me: I will not fear, although
I see that I am fallen, for he lifts them up that are fallen low. I will not
fly from his presence as once Adam did, although I be naked, for he can cover
my wickedness: I will not hide me, although I seem unclean and full of sin,
for he is the fountain of mercy: I will not be ashamed although I am poor:
for he is the Lord of all living things.

I am not much moved if he shall interpret my boldness to be his injury:
but I think I shall give him occasion of greater glory, that being more
wretched than al other living creatures, y^ greatness of the divine mercy may
more clearly appear in me in that, that he will help me.

His darkness that was blind from his birth, atte^ded on the glory of God,
for he was borne blind, to the end that the works of God might be manifested:
so also the misery of my condition shall serve him, because in the same, the
greatness of his bounty shall be beheld, namely, if he who is so mighty
vouchsafe to succor so miserable and poor a creature, and that especially
whereas herein there is no regard had of me, but only for the merits of our
Lord Jesus Christ: for which cause y^ eternal Father gives us good things,
and adopteth us for his children, and takes it in good part that they are wont
so to be esteemed.

I pray thee therefore most humbly, and beseech thee at this present, my God y^
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that as that most holy King David admitted
Mep^boseth weak and lame to sit at his table, because he was the son of his
great and deerly esteemed friend Jonathan, intending hereby to honor his son
not for y^ son himself sake, but for the merits of the father: so let it be
pleasing likewise to thee (O Father) to admit me a poor and unclean sinner to
thy most royal banquet, not for my sake, but for y^ merits and honor of thy
singular friend jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, who has regenerated us on y^
tree of the cross wc so many labors and dolors, to thy glory and honor: who
lives and reigns with thee, world without end.

Another prayer before the Communion.
I Praise thee and thank thee, most sweet Lord Jesus my Savior and redeemer,
for thy so many benefits which thou have vouchsafed to bestow on me most vile
and wretched sinner. I yield thee thanks, O Lord, for all the mercies which you
use toward mankind, especially in the mystery of thy incarnation, namely
in thy nativity, circumcision, presentation in y^ temple, flight into Egypt,
in thy fasting and temptation, in thy labors and many iournies, in thy
preachings and persecutions in this world, in the torments and dolors of thy
bitter passion, and for all that which thou sufferedst in the flesh for me.

But in especial I give thee hearty thanks for thy unspeakable charity,
which moved thee to suffer for my sake, which verily amongst all thy works is
the greatest without any comparison. Moreover, I yield thee all thanks that is
possible, for that thou daignest to admit me to thy most holy Table, and make
me partaker of thy self, and all thy merits, and the inestimable treasure of
the passion. O my GOD and Savior, with what offices of duty shall I recompense
this new and vnheardof kind of mercy? Who art thou, and who am I, that thou
the Lord of most high majesty, daignest to enter into dirt, and this earthly
tabernacle? O Lord, holiness becomes Psalm. 92.
thy house for ever and ever: why therefore come thou into my house, which
is abundantly stored with iniquity? Heaven is thy house, and thy seat, and
the earth the footstool of thy feet, because the glory of thy majesty
fills both heaven and earth: how comes it therefore to pass that thou do
not abhor to lodge in so vile an hospital? Is it therefore to be thought
(says Solomon) that truly God dwells on earth? For 3. Reg. 8.
if the heavens, and the heaven of heavens be not able to contain thee, how
much less this house which I have built? O admirable thing* he that sits
upon the Cherubins, and beholds the depths, now humbles himself even unto
the lowest, and makes his seat in the lowest places.

It seemed little to thy goodness that thou did appoint y^ Angels to our
ministry, but thy self would come unto us, and enter into our souls,
that there with thine own hands, thou might work ye act of our salvation.
There do thou visit the sick, raise such as are fallen, teach the ignorant,
reduce such as are straied out of the way. What need many words? Thou art he
that curest our wounds, and healest our infirmities, not by an other man's
hands, but thine own: not by medicines fet from afar, but with thine own
flesh and blessed blood, do thou medicine us.

O true Pastor, how abundantly have thou discharged thy promises which in times
past thou made by Ezech. 34
thy Prophet? saying, I will feed my sheep, and I will make them rest. But who
shall be worthy of this grace? who can merit this benefit? only thy mercy, O
Lord, can make us worthy of so infinite benefits. And because without the same,
no man can be worthy, O Lord, let the same be favorable unto me, let it
make me partaker of so many mysteries, let it make me thankful for so
inestimable a benefit: O Lord with thy grace supply all my defects, forgive me
all my sins through thy mercy. Let thy spirit prepare my mind, thy merits
enrich my poverty, and thy precious blood cleanse all the blemishes of my soul,
and wash out all the stains of my life; that I may worthily receive this most
reverend sacrament. My soul rejoices and is glad, o my God, as often as I
remember that notorious miracle, wherein in time past, a dead man raised a dead
body, by the only means of touching. For if the body of a dead Prophet could do
so much, what cannot the living body of the Lord of Prophets do? I am assured
O Lord, that thy power is not of less value than that of thy Prophet, and my
soul is no less dead, than the body of that man, neither is this touch of
less efficacy than that: why therefore should I not expect the like benefit
in my self? why should a body begotten in sin, do more mirecles than a body
conceived by the holy ghost? Why shall the body of the servant have a greater
prerogative, than the body of the master? Why shall not thy body raise my
soul, sanctified in thy blood, which cleaves and is joined unto thee by
faith, when that raises those bodies which it touches? And because this body
was raised, not requesting life, but by the only virtue of the bones of thy
blessed Prophet: let it be pleasing to thine infinite mercy, O my God, since
I request and beseech thee to give me life by the means of this Sacrament,
that I may not now line, but thou in me.

O good Jesus, by that thine inestimable charity, which betrayed thee for my
sake, and made thee suffer an ignominious death; I humbly beseech thee, that
thou will cleanse me from all sin, adorn me with all kinds of virtues, and
thy merits: and grant me grace that I may receive this holy Sacrament with so
much humility and reverence: so much fear and trembling: with so much grief
and repentance for my sins: finally, with so much love and charity, as this
most heavenly mystery does require. Grant me most merciful Lord that purity
of intent, whereby I may worthily have access to thy mysticke table, to the
glory of thy holy name, and the remedy of my infirmities and necessities: that
strengthened by the virtue of this Sacrament, I may be able strongly to
withstand mine enemies, to overcome them, and to sustain my self by that
living meat in the spiritual life. Grant also by y^ benefit of this Sacrament
that I may be made one with thee, and incorporated in thee: may inseparably
cleave unto thee, being made one spirit with thee.

Let this sacrifice be my safety, and this inestimable benefit of this
Sacrament assist all men, as it is instituted for the health of them: and left
unto thy Church: who live and reignest world without end.

Amen
A most worthy meditation after the Communion.
O My God and my Savior, how shall I yield thee co^digne thanks, for that thou
being the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have not disdained to visit my
soul and to enter the poor roose of my miserable cottage: and so to work
that both thou and I are one, and that by the means of the inestimable virtue
of y^ Sacrament. With what reward shall I requite such a benefit? With what
offices shall I remunerate thy so great goodness? with thanks may a miserable
wretched, and poor creature give for a gift so rich and precious? For it
suffised thee not in this mystery to make us partakers of thy supreme deity,
but thou would also communicate unto us thy humanity, together with all thy
merits, which in the same, and with the same thou did purchase for us: for
giving us thy body and blood, thou make us also partakers of thy holy
treasure, and of all thy merits, which being on earth, thou obtainedst for us.
O admirable Communion! O treasure to be equalled by no price, and as yet
unknown unto men O merciful Redeemer of our souls! with what more richer
jewels, or greater riches could thou store us, tha^ with this most blessed
Sacrament? Deservedly, O Lord, did thou say in the prayer, which thou saidest
about the hour of thy passion: I sanctify my self for the^, John 17.
that they also may be sanctified in truth, namely after a new manner of
sanctification, difficile to the sanctifier, and easy to the sanctified. For
thine is the sanctity, O Lord: mine the fruit of sanctity: thou did labor,
I received the reward: thou were at the charge, I reapt ye profit: thou art
chastised, and I am pardoned for my sins: thou drunkest the bitter potion, and
I with my self recover my lost health: thy dolours, thy nails, thy strokes,
thy thorns, and thy precious blood, not shed by drops but by floods, satisfied
for me: thy tears wash me, thy wounds heal me, and thy scourgings have
satisfied for me. O rich Communion! O fraternity of infinite merits! O traffic
of inestimable treasure! what stock or sum have we employed in this
partnershippe? what have we adventured that the increase is so profitable unto
us? Why does the sun illuminate the world? why warmeth the fire the body, which
is the object against it? why does the water cool yt same? The reason is
manifest, for these are their natural properties; for such creatures produce
such effect: And it is thy property, O lord, to pardon; thy custom to show
mercy, and that rather to others than to thy self. Thy goodness is ours, and
that not ordinary, but infinite: for as the property of good is to be common and
communicatiue, so truly the chiefest good should also be chiefly diffusiue: and
this have thou done unto us, because thou have wholly given thy self unto us.
In thy birth, thou becamest our brother: in our nourishing, our food: in thy
death, our redemption: in our ruling, our reward: finally, O my soul, if in
one word thou will comprehend all these benefits, which this so admirable
Sacrament brings with it, consider that which this Lord brought into this
world, when as becoming man he came into thy world. For when he entered into the
world, he gave the world the life of grace, with all those things which attend
on the same: so also when he comes by y^ Sacrament into our soul, he gives
the same life of y^ soul. O divine food by which the sons of men are
tra^sformed into the sons of God, and by which the flesh is mortified in us,
that the deity may live in us: O sweetest bread, worthy to be adored,
nourishing the soul, not the belly: strengthening the heart, and not
ouercharging the body: rejoicing the spirit: and not troubling the
understanding: whose virtue does moderate our appetites, kills our self
will, that the will of God may be more effectual in us.

What thanksgiving therefore shall I yield unto thee: what praises shall I sing
unto thee (O Lord) for this thy benefit? If the gratuitie ought to be
answerable to the gift, what kind of recompense I pray you will equal such a
gift? Thou said in times past to thy servant Moses: Take the golden vessel,
and Exodus 16.
hide it in the Arc of the covenant and it shall be kept there for future
generatio^s, that they may see that meat which for forty years long I made
you feed on in the desert. If y^ so much esteemedst (O Lord) that corruptible
meat which thou gave thy people in the desert, yt thou would it should be
kept with reverence, in perpetual remembrance of the same: in what account
should that incorruptible meat be with us, which gives life eternal to those
that eat the same? I manifestly see that there is the same difference which is
between the one meat and the other, as between the one benefit and the
other: and that for that cause there ought to be the same difference between
the one gratuitie and the other; that meat was earthly, this heavenly; that
was of the body, this of the Soul: that gave not true life to those that eat
the same, this gives eternal life to those that worthily receive it. But why
make I co^pariso^ between the one and the other? For whatsoever difference is
between the creature and the Creator, the same is between this and that
meat. If therefore thou O Lord, require such remembrance, and gratuity for
that thou did nourish thy people with corporal and corruptible meat, what
will thou require of us whom thou nourishest with so far better food as the
Creator exceeds the creature? there is not any praise nor thanksgiving which
is worthy this benefit. When as therefore I neglect mine own forces and
faculties, neither can I find way or means to pay thee that which I owe thee,
there is no other remedy left for me, than with the Prophet to take yt cup of
salvation, and call upon the Psalm. 115.
name of our Lord: yt is, not to remunerate yt benefits that are past, but to
ask new, and to require grace upon grace. I beseech thee therefore (O Lord)
vouchsafe that I may receive this Sacrament in satisfaction of all my sins,
and amendment of my former life: that being repaired in me by the benefit
thereof, whatsoever is fallen, whatsoever I want, let it be supplied: and grant
that my poverty may be enriched by the benefits of thy graces. By yt virtue of
this sacrament, mortific in me whatsoever is displeasant to thy divine eyes,
and make me conformable to thy will. Uouch safe me (O Lord) that by this
mystery I may always persevere in thee, and may continually and perfectly love
thee, and that I may be always continually united and coupled unto thee, to
the honor of thy holy name. Be favorable (O Lord) unto all my offenses; and
not mine only, but all others. Grant the Heretics and Schismatikes may
return to the unity of thy Church: illuminate the Infidels that they may know
thee: help all those for whom I am bound to pray Comfort my father, mother,
brothers, and sisters, friends, and enemies, with all those that have ever done
me good. Be merciful unto all those for whom thou sh^dest thy most precious
blood. To thee be all praise, honor, virtue, and glory, who live and
reignest world without end.

Amen.
Prayers and thanksgiuings after the Communion.
The first Prayer.
I Give thee thanks, O Lord, holy Father, omnipotent and eternal God, that
thou have vouchsafed to sat^ate me a wretched sinner, and thy unworthy
servant, not for my merits, but only for thy mercy sake, with the precious
body and blood of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ. And I beseech thee, that this
holy Communion may be unto me not guiltines to procure punishment, but a
fruitful intercession of pardon: may be my armor of faith, and shield of good
will: may be the euacuation of my vices, extermination of my concupiscence and
lust: the augmentation of my charity and patience, humility and obedience,
against the deceits of both my visible and invisible enemies: a firm defense,
a perfect pacification of my motions, both carnal and spiritual and assured
cleaning to thee, the only and true God: and a happy consummation of my life.
And I beseech thee, that thou will conduct me most wretched sinner, to that
inestimable banquet, where thou with thy Son, and the holy Ghost, to thy
Saints art a true light, complete satietie, eternal joy, consummate pleasure,
and perfect felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The second Prayer after the Communion.
I Give thee thanks O Lord Jesus Christ, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
reverend and immesurable in majesty, for that thou have vouchsafed to feed,
and sweetly to refresh my ouer-dried soul with thy sacred body, and precious
bloo^ I beseech thee that whatsoever is found vicious in me, and contrary to
thy most holy will, by the Communion of this Sacrament may be utterly extinct
in me, so that my heart may be prepar^ for a worthy habitation, for the holy
Ghost. And grant, O most sweet Jesus, that this Sacrament of thy body and blood
may be unto me an atonement for my sins: a medicine for my life, an
establishment of grace, a memory of thy most holy passion, relief in my
pilgrimage, the sweet and pleasure of my soul: my health and sanctity in
temptations, my light and virtue in tribulations, my light and virtue in all my
words and deeds, my final comfort and de^ence in death. Grant that it may so
change the affections of my heart, that it may feels conceive no sweetness,
but that which is in thee, love no bea^, seek no love, desire no consolation,
admit no pleasure, care for no honors, and fear no cruelty.

Amen.
The third Prayer after the Communion.
PIerce, O most sweet Lord Jesus, yt marrow and inwards of my soul, with the
sweet and wholesome wound of thy love: with true, perfect, pure, Apostolic, and
sacred charity: that my soul may only languish and melt away, in the love
and desire of thee: let it not long after, and grow weary in thy ways: let it
desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee. Grant that my soul may hunger
after thee the bread of Angels: y^ resurrection of al holy souls: our
supercelestiall and daily bread: having in it all sweetness and savor, and
all delectation of suauitie. Grant that my heart may always hunger and thirst
after thee on whom the Angels desire to look: and with the sweetness of thy
favor, let the inward secrets of my soul be filled: let it always thirst
after thee the fountain of life, the fountain of wisdom and science, the
fountain of eternal light, the river of pleasures, the plenty of Gods house:
Let her always seek thee, compas^e thee, find thee, travel to thee, and
attain unto thee: let her meditate on thee, speak of thee, and work all
things to the honor and praise of thy name, with humility, and discrenon: with
love and delectation: with facility, and affection: with perseverance unto the
end: and be thou always my only hope, my whole trust, my riches, my delight,
my pleasure, my Savior, my sweetness, my meat, my refection, my refuge, my
hope, my wisdom, my portion and possession, my treasure, in which my heart
and mind may be always fixed, and firmly rooted.

Amen.
The first prayer for the love of God.
O Sweet, benign loving, bounteous, dear, mighty, o admirable, ineffable,
inestimable, incomparable, o powerful, magnificent, liberal,
incomprehensible, infinite, and most mighty God. Thou art only good, all
pitiful, all amiable: thou art sweeter than honey, whiter than snow,
delightfuller than all pleasure, sweeter than all delight, more precious than
gold of precious stones: Thou art my God, my life, and my only hope. Grant me
(o Lord) yt I may love thee: if not as much as thou deseruest, yet at leastwise
as much as thou may be beloved in this life, by any man subject to sin,
and thrall to many necessities.

With that Leaper in the gospel, O Lord, I come before thy presence, Math. 8.
crying, o Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean: thou can I say,
cleanse my soul from al her sins, and can purge the same, as it were gold
in the fire of thy love: if thou will, thou can presently enrich this poor
one: if thou will, thou can make me glad, and of all those that are in this
world most blessed. What will it hinder thee, O Lord, if thou yield me such a
blessing? what disprofite will it breed? what loss will it bring thee?

So then, O Lord, since thou art the Ocean of infinite goodness, liberality
and riches, why through thy wrath hidest thou thy mercies from me? Why are my
sins more mighty than thy goodness? Why shall my sins rather condemn me,
than thy mercies save me?

If thou requirest contrition, and grief for my offenses, behold I con^eiue so
much sorrow for my sins, that I had rather have endured a thousand sorts of
death, then once to have offended thee. If thou requirest satisfaction, lo I
offer my body unto thee, power thy wrath upon it: exercise what torments of
thy displeasure thou (...) upon it, so thou deny me not thy mercy.

Grant therefore that I may love thee, my God, my strength, my refresher, my
redeemer, my helper and my hope: I only seek thee, I only desire thee, I
only cry unto thee, my Lord God: thou art ^y first beginning, and my last
end. The things of this life satisfy me not, have no sweetness in them, no
stability or strength, whatsoever I see besides thee is but poverty: whatsoever
is in any place without thee, is but troubled and salt water unto me: it
cools not my thirst, but kindles it. I only seek thee, I only will thee,
I only desire to behold thy face, I pray unto thee, beseeching thee not to
separate thy mercy and love from me.

I will possess thee, and will not let thee go before thou have blessed me: I
will clean unto thee, and will not depart from thee before thou have brought
me into thy Winecellar, and ordered me in thy Cant. 2.
charity. I will cry after thee, neither will I hold my peace: I will say with
the Prophet, I will love Psalm. 17.
thee O Lord my strength, I will meditate upon thee without ceassing, I will
think on thee, in my sleep in the night time: for I am in health when I am
with thee, and sick if I be from thee, for thou only can bless my soul,
thou art my God and my Lord, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A second prayer for the love of God.
O Good Jesu! O the sweetness of my heart, O y^ life and salvation of my soul,
when, in all, and through all things shall I please thee? When shall I
perfectly die unto my self? When shall I prefer thee before all other
creatures? when shall nothing live in me but thy self? Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, and help me. I salute thy wounds, O Lord, like vernall roses: hide me O
Lord, in them, and wash me in y^ same, y^ every way I may be clean, and
inflamed with thy love. O Lord my God O admirable beginning, O piety of amiable
charity, O clearest light of my understanding, O repose of my will, when shall
I ardently love thee? vouchsaf o Lord, to pierce my soul with y^ dart of thy
love, vouchsafe to associate me with thy self, that I may be made one with
thee. O my desire, O my hope, O my relief: Oh if my soul were worthy of thy
imbracings, that all slownesse and lukewarmnesse were consumed in me by the
fire of thy love. O the soul of my soul, O the life of my life: I wholly
desire thee, and wholly offer my self unto thee, one to one and only to thee
only. O if that had place in me which thou said to thy Father: Blessed
Father, let the^ John 17.
be one as we are one: I in them and they in me, that they may be consummate
in one.

I will no other thing, I desire no other thing, I expostulate no other thing at
thy hands, for thou only suffisest me: Thou art my Father, thou art my mother,
thou art my defender, thou art my guider, thou art al my good: thou art
altogether amiable, wholly delectable, only faithful. Who was ever so liberal,
as to forsake himself? who ever so tenderly loved, as to yield himself into
y^ hands of so bitter death for so vile a creature? Who so humble, that so much
diminished and humbled his majesty? o Lord thou despisest no man, thou
disdainest no man* thou repulsest no man that seeks thee, nay rather thou
call and excitest all men to come unto Proverb. (...)
thee, for thou take thy pleasure to be conversant among the children of men.

To thee, O lord, angels sing praises, and what other thing have thou found in
us but y^ filth of our sins? why would thou be with us till Math. 28.
the end of the world? was it not enough for thee that thou sufferedst death
for us, and gave us also y^ Sacraments for our medicine, and left us the
angels for our fellows and tutors, Truly although we are ungrateful for
these benefits, yet would thou dwell amongst us, for thou art so good that
thou could not deny thine own self.

Let us therefore make a covenant (if it so please thee O Lord) take thou care
of me, and I will have care of thee; love thou me, and I will love thee:
protect and preserve my body and soul, and by thy assistance I will keep thy
law: do that with me, O Lord, which best pleases thee, for thou know what
I want, and what is expedient for me: I will be thine, and no other man's. Give
me the grace, O Lord, that I may not seek or desire any thing, but thy self,
and that I may wholly offer my self unto thee.

O fire that kindlest me1 O charity that inflamest me! o light that
illuminatest me! o my rest! o my life! O my love, that always burnest, and art
never quenched: when shall I perfectly love thee again? when shall I embrace
thee with y^ naked arms of my soul? when shall I despise my self and the
whole world, for thy sake? when shall my soul with all the powers and strength
thereof, be united with thee? when shall it be swallowed up in the bottomless
pit of thy love? Most sweet, loving, ^aire, wise, rich noble, precious, and
worthy, both to be beloved and adored, when shall I so love thee, yt I may
wholly be devoured by thy love? O life of my soul, that sufferedst death to
give me life: and dying, sluest death: kill me also, that is, all my perverse
inclinations to evil, my self-will, and whatsoever it be that hinders me
from being, and living with thee. And when in this sort thou have slain me,
make me live with thee through love and charitable actions, that I may
faithfully observe all thy commandments, and the directions of my superiors,
and only follow those things which are of the Spirit.

O most bountiful Jesus, give me perfect renouncement and hatred of my sin,
and perfect conuerston of my heart unto thee: that all my thoughts, and all my
desires may be fixed on thee, and in thee only. O life, without which I am
dead: O truth without which I am deceived: O way, without which I go astry: O
salvation, without which I perish: O light, without which I walk in darkness.
Suffer me not O Lord (suffer me not) to be at any times drawn from thee: for
I live cnely in thee, and without thee (...) die: in thee I am saved, and
without thee I am lost: in thee I am somewhat, without thee I am nothing:
because I had not been at all, except thou had been in me: and except I were
in thee, thou should not be in me. Be thou therefore (O good Jesus) in my
memory in the morning: by the same may I know thee: in the same ^et me find
thee: when I remember thee, delight in thee, and derive my pleasures from thee,
from who^ all things, by whom all things, and in whom all things are.

Amen,
The third prayer for the love of God.
IF y^ duty whereby we are bound to our benefactors for the benefits we have
received be so great, if every of the bounties we receive, be as it were
brands and motives of love: if the sire wax in greatness according to the
multitude of the fuel: O Lord how great a fire of love ought there justly
burn in my heart, if the matter of thy bounty be so infinite, which kindles
and nourishes the same? If the whole world, as well visible and invisible,
with all that which is found therein, be but mere benefits of thine toward
us, how huge ought that flame of my love be, which ought to glow in me? And
that so much the more: because I ought not to love thee for these benefits
only, but also for that in thee, all the causes and reasons of love are to be
found, and they every one of them in the highest degree of perfection.

For if we consider thy goodness, who is found better than thou art? if we
respect thy beauty, thou art the fairest one, whose face the angels desire to
contemplate: if we seek for bounty and sweetness, who is to^ee found more
sweet and benign than thou art? if we desire riches and wisdom, who richer
or wiser than thou art* (...) friendship, who will soue any thing more tha^ he
that pawned his life for us? Now if we return unto benefits, O Lord, from whom
proceeds all that which we have, but from thee? what shall we say of hope?
when as from thee alone, and from thy mercy, we hope and crpect whatsoever we
want: if by the only right of nature, we owe much duty to our carnal
parents: who is more father than he of whom it is^, Call not your selves a
father on the earth, for you have one Father who is in heaven? If ye husband be
so tenderly beloved of his wife, what other spouse has our soul than thy
self, O Lord? who shall replenish the bosom of my heart, and my desires but
thou? If the Philosophers say that ye final end is beloved with infinite love:
who is my beginning, who my latter end, but thou, O Lord? for from whence took
I my original, and whither shall I go to be perfected, but from thee, and in
thee? From whom is all that which I have, and from whom hope I to receive the
same which I want but from thee?

Finally, if s^tude be the cause of love: to whose similitude and likeness is
my soul created, if not to thine? So then if this special title, and every
one of the rest be motives of love, what ought yt to be that is derived from
all these united together? verity, as the Sea is more spacious than all other
floods that enter into the same: and by how much it, overcomes the rest in
greatness, by so much also is thy love more abundant, greater, and more
excellent, than all other eternal loves.

Since therefore I have so just causes (O Lord) and so pregnant occasions to
love thee, why should I not love thee with all my heart, with all my soul,
with all my strength, and inward thoughts? O my hope, my glory, my joy, O my
amiable beginning: O my sacietie and sufficiencie^ when shall that day be when
I shall truly love thee and embrace thee with my whole heart? When shall I show
my self grateful unto thee in all things, and for all things? When shall I
feel all that mortified m ine, which is opposed against thee? When shall I be
wholly thme? When shall I ceasie to be mine own? When shall that hour come, when
nothing shall live in me but thy self? When shall I feel my self wholly
inflamed with thy love? When wilt y^ ravish me perforce? When will thou make
me drunk with yt milk of thy tears? When wilt you transfer me wholly into
thee? When shall I see that happy day, when all impediments and perturbations
of the mind taken away, thou will make me one spirit with thee, so that
hereafter I shall not be drawn from thee? Ah Lord, how much cost it thee to
redeem me? but being once redeemed, how easily can thou do good? For when y^
do good unto man, what is taken out of thy house? what is lost of thy
riches? what is taken out of thine infinite treasures? Why O Lord, does thy
wrath fight with thy mercy against me, whereas thou art th^ea of infinite
liberality and (...)? Remember therefore O Lord, that I am thine, and thou art
mine. Fly me not therefore O Lord, but suffer me to find thee out: I make a
long journey, (...) stand ofe^, I often return: let it not grieve thee (O
Lord) to expect me, who cannot keep company with thee. O my God and my
salvation, why am I so idle? why run I not wc speedy alacrity unto thee,
the chiefest good, in whom at once are all goodnesses found? I will love thee
(O Lord) with an ardent and strong love: I will stretch ye arms of my
affections and desires, that I may embrace thee the sweet spouse of my soul,
from whom I promise unto my self all goodness. The Iu^e so strongly embraces
her neighboring tree, that every twist thereof seems to be a several arm:
for sustained by this help, it grows high, and attaineth to full perfection:
but (O Lord) to what tree shall I cleave, but unto that, which planted-on the
mountain of Caluarie, is become a sure supporter unto me? The Iuy increases
not so largely, neither extends the beauty of her branches so far, being
sustained by the tree, as my soul increases in virtues and graces, being
underpropped by this tree.

Why therefore are not all the members of my body turned into arms that on
every side I may embrace thee? why shall I not love thee? why shall I not put
all my trust (...) confidence in thee? Help me, O Lord my Savior, draw me on
high after thee, for the weight of mortality does always depresse me. Thou (o
Lord) that ascendedst the tree of the Cross, that thou might draw all things
unto thee, thou that through so unmeasurable charity, did couple two-natures
so different together, and made one person of them, that we might be made one
with thee. Grant me this one thing (o Lord) and it suff^eth me: For the
riches of this world satiate me not: I only will thee, I seek thee, I desire
to see thy face, I will aspire always to thy love; and with the Prophet I will
sing, I will love thee, o Lord Psalm. 17.
my strength, God is my foundation and my refuge: God is my helper, and I will
hope in him, my protector and the horn of my salvation, and my defender.
Praising will I call upon our Lord, and I shall be safe from mine enemies.

The fourth prayer for obtaining of the love of God.
ON the bended knees of my heart, and devoured in the depth of mine own
abiectnes, with a^ are and reverence, I come before thy sight (o my God) as one
the most unhappy, poor, and vilest creature of the world. I set my self
near the floods of thy mercy, by the river of thy graces, before the brightness
of the true Sun of justice, whose beams are spread over the whole earth, and
communicate themselves freely to all those that shut not the window against
them.

Behold a mass of chalk, a rude and impolisht trunck cut from the tree, is
presented to the hands of the most wise workmaster: make of it, O most merciful
Father, that which thou have decreed to do. Great is my boldness, in that a
creature so vile dare demand a love so precious and excellent as thine is.
Truly I would (considering my great indignity) require some lesser thing at thy
hands: but what shall I do, wretch that I am, whereas thou co^mandest me that I
should love thee? Thou have created me to the end I should love thee, and
threatnest me except I love thee. Tho^dst die, that I might love thee, and
command me that I should ask nothing more fervently at thy hands, than thy
love: yea, and so much destrest thou to be beloved by me, that seeing me
without thy love, thou did institute thy Sacrament of admirable value whereby
my heart might be enflamed with thy love.

O my Savior, whom am I, yt thou should require my love, and to this end
thou should seek so many and so admirable means? What am I to thee but a
torment? a cross, and a vaily tribulation? And what art thou to me, but
salvation, rest, and all goodness? If therefore thou love me, why am I every
ways trouble some unto thee? why shall I not love thee again, who art every
way so profitable and beneficial to me?

Possessed therefore, O Lord, of these pledges of thy love: and confirmed by
that thy merciful commandment, whereby even unto my lives end it pleased
thee so bountifully to muite me, and command me to love thee: by this thy
singular grace, I require another like favor, namely that thou will first give
me that, which y^ would have me give thee: for I cannot give thee this,
except thon first give it me: for I am not worthy to love thee, but thou art
worthy to beloved by me. I therefore dare not request thee to love thee, but
that it might please thee to give me leave to love thee. Fly not, O Lord, fly
me not, despise not to be beloved by thy creatures, with the utmost of their
love.

O God, who art essentially love, increated love, infinite love, love without
measure, not only a lover but all love, from whence the love of all Seraphins
and every creature proceeds in like manner as the light of all the stars
from the brightness of the sun, why shall I not love thee? how can I choose but
be burnt with this fire of love, which inflameth the whole world, and each thing,
contained in the same, yea welnigh burns them?

O God, who art essentialy goodness it self, from whom all that is good
whatsoever is called good, from whom the goodness of all living creatures (no
otherwise than al rivers from the sea) is derived, in comparison of whose more
than excellent goodness, there is not any thing either in heaven or in earth
that may be called good; why therefore shall I not love thee, whereas goodness is
the object of love? If I cannot love thee, o my Lord, for thine excellency, how
can I choose but love thee for mine own profit sake? The son loves the
father, who has received his being from him: the members love the head, and
offer themselves to death for it, because by the same they are continued in
their essence: All effects love their causes, for from them they have received
whatsoever they are, and from them they expect that which yet they have not:
but thou o Lord art my father, my head, and my cause: that therefore which the
son owes the father, the mother the head: that which the effects owe to
their causes, all that and far more do I owe thee.

Thou gave me that being which I have, more perfect than my parents did:
thou keep me in this being which thou gave me, more carefully than the
head does the members: thou finishest in me that which is wanting, till thou
have brought me to the last point of perfection. Thou art my father which made
me: thou art my head which gouernest me: thou art my spouse who gave to my
soul perfect felicity: thou art the Architect of this building: thou art the
painter of this figure made according to thy image and similitude, which thou will also make perfect. Whatsoever it has, it has it from thee: whatsoever it
wants, it hops to receive it from thee. For even as no one could give him
that which he is, but thou O Lord: so also no man can perfect that which as yet
is imperfect, but thou: whatsoever therefore it has, whatsoever it is,
whatsoever it hops, all that is thine. Whom therefore shall it behold, but
thee? To whom shall it be accountable but to thee? In whose eyes shall it
walk, but in thine? Whither shall he direct all his love, but to thee, who
art his whole good?

If therefore (O Lord) thou be the beauty and ornament of my soul, how ca^ I
forget thee? What have I in heaven, and what will I of thee on earth? My flesh
and my heart fails, God of my heart, and my heritage for ever. O increate
love, which always burnest and never art extinguished: o love which always
live and burnest in the bosom of God. O eternal dart of the fathers heart,
yt always wounds the face of the Son with the wound of infinite love! O let
this dart wound me: this fire inflame me, let me follow thee my beloved, let me
sing a new song with a loud voice, let my soul melt in thy praises, with the
unspeakable applause and Iubile of love.

O most holy father, o most merciful son, O most loving holy ghost! when
will thou, most beloved father dwell in my soul, and abide in the secrets of
my heart, and possess me wholly? When shall I be wholly thine, and thou wholly
mine? When shall it come to pass, o my King? when will that day come? o when?
O were it here! Shall I never see it? o how ungrateful delay? how odious
procrastinatio^? Haste thee, O Jesus, haste thee, and delay not: return,
return, and run like a Goat, and the young hinds upon the mountains of
Bether.

O my God, the repose of my life: the light of mine eyes, my consolation in
tribulations: the end of my desires: the paradise of my heart: the center of my
soul: the pledge of glory: the companion of my pilgrimage: my joy in exile,
the medicine of my wounds: merciful iusticer of my sins: master of the
ignorant, guide of life, nest in which my soul rests, haven wherein she is
saved, glass wherein she beholds her self, staff on which she leans,
stone on which she is builded, and precious treasure in which she glories. If
thou therefore (o Lord) be all these unto me, how can I forget yea but for a
moment of time? If I forget thee Psalm. 136.
o my God, let me forget my right hand; let my tongue clean to the roof of
my mouth, if I remember Psalm. 131.
thee not: I will give no sleep unto mine eyes, o blessed Trinity, nor rest
to mine eie-lids, nor quiet to my temples, until I find this love, until I
find a place for my Lord in my heart, and a tabernacle for the God of Jacob in
my soul, who lives for ever world without end.

Amen.
The first prayer for the love of God.
I Will love thee, O Lord my strength, I will love thee my unspeakable joy, and
let my whole life live, not to my self, but to thee which was condemned to
misery and raised again by thy mercy. Too late did I fear thy Majesty: too
late did I love thee, thou beauty both old and new: too late did I love thee:
I sought thee my refreshment, and I found thee not, because I indirectly sought
thee: I sought thee without my self, and thou did dwell in me: I traveled
the streets and ways of the City of this world, seeking thee, and I found
thee not, because inconsiderately I sought thee abroad, whereas thou were at
home with me.

I asked y^ earth whether it were my God? and it answered me no, and all
things which are in the same, confessed the very same. I asked the Sea, the
depths and y^ inhabitants thereof, and they answered, we are not God, seek him
above us. I asked the fleeting air, with all the dwellers therein, and he
answered me no. I asked heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars: neither
are we thy Gods (said they) Finally, I asked all creatures: and they cried
unto me with a loud voice, he that made us is thy true God and Lord. And I
said: where therefore is my God? where shall I seek him? show him me. And I
heard a voice saying unto me, God is in every place seek him in thy self, he
fills Heaven, fills the earth, and fills thy heart.

And I came to my self, and I entered into my self, and I said unto my self,
how entrest thou hither O my God? at what door were thou admitted? I began to
enquire and examine every one of my senses if by any of them thou did enter,
but they likewise knew not how or which ways thou came in. For the eyes say:
if he be not colored, he cannot enter by us. The cares say, if he make no
sound, he cannot pass by us: The nose says, if he smell not, he could not
come by me: Taste says, if he sauored not, he entered not by me: Touch likewise
adds, if he is not corpulent, ask me nothing of this matter.

How therefore o my love did thou enter my soul? and did not enter by any
door? Truly thou art light, shining in darkness, yet such as the eye is not
capable of. Thou art a voice, sweet above all voices, yet such a one as the
ear conceiueth not. Thou art a sweet, more fragrant than any odor, which
nevertheless my taste comprehends not. Thou art an embracement, to be
esteemed above all embraces, which notwithstanding the touch attaineth not.

Where were thoutherefore, my God? where were thou my light? where were thou my
hope? I asked and it was answered me, Ascend into the superior parts of thy
heart, and there shall thou find God. Truly thou art great, O God, and have
overcome our wisdom. Thou art the king of kings, and the Lord of Lords. Thou
art immortal, and dwell in inaccessible light: whom no mortal man ever
saw, or shall ever see and live. Many and great are the wonders that are
reported of thee, o Lord: yet more less and fewer than may be said of thee,
and words are defective, where thou are never deficient. For thou exceedest all
that which may be spoken or thought.

O only love, and my Lord God, thou did love me before I loved thee, and
createdst me according to thine own image, and made me Lord over all thy
creatures. Moreover, thou make thine Angels spirits for me, who^ thou have
ordained to defend me in all my ways, lest I should hurt my foot Psalm. 90.
against the stone. Thou would not permit me to be borne in a pagan but a
Christian land, in which by the water and the holy Ghost. I am regenerate and
sanctified. Thou neither gave me too much riches, nor too abject poverty,
lest I should either wax proud, or grow more contemptible: but thou gave me
understanding and will, whereby I should know and love thee.

Thou did call me when I was lost, and knockedst at my door, but I did not
answer thee. I lived according to mine own lust, and attributed too much to
mine own strength, whereas nevertheless it was not strength but weakness: I
would run, and grow presently weary: and where I thought I should be secure,
there was I in greatest danger: I went away from thee like y^ prodigal son,
and traveled into a strange country, and dwelt therein, whereas loving
vanity, I became vain. I was blind, and I desired blindness: I was a servant,
and I loved servitude: I was bound, and took pleasure in thraldom: I thought
bitter was sweet, and sweet was bitterness. I was wretched, and I knew it not.

Whilst I lived in this most desperate estate, thou did cast thine eyes of
compassion upon me: and although without intermission I did offend thee, yet
did not thou give over to reclaim me from my sins: when I wandered you
broughtest me into the way: when I was ignorant thou taughtest me, when I did
sin, thou did correct me: when I was sad, thou did comfort me: When I
did despair, you did encourage me: when I fell you did raise me up: when I
stood, thou sustainedst me.

I was undone and dead, thou descendedst unto the dead, and tookest on thee
mortality: thou a king did descend to thy servant: and to redeem thy slave
thou did betray thy self. So much did thou love me, that thou gave thy
blood for a ransom for me: thou did love me (O Lord) more than thy self,
because thou would se^d for me: For this cause thou did ransom me from
exile with so dear a price: thou did redeem me from thraldom: thou
withheldedst me from punishment: thou calledst me by thy name, thou ^ignedst
me with thy blood; that thy remembrance might be always with me and never
depart from my heart, which for my sake departed not from the Cross.

Let me know thee therefore O Lord, my acknowledger: let me know thee thou
virtue of my soul: let me walk always in thy light, O thou Sun of justice;
for it is good for me to cleave, O Lord, Psalm. 72.
and to put my trust in our lord God: for as soon as I shall be turned from
thee, I am presently converted to transitory delights, and distracted with
vain cogitations.

O therefore wretched and unfortunate that I am, when shall I so inseparably
cleave unto thee, as I may never be withdrawn from thee? When shall my
thoughts, words, and works, differ no more from the rule of thy equity and
justice? Thou (o Lord) love solitude, and I company: thou silence, and I
fables: thou verity, and I vanity; thou cleanness, and I follow uncleanness.

I beseech thee therefore, O Lord, for thine own sake, illuminat mine eyes with
thy light: wou^d my heart with thy love: direct my steps in the way of thy
commandments, that I may never swerue from the same: deliver me (o Lord) that
am captive: reduce the stray into thy wounds, raise him that is fallen; and
relieve him that is every way weakened. Give me a heart yt may always think on
thee, a mind yt may always love thee, an understanding that may conceive
thee: a reason that may always strongly cleave unto thee the most chief
delight.

Fly not from my heart, depart neither from my words nor works: but always
assist me, because thou art my helper in all my tribulations. Without thee I
die: and thinking on thee, I am revived: thine adour does recreate me: thy
memory does heal me: thy light does illuminate me, and I am raised again by
thy voice, and shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.

The sixth prayer for the love of God.
IF amongst all those things which provoke us unto love, there be nothing more
effectual than form and beauty, why should I not worthily love thee (o my God)
who art the Fountain of all beauty and seemelines? Thou art the Ornament of
the whole Mass of this world, for whatsoever is beautiful in it, by thee and
from thee has his beauty, because thou createdst it: the Sun and Moon
admire thy majesty, the Angels desire to behold thy face, for in the sight
thereof consists perfect felicity, and the glory of all supernall spirits.

Birds, flowers, fou^taines, fields, floods, seas, woods, forests, trees,
earth, mountains, valleies, and whatsoever is in them, have their ornaments
from thee: thou did deck the heavens with stars, ye air with birds, the
water with fishes, the fields with flowers, and ye earth with infinite plants,
and variety of living creatures. In each place of the world thou art feared,
because tokens of thy beauty are seen in every place: in the heavens thou art
the beauty of glory, in hell of justice, in good men, of grace, in the wicked
of patience.

I will therefore love thee my God, who are the perfection of all things: thou
art the praise of the Angels, the reward of Saints, y^ hope of Patriarchs, the
Crown of Martyrs, the glory of Confessors, yt purity of Uirgins, and the
salvation of all the elect. All blessed spirits praise thee, y^ Pillars of
heaven tr^ble at thy presence, and all the creatures of the world reverence
thee.

Thou fulfillest all things, yet art thou not di^ated: thou art in all things,
yet art contained in none: thou did create all things without necessity:
thou gouernest all things without labor thou changest all things, and thy
self art not changed: thou only iudgest without any erro^, thou only
chastifest without any p^turbation, thou only distributest gifts, and thy
treasure is not impaired: thou only art sufficient for thy self and all
things: who therefore has thee, he has all things: and who has thee not,
although he have all the treasures of this world, he is poor he is naked, he
is wretched and miserable.

One thing very often draws us to such insensate a love of some creature,
that we fear not in the behalf of the same, to adventure a thousand deaths:
but in thee (O Lord) whereas so many things and so great concur together, why
should I not love thee* why should I not willingly suffer whatsoever misery
for the glory of thy name? why should I not freely spend my blood for thee, who
so liberally did power out thine for me? If I consider thy benefits, I owe
no man more than thy self: if thy love, no man wishes me better than thy
self: if consangumitie, my soul has not any one more nearly allied unto her
than thy self. Truly similitude is a great cause of love, and what greater
similitude is there, than is between thee (O Lord) and my soul, which is
created after thy similitude and likeness? Thou art a spirit, and my soul is
a spirit thou art invisible, and my soul is also invisible: thou immortal,
and my soul is immortal: thou have understanding, memory, and will: and the
like powers has my soul.

Thou being most simple and invisible, art all in the whole world, and all in
every part thereof: and my soul being of the same condition is all in the
whole body, and all in every member of the same.

Since therefore there is so much similitude between thee and me, O my love,
why should I not love thee? Is it because thou art high, and I humble? or for
that thou art the Creator, and I thy creature: or because thou art the
perfectest being, and I altogether imperfect? This ought not to hinder, but to
increase our love. For the similitude is far more am^able which is proportioned
with inequality, than yt which is every way equal. The fathers love is
greater toward y^ son, and the wives toward the husband, than of brothers
amongst themselves, who are equal. Uoices that art ^rent among themselves,
(...) more sweetly, if they be reduced unto proportion, than those that are
consonant and uniform. Let then this inequality, which is between thee and
my soul, (o Lord) be a cause of greater love

In thee therefore, O most sweet spouse of my soul, in thee are all the causes
of love, which may be imagined, and thou art most worthy to be beloved with
infinite love: but I find in my self, my will in such manner depraved, that it
cannot perform it, would God it were not so that she loved her self more than
thee.

Wherefore, O Lord, except thou heal my infirm nature by thy grace: and except
thou power into my heart the virtue of charity, by the mediation of the holy
Ghost, I may never love thee with a gratuitall and supernatural love, in such
manner as thou art worthy, and wilt be beloved. Give me the grace to love
thee, if not with such a love as thou art worthy of, yet at leastwise with such
a love as my nature may partake, that is, with all my heart, all my soul, all
my strength, and all my forces, so yt all my bowels inwardly burn, and melt in
thy love.

Grant that I may love thee, with a simple, willing, and free love, without any
respect of profit. Grant that with pure love, and no perverse intention, I may
desire nothing but thy self for thy self. Grant me (O Lord) a strong and
invincible love, that may refuse or abhor no perils, no labors, no damages,
no injuries, or torments for thy sake.

Give me a ready and diligent love, that may always be occupied in matters
pertaining to thy service. Give me an inestimable love (O Lord) that may
contemn all things for thy sake: give me a discreet love, which with
immoderate zeal and fervor, shall not exceed thy law.

Finally, give me (o my God) yt grace to love thee with an ordinate love, which
loves al things according to yt dignity of their proportion, but thee above
all things with a sweet and amiable love: which shall taste no sweetness or
pleasure in any thing but in thee: with a love, burning in zeal, that destreth
nothing more than thy glory: hates nothing more than ignominy imputed to thy
holy Name. Finally, with a love so violent, that it may pull my heart from all
things that are transitory, and always draw the same upwards unto thee,
until I may pass over all this place of exile, into yt celestial country,
where beholding the greatness of thy beauty face to face, I may perpetually love
thee, with those perfect lovers that never cease to love and praise thee, the
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and God of Gods in Sion.

Amen.
The seventh prayer for the obtaining of Gods love.
O Most high, mighty, omnipotent, merciful, just, strong, and
incomprehensible God, and my Lord. Thou that art sweeter than any honey, whiter
than milk, clearer than all light, and more precious than al pearl, there are
infinite causes which ravish my heart with thy love. For thou art higher then
Job 1^.
heaven, deeper than hell: thy measure is longer then the earth, and broader
then y^ sea, as thy prophet says: Who is perfecter than thou art: who better?
who fairer? who bountifuller? who nobler? who stronger? who wiser? who richer
than thou art? A^ these things are in thee, O Lord, and for every one of them
art thou to be loved, since thou art the chiefest good.

But since every good thing is truly amiable by it self, yet every man
affects more his proper good: I will therefore love thee, o Lord my God, not
only because thou art the chiefest good, but also because thou art my good:
for when I consider and weigh with my self, by how many titles and means thou
art made mine, my inward parts melt, and I cry with the spouse: My spouse is
beloved of me, and I of him. Cant. 2.


For thou (o Lord) art my creator, thou art my sanctifier and glorifier, thou
gave me my being in nature, thou gave me that of grace, and wilt give me
the being of glory. Thou art my helper, my governor, defender, tutor, and
keeper: finally, thou art my God, my Lord, thou art my salvation, thou art my
hope, thou art my glory, thou art all my good.

Uerily, you art all those unto me, in as much as thou art my God, in so much
as thou art my creator, and the conseruer of all things. But in as much as thou
art man, there are many other titles, other offices, and other bonds wherewith I
am bound unto thee, and thou unto me. For which I also (if it were possible)
ought to love thee, and that by reason, with an in^nite and diligent love: for
thou art my restorer, for thou have restored me to entire humane nature, which
by sin was weakened in me. Thou art my deliverer, for by thy captivity, thou
have delivered me from the tyranny of sin, death, hell, and the devil, my most
capital enemies, Thou art my Redeemer, for thou have ransomed me from
servitude, into which through sin I was fallen, by the shedding of the
incomparable treasure of thy precious blood.

Thou art my King, for thou gouernest me by thy Spirit, thou foughtest for me,
and deliueredst me from the hands of my enemies: thou art my priest, for thou
praiedst and incessantly praiest like an everlasting priest for me, in y^ sight
of thy celestial Father. Thou art my sacrifice, for you offeredst up thy self
on the altar of the Cross, that by thy clemency thou might expiate my
crimes. Thou art my advocate, for when the Devil accuses me, and offers the
libel wherein my sins are written, to thy father, thou do protect my cause,
thou make payment with thine own, and do supply all that which my justice
defaulteth in. Thou art my Mediator, for thou art God and man, and a mighty
friend of God, and yt true Son of God, so put thou thy self, as a mediator
between me and God.

Thou art my shepherd, for y^ feedest and gouernest my soul like a sheep of
thy flock: thou art my meat, for thou art he by whom I am nourished in the
divine Sacrament of the Altar: thou art my father, and the father of the world
to come: for thou have regenerated me with grievous dolours on the tree of the
Cross, and given me a new essence by y^ holy Spirit. Thou art my head, and the
universal head of the Church: for from thee, as from the true head, flows
into the same, and every member thereof, virtue, life, and spiritual sense.
Thou art my true Physician, for by thy blood thou have healed the wounds and
strips of my soul.

Thou art my master, for by the light of thy doctrine thou have showed me the
way to the celestial country. Thou art my example, for not only in words, but
that which is far more, in deeds and most holy examples of thy life, thou
have led me in this way.

Thou art my strength and mercy, for there is no tribulation or grief so great
which the memory of thy passions that thou sufferedst for me does not make
sweet and tolerable. Thou art my honor and glory, for thou becamest man for
me, thou made me thy brother, and a consort of thy nature.

To conclude, thou art my Savior, yea and such a savior, that every where,
always, and in all things art sufficient for me: for thou have most perfectly
wrought all that on the earth, which was requistte for my salvation. Thou have
illuminated my ignorance by thy doctrine, thou have strengthened my weakness by
thy examples. Thou have inflamed my warmth by thy benefits, thou have
instructed my soul in thy mysteries, thou have enriched my poverty by thy
merits: Thou have healed my wounds by thy Sacraments, thou have satisfied by
thy dolors for my defaults, and now in Heaven thou sit on the right hand of
thy Father, as mine advocate: what need many words? Thou art made unto me
wisdom and justice, sanctification and redemption, and therefore all
goodness. 2. Cor. 1.


What impudence were it therefore in me not to love my Lord, who did all this
for my sake, and to whom I am bound under so many titles and benefits? If men
with the same love wherewith they affect them selves, do also love al those
things which are their own, why should I not also love thee (O Lord) if I
would have thee to be mine, and that by so many offices and benefits, and in
things so pregnant? And if for every one of these benefits I owe thee my whole
heart, and not this one only, but more if I had them: what shall I owe thee,
or what am I not indebted unto thee if we join all these benefits together?
What iniquity therefore should it be, not to give one heart wh^h I have, unto
him to whom I owe so many, and other diverse things? And if every one of these
benefits be a goade or provocation to love, yea, and arrows to pierce the
hearts of men, how shall I choose blit burn amids so many flames of love? How
comes it to pass that I am altogether cold? amidst so many weapons, how escape
I from wounds? How comes it to pass, that I persevere in the hardness of my
heart, as it were without sense?

O Lord, I lament in thy presence the dullness, and insensibility of my heart,
I confess the infidelity thereof: for you raining into it innumerable causes of
love, yet receiuest nothing from y^ came that deserves so many favors. O
heart more felon than furious beasts; more insensible than stones, more hard
than Adamant, that is not mollified by so many strokes! I pray thee therefore,
O thou fairest amongst the children of men, grant that I may desire thee, love
thee as much as I list, and as much as I ought. Thou art immeasurable, and
ought to be loved beyond measure, especially of us, whom thou have so loved,
so saved, and for whom thou have done so great and so many things. O love that
always burnest, and art never extinct: sweet Christ, good Jesus, charity, my
God, inflame me wholly with thy fire, with thy love, with thy sweetness, with thy
affection, with thy desire, with thy charity, with thy pleasure, and joy,
which is holy and good, which is chaste and clean: that wholly filled with the
sweetness of thy love, wholly kindled with the flame of thy charity, I may love
thee my most sweet Lord with my whole heart, with all my soul, with all my
strength, with all my intention, and let nothing be in me that does not love
thee.

And for that to love, is to wish well to him we love, and thou (O Lord)
aboundest with so much goodness that I cannot wish thee more than thou have:
that only thing I wish, that thou be possessed of my heart also, and that all
yt is mine, may be thine: and for thine infinite glory, I give thee hearty
thanks. This likewise do I desire, that al creatures should serve thee, honor
thee, praise, and glorify thee, and that the whole earth should be filled with
thy praises. Let this be always my desire, this my meat, this my dainties to
praise thee always; and let thy lauds be always in my lips. But because
praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, let the Saints, and all the
spirits of the celestial throne praise thee continually: for to them praise
belongs.

O all ye works of yt Lord therefore, bless ye the Lord, praise yet and
magnify him for ever. O ye Angels and Archangls, bless ye the Lord, praise
ye and magnify him for ever. O ye virtues and dominations, bless ye yt
Lord, praise him and magnify hime for ever. O ye prince-domes and powers,
bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever, etc. Ye blessed
thrones in which God sits an judges, bless ye the Lord, praise him, etc. O
ye Cherubins, and Seraphins that burn altogether inflamed with the love of
your creator, bless ye the Lord, praise him, etc. O ye Apostles and
Evangelists, founders of the Christian Church, bless ye the Lord, praise him,
etc. O ye glorious hosts of Martyrs, bless ye the Lord, praise him, etc. O
all ye renownced and chaste virgins, bless ye the Lord, praise him and
magnify him for ever. Blessed is the God of our Fathers, and blessed be the
name of thy glory, holy and laudable, and magnified for ever and ever.

Amen.
The first prayer unto the holy Trinity, expressing the Majesty thereof.
LOrd God, without beginning, immortal, incomprehensible, incircumscribed,
incorporall, indefinite, unsearchable, invisible, immutable, every where
present, but hidden, every where al, but immeasurable, who by thy never too
much praised wisdom, have created this huge world, and placed man in the same:
holy Trinity, one God have mercy upon me.

If that Publican in the Gospel durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but
standing afar off, struck his breast, saying: God be merciful unto Luke 18.
me a sinner: if that holy penitent was afraid to appear before the presence
of our Lord, but standing behind near his feet, obtained remission of her
sins by him, tears flowing from her eyes: if that holy Luke 7.
Patriarch Abraham, willing to talk with thee o God, said, shall I speak unto my
Lord whereas I am but Genes. 18.
dust and ashes? If all these were so humble and so reverent in respect of
thee, coming before the sight of thy divine majesty, and thy most holy: what
shall a poor and miserable sinner do, such as I am? what shall dust and ashes
do? what shall the Abyss of all misery and sins do? But because, o Lord, I
cannot obtain that fear and reverence, which is due to so great a majesty,
except I fix mine eyes immediately on the same: give me leave to dare to lift
up mine eyes unto thee: neither let the brightness of thy glory be an
impediment to the frailty of my sight. Truly I see that thou art yt great God
that transcendest all the reach of our understanding: I know that no
understanding created can comprehend thee: and although this be thus, yet can I
not do any thing more profitable, than to fire mine eyes on thee.

Therefore, O most high, omnipotent, merciful, just, fair, strong, stable,
simple, perfect, incomprehensible, secret, and yet present withal: invisible,
and yet seeing all things: immutable, changing and renewing al things: whom
altitudes dilate not, neither limits restrain, nor variety changes, nor
corruption wastes, nor affliction fasteneth on, nor joys move in his essence:
from whom neither oblivion detra^h, nor to whom memory adds any thing: to
whom neither things yt are past, are past: nor things to come shall succeed: to
whom nothing gave beginning, nor time augment, neither any thing shall give
end, for thou live and reignest for ever. Thou art he who possesses all
things in all places: and that disposest them sweetly. Thou art he that
createdst all things, without any necessity, and conseruest them, without
labor, and gouernest all things without molestation, and mouest al things, thy
self being immovable. Thou art all eye, all foot, all hand: for thou see,
sustainest, and wor^ all things. Thou art in all things, and yet art not
concluded: thou art without all things, and yet art not disioyned. Thou art
under all things, and yet art not subject: you art above al things, and yet art
not lifted up. Thou art the sovereign and true God, the sovereign and true
life, from whom and by whom all things have birth and being.

Thou (O Lord) art very goodness and beauty it self: by which, and from which,
all that is good and fair, is good and fair. Thou art he who willest us to
leeke thee, and give us leave to find thee: thou bidst us knock, and thou
openest when we call upon thee: thou art he whom to forsake, is to fall, and
whom to wear, is to rise: and in whom to stand, is to endure for ever. Thou
art he, whom no man forsakes, but the foolish: no man seeks, except he be
called: no man finds, except he be purged: thou art he whose knowledge is
life; whose service is a Kingdom: whose praise is salvation: and you art the
very joy of those that reio^e in thee. What therefore shall I, O my king and
Savior, what shall I say unto thee? I say a wretched worm, what shall I say of
ye greatness of so many praises? I will say yt which the Prophets (inspired with
thy truth) said: who has measured the waters with a hand, and weighed Esaias 40.
the heavens with a palm? who hanged the weight of the earth on three fingers,
and poised the mountains in balances, and the hills (...) scales? Who assisted
the spirit of our Lord, or who is his counselor and instructour? Of whom took
he counsel, and instructed him Sap. 11.
and taught him the way of his ^stice, and brought him up in science, and
showed him the way (...) prudence? Behold, the Gentiles are but as a drop of a
bucket, and are reputed as a grain in the balance. Lo, ye Islands are but as
a little dust, and the Woods of Lybanus shall not be sufficient to burn, and
the beasts shall not suffice for a sacrifice: All nations, as if they were not,
so are they before him: and in his sight are reputed as nothing, and a vain
thing. For if at the presen^e of the Sun all the stars in the heavens shine
not, nay rather are as if they were not, whereas notwithstanding both the one
and the other are creatures: what shall all created things be in his sight,
who is the Creator of the whole world?

I adore thee therefore especially (O Lord) with profound humility and due
reverence, with that adoration and worship, which is only due unto thee and to
no other creature: with such duty as all the dominations of heaven, and all the
creatures of the world adore thee: of whom though many know thee not, yet can
they not choose, but every one in their kind adore thee, end in their manner
offer homage to the Scepter of thy divinity, and acknowledge thy greatness.
For thou only art the God of Gods: thou only the King of Kings, thou only the
Lord of Lords, and the cause of causes: thou art Al^ha and Omega, the beginning
and ending Apoc. 22.
of all things: Thou art the beginning without beginning, and the end without
end. Thou only art he yt thou art, for all other things how excellent soever
they be, have their being borrowed from another? but thy being is high,
perfect, universal, and that depends on none other. And therefore deservedly
art thou said to be that which thou art, because whatsoever is created, has
no being, if it be compared with thine.

For which cause (O Lord) acknowledging all these great and wanderfull things,
prostrate before the foot of thy Divine presence, with all that humility which
I am able to express, I adore thee in such manner as those blessed spirits
adore thee, who falling down before thee, seated in thy Thro^ of Majesty, and
laying down their Apoc. 4.
crowns before thy feet, adore thee: and confess that all that which they
have, proceeds from thee. So I also (o Lord) who am the vilest of all
creatures, adore thee, and a thousand times remember thee, confessing unto
thee, that thou art my true Lord and God, and that all that which I am, or
whatsoever I find in my self, as my being, living and breathing, is all
thine: and therefore I call upon all creatures, that they together with me may
praise thee, adore thee, glorify thee, in that divine song of the Prophet
saying: Come let us sing unto the Lord, let us praise ye Psalm 94.
God of our salvation, let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and
rejoice to him with Psalms: because our God is a great God, and a great King
above all Gods: in his hands are all the corners of the earth and the height of
the hills is his also: The sea is his, and he made it, and his hands fashioned
the dry land. Come therefore let us adore and fall down before him, and weep
before our Lord God that made us, for he is our Lord God, and we are his
people, and the sheep of his pasture.

Wherefore (O my God) since thou art so worthy to be adored and honored, give
me grace, that without intermission I may magnify thee: not only in words and
with my tongue, but also in my heart, my actions, and my whole life: Thou which
live and reignest, world without end.

Amen.
The second prayer to the holy Trinity, of the greatness of the divine
Majesty.
OMnipotent and eternal God, three in persons, one in substance, just and meet
it is, and agreeable with reason, that I should employ all my whole life in the
exercise of repentance and fear: when as I have so just causes of lament and
fear. Tuen as therefore the greatness of thy glory impelleth me to honor and
praise thee: so also commands it me to praise and glorify thee: For a Hymn
becomes thee in ^ion, and a vow shall be made to thee in Jerusalem, because
thou art the Ocean of all perfections, the Sea of wisdom, the Abyss of
power, beauty, greatness, riches, sweetness and majesty: in which are all
perfections and beauties of creatures, which are in heaven, or on earth; and
all these perfections are found in thee, in the highest perfection and degree.
All beauty compared to thee, is deformity: all riches, poverty: all strength,
weakness: all wisdom, ignorance: all sweetness, bitterness: and to
conclude many things in a few, all things that are in heaven and on earth, make
less appearance in thy sight than a little candle before the sunshine.

Thou art perfect in all things, without any deformity: great without quantity,
good without quality, strong without infirmity, true without falsitie, always
present without place, in all places, without division. In magnitude you art
infinite, in virtue omnipotent, in goodness chief, in wisdom inestimable,
in counsels terrible, in judgments just, in thoughts secret, in words true, in
works holy, in mercy copious, toward sinners patient, toward penitents,
compassionate.

But what in especial should I speak of thy wisdom, but that which erst
the Prophet* aid: O Lord, thou know my thoughts afar off, thou have searched
my commings in and goings out, and all my ways have thou foreknowne, because
there is no speech in my tongue which thou know not. Behold, O Lord, thou
know al things, both the first and the last: Thou have made me, and laid
the hand upon me: Such knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me, I
cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I
fly from thy presence: if I climb up to heaven, thou a^ there: if I go down
to hell, thou art there also: if I take the wings of the morning, and remain
in the utmost parts of the sea, even there also shall thy hand lead me, and
thy right hand shall hold me. If I say ye darkness shall cover me, then shall
thy right hand be turned to day: yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee,
but the night is as clear as day, the darkness and light to thee are both
alike. For his eyes, says another, are upon the ways of men, and he
considers all their steps: there is no darkness nor shadow of death to hide
them that work iniquity. But what shall I say of ye greatness of thy power? I will
say that in times past which ye Prophet said, saying: For God is my king of
old, the help that is Psalm. 74.
done upon earth, he does it himself: Thou did divide the sea through thy
power, thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters. Thou smotest the
heads of the dragons, and gave them for meat to thy people, in the
wilderness: thou broughtest out fountains and waters out of the hard rocks,
thou driedst up many waters. The day is thine, and the night is thine, thou
have prepared the light and the sun: thou have set all the borders of the
earth: thou have made summer and winter. And in another place the same Prophet
says: O Lord God of hoasts, who Psalm. 89.
is like unto thee? thy truth, most mighty Lord, is on every side. Thou rulest
ye raging of the sea: you stillest the waves thereof when they arise: thou have
subdued Egypt, and destroyed it: thou have scattered thine enemies abroad with
thy mighty arm. The heavens are thine, and the earth is thine: thou have laid
the foundation of the round world, and all yt therein is. Thou have made the
North and the South: ^abor and Herm^ shall rejoice in thy name. Thou have a
mighty arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. Blessed Job knew
this thy power, when he said. With him is counsel, and strength, wisdom, and
understanding. Behold, if he break down a thing, who can set it up again? If
he shut a thing, who will open it? Behold, if he withhold the waters, they ^ry
up: if he let them go, they destroy the earth: with him is strength and
wisdom, both the deceiuer, and ^ee that is deceived are his: he carries
away the wise men as it were a spoil, and makes yt Judges fools: he loses
the rule of Kings, and guirdeth their loins with a band: he leads away the
great men into captivity, and turns the mighty vpside down: he stops the
mouth of them that speak truth, and disappointeth ye aged of their
understanding: hec pours contempt upon Princes, and makes the strength of
the mighty weak. Look what lies hid in darkness, he declares it openly,
and the very shadow of death brings he to light: he increases the people,
and destroieth them: he makes them to multiply, and diminishes them.

These o Lord, are testimonies of thy mightines: but what shall I say of the
riches of thy glory, and the vein of thy felicity? If thou have sinned, says
ye scripture, what have you done against him? if thy offenses be many, what have
thou done Job 35.
unto him? if thou be righteous, what give thou him, or what will he receive
at thy hands? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness
may profit the son of man. But thou (O Lord) art such, and so blessed, as
thou need not another man's goods: I confess thee to be such a one, for such
a one I praise thee, and glorify thy most holy name. Infuse thy light into my
heart, and give me words in my mouth, that my heart may always think of thy
mightines, and let thy praise be in my mouth for ever. But for that thy laud is
not seemly in y^ mouth of a sinner, I therefore require all the Angels of
heaven, and all the creatures of the world that they together with me, may
praise thee, and may supply my defect, inuiting them thereunto with that
glorious song which the three children sung in the midst of the fiery furnace
in Babylon, saying: Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, be he praised
and magnified for ever. And Daniel 3,
blessed be the name of his glory, holy and laudable, and magnified for ever
and ever. Blessed art thou in the throne of thy majesty, to be praised and
magnified for ever. Blessed art thou that beholdest the depths, and sit
upon ye Cherubins, to be praised and magnified for ever. Blessed art thou in
the firmament of heaven, and praised and glorified, world without end.

Amen.
The third prayer to the holy Trinity.
GOD, holy of holiest, God omnipotent, God eternal, God that art strong, God
of spirits, and all flesh, at whose presence heaven and earth trembles, at
whose beck the heavens and elements obey, trinity in unity, and unity in
trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, thou being of my being, life that
quickenest me, light that illuminatest me, science that instructs me: yet
above all essence, light, life and science: all creatures adore and celebrate
thee: and I incited by the duty. I owe thee, this day do bow the knees of my
heart before the footstool of thy Majesty.

I give thee thanks yt thou not only did frame me when I was nothing, but
also did fashion me according to thine own form, that is, gave me a
perfect shape; that where I deserved no favor, thou had compassion on me:
for that thou have sanctified me with the sacraments of y^ Church: that from
my childhood hitherto thou have brought me up in all goodness.

But O thou maker of heaven and of earth, whereas I am not able to serve thee
to any use, for whose cause did thou so much bounty upon me? how comes it
to pass that thou love me so much? for what have I given thee to induce
thee to recompense me? yea, where was I before I was made, that I might show
thee a former courtesy? Truly, by thy benefit in times past I was made and
dignified with many blessings: thy bounty and benignity has done all this, and
I being insufficient to yield thanks for only one of them, how can I requit so
many thousands? And how may darkness praise light? how may vanity commend
verity? how (...) a mortal man (by nature frail) conceive thine immortality?
how may a gross substance comprehend him, who is free from all weight of
matter? how may uncleanness praise purity? who then shall applaud thy works? who
shall resound thy praises? but thou like a most merciful Father, receiuest our
vows, and take in good part thy childrens tha^sgiuing whosoever. Make me
therefore worthy, O good God, to give thee thanks, to cleave perpetually to thy
charity, that I may praise thee for ye many and mighty benefits wherewith you
have honored me. That I may pay thee thanksgiving for ye perils from whence
thou have delivered me. Finally, yt I may do thee duty for protecting me
both in prosperity and adversity: because thou have done all things with
discretion; and for that thou art the Lord of our bodies and souls, of life
and death, of health and sickness, of felicity and infelicity. To be short, the
moment of all things depends on thy hand. Thou do rejoice in us by thy
benefits, thou do amate us by thy menaces, thou differedst in chastising and
comfortest us, reclaming our frailty unto thy self.

Glory be to thy wondrous power, praise to thy insatiable love to mankind:
govern the rest of our life, most merciful guide and vigilant governor:
deliver me, O Lord, from all mine enemies, visible and invisible: stretch out
thy bounteous hand, that may draw us out of the deep waters of the roaring
floods of this world, and that may relieve and lighten the dangers of our
navigations. Govern y^ the magistracy, O King, which thou have committed to our
charge: for thou art the steersman, we the rudder, let thy hand therefore
inuisibly rule this Rudder whither it please the, and whither thou have decreed
it; for neither will I trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me: but thy
right hand and thine arm, and the clear light of thy countenance.

Thy will be done, o King, in us, as it is in heaven and earth: if at any time
we shall run astray from the laws of thy commandments, conceive not sudden
wrath, O most merciful God, since thou art not ignorant how frail and weak we
are from our beginning: if thou list thou can save me: vouch safe it may be
accordant to thy will. For unless thy power strengthen me, I cannot do that
which I would.

Consider my heart therefore, with the unspeakable sweetenes of thy bounty, to
the end that a little sense, and taste of the future and eternal blessedness
which we shall enjoy in thee, may refresh our minds. Lastly, make nice worthy,
that after this present life, I may hasten unto thee my Lord and God: that I
may behold the riches of thy kingdom, and contemplate the beauty of thy
look: which grant, o most holy King, my true God and maker, for thy Sons
sake our Lord Jesus Christ,

Ame^.
A prayer unto the Father, wherein we demand sanctification.
THou that rulest in the highest, reignest for ever, and only can do all
things, God the governor of heaven and earth, at whose beck all creatures
tremble, and the pillars of heaven shake. O heavenly God, perfect workman and
Potter, I wretch made out of clay, or rather of filthy mudde, with fear and
trembling come before the throne of thy majesty. I acknowledge and confess my
wickedness, I know that I am nothing, yea that I am mere abomination and
horror in thy sight, if thy grace and mercy do fail me: without thee I think
no goodness, without thee I do no good thing: without thee I am a contemptible
creeping worm.

I cannot be saved without thine assistance, my salvation depends on thy
hands. I give thee thanks, O God, and in especial for this, for that thou have
given me that know ledge, that I may see and know yt I am nothing, and unable
to do aniething without thee. Thou art ye Potter, I the clay: such as thou will
have me be, such can thou form and fashion me: if thou make me blessed,
thou show thy mercy and grace: if thou castest me into perdition, thou
show thy justice, and executest thy judgment: neither is it my duty to
contradict thee, why, or under what reason thou do it. For thou have mercy
upon him whom thou love: these things I meditate with my self, o Lord, and I
fear thy judgments.

Since therefore all my safety and salvation depends on thee, and consists
in thy hand and power, and since thou have showed thy self a merciful and
long-suffering God to the whole world: and have testified the same indeed, in
that thou would thy only son Jesus Christ the innocent, should die for our
offenses, and expiate our sins with his blood on the Cross. Finally, since
thou have taught us in all our perturbations to call upon thee, and ask thy
grace and mercy, for that thou will give us all things which we shall ask in
the Name of thy Son: I come unto thee, being dross and a lump of clay, O
merciful and celestial Potter, beseeching thee most humbly, that thou will
use thy mercy, and make of this unworthy matter, a Uessell of eternal Glory.
Uouchsafe also of thy mere grace, to fix my mind on perfect faith, assured
hope, and chaste and holy love, that being justified by these thy gifts, I may
become upright, perfect, good and holy, according to thy good will both in the
midst, and end of my life, as also at the latter day of judgment.

O merciful Father, grant me pardon of all my sins: through y^ death of thy
beloved Son Jesus Christ, make me to please thee alone: grant me to be thy
grateful son and heir, increase in me that justice whatsoever, which is
given me, and granted from heaven, that I may continue and end my life (...)
the same: increase in me that faith which thou have given me: kindle my love
of thee, and make it more apparent, that by thy help, and the presence of thy
grace, and the accomplishment of thy holy will, I may obtain everlasting life
which thou have promised us, to the end I may praise thee, and give thee thanks
in thy kingdom, for e^ and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to God the Son.
OThou maker and redeemer of makinde, Jesus Christ, who saiedst, I am ye way,
the truth, and the life: the way in doctrine, precept and examples: the truth
in promises: ye life in reward: I pray thee by thy unspeakable charity,
wherewith thou daignest to employ thy self wholly for our salvation, suffer me
never to wander from thee who art the way: neither ever to distrust in thy
promises, who art the truth and performest whatsoever thou do promise:
neither to repose or rely on any other thing, because thou art eternal life,
than which, there is nothing more to be desired, neither in heaven nor in
earth. By thee have we learned the true and ready way to eternal salvation,
lest we should wander any longer in the Labyrinthes of this life. Thou did
teach us exactly how to believe, what to do, what to hope, and in whom we
ought to rest: by thee we have learnt how un happy we were borne through our
first father Adam, by thee we have learnt that there is no hope of salvation,
except by faith in thee.

Thou have taught us yt thou art the only light that shinest to all men in the
desert of this world, co^ducting them through the night of their minds, from
the Egyptian darkness, to that blessed Land which thou promisest unto the
meek, and such as follow thy humility. For in us was nothing but utter
darkness, who neither could see our calamity, neither know from whence to
secke the remedy of our misery: thou daignedst to enter into the world,
vouchsafedst to take upon thee our nature, that thy doctrine might disperse the
cloud of our ignorance: that by thy precepts thou might direct our feet in
ye way of peace: by the examples of thy life thou did limit out a path for us
to immortality: and beating it with thy steps, thou made it of a tedious and
rough, an easy and beaten way. So becamest thou unto us a way, that knows no
error, in which lest we should be wearied, thy bounty with great and assured
promises, vouchsafed to assure us: for who could be wearied, that thinks how
in following thy footsteps there is an heritage of eternal life prepared for
him? Therefore whilst we are in this journey, thou would in stead of a staff
be an assured hope unto us whereby we might be sustained.

Neither was thy goodness contented herewith, but acknowledging the frailty of
our natures, in the mean space with the comfort of ye holy Spirit y^ repairest
our courages, to the end that we may more willingly run unto thee. And as thou
being made a way unto us driuest away all error, so becoming our truth, thou
take away all distrust.

Finally, being made life unto us, thou give heat unto those that are dead
in sin, a life through thy holy spirit which quickneth all things, until all
mortality laid aside, in ye resurrection we may always live with thee and in
thee, by reason that thou art unto us al in all things: For it is eternal life
to know the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, to be one true God.
Wherefore I beseech thee, O most merciful Father, to increase faith in me who
am thy unworthy servant, lest at any time I waver in thy celestial doctrine:
increase obedience in me, lest I swerue from thy precepts, increase constancy,
that walking in thy ways, I neither be allured by the inticements of satan,
nor dejected by his terrors: but that I may persevere in thee who art the true
way, to my lives end. Increase my faith, that possessed of thy promises, I may
never wax slow in the study of godliness: but forgetting those things I have
left behind me, I may always strive and endeavor for more perfection.

Increase thy grace in me, that daily more and more being mortified my self: I
may live and be encouraged by thy holy Spirit, fearing nothing but thee, than
whom there is nothing more amiable, glo rying in none but in thee, who art the
true glory of all the Saints, wishing nothing but thee, the whom there is
nothing better: desiring nothing but thee, who art full and perfect felicity,
with the Father and the holy Ghost, world without end.

Amen.
A prayer to the holy Ghost.
HOly Spirit, our advocate who on Whitsunday did descend upon thy Apostles,
filling their bosoms with charity, grace, and wisdom: I pray thee by that thy
unspeakable mercy and liberality, that thou will vouchsafe to fill the
secrets of my soul with thy grace and water my inward heart with the
unspeakable sweetness of thy love: Come holy Ghost, and from heaven send a
beam of thy light. Come thou Father of the poor, come thou giver of gifts,
come thou light of hearts, come thou gracious comforter, thou sweet guest of
my soul, my pleasant refresher. Come thou Physician of those that faint, come
thou purger of eyes, come thou strength o^ the frail, come thou remedy of
sins, come thou doctor of the humble, come thou destroier of the prond, come
thou excellent ornament of all virtues: come thou only salvation of the dying.
Come my God, and adorn a bed for thee, in which I may worthily entertain
thee, with all thy riches and mercies: make me drunk with the gifts of thy
wisdom, illuminate me with the benefit of understanding, govern me with the
gift of counsel, confirm me with the gift of fortitude, instruct me with the
gift of science, wound me with the gift of piety, and pierce my heart with the
gift of thy holy fear.

O sweet lover of clean hearts, burn and inflame all my bowels with the sweet
fire of thy love, that being inflamed, they may be carried and ravished into
thee, who art the center and final end of all my good: o sweet lover of holy
souls, since thou art not ignorant that I can do nothing of my self, nor by
my self: stretch out thy favorable hand over me, and grant that I may forsake
my self, and fly unto thee: mortify, extinguish and dissolve in me whatsoever
is displeasant unto thee, that in all things thou may conform me unto thy
will, that my life hereafter may be a perfect sacrifice in thy sight, or rather
an offering which may wholly be consumed in the fire of thy love.

O who shall give me the grace, ye I may at least attain this chief good?
Look upon me, O Lord, look upon me, and see here this thy poor creature:
my soul sighing after thee day and night, how she thirsts after God: when
shall I come and appear before the presence of thy grace? When shall I enter
into that admirable place of thy Tabernacle that I may attain the house of my
God? When will thou fill me with the light of thy countenance? When shall I be
satiate with the presence of thy glory? When shall I by thy means be delivered
from all temptations? and when shall I overcome this frailty of my mortality? O
eternal fountain of light: bring me back again to the Abyss of eternal
goodness, by whom I am created, that there I may know thee, even as I am known
of thee, and may so love thee, as I am loved by thee that I may see and enjoy
thee in the society of all the elect, even as thou also have seen me from
everlasting

Amen.
The first prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Yield thee immortal thanks, O most sweet Jesus, that from thy 1 Christ des
cended from heaven, and was conceived in the Virgins womb.
roial palace, and the secret bosom of thy father, thou have vouchsafed for
my sake to descend into this vale of misery, and in the sanctified womb of
that chaste Uirgin thy mother, thou did take upon thee a humane body: I pray
thee (O Lord) that thou will prepare thy self a dwelling place in my heart,
and to that end that thou adorn the same with all kinds of virtues, to the end
that thou perpetually may dwell in the same. Would to God, O Lord, it might
please thy bounty that my heart should be such, that I might not fear to
inuit thee, but that thou might come and dwell with me, and I might deserve
to entertain thee kindly, and thou in the same heart might rest contentedly
for all eternities. O that I might embrace thee with so powerful arms of
love, that neither in thought or affection I might ever be drawn from thee.

I give thee thanks most sweet 2 Mary visits her Cousin.
Jesus, for that after thou were conceived in the glorious womb of the Uirgine
Marie, thou would have her pass the mountains, and visit her Cosen
Elizabeth, to the end she might salute her, and minister in her childbirth
unto her. Thou did not disdain to be inclo sed for nine months space in the
glorious womb of thy mother. And therefore I pray thee give me the grace of
true humility, and vouchsafe that I may imprint the same in the bowels of my
heart, that by the benefit thereof thou may always find me ready in
matters which appertain to thy service: Grant, O Lord, that my heart may
always loath transitory things, and always desire to have thee, O Lord,
inhabitant therein.

I give thee thanks, most sweet Jesus, that thou were borne of the 3 Christ is
borne.
pure Uirgine thy mother without stain of her virginity, and who laid thee
presently in a manger as a poor and mortal creature: and humbly adored thee
as God, and the creator of al things. I beseech thy divine mercy to vouchsafe
to be continually borne in me by new heat of charity, and that thou may be
my only destre, my sole sacietie, and the firm hope of my heart That it may
please thy bounty, that I may only and always seek thee, always think of
thee, always love thee with an ardent affection.

I give thee always thanks, O sweet Jesus, that being borne in the 4 Christ is
swathed.
extremest horror of winter, thou did not refuse to be wrapped in most
vile swathing bands, and to suck milk from y^ Uirginal breast of thy blessed
mother, and as it were a simple and innocent babe to draw the Uirgins teates,
where indeed thou were God omnipotent. Grant me, o Lord, ye in thy sight, I
may be always a very infa^t in humility, and truly poor in spirit. Uouchsafe
that for thy love sake, I may refuse to endure no tedious or laborous troubles
whatsoever. Grant that I may love nothing in this world but thee, neither
desire to possess any thing in the same, but thee.

I give thee thanks, most bountiful 5 Christ is adored by the shepherds.
Jesus, for that as soon as you were borne, it pleased thee to be praised by
the Hymns of Angels, and to be adored by the shepherds with great joy and
admiration. Give me the grace, O Lord, that I may persevere likewise in thy
praise with gladness, and that I may seek thee in the society of shepherds,
and seeking thee, find thee, and finding thee, possess thee eternally.

Be thou praised and glorified 6 Christ is ci^ cumcised and called Jesus.
always (O good Jesus) for that y^ eight day according to the custom of other
infants, thou would be circumcised, and for that in thy tender age thou
beganst to shed thy blood for my love: and to the end thou might bless me
with unspeakable consolation, thou were pleased to be called Jesus, I beseech
thee (O Lord) vouchsafe to recko^ me amongst the number of thy elect, and to
register my name in the book of life, and that thou will circumcise my heart
from al superfluity, that is, idle and indecent speeches, and wicked works,
and root out in me all impure and vain cogitations. My redeemer, thou art
called Jesus, which is a Savior: for to thee alone it appertains to give
salvation. I therefore request thee (O Lord) that the sweet remembrance of this
name, may expel from me all inordinate pustilanimity and sluggishnesse, and
may give me the firm hope of thy mercy, and defend me from all the
persecutions of mine enemies.

I give thee thanks most sweet 7 Christ is adored by the wisem^n.
Jesus, who were found by the wisemen, who of entire devotion, and with sincere
faith, sought thee out, and that by the means of a star which conducted
them: who humbling them on their knees before thee, offered thee gold,
frankencence and myrrh. Grant me) O Lord) that in the company of these holy
kings I may seek thee, not in Brthleem, but in the hiue of my heart, and that
there finding thee, I may adore thee in spirit and truth: Let me offer thee the
gold of shining charity, the incense of devotion, and the perfect myrrh of
mortification. Finally, give me grace, that I may employ with a willing mind
and alacrity, all my forces, and all the strength of my mind in imitating thy
fortitude.

I give thee thanks, O Lord Jesus 8 Christ is presented in the Temple.
Christ, who, that you might give us an example of obedience and humility,
would be subject to the law of our Lord, and be brought into the temple, in
the arms of thy holy mother, and have an oblation, not of a rich, but of a
poor man offered for thee: for which cause just and old Simeon with Anna the
Prophetess rejoicing at thy presence, gave a famous testimony of thy glory.
Let it be pleasing to thy good will, O Lord, yt never hereafter ye least
thought of vanity enter into my heart. Ah how blessed should I be, if each kind
of presumption were banished from me, and each desire of worldly favor,
together with all my inordinate love, were wholly extinct in me: Uouchsafe to
impart that grace unto me, that I may fly al worldly praise, and subject my
self to all men, and obey them willingly.

I give thee thanks, sweet Jesus, for that being as yet young, thou beganst to
suffer persecution in the company of thy dear mother: neither 9 Jesus flies
^to Egypt.
did disdain to fly into Egypt: Give me the grace yt in all y^ tempests of
my persecutions, in all my tribulations and temptations, I may fly unto thee,
seek thee, and only call upon thee: and as often soever as any of y^ aforesaid
troubles shall be inflicted on me by thy hand, grant, O Lord, that I may
sustain them with joy, and suffer them with a quiet heart, yielding thee
continual thanks for all things, which it shall please thee to impose upon me.

I give thee also infinite thanks, O Lord Jesus, for that thy most dear 10 Jesus
sits amongst the Do^tors.
mother sought thee with great grief, when thou remainedst in the Temple, and
after three days with great joy found thee sitting in the midst of the
doctors, whom thou heardest and questionedst with wonderful wisdom: O Lord
for thy mere mercy sake, grant that I may never be separated from thee, nor
thou from me. Expel from me all idleness and sluggishnesse, banish the
coldness of my mind, which displeases thee so much: and give me perfect
devotion and ardent thirst of thy justice, which may so possess my heart, y^ I
may never be weary, nor satisfied with serving thee. Our Father, etc

The second prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Give thee thanks most sweet Ie 11 Jesus is Baptized.
su, for that entering y^ flood Jordan thou would be baptized by the hands of
thy precurser S. John Baptist: vouchsafe, O Lord, to purify me in this life
by thy merits, and to cleanse me from all my sins, and to make me drunk with
thy love, and desire of my celestial country. Make me such a one before my
soul shall depart out of y^ prison of this flesh, as thou will have me to be,
that at the end of this pilgrimage I may presently be with thee: that I may
always see thee, and always enjoy thee in yt blessed eternity that has no
end.

I give thee continual thanks, most bountiful Jesus, for yt living 12 Jesus is
tempted by the devil in the desert.
in the desert before thou beganst to preach the Gospel, thou did live
amongst wild beasts: and perseuering in fasting forty days and forty
nights, and watching in continual prayers and sighs, thou would afterward
be tempted by the devil: and after thou had obtained the victory, the Angels
came and ministered unto thee. Uouchsafe O Lord, that by thy grace I may
chastise my flesh: and make thrall all my sinful affections of y^ flesh: and
that by the gift of perseverance I may exercise my self in fastings,
watchings, prayers, and other spiritual exercises. But especially, O Lord,
grant me that by the help of thy grace, I may be free from the sin of
gluttome, and from all other snares and temptations of the devil: let no
temptation prevail against me: let no allurement separate me from thee:
rather bring to pass, O Lord, that all these may give me greater occasion,
more nearly to unite and tie my self unto thee.

I give thee thanks sweet Jesus, for that for my love thou were afflicted 13
Jesus is afflicted with diverse labors and necessities.
in this world with many dolors, and diverse necessities, as heat, cold,
thirst, hunger, weariness, and swellings: with diverse iourneis, watchings,
persecutions, and tribulations of al sorts. Grant me, O Lord, that for thy love
sake I may suffer all adversity with a glad heart, as if coming from thy hands:
and that I may bear them with great patience. Grant yt in whatsoever fortune,
either prosperous or adverse, troublesome or peaceable, I may always persevere
in thee, and faithfully cleave unto thee, that in all things thy will be done,
and not mine.

I give thee thanks most sweet Jesus, for that thou sufferedst many 14 Jesus
prays and preaches.
things whilst like a true shepherd and Savior of the world, thou soughtest
the conversion and health of my soul: in watching and prayer, in wearying thy
self in travels, in preaching the Gospel, traveling from Province to
Province, and Castle to Castle, and omitting in no sort the office of a good
Pastor. I beseech thee, O Lord, give me this grace, that I may never be found
hereafter slow and negligent in doing thee service, but that I may be always
ready and prompt to all goodness. Grant that I may most ardently thirst after
all men's salvation: and may always have zeal of thine honor, and occupy my
self in the same.

I give thee thanks, most bountiful 15 Jesus conuerseth with men.
Jesus, yt in thy merciful conversation with men, thou would comfort them,
and of thy great mercy cure their infirmities. Give me, O Lord, a heart
replenished with a certain zealous affection toward al me^, that I may be
partaker with all those whom I shall see in affliction. Grant also, O Lord, yt
I may esteem other men's miseries as mine own, and that with a sincere heart,
and without any passion, I may bear with other men's imperfections, and succor
them according to my most power in all their necessities. O Lord purge my heart
perfectly from all vicious passions, and all evil desires, which tyrannize in
the same: that being healed of all these evils and freed from all these
impediments, she may freely fly to Heaven, and never cease, till of most
pure love it may deserve to partake thy divine embracings.

I give thee thanks, good Jesus, for 16 Jesus suffers many things for our
sake.
that for my sake thou sufferedst so innumerable injuries, blasphemies
slanders, reproaches, and persecutions, and especially at their hands whom thou
had graced with infinite benefits. I beseech thee (O Lord) give me a heart
truly simple and innocent, that I may love mine enemies, and that their
misfortunes may grieve me to the heart, that I may excuse them always, if many
thing they shall offend, yielding good for evil: and that I may be a perfect
follower of thy perfect charity and patience.

I give thee thanks most loving 17 Jesus came into Jerusalem.
Jesus, for that thou came in humble sort into Jerusalem, lowly sitting upon
an Ass, and whilst they that came out to meet thee: recorded thy glorious
praises in pleasant Hymns, thou sheddest tears full of bitterness, with the
grief thou had conceived for the destruction of such a City, and the loss
of so many souls, extorted from thee. Give me, O Lord, a certain inward
knowledge of my self, that I may manifestly know my vileness, and heartily
humble my self: yt I may so contemn my self, that hereafter no flattery or
commendations of men may please me, but that I may continually bewail not
only mine own but my neighbors sins, reputing all his evils to be mine.
Our Father, etc.

The third prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Give thee thanks, O Lord Jesus Christ, for that to bring the old 18 Jesus
washes his disciples ^eet at supper.
law to an end, thou did eat the paschall Lamb with thy Disciples in
Jerusalem, and giving them an example of great humility, and unspeakable
love, kneeling on thy knees, thou did wash their feet, wiping them with the
towell wherewith thou were girt: I pray thee, O Lord, let this example of thine
pierce my heart, and cast out of the same, whatsoever presumption or pride may
be found in it. Give me I beseech thee, O Lord, profound humility, by means
whereof I may rejoice to be subject unto them, without alteration. Add to me
also perfect obedience, whereby I may entirely satisfy thy commandments:
together be obseruant to their instructions, who in thy name have the authority
over me. Kindle in me a fervent charity, wherewith I may purely love thee,
and through thy love, love all men.

I give thee thanks, most sweet Jesus, that of thy most excellent 19 Jesus
instituteth the holy Sacrament.
charity, thou did institute the most excellent Sacrament of thy body and
blood: and for that of a certain admirable liberality of thine, thou gave
thy self for meat unto us, and repinedst not to remain with us in this world
till the end thereof. Ah Lord, excite in me I pray thee a loving desire, and an
arde^t thirst of this venerable Sacrament. Grant me the grace, that I may come
to this Table of life, to receive thee with a chaste love, profound humility,
purity of heart, and sincerity of mind. Grant also, that my soul may so thirst
after thee, and be so wounded by thy love, that at length I may deserve to
enjoy thy divine pleasures for the honor and glory of thy holy Name.

I give thee thanks, O sweetest Jesus, that upon thy departure out 10 Christin
his last Supper comfort his disciples
of this world, thou did admonish and comfort thy Disciples, commending them
in the words full of love, and prayers fraught with charity, to thy Father
showing with how much love thou did embrace them, and all those yt through
their doctrine should believe in thee: I beseech thee, O Lord, that my heart
may taste some sweetness in thy words, and that they may be sweeter unto me
than the honey and the honey comb. Let thy spirit, full of exhortation wound
my breast, and alter my affections, that I may wholly transform my self into
thy love. Order all mine actions that thy will may be always fulfilled in me
and of me.

I give thee thanks, most beloved Jesus, that falling upon the earth 21 Jesus
prays to his Father in the garden.
with outstretched arms, thou did pray unto thy Father, resigning thy self
wholly into his hands, requiring that in all things not thy will, but thy
Fathers should be fulfilled: I beseech thee (O Lord) give me grace, that in
all my troubles and necessities, I may have recourse unto thee in prayer, and
that I may trust my self wholly to thy providence without the election of my
will, or expectation of any private profit. Let me never fly adversities,
nor fail in any good intent through them, but that whatsoever befortune me, I
may receive it with a quiet mind, as that which is given me by thy merciful
hands, suffering all things with an humble and quiet heart. 22 Jesus is taken
prisoner.


I give thee thanks o bounteous Jesus, for yt thou vouchsafedst to be taken by
armed soldiers, and to be bound with cords, like a wicked man and offender,
and thence be led to Annas: and for that before him thou fearedst not to stand
in judgment: o admirable meekenes of my Redemer* whilst then art apprehended,
whilst thou art bound, whilst you art mo^kt, whilst thou art abused, thou
lamentest not, thou murmurest not, you striuest not, but silently followest
their steps, who led thee, or rather draw thee and weary thee. Thou obeiest
such as command thee, and with infinite patience bear the torments wherewith
thou art crucified, O my Lord, e^uy me not that such and so excellent an
example of so much virtue may shine in me, for the glory and honor of thy most
holy Name.

I give thee thanks O most amiable ^su, king of heaven and earth, 23 Jesus
suffered a stri^e on the face.
who standing before the proud and inflamed Bishop, in no other sort than as if
thou had been a vile and abject man, were stricken, and did patiently suffer
the cruel stroke which one of his wicked ministers enforced against thy face:
I pray thee, o Lord, mortify in me all unbridled heat of wrath, restrain al
indiguation, take away all hate, and extinguish in me every spark and desire
of revenge: that when as any man shall do me injury, I may not be moved, or
thought full of revenge: but suffering all things patiently for thy loves sake,
I may do good to all those that do me evil. Our Father, etc.

The fourth prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Give thee thanks, sweet Jesus, who in the night of thy passion 24 Jesus in
the night wherein he was taken, was vexed diverse ways.
were mocked, deluded, stricken by thine enemies hands, and kicked with their
heels, and vexed with diverse sorts of injuries: Thou know o my Lord, how
grievous and troublesome it is unto me to suffer the least injury. Thou know
est I have no virtue, that my will is slow, and my good desires are cold in
me. O Lord, for thy mercy sake help my in^nitie: Give me grace, that my
mind may be dejected by no storm of adversity, but humbled by affliction.
Help me, lest I saint under the burden of my tribulations, which shall come
upon me, neither let injuries offered me by other men, ^re up my impatiencie:
but giving thee thanks in all things, I may refer all things to the honor and
glory of thy Name.

I give thee thanks, o Lord Jesus, for that standing before the President
Pontius Pi^ate, thou did not 25. Jesus is accused before Pilate.
answer to the false accusations and slanders of thy accusers: but like an
innocent Lamb that opens not his mouth, and is silent before his sheerers,
so with a reverent ^lence did thou ouerpasse all things. Grant, O Lord,
that reproves, murmurings, and detractions may not move me to cho^: but that
instructed by thy example I may overcome all those that in^ure and defame me,
with silence. Give me the grace of perfect humility, that I may neither desire
to be praised by men, nor fear to be dispraised by thee.

I give thee thanks, most merciful 26 Jesus is led to Herod.
Jesus, for that amidst ye great tumult and fury of the people, by the
commandment of Pilate, thou were led to King Herod: Give me strength that
persecutions confound me not: neither the injuries of mine enemies provoke me
to wrath, nor their impudence make me ashamed: but that I may endure all things
with meekenes, and overcome them with silence, and possess my soul in my
patience: according to the prescript of thy holy commandments.

I give thee thanks, merciful Jesus, 27 Jesus is accused before Herod.
that standing before Herod, and accused of many crimes and offenses by the
Bishops and Priests, thou would answer to none of them, but did justify
thy cause with silence. Give me, O Lord, the de^ritie to refrain my tongue,
that I may never take pleasure to speak idle, vain, or fillthy words: or
consume my time unprofitably (...) telling fruitles and vain sto^s, but grant
that my tongue may ^und with nothing but that which is just, honest, and
profitable, and consonant likewise to thy heavenly will, make me detest the
vice of backbiting, and grant that I may take pleasure to hear and speak that
which is honest.

I give thee thanks, sweet Jesus, that being compared with that infamous 28
Jesus is judged more wicked then Barrabas.
and seditious Thief Barrabas, thou were judged worse than he, and vnworthier
life: in so much as the homicide was set at liberty, and thou the author of
life condemned to death. King of eternal glory, with what more great ignominy
(I pray thee) might thy majesty be affected? Here Lord, hence it appears,
that thou art that living stone refused by men, which God chose unto himself,
and made the corner stone. May it please thee, o Lord, that I prefer nothing
before thee, nor change any thing for thee, but let al things seem as dirt
unto me in comparison of thee. Grant that the venom of envy may never infect
my soul, but that I may always rest in thee and build my whole sal^tion upon
thee.

I give thee thanks, most loving 29 Christ is whipped.
Jesus, that being dispoiled of thy garments, thou sufferedst that maiden skin
of thine to be laid naked: and then tied with hard cords unto a pillar, thou
would suffer the same flesh to be torn with horrible scourges, to the end
thou might heal our wounds by thy wounds. O Lord, spoil my heart of all
unclean cogitations: put off mine old man, with all the concupiscence thereof,
and put me on a man, which is created according to thine own similitude and
likeness, in justice and sanctity: and grant me that with all patience and
humility, I may sustain the whip of thy fatherly visitation.

I give thee thanks, benign Jesus, that after so many wounds, so 30 Jesus is
crowned.
many stripes received in that scourging for my sake, after so copious
bloodshedding from all thy body, that thou were diverse ways mocked and scorned
at, and to thy greater disgrace they put thee on a Purple garment, and platting
a Crown of thorns, they put it on thy head, they gave thee a reed in thy hand
in stead of a Scepter, and bowing their knees, saluted thee, or rather mocked
thee by the name of King, saying: All hail king of the Jews. Grant, O Lord,
that the memory of this miserable tragedy may be imprinted in my heart, and
never be blotted out of the same: pierce the same with the ardent arrows of
thy charity, that I may only love thee, only think of thee only rest in
thee: and that neither tribulation, anguishes, or any persecutions, may
separate me from thee: neither let me take it grievously if at any time men
contemn and set me at naught for thy sake.

I give thee thanks sweet Jesus, that after so many labors, anguishes, 31 Jesus
bears his Cross.
tribulations, scorns, and wounds suffered for my sake, thou would also
bear thy Cross on thy broken and bruised shoulders unto the Mountain of
Caluarie, thy place of execution: and that with great labor and weariness
through y^ grievous weight thereof, and the extreme weakness of thy body.
Uouchsafe me, O Lord, that with a willing and devout heart I may embrace thy
Cross, denying my self, and imitating the example of thy virtues with fervent
charity, that I may humbly follow thee even unto the death.

I give thee thanks, O good Jesus, 32 Jesus bearing his cross, speaks to the
women.
who in this laborious journey, when thou were led forth to be crucified,
did bountifully comfort the women that lamented, exhorting them not to weep
for thee, but for themselves, and their children. Grant (O Lord) that I also
may power out devout tears of compassion and love so abundantly, that the
hardness of my heart may be mollified, and made acceptable in the sight of thy
Majesty. Grant me (O Lord) that set on fire by the flames of thy most holy
love, I may little or nothing esteem these worldly delights, but only love
thee, and eternally rest in the. Our Father, etc.

The first prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Give thee thanks, most bountiful Jesus, that being wearied and 33 Jesus
drinks vinegar and gal
spent with labor, and oppressed with the grievous weight of thy Cross, thou
came at length to the place of sacrifice, where thou were found altogether
afflicted, almost killed with thirst at which time those wicked and barbarous
soldiers offered thee vinegar mixed with gall. May it please thee (O Lord,)
that y^ memory of this cup may extinguish in me all inordinate desire of belly
cheer, and delight of the flesh: and bring to pass that I may never give
consent to any filthy and unlawful delectations: but give me the most honest
and the most necessary virtue of temperance, as well in eating, and in
drinking, as in other things: yt refraining all gluttonous appetites, I may
only hunger and thirst after thee, and fix my whole pleasure on thee.

I give thee thanks, blessed Jesus, 34 Jesus is stripped of his garments.
who once more dispoyled of thy garments, stoodest naked before all the people,
where, thy raiments pulled off, which with clotted blood were fast sticking to
thy shoulders all thy wounds grew fresh and were renewed: from whence once more
blood did plentifully flow, not without renewing of thy dolours. Grant me, O
Lord the true love of poverty, that I may never be distracted through the want
of worldly wealth, but that I may bear my Cross, and the necessities of this
life, with all patience. Spoil my heart O Lord, of all carthly imaginations
and affections, and renew in me daily living desires of thy holy love.

I give thee thanks, good Jesus, who were cruelly pulled and torn diverse 35 Jesus
is crucified.
ways, when they would crucify thee, so as all the joints of thy most sacred
body were pulled out of their natural places. Thou like wise did suffer thy
holy hands and sacred feet to be pierced with hard and thick nails, and
affixed to the Cross. Grant me (O Lord) that with a grateful and thankful
heart I may always have in mind thy most ardent charity, by means whereof
thou so bountifully extendedst thine arms, and openedst thy hands, that they
might be pierced; and setledst thy feet, that they might be boared with hard
nails: Go to (O LORD) arise and wound my heart with perfect charity: pierce
all my senses with the same nails of thy love, that my thoughts and desires
may be never separated from thee.

I give thee thanks, O holy Jesus, that for three hours space thou 36 Jesus
hangs on the Cross.
hangedst on y^ wood of the Cross afflicted with many and intolerable
reproves, shedding blood abundantly, and sustaining immeasurable dolors in all
thy members. Nail (O Lord) my miserable soul to that Cross, that lies on
the ground, and purge the same from the uncleanness of all my sins and
appetites, washing it in the flowing rivers of thy blood. O blood that gave
me life and salvation, disdain not, o Lord, to wash me in that blood, to
sanctify me, and purify me in that precious liquor. Offer the same (O Lord)
to thy dread Father, in full satisfaction and remedy of all my evils. I pray
thee grant me that with my heart I may deserve to drink, and with the tongue
of my soul to lick y^ precious drops of thy Divine blood, that I may taste
there how sweet thy Spirit is, and how sweet that thy most precious liquor is.

I give thee thanks sweet Jesus, 37 Jesus hangs between two thieves
who for my sake would hang in the midst of two thieves, and be esteemed
for such as they were, that by this thy incredible humility and patience, thou
might heal and vitterly overthrow my pride and impatience. I pray thee (O
Lord) exalt my spirit, that I may despise all the visible things of this world,
and only look upon thee, love thee, think on naught but thee, sigh after
thee, speak of thee, delight in thee, and that all mine actions may be
always in thee, and by thee, and nothing without thee which may saciate my
mind. I give thee thanks, beloved Jesus, who were so kind to them that 38
Jesus prays for his persecutors.
were cruel toward thee: who also prayedst to thy Father for them who
crucified thee, saying: Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Give
me grace (Lord) that I may have true patience and meekenes, by which being
armed (according to thy example which thou gave me, and commandment which
thou leftest me) I may love mine enemies, and do good unto them that do me
evil, and pray unto thee for them, that thou would pardon them all injuries,
from my heart.

I give thee thanks, benign Jesus, who were mocked and despised 39 Jesus is
mocked upon the Cross.
by thine enemies, and outraged with so many blasphemies and in^ties, even at
that time when thou were afflicted on the cross, with so many unspeakable
dolours and anguishes. Grant me grace, O Lord I beseech thee, that remembering
me of that humility and patience wherewith thou enduredst so many griefs and
disgraces, I also with the like sufferance may endure all whatsoever
adversities, perseuering with thee on the cross of patience till death. Let no
force of temptation, no tempest of tribulation, no storms of injuries, lead
me from my intended good purpose: let neither death nor life, nor things
present nor to come, nor any other creature separate me from thee

I give thee thanks, honored Jesus, who sparedst that thief who 40 Jesus
promises the thief Paradise.
blasphemed and mocked thee, and to the other that confessed his sins, and with
a firm faith preached thine innocence, promisedst the glory of Paradise. O
blessed were I, if ever I might be so happy, as to deserve to be beheld by
thine eyes of mercy, wherewith thou did look upon that fortunate thief;
and by the help of thy grace I might so innocently live, that in the end of my
life, I were worthy to here that most sweet word, To day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. Our Father, etc.

The sixth prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Give thee as great thanks as is possible for me, O Lord Jesus: 41 Jesus
commends his mother to the disciple.
for that looking from the tree of the Cross, seeing thy mother full of
griefs and afflictions, and drowned in her tears, thou tookest compassion
other estate, and commendedst her to thy beloved Apostle John, and afterward
commended him to thy mother, and us all in his person. Grant me Lord, that I
may suffer with her in grief, and travel in tears til I behold thee.

I give thee thanks, sweetest Jesus, for that with open wounds, thy 42 Jesus
complains that he is left of his Father.
head crowned with thorns, thy hands and feet nailed to the Cross, thou
said: O God my God, ^hy have thou forsaken me? Effect (O Lord) in me, that
in all my adversities and temptations, I may fly unto thee my most merciful
Father, and distrusting in my self, trust only in thee, and resign my self
wholly into thy hands. I require thee, O Lord, to wound the entrals of my soul
with the memory of thy wounds: cause them to be imprinted in my secret
thoughts, and make me so drunk with thy blood, that I may think on naught
else, nor seek any other but thee, that seeking thee, I may find thee, and
possess thee for ever.

I give thee thanks, o Lord Jesus 43 Jesus thirsted on the Cross.
Christ, who having thy body weakened and dried through too grievous torments,
and too much effusion of blood, were vehemently dry: and burning with
excessive desire of our salvation, said, I thirst: Grant me, o Lord, yt I may
ardently thirst after thine honor, and the salvation of al souls: herein let
me wholly conform my self to thy holy will, doing as much as lies in me, in
respect of my profession: I pray thee that no love of transitory things may
entangle me: that no creature may draw me into perilous snares, but that I may
love all things for thy sake, which ought to be loved, and thy self more than
all, that in thee alone I may only find rest. I give thee thanks, O merciful
Jesus, for that in the hour of thy 44 Jesus drinks gall on the Cross.
death, that thou might quench thy thirst, thou would apply to thy mouth
a sponge full of Vinegar, that tasting yt bitter draught, in that thy most
afflicted state, thou might satisfy thy eternal Father, for all our
intemperance and ryots, and might leave us a wonderful example of poverty.
Grant me grace, that for the love of thee, I may contemn all delicious savors
and exquisit banquets, and that I may be content to eat and drink that only
with temperance and moderation, which suffices to sustain this body,
yielding thee infinite thanks for the same. Puri^e and heal the palate of my
soul, that that may be sweet unto me whatsoever is grateful unto thee: and
whatsouer displeases thee, the same may not be sauorie unto me but rather
loathsome.

I give thee thanks, O Jesus, ye 45 ^sus fini^eth the ^orke of ^r redemp ^n.
fervent lover of mankind, for that so absolutely and with so excellent an
order thou broughtst the work of our redemption to end: offering thy self a
living sacrifice, on the altar of the Cross, for ye sins of the world. I
pray thee, O my Redeemer, that thou will only vouchsafe to be the seal of my
heart, and the scope of my thoughts, words, and works: that in all things with
a pure and chaste intention, I may only respect and do that, which thine
honor requires: or that nothing without thee may please me, or that I may
desire any thing but thee. Grant me (O Lord) yt hereafter I never wax sluggish
or weary in thy service, but that the fervor of the Spirit renewed in me
daily, my diligence may more and more increase in praising and serving thee.

I give thee thanks, sweet Jesus, 46 Jesus gives up ^heghost.
who when it was thy pleasure, calledst for death, and bowing thy reverend
head, thou commandedst thy spirit, commended to the hands of thy Father, to
forsake thy body: wherein thou declaredst that thou were the true Shepherd,
who lost his life for his sheep. Grant me O Lord, that being dead to all my
sins and iniquities, I may live only to thee; that the course of this my
life being finished in charity, I may presently enter into thee, who art the
true Paradise of our souls.

I give thee thanks, most meek Jesus, that thou would have thy 47 Jesus
side is opened with a Lau^e.
divine body opened with a lance of a certain Soldier, out of which, blood
and water issued to wash and quicken our souls: May it please thee (O LORD) so
to strike my heart with the lance of thy holy love, that I may will nothing,
except that which thou willest. O Lord, let my soul enter the wound of thy
breast, and attain even unto the seat of thy charity, and treasure of thy
divinity, that there I may adore thee my GOD, crucified and dead for me: and
casting from my memory all the figures of things visible, I may only respect
thee, and have thee solely present in all things.

I give thee thanks, beloved Jesus, 48 Christ is adored by ^he wise^en.
who with the great lament of thy friends were taken from the Cross, and
embalmed with precious ointments, wrapped in a fair winding sheet, and
carried into a strange Sepulcher. O Lord, bury with me all my senses, that
being joined unto thee by a strong bond of love, I may be as it were dead in
those things which displease thee, and as it were ravished out of my self, in
all things contrary unto thee: And contrariwise in these things that please me,
let me be altogether, lively, prompt, and swift, and delight in thee alon^
my only Redeemer, and treasure of my soul, Our Father, etc.

The seventh prayer of the life of Jesus.
I Give thee thanks, sweet Jesus, 49 Jesus descended into hell
who of thy mighty power descendedst into hell, and there subduedst satan's
power, and conqueredst obscurity and death. I pray thee, O Lord, that the
reason of thy passion and blood may redeem me from hell and damnation, and
reserve me to the life everlasting.

I give thee thanks, o good Jesus, 50 Jesus arises from the dead.
who victoriously issuing from the Sepulcher* (...) noble triumph (after thou
had overcome and slain death) did rise again the third day, reassuming
thy glorious body: and clothed with immeasurable brightness, visiting thy
friends did affect them with unspeakable joy. Grant me also, O Lord, that
rising again from the death of my sins, and old conuers^tion, I may walk in
newnes of life, and seek those things only which are high and excellent, and
not base and transitory: that when as thou the true life, shall make thy
second apparition here on earth, I may appear with thee also in thy glory.

I give thee thanks, O merciful Jesus, who forty days after thy resurrection 51
Jesus ascends into heaven.
(in the sight of thine Apostles, did ascend into Heaven, glorious and
triumphant, where sitting on the right hand of ye Father, thou live and
reignest world without end. May it please thy divine bounty, o God, that my
soul may languish in thy love: and disdain all things that are in this world,
that she may always aspire unto thee, desiring celestial things and that with
a continual and fervent will: let nothing rejoice her, nothing affect her, but
thou only my Lord and God.

I give thee thanks, most loving 52 Jesus sends the holy Ghost.
Jesus, for that thou sentest down thy holy Spirit upon y^ elect, who
perseuered in prayer, and did send them to preach and teach all nations
throughout the world. I beseech thee, O Lord, purify the secrets of my heart,
and give me the true purity and cleanness of conscience, that the same
Comforter finding a general habitation in the same, may adorn it, and make it
fair and beautiful with the plentiful gifts of his graces: let him alone
comfort me, let him confirm and rule me, and be possessed of me.

I gi^e thee thanks, most bountiful Jesus, who when thou shall 53 Jesus shall
come to judgment
come in the latter day to judge the world, and to reward every one according
to his works and deserts, either with rewards or punishments. My merciful
Lord, give me grace, that my soul innocently ^nishing the race of this
miserable life, according to thy holy will, may at last depart out of this
prison of the body, adorned with many merits and virtues, that for thy
mercie-sake she may be received into the house of thy glory, that without
end she may praise thee, and in the company of all the Saints, bless thee
world without end. Amen. Our Father, etc.

The first thanksgiving for the benefit of our Creation.
I Give thee thanks, omnipotent and eternal God, most wise and munificent
Creator of all things, yt when I was nothing, have created me to be somethat,
not a stone, not a Serpent, not a board, not a fourefooted beast, but a man
made according to thy image and similitude, or rather the very image and
similitude of thy self, namely a substance endued with understanding and
will* that having a similitude of being, living and working with thee, I might
be the image and type of thy infinite beauty.

But ^est a creature so noble, should presently fall again to nothing, and
should presently and instantly perish, thou createdst me immortal; that
whereas other living creatures appear but a little while, and straight come to
nothing, I should never return to not being: but perpetually live.

Yet seemed that little unto thee, O Lord, except also thou had infused into
me, a soul so precious and noble, as that it scarsely gives place to ye
Angels in dignity. Or^n and Sheep are satisfied with herbs and grass: Hogs
feed on A^orns and Beane-cods, neither are the means of more moment wherewith
all other creatures are nourished, which if they enjoy, they rest contented.
But my meat is celestial, and my appetite cannot be satisfied, but by thy
immeasurable Majesty: for thou have created my soul of that nature and
capacity, as neither the heavens nor the earth can fill it. O unhappy man that
I am, why do I love thee world? why seek I honors? why gape I after riches?
why am I drowned in pleasures? why se^ke I those things that are to day and are
not found to morrow? These Acornes suffice not: These Husks are not sauoury:
and these Beans do not nourish. Know, O my soul, what thou art, to what use
thou were created, what thou ought to seek, and with what dainties thou
should be satified. Only God can satiate thee: all the rest may possess
thee: but they cannot satisfy thee: Seek him, h^e is thy Spouse, he is the
Haven of thy desires, he is thy last end. Acknowledge thy dignity, O my soul,
acknowledge what and how thou art created.

The king whose beauty the Sun and moon admire, whose majesty the Heavens
reverence, and the earth adoreth: with whose wisdom y^ quires of Angels are
illuminate, with whose bounty the society of supernall Citizens is sed: he
created thee, that thou might be his habitation: his seat and holy temple:
he would infuse himself into thy bosom, he can fill all the corners of thy
immeasurable capacities. Rise, arise, o my soul, go meet with such a guest,
introduce him with gladness into thy house, and say: He that created me, has
his rest in my tabernacle. Eccle. 24.


Which dignity of my Soul, O Lord, when I considerately look into, I wonder
not that thy only begotten Son, make drunk with the love thereof, forsaking
thy bosom, dis^ained not the Uirgins womb: sought her thirty three years
with diverse labors and dolours: gave his life for her, and by the pledge of his
precious blood redeemed her being captive: But I rather wonder at my
ingratitud, carelessness and dulnes, who had rather prostitute the same soul
so redeemed, for a final reward once again to the cursed devils, and commit
fornication with so unclean beasts, than rest in ye arms of my Redeemer, who
is fairest amongst the children of men: whose Psalm. 44. Cant. 1.
^aps are better than wine, and whose name is powered out oil. When I behold
the fashion which y^ gave to this my body, I find^ so many of thy benefits,
as the^ are members, senses, veins, nerves, or small strings to be found in
the same: all which do publish thy ^comparable wisdom and bounty. In the
only harmony of which b^dy, if I should always philosophy, I should never want
matter to praise thee, I should never yield thee condign thanks, I should
never pay my duties for so many (...) great benefits: which how great they are,
they best know who want the use of some members, or are traveled with some
other vicious affection of the body.

I yield therefore, O thou maker of man, infinite thanks unto thy goodness,
for that thou have not made me blind, lame, mute, monstrous, mad, or
disguised with any other vice, either of mind or of body, but for that thou
have bestowed on me a sound mind in a sound body: Grant also that I may never
abuse any of my members, senses, or powers of my soul, in contempt or disgrace
of thy holy Name.

Yet (O Lord) there are many things which yet I want, for nothing is presently
reduced from his not being, to his perfect being: but all things tend to their
perfection by certain degrees: And that perfection, from whom is it to be
required, but from him who is the beginner of this work? Hence it is that all
effects are converted to their causes, that they may receive their final
perfection from thence whence they had their beginning. So see I (O Lord) the
plants labor and wrest themselves on every side, that they may behold the Sun,
and fasten their roots in the earth: Fishes forsake not the water: and the
Chicken scarce hatched from the egg, hides himself under the wings of the
Hen, and follows her whither soever she go. Since all creatures do this, in
whom there is no understanding: I alone do it not, whom yet thou have created
and endued with reason: I see yt I want many things, (...) that daily I am
diversely hindered: and the inordinate and insatiable hunger of mine appetites
teaches me no less: but I like a Dove wanting a heart, have not recourse to
my Creator, but to creatures: I seek not water out of ye Fountain, but dig
new Cesterns for my self: I hunt after the earth, and contemn him that made
ye earth: I seek life in the land of death: and I will rest my self in things
that are restles: I will beg from creatures, that which I ought to ask from
the Creator.

I therefore pray thy goodness, O my merciful Father and Creator, to take away
this ignorance from (...) and convert me unto thee, and then shall I be
converted: thine eyes see that which is imperfect in me, thou made me, thou
finishedst me, thou beganst this work, do thou finish it. Thy hands have
fashioned me, give me understanding, that I may learn thy Testimonies. Thou
gave me ears, but such as are more attentive to here fables tha^ thy word:
thou gave me eyes, but such as are more prone to behold curiosity, than to
consider the wondrous works of thy law: thou gave me hands, but weak to
perform good works: thou gave me feet, but swift unto evil, and slow unto
goodness. What need more? There is no health in my flesh: per^ O Lord* that
which thou have begun (...) me. ^ of thy hands. Give me yt I want, because thou
art my Creator and my God: thou art my life, thou art my salvation: thou art my
living, thou art my abundance, thou art my glory: thou art my honor: thou art
my peace, thou art all my good: without thee, all my plenty is poverty: who
live and reignest God, world without end.

Amen.
The second thanksgiving for the benefit of our corporal conservation.
I Give thee thanks, O most omnipotent, high, just, and merciful Lord God, not
only for that thou have created me, and broughtest me from not being, to a
being: but also for that thou have preserved, and daily do preserve me^
being made of nothing, from falling into nothing: for I both believe and
confess that both is thy work: but if thy hand should be shut, and but for
the twinkling of an eye should ^iue over ^is (...) ^ng, (of which thou
createdst me.) As many moments therefore, and points of time as this my life
has had, now has, or may have hereafter, so many parts are there of this
benefit.

I give thee thanks, O merci^ Father, that by an vnsearchabl^ kind of means,
from my conception, until my nativity, thou has^ kept me close shut up in
the narrow bed of my mothers womb, least choked in my mothers bowels, I had
come forth into this world, either borne an abortiue, or strangled in my
nativity without the benefit of Baptism. I give thee thanks that I am borne,
not amongst Barbarians and idolators, who honor wood, and adore stone: not
amongst Heretics, that blaspheme thy name and most sacred Sacraments but
amongst Catholics, who honor and reverence thee with a true, sincere and
pure ^uth.

I give thee thanks for that thou have preserved me from all misfor^ne and
sudden death, being borne (...) bred up in this world so full of snares and of
perils. For whereas ^uers men in my life time, drowned in the Sea, slain in
the war, ^urthered by thieves, torn by the ^skes of beasts, swallowed up by
^rthquakes, killed by hunger, ex^ct by thirst, burnt with heat, ^illed with
cold, poisoned with venom, stra^gled with the haltar, slain by ye sword, or
other sudden and violent death, are taken hence; when in the mean while there
are so many blind, lame, mad, troubled with the Iand^es, s^ke of the ^ir,
traveled with the spleen, bed^em, furious, lunat^ke, and sub^ct to the falling
sickness, whose ^ife is more miserable than death: Thy fatherly providence, O
Lord has defended me from all these e^ils: whereas notwithstanding nothing
happened unto the^ that might not have fallen on me, the son of ^dam, created
out of the same mass of perdition, conceived an^ begotten in the same
original sin, except thou had preserved me. I owe all this to thy mercy,
these benefits I receive from thee. If my earthly King and Lord, had of ten
captives condemned for one and the same crime, sent nine to the gallows, and
of his mere grace and favor had set me free, what condign thanks could I
offer him? But thou (O Lord) have done this for me, not once, but daily: yea
and every moment.

What shall I therefore pay thee, O Lord, for all these benefits? what praises
shall I sing? what thanksgiving shall I offer? I will say with ye Prophet: It is
the mercy of God ^am. 3.
that we are not consumed: for that his mercies have not failed.

Thou have given us a body though unworthy of many things, which except they
be present, it easily corrupts and perishes: but that they might be
present, it is thy singular providence that has so disposed. For as thou
createdst us for thy self, so have thou made all things for us: for whatsoever
is created in the earth, in the waters, the air, the fire, or in the
celestial spheres, yea in the imperial heaven, all that have thou created to
obey us: for thou have placed man above all the works of thy hands. Thou have
Psalm. 8.
subjected all things under his feet, etc. For me, trees bring forth their
boughs and fruit: vines flourish for me: oils fatte^ and grow fruitful for
me: the garden flowreth for me, and all the plowland of the fields is mine. For
me does the earth yield gold, silver, and diverse min^rals, profitable for the
use of man. For me does the Sea ebb and flowfor me it brings forth diverse
sorts of fishes: for me it bears ships and sails: for me do the
fountains spring: for me do the floods flow: sheep, oxen and the beasts of
the field are fed, bring forth skins, wool, milk, and butter for me: for me
has the hound nails and teeth: for me does the Monocerote bring forth a
horn: for me does the Thrush sing: for me does the Peacoke spread her
party-colored plumes: what need more? There is nothing yt lives or moves in
water, earth, o^ air, which either feeds me no^, or recreateth me not, or
medicineth me not: so that all this inferior world is no other thing tha^ my
storehouse, my walk, and (...) Poticaries shop.

If I shall ascend above the elementall world, how many and how great wonders
have y^ made there for me? The moon, the sun, the stars, to whom shine they
but to me? to whose use do they impart their influences to those inferior
bodies, but to mine? To whom do the times of years, months, and days, vary
and admit measure, but for me? I will ascend higher: it was thy will that those
noble and pure Angelical spirits, who minister unto thee and assist thee,
should be my ministers also, that they might defend me from the assaults of al
mine enemies, visible and invisible, induce me to goodness by their
suggestion, help me in my tribulations, offer my prayers unto thee, and bring
my soul departing out of this life to thy presence.

Arise now my soul, arise, number if thou can, all these benefits wherewith
God ceasseth not to follow thee, though a sinner every day. All and every one
of these are certain voices inuiting thee to praise this thy bountiful
benefactor. Do thou not hear, nor know who he is, who insinuates himself
unto thee by so many arguments? makes himself known by so many testimonies?
draws thee unto him by so many rewards? esteemed thee so much, yt he made
all things for thy use? who is made the shepherd of thy flock? ye steward of
thy household? ye Physician of thy body and soul? will thou not love him? will thou not serve him? will thou not give him thanks? will thou not praise him?

I desire to praise thee, O Lord, and give thee thanks with my whole heart, but
in my self I find no means how I may do it: for praise is not seeming in the
mouth of a Eccles. 15.
sinner. But for that thou have created all things to my use and service, I
will call upon all creatures, that they with me may praise the Lord of al
things, saying: O alye works of the Lord, bless ye with me the Lord, praise
him and magnify his name for ever.

The third thanksgiving for the benefit of our redemption.
I Give thanks with my lips, my heart, and all the virtue that is in me, to
thine infinite mercy, O Lord my God, for yt, being created according to thy
similitude and likeness, and fallen and lost in my first parents, thou would
not banish me for ever like the proud angel from thy presence: but of thy
unspeakable goodness thou have redeemed me. Because thou madst me, O Lord, I
owe my self unto thee: but for that thou redeemedst me, I should owe thee
far more than my self, if I had it. But where as thou could not help us by
thy life, yet was it thy pleasure to effect the same in thy death, to the end
thou might express unto us, the force of thy love: for less had thou
loved, except for a time thou had sustained, to the end thou might
disburden us. And so much more worthily art thou to be honored by us, by how
much more greater things thou have sustained for our sakes. For who art thou
that suffer? what, and of what kind are the things thou suffer? for whom
suffer thou? and why suffer thou? Tell me, O Lord, that I may
counterpoise equally this wonderful work and incomparable benefit. What
therefore, O my God, shall I say that thou art? I will say yt which you thy
self said to Moses in times past: Thou art that thou art: Thou art an
infinite being that proceedest from no man but thy self: and without thee,
there is no being that has being of himself, but from thee only, who art
that beginning and fountain of al being. Thou of thy omnipotent power, madst
al things of nothing, thou of thy goodness, conseruest all things without any
foreign help: thou by thy will (if it so pleased thee) may reduce al
things to nothing: thou only art, that art, and all that seems to be, is
nothing in comparison of thee. The moon shines not, and the stars are not
clean in thy sight. All beauty compared to thee is deformity, all power
infirmity, all wisdom ignorance, and all goodness is malice. Thou art good
without defect: wise without error, liberal without acception of persons, just
without wrath, clean without detriment: thou workest all things, and art not
distracted, thou labourest, and art not weary: thou art every where, and
nothing is wanting in thee.

What therefore shall I speak of the greatness of thy majesty? Thou beholdest the
earth, and make it P^al. 103.
tremble: thou touchest the mountains, and they smokke. thou have shut the sea
within bounds, when Job. 38.
it brake out as a child from his mothers womb: thou numbrest y^ multitude of
stars, and call Psalm. 148.
them all by their names: whom the dominations and Angelical powers adore:
before whom the highest Seraphins clock their wings, and hide themselves with
their feathers. All thy works praise thee, and thy Saints bless thee: the
morning stars praise thee, and all the children of God rejoice in thee: the
heavens declare thy glory: and Psalm. 18.
the firmament shows thy brightness: the flowers of the field testify thy
beauty: the earth thy providence: the Sea, and the floods thereof, do preach
thy Majesty.

Such and so great art thou, O Lord, oh now let it be lawful for me to
speak, or rather to feel, what and how unworthy wrongs, thou, the God of so
great majesty, have suffered for me: and whilst I reckon up these things, let
all ^he Quires of Angels fall down before thee, and give thee thanks for that
which thou have sustained for our redemption. Thou being so sublime and
admirable, did descend from the height of thy glory into this vale of
misery, invested with our carnal body, and in habit like a man subject to
sin. Thou in this world sustainedst for my sake hunger and thirst, y^ heat
of the Sun, and the cold of the Winter: persecutions and dolors: thou
sufferedst for me so much poverty, that where the Foxes have dens, and the
birds of the air their nests, thou the Lord of heaven, had not a place to
rest thy Luke 5.
head on: borne in a Stable among beasts, thou did beg the heat of their
breath from them, and were wrapped in ragged clouts. On the eight day thou
tookest on thee the mark of a sinner: Presently after this, the world
persecuted thee: thou fledst to foreign Lands, and to a Nation honoring
idols, and to that purpose soughtst the silence of the night: the innocence of
thy ^s excused thee not, neither was there rest given to thy tender body,
neither was thy delicate childhood idle: as thy body increased, thy griefs and
labors grew. For who can express, O Lord, thy prayers, watchings, fastings,
wearines, hunger, thirst, persecutions, and injuries done thee by thine
enemies? They spoke against thee who sat in the gate, and the drunkards made
Ballads of thee. In a Psalm. 68.
word, thy life was tormented in so unworthy sort, as that thou may justly
say with the Prophet, I am poor, and in labors from my youth Psalm. 87.
and infancy.

These were the things thou sustainedst in thy life time, but greater are they
which thou sufferedst in thy death and on the Cross: There was liberty, taken
prisoner: innocence, strooken: beauty, spit upon: justice, condemned: glory,
deluded: and life, slain and crucified. Good Lord, what more admirable? what
more horrible? what more strange? Life dies, God is whipped: the power of God
tied with cords: the image of the Father spit upon: finally, naked God is
nailed to a Cross, and hanged between two thieves, in the sight of the whole
world. Further may not my soul wade: my strength is weak ned, and my heart
fails within me. O height of charity! O depth of immasurable humility! O
greatness of mercy! O incomprehensible and bottomless pit of bounty! If I
owe thee so much, O Lord, for yt thou have redeemed me, what shall I owe thee,
for yt after so admirable a manner, and so hard and difficult unto me, thou
have redeemed me? O most merciful Pastor! O most faithful shepherd, who
gave thy life for thy sheep, whom thou tookest upon thee to defend and
keep, with what duty may I remunerate so great a benefit? with what tears may
I prosecute my plaints? with what life shall I imitate thy pure and immaculate
life? Truly I owe thee far more, O Lord, for thy sufferance whereby I was
redeemed, than for thy work by which I was created.

And if, O Lord, thou had sustained these things for Angels or archangels,
for cherubins or seraphins, it were less to be wondered at: but now have you not
suffered for these, but for man: and what is man yt thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man yt after this sort you visitest him? If thou consider his
body, man is the most wretched of al living creatures: if his manners, more
miserable and worser. Do thou therefore, O God, die for the sons of Satan,
for y^ corrupters of all honesty and justice? for parricides and breakers of
thy divine Laws? for contemners of thy Majesty, and blasphemers of thy glory?
Do you then die, O God; for thy infernal tormentor, whose heart is not
allured by benefits, nor terrified by threatenings, nor mollified by promises,
nor moved by punishments? For a man who is not content with his own power and
domestical malice, compasses the earth also, sorteth out all ye worse
sensualities, puts on ye nature of beasts: becoming worse than they:
crueller than a Tiger, fiercer than a Lio^: greedier tha^ a Wolf: venomouser
than a Toad: craftier than a Serpent. Which not sufficing him, he descends
into hell, and borrows whatsoever detestable things, in the devils
themselves: as blasphemy, pride, envy, and perpetual hardness of heart.

And when he finds no more, ^ee inuenteth of his own brain ^ost prodigious
monsters of sin: ^ertaine new kinds of riot, lechey, and other sorts of
uncleanness which are never heard of a^ongst very Beasts, or the devils
themselves. Do thou think, O Lord, this monster to be worthy that thou
should open thine eyes on him? Do thou die for this sink and cave of
Serpents, replenished with Uipers and Scorpions, to the end to sanctify y^
same? My heart fails me in considering thy mercies O God, and there is no
more spirit left in me.

Because I have once begun, I will speak unto thee my King and my God,
though I am dust and ashes: Genes 18.
What moved thy merciful heart? What overcame and conquered the same, that
thou sufferedst so much for so abominable a creature? did thou hunt after
profit? did thou expect greater glory and blessedness, than thou had? O
mere grace! O love without respect! O pure and sincere goodness! What profit
have thou by the service of one poor Ant? Psalm. 15.
What fruit was there expected to thee by the salvation of man? Thou have no
need of riches. Who gave thee, that you might restore Job 41.
again unto him? all things under the heavens are thine.

What had thou therefore to do with our dolours and miseries? Through the
bowels of the mercy of our God, thou did visit us, rising from on high. O
pitiful bowels! O sweet bowels! O bowels unto us the Sea of love and mercy!
In these bowels, and not moved either with profit or necessity, thou tookest
compassion on our griefs and had mercy upon us: Thou saw the affliction
of thy people, and appearedst in the bush amongst thorns and briars,
discending from Heaven, and taking on thee our nature.

Be not angry, o Lord, if I speak: If the force of thy love were so great, thou
fountain of charity, that it compelled thee to a marriage so unworthy thy
majesty, that thou would espouse thy self to thy creature: was there not a
more noble spouse for thee on the earth, and more allied to thee by grace and
nature? Why did thou not rather entertain the Angelical nature? why did
thou love a wife of an uncircumcised nation, which shall afterward betray thee
to thine enemies and kill thee? what do thou answer me my God? what do
thou answer? but, I would have this, this was pleasing in my fight as ^ampson,
who erst prefigured thee, once said. Judge 14.


What thanks shall I therefore give thee, O Lord, for this incomparable
benefit? with what love shall I love thee, that have given so manifest and
incomprehensible testimony of thy goodness toward me? How can it be that
there should be any one in this world that should not love thee? how can he
be unmindful of such a benefit? First (O Lord) let me forget my self, than
the memory of so great a mercy be extinct in me. Those nails which pierced
thy most innocent hands, shall also pierce my heart: and that admirable change,
wherein thou tookest upon thee my infirmities, and powredst thy goodness
liberally upon me, shall never depart out of my mind. And whereas thou all
thy life time did desire the Cross with great affection, whereon thou were
to die for my sake: Grant yt I also as long as I live may not abhor the
Cross, but bear the same patiently, until thou transfer me to that place,
where nei^ death, nor mourning, nor cry, nor dolor shall be heard of, where
thou reignest, world without end.

Amen.
The fourth thanksgiving for the benefit of our vocation and justification.
I Give thee thanks, O Lord God my helper and Redeemer, for that from
darkness thou have called me into so admirable a light, as 1, Pet. 2. 21.
that being without hope of mercy, I have now obtained mercy. For Oseas, 1.
during the time that I lived in the land of Oblivion, and in the shadow of
death, when my ways were most wicked and contrary unto thee: then did thy
mercy call me, not only flying, but also repugning: then gave thou me thy
holy Spirit, and adoptedst me for thy son.

The grace which in baptism I received of thee, I cursedly neglected; I rent
my first robe, and like the prodigal son, spent all my substance: Thy holy
temple which thou sanctifiedst in me for thy le^e, I have profaned: raising in
the same an idol of my disordinate pleasures, and defiling it with diverse
sins. The tune was once, o Lord my Savior, wherein I was so blind, and
lived so loosely, as if I had no law, or as though I believed there were no
God: I was unmindful of death, neither remembered I y^ latter judgment, or ye
life to come. The Laws, according to whose prescript I did live, were mine
appetites: I followed mine own inventions, and walked according to mine own
ways.

So diverse years of my life were ouerpast, wherein I lived in so palpable
darkness, tha^ in like sort as that of Egypt, I might have felt it with my
hands. O eternal light, how ouerlate did I know thee, how slackely did I open
mine eyes to behold thine ancient beauty? All this time thou obseruedst me,
sustainedst me, expectedst me, not permittting timelesse death to apprehend
me. O altitude of thy judgments! O greatness of thy ^ercies! How many men in
the ^eane space, in the midde race of their sins, are there swallowed by
sudden death, who now are miserably tormented in hell? and I, who was one of
them, protected by thy mercy, am reserved even until this hour? Ah what had
become of me if at that time thou had summoned me likewise before thy
judgment seat? What account could I have made in so miserable an estate? O my
mercy and my redemption: I give thee no less thanks for this bounty, than if
you had acquitted me being condemned amongst those damned, and delivered me
from perpetual torments. Blessed be thy patience, by the benefit whereof I
live: and blessed be thy mercy which so long time defended and kept me.

Neither did thou only keep me when I sinne^ against thee, but very often
times thou did also visit me as my friend, and calledst me unto thee by thy
sweet and secret inspirations: obiecting to me the greatness of my sins, the
shortness of this life, the eternity of y^ other: the severity of thy justice,
and ^he bounty of thy mercy. In the midst of mine iniquity afterward, thy
presence appeared unto me so effectually, that perseuering in my delights, and
seeking after y^ Leeks, ^urneps, and Garlike of Egypt, thou extortedst
plentiful tears from me. I did sin, and thou did recall me from finne: I
did fly from thee, as though it had been a slight matter to lose thee: and
thou did seek me, as though it were much for thy profit to find me out. So
many years did we live wrestling and resisting, thou in doing good, I in
doing evil, and contemning thy goodness. With these voices did thou call
me, with these cords did thou draw me.

At length when it pleased thee to single me out, and to call me by thy grace,
thou sentest a great cry into the ears of my soul, wherewith as it were the
roaring of a Lion, thou did awake me from sleep, and thou calledst me from
death unto life: This is the voice which David thy friend so highly commends,
Psalm. ^8.
in virtue and power, breaking the Cedars, cutting the flames of fire, and
shaking and moving the desert of Cades. For no less is thy power than thy
mercy which thou art wont to use in this work: for it is great mercy to
remit sins, and mighty power to make finners just.

O how many and how great are the benefits, which together with this one, are
powered into us? here is given pardon of sins: grace is given, charity is
given with those other virtues which attend her: finally the gifts and graces
of ye holy Spirit are given. Hereby the sinner is reconciled unto thee: of an
enemy, made a friend: and of the slave of the devil, thy Son, and the heir
of thy kingdom. Here the Prodigal Son is entertained into his Fathers
house: the first Robe, Ring, and Shoes, and Luke, 15.
ornaments of a Son are restored unto him.

And although I cannot be assured, O Lord, whether I be worthy of hate or love:
yet hope I y^ same and confidently every way trust in thy bounty: my conscience
likewise bears me witness, that I am partaker of the grace of
justification, for which I acknowledge my self deeply indebted. Blessed be
thou therefore O bountiful Lord, the giver of all goodness, yea of thy self,
for that I living most lasciuiously, thou gave me thy holy Spirit for my
nurse, tutor, master, governor, comforter, and all my good: he is to me the
pattent of adoption, the pledge of matrimony, and the assurance of everlasting
life. Blessed be the day in which such a guest entered my soul: and blessed
be the hour in which the gates of my wall were opened to receive him. That day
was holy unto me: in that day I came out of Egypt: that day was my birth day,
in which I was regenerated into the Son of God. This my Easter day, in which I
rose again from death to life: in which I received the holy Ghost.

Let Job curse the day of his nativity, Job. 3. Luke, 15.
I will bless this: this is ye day in which the Angels rejoiced at the
conversion of a sinner: in which the woman rejoiced that found her groat: in
which the shepherd assembled his neighbors with joy, for the lost sheep
which he found: in which the devils do houle for their lost prey. This is that
day in which thou my Father do acknowledge me thy son, and thy Son
terms me his brother: and thy holy Spirit has consecrated me for his
Temple: and the Quire of Angels have saluted me for their companion and fellow
Citizen. If on this day the Angels rejoiced and sung unto thee, O Lord, how can
my lips be shut? how may my tongue be silent? how can my mouth choose but be
^lled with thy praises? whatsoever the Psalmi^ or Prophets sung of the coming
of my Redeemer, all y^ will I sing unto thee, O Lord.

It was a great benefit of thine O Lord, that thou did create me: for
thereby thou did produce me from not being, to a being: but much more is it,
that thou iustifiedst me: for in this thou tookst from me the being of sin,
and bring me to the being of grace: in that, am I made the son of man: in
this am I adopted the son of God. It is a great benefit which I expect of
glory, but no less in this kind is that of justification. For it is no less
to make a just man of a sinner, than of a just man a blessed man, since there
is a greater distance betwixt sin and grace, than between grace and glory.
Great also, yea very great is ye benefit of redemption: but what had
redemption profited, if vocation and justification had not followed? I
acknowledge therefore, O Lord, yt the benefit of justification is the keie and
ground of all the other, without which the rest do not only not profit, but
give us matter of greater damnation.

But (O Lord) what did I unto thee, that thou should give me those things?
what obedience showed I to thee, that thou should give me this blessing? what
foundest thou in me worthy of so great honor and reward? nothing in me was
free from sin: I knew thee not: I loved thee not, I served thee not: neither
had thee in remembrance. I became ye bottomless pit of darkness and iniquity. I
cannot choose (O Lord) but tremble with horror, as often as I think hereon:
neither find I any other cause of this benefit, but thy bounty. How many were
my companions of the same age, nature, and impiety, of whom I was the most
reprobate? yet tookest thou me unto thee, and forsookest them: we were detained
in the same Egyptian captivity, and thou admittedst me to thy royal Table,
but condemnedst them, and cast out their flesh to be devoured by the creatures
of hell.

Whilst I remember these things, O Lord, my spirit is no more in me: and I know
not how to praise thee, or what thanksgiving to offer unto thee for so
incomparable a benefit. All the time of my life I will say, O Lord, what
saw thou in me: O Lord, what saw thou in me? Lord, what saw thou in
me, more than in the rest whom thou have forsaken? Why did thou so call me?
so deliver me? so look upon me? so succor me? (if so be thou have succored
me) leaving the rest in sin, who were less evil than I? I know not what to
say, I know not what to do, I know not what to yield unto thee O Lord, for all
the benefits thou have bestowed on me. I will with the Prophet, praise my Lord
at all times: his praise shall be always ^.
in my mouth: I will say with the same Prophet: Thou have broken my bonds, O
Lord I will sacrifice to thee the sacrifice of praise, and call upon the name of
ye Lord. To the Lamb yt sits on the throne be blessing, and honor, and
glory, and power for ever and ever,

Amen.
A thanksgiving for the benefit of our spiritual conversation in the life of
grace.
I Adore thee, I praise thee, I glorify thee, I give thee thanks, most
merciful Father and eternal God, with my whole heart, for all thy benefits: but
in especial, for that thou have called me, whom being beforetimes wounded,
thou have ^thout any my precedent merits ^ured: and being an enemy unto thee,
reconciled: redeemed from captivity, and called from death to life: and of thy
fatherly goodness have hitherto conserved me in this state, and as yet do
conserve me by thy grace.

Thou art he only, O Lord, yt created me, and made me of naught: and thou
only art he that conseruest that which thou have created: thou bountifully
do protect that essence of nature which thou gave me, lest it should
perish. Thou only have regenerated me by thy Spirit in the life of grace. By
thee are we privileged from our sins: by thee are we conserved, lest we
should fall again into sin. If at any time I have risen, thou gave me thy
hand: if I now stand, thou sustainest me, lest I fall. As many good purposes as
I have conceived: as many godly inspiratio^s as I have felt: all are by thy
benefit. As often as I have overcome mine enemy, as often as I have refrained
my evil inclinations and perverse appetites, it was thy benefit. For if no
man can say, Lord Jesus, but in ye holy Spirit, nor do any good deed without
thee, even as the branch can yield no fruit being divided from the vine: sure
it is, that if any fruit grow from this cluster, it is by the benefit of that
vine to which it cleaves.

If at any time I have fasted, it came from thee: if I have endured adversity
patiently, thou did assist me: if at any time I have denied mine own will,
it was thy working: If ever hitherto I have shed the tears of contrition, if
my prayers have prevailed with thee, I confess (O Lord) that I did it by thy
help, I confess that thou have wrought all good works in me: for all these
do I give thee thanks. I refer al these benefits with thanksgiving to him
from whom they proceeded, that hereafter they may flow more plentifully. I
acknowledge my self to be indebted for so many benefits, as I have done
duties to thee, O Lord, in this life, if I have done any at all. What shall I
say of the occasions and opportunities offered by thee unto me of good life?
How many preachers have thou sent to teach me? how many counselors to instruct
me? how many good friends, how many godly companions, how many good examples,
how many devout books have thou lent me, by whose helps I am incited to
goodness, and pricked forward to vprightnes of life? Great are these thy
benefits, but greater does he owe thee, who has profited without these:
blessed is he whom thou have taught, O Lord, and instructed in thy law: for so
Psalm. 94.
much more has he profited, by how much thou art a better Doctor, and wiser
Master then others.

But who can recount the perils and dangers from whence thou have delivered
me, O bountiful shepherd of men's souls? or the sins whereinto I had
fallen without thine assistance? There is no sin so great, that was ever
attempted by man, which another man cannot fall into, if the Creator be
wanting by whom he is made. For which cause upon good occasion I will call all
men's sins my benefits: for into al them might I have been plunged, except
thine infinite mercy had preserved me. Is many occasions of sin therefore
as might have enforced me to fall (for they could enforce David) so many had I
fallen into, except thou (O Lord) had taken them away, because thou knew
my infirmities. All men acknowledge not these thy benefits, but I through the
grace do both acknowledge and embrace them. How often, O loving Father, have
thou used this mercy toward me? How often have thou bound the enemies hands,
lest he should tempt me? or if he should have tempted me, that yet he might
not overcome me? how often have thou enchanted that old Serpent, yt although I
walked amongst Uipers and Bas^lisques, yet could they not hurt me* How often
have thou traveled with me through water and fire, lest I should be burned
in the flame, or drowned in the water? How often in the midst of the servants
of this world have thou tempered the flame of this Babylonicall furnace with ye
dew of the holy Spirit, and so cooled it that it might not consume me? How
often might I justly say with the Prophet: I was thrust fore at y^ I might fall?
But y^ Lord Psalm. 118.
was my help? If at any time I have stood, I stood by thee: if I have fallen,
I have fallen by my self: and thy hand has stayed me up, lest I should be
bruised. Yea I had always lien in y^ dirt, except thou had raised me. In the
multitude of my sorrows therefore which I had in my heart, thy comforts have
Psalm. 94.
refreshed my soul, and raised it.

How often, O Lord, have my sins deserved thy wrath? How often might thou
have taken thy hand away, and that justly from me, as thou have withdrawn it
from others less ungrateful? yet were y^ merciful unto me, and did not
punish me according to my iniquities? I was proud, swollen with vain glory, I
attributed that glory which was due unto thee, to my self: and therefore I am
worthy to be an outcast from thy mercy. I was ungrateful, I did not acknow
ledge thy benefits: I attributed that to nature which was due to the author of
nature: neither did I yield the thanks which belonged unto thee: I was
negligent and slothful in those things which appertain to my salvation: and
therefore I deserved that my tale^t should long since have been taken from me.
I was rash in loving perils, and therefore worthy to fall into them.

I am worthy I say, O Lord, y^ for these and many such like, I should already
be forsaken and ^ast off by thee, that the crime of the last sin, might be
the punishment of the first. But thy patience was so great, that thou wink^dst
at the wickedness of my dissolute life, and shuttedst thine eyes against my
infirmities. Hitherto have thou forborne me with so much mercy: neither
would thou suffer that thy succor should at any time leave me.

I pray thee (O Lord) perfect that which thou have begun: vouchs^ not only to
keep in me, but also to in^ease thy benefits, which thou thy self have
daigned to impart to me. Continue (O Lord) to keep me innocent in this
spiritual life: and forsake me not, as hitherto thou have not forsaken me.

I convert the dolors of my conscience, O Lord, wherewith I should be vexed, if
thou had forsaken me, into joy: and now with glad mind and rejoicing
spirit, in way of thanksgiving and praise I sing, saying with thy friend:
Return my soul into thy rest, for our Lord has done good unto thee. For he
Psalm. 116.
has delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling. For all these thy benefits, we yield thee thanks Lord God omnipotent,
who art, and have been, and who shall be: for thy Apoc. 11. and 15.
works are great and wonderful, and thy ways are just and true, Lord and King
for ever.

Amen.
To how many temptations our life is exposed, and how much need we have of
Gods help.
LOrd, let me know mine end, and the number of my days, yt I may be
certified how long I Psalm. 38.
have to live. Are not my days few? it irketh my soul of my life: For Job. 10.
what is this life, where continual tribulations are conversant? where all
things are full of snares and enemies? Scarcely does one temptation pass away,
but another succeeds, and the first conflict as yet undetermined, others more
grievous and unexpected do follow: Help me therefore, O Lord my God, for
mine enemies have environed my soul, on this ^e, my body: on that side the
devil: here the world urges, and all of these enforce and search after my
soul: I cannot fly from the body: nor drive it from me, I must needs bear
it about with me: for that it is tied unto me. I must not kill it, I am compeld
to sustain it: and when I ^atten the same, I nourish mine own enemy against
my self. The world begirteth and bes^egeth me every way: and by the five
windows or senses of my body, my sight, my hearing, my taste, my smelling, and
my touching, wounds me with his arrows, and death enters by my windows
into my soul. I cannot see the devil, and therefore have less means to
beware of him. He has bent his bow, and has to that end prepared his shafts,
that he may wound me suddenly: he has said he would hide his snares, saying:
Who shall see them? which way soever I see the^, there is no security: the
flesh suggesteth me with delight, the world presents sweet, the devil gall:
the flesh talks unto me of sleep, of drink, of meat, and such like
appurtenances of the same: the world bewitcheth me with ambitious pleasing of
time, with boasting, with arrogance, and pride: but to wrath, malice and
bitterness of mind, the devil provoke me.

Behold, Infidels and Atheists are with me, O Lo^, and I dwell with Scorpions:
woe is me because my life is prolonged, I have dwelt with Ezech. 2 Psalm. 119.
the inhabitants of ^edar, my soul has too long remained on the earth: and in
this so dangerous assault, I find nothing in me whereunto I may have recourse:
for my heart is vain, fugitive, and unstable, more moveable than motion: it is
distracted diverse ways, and trauerseth innumerable things with incertaintie: and
whilst it wandreth through diverse things, it finds no rest: For even as a Mil
turns swiftly, and refuses nothing, but grindeth whatsoever is put upon it:
and if nothing be put thereon, it consumes it self: so is my heart always in
motion, and never rests. Bitter thoughts trouble: unclean, defile: vain,
disquiet and trouble the same: whilst my heart cries not for future joy, nor
seeks thy help, it is estranged from the love of God, and drowned in ^rthly
affections: And when it falls from those, and is ensnared in these: vanity
seduceth it, curios^tie confounds it, des^re allureth it, pleasure intangleth
it, lust de^leth it, envy tortureth it, ire disturbeth it, sadness tormenteth
it. So by miserable chances it is drowned in all vices, and sometimes an abject
matter falls out to be the cause of a grievous temptation. Wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver Romans 7.
me from the body of this death? In all these am I overthrown, O Lord, unless
thou help me.

Have mercy therefore, have mercy upon me (O Lord) and deliver me from the
dirt, that I stick not therein, lest every way I remain discomfortlesse:
Deliver me from ^ine enemies, O God, and from them that hate me: defend me
against Psalm. 5^.
all those that rise up against me But thou, O Lord, deliver me from the snare
of the Hunter, and from the bitter tongue, that we may confess unto thee,
saying: Blessed be God, who gave us not in prey to their teeth. My soul is
Psalm. 123.
escaped like a Sparrow from the ^et of the fowler: the net is broken, and we
are escaped.

Against whatsoever temptation.
THou see, O bountiful Father, ye great danger wherewith I am entangled: you
see ye snares which mine enemies have laid for me: and the violence that they
v^ against me, that they may raui^ me (o Father) from the number of thy
children, and deliver me thy poor sheep as a prey to the fierce teeth of
Wolves: I therefore humbly beseech thee for thy fatherly goodness sake, to
help me and strengthen me, and that they may have no other use of these their
subtilties, but to strengthen my love toward thee, and make their subtilties,
and cursed counsels more manifest.

Truly my infirmities might crave peace and tranquillity (for how can I choose
being a weak and frail man but fear so mighty enemies, as the world, the
devil, and the greatest enemy of all, my flesh?) yet since I am not ignorant O
Father, that temptations are so profitable and healthful for us, y^ we ought
to rejoice therein: I require no other thing at thy hands, but that thou will
take from before me the multitude of all my sins, which with their
immmeasurable weight, not only depresse my poor back, but turn away thy
help and assistance every way from me. Let me hear in my temptations, that
which once Saint Paul heard when he was tempted: My grace 1. Cor. 12.
^s sufficient for thee. O Lord, if ^hou deny me not this, I will say with ye
Prophet, God is my light, and my salvation, whom then shall Psalm. 27.
I fear? God is the protector of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? If (...)
host of men were encamped against me, my heart should not ^are: If an army
were imbattelled against me, hereat I would not be afraid.

Behold, O Father, how thy co^^ence makes us fearelesse, and how ^int hearted
our sins find us: for ^is written, whither flies the wicked when no man
follows him? and seeing the morning Star, he supposes it to be the shadow
of death. Take my sins therefore from me, which make me fearful and
faint-hearted, and give me thy grace: that if it be not expedient for me to
have a life which is free from all temptations, yet that I may constantly
resist some assaults and with greater desire thirst after that my celestial
country, when neither temptation does solicit, nor grief cruciate, nor
tribulation afflict: where thou the celestial Father, with the Son and the
holy Ghost, live and reignest, God world without end,

Amen.
Against the temptation of the devil.
LOrd God, Creator and mai^tainer of mankind, behold y^ fearful Dragon
tempts me, the old serpent which first began in the paradise of pleasure, who
with his tail draws the third part of the stars of heaven, and casts them
Apoc. 12.
on the earth: who with his venom, corrupts the waters of the earth, that
men that drink thereof die: and who shall defend me from his jaws? Who shall
deliver me from his mouth, but thou, o Lord, who have broken the head of the
great Dragon? Help me: spread thy wings, O Lord, over me, that me may fly
under them from the face of this Dragon who persecuteth me, and with thy
shield deliver me from his horns: for this is his continual study, this his
only desire, to devour those souls whom thou have created: and therefore my
God, I cry unto thee, deliver me from my daily adversary, who whether I sleep
or wake, when there I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, does every way, day and
night, with his frauds and arts, endeavor now openly to wound, and now
secretly to hurt me, directing his inuenomed shafts against me, to the end
he may slay my soul.

But thou, O invisible Lion of the tribe of Judah, give strength to thy servant
against this roaring Lion, who always seeks about, watching whom he may
devour. most healthful Serpent, fixed on a high Cross, give power unto ye
weak one, against the deceits of this subtle Serpent. Thou snowwhite Lamb,
conqueror of satan's tyranny, give thy tender sheep the strength of thy
Spirit, that being frail in himself, and strong in thee, he may overcome all
the assaults of the devil, lest mine enemy triumph over me: but being
conquered by thy might, I may give thee thanks for thy mercy which never
fails those that put their trust in thee.

Amen.
Against the temptations of the world.
I Am assaulted, O Lord Jesus, I am assaulted: come and revenge me of mine
adversary, and deliver me. Have you not said, Be not dismayed, I have overcome
the world? Whence therefore had the world those forces, that it so triumphs
over thine elect, and persecuteth all with fire and sword, who cleaving unto
thee, do not adore and reverence him? why do they so largely rule over those
whom thou have chosen in the world to be thine? especially in this doting age
of his continuance, in which it behooued his power should decrease and his
might diminish? The contempt of Gods word reigueth every where, and with it,
ingratitude, lust, riot, unlawful pleasures, and an extreme abuse of all
things: and he that will not follow these, is scorned and esteemed a fool, his
life is accounted madness, and Sap. 5.
his end is without honor. He is odious in the worlds eye, for that his life
is different from other ^us.

These things do often times as^ult our souls, o Lord, and almost move our
feet, that leaving the hard ways, we may enter into the ^igh way of the
world, which pro^seth us all things happy, pleasant, sweet, and delightful:
smiling upon us with a pleasant counte^ance, and offering us with a full ^and,
the riches, honors and plea^res of the same. But thou (O Lord, withdraw me
from ye darkness, deceites, and allurements of this world. Lighten mine eyes
that I may see and understand how short and uncertain, how deceitful, how
blind and pernicious y^ felicity of this world is. Maintain me in the
knowledge of thy truth, lest in this covetous and drunken age of this world, I
be entangled with secular cares, which lead our minds from the exercises of
piety, and choke those motions which the holy Spirit stirs up in us.

Grant (o Lord) that this world may dee crucified unto me, and I unto the
world: let me no ways study to please him, lest whilst I become a friend of
this world, I make my self thine enemy: let me contemn his hatred and
slanders, knowing that we oughtto glory in nothing but in thy Cross (O Lord.)
Who live and re^nest with the Father and the h^ Ghost world without end.

Amen.
Against the temptations of the flesh.
Where art thou, O good Jesus, where art thou? Yet once again Iesabell tyr
annizeth, once again the flesh rages, a domesticke, but yet a mortal enemy.
Be at hand, O Jesus, be at hand, assist me in my necessity, because the
waters have ouer-flowed my soul, and the desires of the flesh ouerprest me.

My flesh, made of dirt, brings forth naught but dirtie and filthy
cogitations. In respect of the world, vain and curious: from the devil i^
receives vain and bitter, whereby it sins against the Spirit: borne of
sin, nourished in sin, corrupted from the beginning with vices, but much
more depraved by evil customs. Who shall stand against so strong an enemy?
(O Lord.) Who shall sustain his assaults? He stirs up unlawful motions,
venomous cogitatious. It inflameth, moves war, nourishes hatred, inciteth
gourmandise, quickens lust, prepares occasions of sin, and ceasseth not
with a thousand subtilties of circumuention, to drive away the spirit. It is a
grievous conflict, and a dangerous war to fight against a homebred enemy,
especially where we are strangers, and he a Citizen: he dwells in his own
country, we are pilgrims and strangers.

Thou art not ignorant of mine infirmity, O sweet Jesus: you know how weak
and frail a fortress this is: thou know it must needs fall, being shaken
with so many volleyes, except thou, O Christ, rampaire it by thy might. To thee
therefore do I cry from the depth of my heart, give me grace that I follow not
the concupiscence of my flesh, and that I provoke not my unbridled senses with
liberty, but that I may strongly resist them. Help me that I may tame my body,
and bring it in subjection, lest my flesh growing too proud, make me offend,
and break my appointed limits* lest my heart and body be stained with carnal
concupiscence, lust, riot, and unlawful pleasures. Sanctify me and govern
me, that mine eyes may be governed: mine ears shut, that I may touch no
unlawful thing, but ^e from that which is hurtful: though I feel a sting,
yet let me not give consent: so let me nourish my flesh, that it rebel not:
and so bridle it, that it allure not. Grant that in all and through all I may
so subject my flesh to my spirit, that at the last it may willingly obey her,
and tyrannize over her no more is a mistress, but serve as a handmaid: that
between both, there may be an harmonious concent, wished peace, and
perpetual concord,

Amen.
When temptations are overcome.
Give thee thanks, O Lord God ^y whose bounty I am enabled (...) such sort,
that this tempest being ^ed, I enjoy a destred calm. To thee be the honor of
the triumph: by thee and not by me this prove Goliath is overcome: to thee I
attribute whatsoever good effect has succeeded. For in respect of mine own
forces I must needs be subdued: but now am I conqueror, because I grounded my
assured hope of victory on thee my strong assister, having this always
hanging before mine eyes: If God be with us who can be against us? and, I can
do all things in h^ yt Romans 8. Philip. 4.
comfort me.

And though I sing praises to thee, O Lord, for this victory, yet for that we
are taught, that when we have done all those things which belong to, or become
a strong Champion, we should not return to lusts and pleasures, but by the
assistance of thy holy Spirit, stand strong in the battle against the
continual assaults of the dwell. Therefore I fly unto thee the helper of all
those that hope in thee* increase my trust in thee, that dail^ more and more
increasing in fait^ the power of our enemies may fa^ until thou have settled us
in that security, whereas there is no fear of battle, peril, or anguish, but
eternal security, purchased by thee, when thou shall surrender thy kingdom to
thy Farher, with whom thou live and reignest God for ^uer,

Amen.
Against the conflict of vices.
MOst merciful Lord Jesus Christ, behold me miserable, wretched and vile
sinner, prostrate before the feet of thy mercy: behold the wounds, botches,
infirmities, and vices of my soul, which I my self (ah less) by my sin
have enforced against my self, and now present them to be healed by the eyes
of thy mercy. Most merciful Jesus, take pity of my infirmity, captivity, and
infelicitie, wherewith my wretched soul is drowned in transitory things, and
distracted by diverse desires. Most loving Jesus, by yt charity which delivered
thee bound into the hands of sinners, and haled thee to the Cross, and there
afflicted thee more than those nails that pierced thy hands and feet: I
beseech thee loose the yoke of my captivity, and deliver me from all vices,
concupiscences, and evil inclinations: and from all the assaults of mine
enemies and every tribulation, defend me.

Extinguish and kill in me utterly all pr^ate love, all inordinate motions,
passions, and affections, each occasion: all promptnes and inclination to
pride, wrath, envy, vainglory, etc. for from these thou only can deliver
me.

Sweet Jesus, fill me with graces and most perfect charity, keep me in all
goodness, that I may (...) all occasions of sin, overcome all temptations
constantly, subject my flesh to my spirit, persecute and banish sin, avoid the
assaults and subtilties of the devil: never consent to any sin: never
nourish that which displeases thee: but that I may ardently thirst after thy
glory, faithfully further the same, and addict my self wholly (...) thy good
liking.

Amen.
Against evil thoughts.
O Lord my God, be not far from me. O my God haste thee to help me, because
diverse cogitations are risen up against me, and great fears afflicting my
soul. How shall I escape unhurt? how may I overcome them? I (say thou) will
go before thee, and will Esaias, 45.
humble the mighty on earth. Do, O Lord, as thou speak, and let all evil
cogitations fly from thy presence. This is my hope, and only consolation, to
fly unto thee in all tribulation, to trust in thee, to call upon thee with my
whole heart, and patiently to expect thy consolation.

Amen.
Against diverse sorts of sins.
GOD, Father of our Lord and God, and Savior Jesus Christ, lord of great might,
blessed nature, effused goodness, God and Lord of all things, who art blessed
for ever, who art glorified by the Seraphins, to whom thousands of Angels
assist, and whom infinite hoasts of Angels and Archangels attend: for thy
Christ's sake, and the coming of thy holy Spirit, sanctify (we pray thee) our
souls, our bodies, and our spirits: touch thou likewise our minds, search our
consciences, and take from us all evil cogitations, all immodest talk, al
filthy destres, al vndece^t thoughts, all envy, pride, and hypocrisy: all
lying, all deceit, all distraction of this life, all avarice, all vain glory,
all sloth, all vice, all wrath, all ire, all remembrance of injury, all
blasphemy, all commotion of the flesh or spirit contrary to thy holy will.

Amen.
Against evil thoughts.
O Lord my God, be not thou estranged from me: o God take me into thy
protection, for diverse cogitations are risen up against me, and great fears
that afflict my soul: How shall I escape unhurt? how shall I overcome them? I
(say thou) will go before thee, Esaias, 45.
and I will humble the mighty upon earth. Do, O Lord, as thou speak, and
let all wicked thoughts fly from thy presence. This is my hope and only
comfort, to fly unto thee in all tribulations, to trust in thee, to call upon
thee with my whole heart, and patiently to expect thy consolation.

Amen.
A prayer against covetousness.
THe daily necessities of the body, draws and tieth ye mind thereunto: send
us, O Lord, who as we know, have care over us, yt daily Bread, which thine
only Son Jesus Christ commanded us to ask and hope for at thy hands: Grant us
to live content with those things yt are needful, and to despise such things
as are superfluous: yt neither unavoidable necessity overcome us, neither
affluence ouerwhelme us: and so send us those things that are necessary for
us, that we obtain not the same to offend thy Majesty. So delivered and
discharged of all care, we shall only endeavor our selves to keep us (as
far as in us lies) in thy favor, which care thou will further: who, if thou
be wanting, nothing can prosper with us. Translate my heart from the service
of Idols, to thy service: toward whom, whosoever is devout, he obtains
dignity. Grant me in stead of this desire of riches, which are exposed to
time, the injuries of men, and mischances: to grow in love with thine which
being once received, are eternal and inviolable,

Amen.
Against pride.
O Most wise and beloved Father, who always studiest how you may further us,
whereas we always endeavor how to offend thee: thou gave to mankind, the
proudest, untamed, and rebellious creature, the heavenly example of moderation
and obedience in thy Son: Convert our minds unto thee and that thine example,
that we may so humbly demean our selves, being wicked and weak, as he that
was most worthy and most strong,

Amen.
Against drunkenness.
ALmighty and most merciful God, vouchsafe so to look upon us, that we may
so detest that most shameful sin of drunkenness, that we never permit the
same to take place: but let that which was to perish in drunkenness, be
employed for the sustenance of the poor: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Against remembrance of injuries.
O Lord, of thy goodness fill our hearts with thy peace, and cleanse us from
all evil cogitations and uncleanness, and from all memory of injuries, and
from all envy, and mind of mischief which brings death. O Lord, make us all
worthy to salute one another with a holy and immaculate salutation: and grant
that we may receive without judgment and death, thy heavenly gift, that is,
thy grace, with the holy Spirit,

Amen.
Against wrath.
HOw much error breeds this blind indulgence of our selves in our minds, that
we esteem that to be done unjustly, which is done most uprightly: yt in those
things we deny pardon unto others, in which we our selves every hour are
faulty and want pardon: yt we challenge to our selves a revenge being
children, mad, furious and unjust: and take it from him, who is only wise and
just: who in respect of his wisdom, is deficient in nothing, and in regard of
his equity seduceth no man from the truth.

O most merciful Christ, example of modesty, fountain of meekness, (...)
into us some part of this thy lenity, whereby in imitation of thy humility,
being assailed with railings, affected with injuries, oppressed and afflicted
with slanders and reproves, yet that we may reward good for evil.

Against envy.
THou, O Lord, art the founder and maker of all things: thou art the dispenser
of thy mercies, which thou by thy immeasurable liberality bestowest on men,
yielding every one more than he deserves, and defrauding no man of that which
is sufficient for him: What cause therefore have we to envy thee, when as thou
bestowest thy liberality upon al men of thine own, and art bountiful to those
that deserve it not, and give to every one that which suffices him for his
beatitude?

O Father, add this also to ye rest of thy benefits, that we may submit to thy
judgment, and satisfy our selves with thy ^stributions: that we may give thee
thanks for those things which we have received. And for those things yt thou
have bestowed on others, grant that secretly we condemn not thy holy will, and
unsearchable judgment: but rather that in other men's blessings, we may love
and laud thy munificence, who art so bountiful unto all men, wanting of thy
self nothing, neither receiving any thing from any man, neither hoping any
thing.

Amen.
In extreme troubles and persecutions.
O Lord God that deliueredst ye honest matron Susanna from false judgment, at
such time as she was reprochfully circumuented by slander: that keptst Daniel
thy prophet in the den of Lions, and preseruedst the three children in the
flaming furnace: that deliueredst Peter ready to be devoured by the sea, and
swallowed in the waves thereof, by the might of thy right hand: I beseech thee,
O most merciful God, that thou will redeem and deliver both me thy unworthy
servant, and all other christian people, out of these miseries and calamities
wherewith we are circumuented. Spare thy people, I beseech thee, whom thou
have redeemed by thy precious blood, keep this nation and people redeemed by
so precious a ransom, in peace, mutual concord, and conjunction, to the glory
of thy holy name.

Amen.
In the time of war amongst Christians.
O Lord, Father of mercies, God of peace and dilection, how long, I pray thee,
will thou be angry with thy christian people? punishing them with erecrable
wars, and utter ouerthrows. Behold the affliction and extreme extinction of thy
people and nations. Hear the groans of the poor, let the christian blood
move thee unto mercy.

Ah las, O Lord, these are truly yt just punishments of our sins: we have
sinned, we have done wickedly, we have left thee ye fountain of life and our
felicity, we have contemned thee, mocked thee, and with an obstinate mind
made war by our sins, against thy commandments: we have kept none of thy
testimonies, of which thou have said: If you shall keep them, they shall keep
you: if you despise them, Esaias, 1.
the sword shall consume you. But thou (O Lord) notwithstanding thou art justly
displeased, remember thee of thy mercies: and to the end we may be made capable
thereof, give unto thy people I beseech thee the knowledge and confession of
their wicked lives: power upon them the spirit of thy grace and of prayer, that
every where with a contrite and humble heart (which thou despisest not) they
may cry unto thee, saying: O Lord have mercy, O Lord have mercy upon thy
people, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood: we have sinned, we
have done unjustly. Thy judgments are justly urged against us: prostrating our
selves, we call upon thy grace and mercy, to the end that thy revenging hand
may be appeased.

Put (o Lord) thy cruel and devouring sword into thy sheath, command the evil
beasts, that is, all those things which give cause of war, to return unto
their place: and leave most wholesome peace long desired amongst Christians,
safely to reign amongst them, to the praise and glory of thy most holy name,
who strikest, and healest, ^illest, and quickenest,

Amen.
In the time of plague.
WE know, O Lord God and most just Father, that the rebellion almost of all
creatures against man only is very great, whom (if all things were disposed
according to the order of creation) they ought to obey and acknowledge: Now
earthquakes, now thunders, now inundations, now most fatal conjunctions of
Stars, now the infection of the air, and daily new and other kind of evils
are heard of. But this punishment falls upon us, because we abuse the gifts
of thy munificence, transgress thy commaundemenis, for that we are not
terrified with threatrungs, nor allured by promises.

We acknowledge that by these thy chastisements thou drawest us from these
earthly affairs, and inuitest us to heavenly destres, and that for this cause
thy creatures are obedient unto thee. Be than mindful in this thy wrath, of
thy great mercy: and favorably take away this contagious sickness, which by
thy wrath is powered upon us. For the pestilent air shall enforce no evil, if
we oppose our selves against all kinds of iniquity: yet all things proceed
from thee, O most merciful Father. both for that in body we are secured from
this plague, and for that in soul we are protected from the venom of sin,
and reward thereof. For although other men, detained with the love of this
lif^, run here and there seeking hel^: in these perils, yet from no m^,
either more rightly or more secu^ly is their help to be intreat^, than from
thee only, whose po^ ^t no man may fly, who receiuest us into thy favor, for
that thou despisest no man that hops in thy goodness. To thee therefore do
we cry, O Lord, hear our prayers and supplications, that thou may deliver us
from this pestilent and deadly plague: Command thine Angel that strikes us,
to shut his sword in his sheath, lest he pursue us till we be utterly
extinguished: extend not thine ire against us, spare our souls, preserve us
from the plague.

R^rne return, O Lord, and have mercy on thy servants, take from us this
indisposition of the air, and vnholsomnes of ye place, lest the infected air
power that poison (wherewith it is infected) upon us, to our confusion. O Lord,
let thy hand I pray thee be turned, that all the earth may know that thou art
the Lord our GOD, and that thy Name is called upon 2. Reg. 24.
amongst us.

Amen.
In the time of famine and scarsity of victuals.
MOst just Lord God, that according to the merits of thy people, both bestowest
and withdrawest thy blessings: look upon our poverty, who acknowledge this
present scarsitie of victuals and famine, as a rod in thy hand, whereby thou
chastisest and punishest y^ manifold abuses of thy blessings, misimployed by us
in riot, and often drunkenness, and other destres of the flesh, and dissipations
of thy gifts which thou have given us, not to that intent, that being fa^ed and
filled, we should kick against thee, but rather we might serve thee
thankfully in way of acknowledgment. Why complain we not of the profanation
of thy name by oaths, and horrible imprecations, and of the violating of thy
holy days and service?

But what other thing shall we most wretched sinners (justly puni shed by thee
for our iniquities) do, but falling down prostrate in the presence of thy
Majesty, accuse our selves, and deplore our offenses, and implore thy grace
and mercy: that thou will vouchasafe to look down from Heaven, to the end,
that by thy blessing, our land may yield us increase: and by that means
relieved and satisfied with necessary food, we may praise thee for the
blessings we have received, and profess our selves more and more bound to do
thee service.

Amen.
Against the tempests and thunder of the air.
KIng of eternal glory, omnipotent God, that give food unto all creatures,
and couerest the heaven with clouds, and preparest rain for the earth, that
transferrest the Southern wind from y^ heaven, and bring in the Affricke
by thy virtue: that waterest the mountains from the higher places thereof, and
who satiatest the earth with the fruit of thy works: that have commanded thine
Angel, that he should not hurt neither Apoc. 9.
the land nor the Sea, nor trees: spare those that fear thee, and be
merciful to their prayers.

For we most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, that y^ incursion of storms may
depart far from us, and the calamity of tempests, the tempest of hail, the
blasting of lightning, and that all the assaults of the enemy may be
tempered. Let the harmefull thunders, the noisome raines, the raging wmdes be
calmed, grant also that the right hand of thy virtue may ouer-way the spirits
of storm and airie tempests.

O Lord, thou that thunderest from heaven, and give thy voice, Psalm. 17.
that sendest forth thine arrows, and multipliest thy lightnings: turn away
we pray thee, this cruel tempest from us, let it not bring us to confusion.
Restrain the thunder and thine arrows, lest they hurt us. keep us and our
houses, lest we perish through yt fury of storm and the force of lightning:
Protect our habitations, lest by fire sent down from heaven, they burn and
(...) consumed.

Most merciful Lord, rain not I beseech thee, thy hail upon the (...) of the
earth, neither strike the ^ell or fruit of our pastors: ^rch not up the herbs
and trees of (...) Country: kill not our corn, ^ther expose our cattle to
the ^le, whereby they may be destroyed: but in thy mercy contain thy wrath,
that we that are iuftly punished for our offenses, by the ^ntion of thy mercy
may find grace and indulgence of our sins.

Amen.
A prayer for the Master of a Household.
Whereas, O Father, you command every one of us to have care of our
neighbors, to further their affairs and fortunes, and to withstand all their
incommodities, I very well understand what ^u meanest: namely, that it be^th a
Master in his household ^e no less care toward his servants, than himself:
and than teach the servants likewise to obey their masters: I acknowledge my
duty: but in ruling those whom thou have committed to my charge, my wife,
children, servants, handmaids, and other domestical servants, I neither find
facult^ nor judgment in my self.

I fly therefore unto thee, t^ chiefest Father of the family; (...) thee I
say, who art ye ruler both (...) heaven and earth, I most hu^ submit my self,
beseeching thy (...) uor. Grant O Father and gouer^ that I may keep and
continue the my servants, which thou have committed to my charge, in thy fea^
discipline, and that I may de^ and further both those things yt belong to the
profit of their bodies and souls, and such as concern their honor and
profit. And grant yt they likewise on the other side (...) perform their
duties with f^ and obedience, not serving according to the outward eye, but
de^ning them lovingly, and freely discharging their duties in ^tie of heart, as
if before GOD* and not men, whereby at lenght we may al find the reward in
hea^.

Amen.
The prayer of a Son.
OMnipotent and eternal God, to whom every obedience of the child toward his
parents is ^ll pleasing, and all rebellion is loathsome: who in thy law
com^dest us to honor our parents, ^ding this thy commandment (...) a double
wall, namely with re^d and punishment, whilst thou promisest to the humble and
obedient child eternal life, and to the Exodus 20.
untoward and rebellious, thou denouncest death and malediction. Neither is
this thy precept upon me, neither far estranged from me, that I might say,
who in effect may fulfill the same? but it is near me, or rather in me,
whereas the very law of nature engraven in my foul, inciteth and inuiteth me
unto the same.

I beseech thee therefore, O most bountiful Father, from whom proceeds all
fatherhood, bo^ heaven and in earth: take (...) me all rebellion ^d conten^
lest I attempt and dare to br^ and infringe all the bonds ^ume and humane
laws. (...) vouchsafe that I may pro^ my parents in all kind of (...) serve
them with due honor and re^rence, obey their commande^ with humble and ready
obedi^ and that I may help them (...) kinds of succor, obsequios^ and offices
of kindness: that I (...) suffer their reproves, auste^ unbridled mislikes or
exclai^ and all their imperfections whats^uer with a willing mind, not
^greeuing or vexing them in the whole course of my life: if at any time through
age they shall dote, default in reason, y^ I may not co^^emne them, but that I
may suffer their age and imbecility with due modesty. Finally, if they want or
be sick, that I may nourish and sustain them by my succor and sustenance,
lest through my default and avarice, they should lose their lives, from whom
and by whom I had the beginning of my life: but that I may serve them that
begot me in all things as my Lords: O Eccles. 3.
Lord, forgive me all those my sins wherein I have ever offended my most dear
parents: Increase the ^ltitude of their days, and keep them in all health of
mind and of body: let them behold their sons, like olive pla^ts round about
their Psalm. 12^
^ble: let them bring them up in all (...): let them govern their family in
holy counsels and conuer^on; that at the length they may, ^culate and
faultlesse, come ^to thee where thou live with (...) Son and the holy
Ghost, (...) God world without end,

Ame^.
The prayer of the Schoolmaster.
OMnipotent and eternal God, in whose power all things ^re, give me thy holy
Spirit, without whom I neither can learn or teach any thing, that I may
diligently instruct the youth committed to my charge, and form them not only
to follow piety and good manners: but (...) diligently to apprehend lear^ to
the glory of thy holy nam^ the end they may become (...) citizens, and
profitable (...) of thy Church. Give the^ a (...) and understanding heart, that
(...) may easily apprehend and (...) that which I teach them, and (...) ^ee in
all things which co^ my function: suffering themse^ to be directed and informed
(...) an humble and obedient will, (...) their age, who have spent (...) youth
in good arts, in increase^ be increased in knowledge, (...) may reap and
communicate (...) others the most pleasant fruits (...) his former studies,

Amen.
The prayer of a professor of any faculty.
O My Creator, and incomprehensible Lord God, who from the treasure of thy
wisdom did inform the nine orders of angels, and placedst them in worthy
order above the imperial heaven, a^ have most wonderfully disposed y^ ^rts of
the world: Thou I say, y^ (...) called the true Fountain of life and wisdom,
and the supere^t beginning, vouchsafe to (...) upon the darkness of my
vn^tanding the double beam of the brightness, removing from me ^tion, sin and
ignorance, ^erein I was borne. Thou that ^est the tongues of infants elo^t,
order my discourse, and (...) on my lips the grace of thy blessing. Give me
the sharpnes of ^erstanding, the capacity of re^ning, the subtilty of
interpre^g, the faculty of learning, the ^pious grace of speaking: instruct
mine entrance, direct my proceedings, and fulfill my issues. Who with the
Father and y^ holy Spirit live and reignest God, world without end.

Amen.
The prayer of a Student.
O Most wise Father, and omnipotent God, the fountain and giver of all
wisdom and understanding, without whom a^ our studies want their success:
wh^y thy holy Spirit, made of she herds of sheep, y^ Prophets of (...) Amos.
1.
people: and of fishermen, the Apostels and doctors of the wh^ world. Infuse
into me by y^ me^ of Christ thy Son, y^ grace of the same holy Spirit, whereby
my understanding may be the better ^formed in the liberal Science^ which
hereafter I way convert (...) thy divine honor, and the spiritual profit of
thy Church.

Grant y^ I may faithfully lear^ good letters and necessary tongues, and
retain them with apprehending memory, and convert them to the use of a better
life: that according to the example of thy holy youth, I may daily increase in
years, wisdom and grace, before GOD and men. Grant me understanding and
subtlety of wit, that I may the easier comprehend those things that are to be
learnt, and cull out the sublimest and deepest knowledge thereof. Give me also
alacrity in study, lest my mind, wearied with continual labor, and surprised
with a certain loathsomeness, abhor studies. Suffer me not to spend my time
unprofitably, nor pass my young years that are most apt for study, in
idleness, lest my parents charge being euilly employed on me, I increase
their hate against me, and I leaudly delude the hope and expectation of my
friends.

Amen.
Seven Psalms of David's repentance, commonly called Penitential Psalms.
PSALM VI.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

3 My soul is also fore tro^bled, but Lord, how long will thou punish me?

4 Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: Oh save me for (...) mercies sake.

5 For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give the thanks in the pit?

6 I am weary of my groaning every night wash I my bed: and water my couch
with my tears.

7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of mine enemies.

8 Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping.

9 The Lord has heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer.

10 All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back and put to shame suddenly.

PSALM XXXII.
BLessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man unto who^ the Lord imputes no sin: and ^t whose spirit
there is no guile.

3 For while I held my tongue, ^y bones consumed away, through ^y daily
complaining.

4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the
drought in Summer.

5 I will acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine unrighteousness have I not
hid.

6 I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin.

7 For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found: but in great water-flouds they shall not come nigh
him.

8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

9 I will inform thee and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

10 Be ye not like unto horse and mule, which has no understanding: whose
mouths (...) den with bit and bridl^ (...) fall upon thee.

11 Great plagues (...) for the ungodly: but who so put^h his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye
that are true of heart.

PSALM XXXVIII.
PUt me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

3 There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

4 For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden, too
heavy for me to bear.

5 My wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishness.

6 I am brought into so great trouble and misery, that I go mourning all the
day long.

7 For my loins are filled with a (...) disease: and there is no whole ^rt of
my body.

8 I am feeble and sore smitten: (...) have roared for the very disqui^esse of
my heart.

9 Lord, thou know all my ^sire: and my groaning is not hid ^om thee.

10 My heart pants, my strength ^th failed me: and the sight of ^e eyes is
gone from me.

11 My lovers and my neighbors ^id stand looking upon my trouble, and my
kinsmen stood afar off.

12 They also that sought after ^y life laid snares for me: and they that went
about to do me evil ^alked of wickedness, and imagi^ed deceit all the day
long.

13 As for me, I was like a deaf man and heard not: and as one y^ is dumb,
which does not open his mouth.

14 I became even as a man that hears not: and in whose mouth are no
reproves.

15 For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shall answer for me, O Lord
my God.

16 I have required that they ^uen mine enemies) should not ^umph over me: for
when my f^ slipped, they rejoiced greatly aga^ me.

17 And I truly am set in (...) plague: and my heaviness is e^ in my sight.

18 For I will confess my wi^ ednesse: and be sorry for my sinn^

19 But mine enemies live a^ are mighty: and they that hate m^ wrongfully are
many in number.

20 They also that reward evil for good, are against me: because I follow the
thing that good is.

21 Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou far from me.

22 Have thee to help me: O Lord God of my salvation.

PSALM LI.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according unto the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

2 Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I acknowledge my faults: (...) sin is ever before me.

4 against thee only have I sinne^, and done this evil in thy sight: the thou
might be justified in the saying, and clear when thou a^ judged.

(...) Behold I was shapen in wic^nesse, and in sin has my moth^ conceived
me.

(...) But lo, thou requirest truth in (...) inward parts: and shall make me
(...) understand wisdom secretly.

(...) Thou shall purge me with I^e, and I shall be clean: thou ^lt wash me,
and I shall be whi^ than snow.

8 Thou shall make me hear of ^y and gladness, that y^ bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

9 Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeedes.

10 Make me a clean heart o God, and renew a right spirit within me

11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

12 O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free
Spirit.

13 Then shall I teach thy waye^ unto the wicked: and sinners she be converted
unto thee.

14 Deliver me from bloodg^ tinesse, O GOD, thou that a^ God of my health: and
my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

15 Thou shall open my lips (O Lord) and my mouth shall show thy praise.

16 For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but the
delightest not in burnt offerings.

17 The sacrifice of GOD is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrite heart (O
God) shall thou not despise.

18 O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
Altar.

PSALM CII.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my crying come unto thee.

2 Hide not thy face from me in (...) ^e of my trouble: incline (...) ears
unto me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

3 For my days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones (...) burnt up as it
were a firebra^d.

4 My heart is smitten down and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat
my bread.

5 For the voice of my groaning, my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

6 I am become like a Pelican in the Wilderness: and like an Owl that is in
the desert.

6 I have watched, and am even as it were a Sparrow that sits alone upon the
house top.

8 Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me are
sworn together against me.

9 For I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drink with weeping.

10 And that because of thine indignation and wrath, for thou have taken me up,
and cast me down.

11 My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered (...) grass.

12 But thou, O Lord, shall ^dure for ever: and thy remembrance throughout all
gener^ons.

13 Thou shall arise and hau^ mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou have
mercy on her, ye^ the time is come.

14 And why? thy servants think upon her stones: and it pittieth the^ to see
her in the dust.

15 The Heathen shall fear thy Name, O Lord: and all the Kings of the earth thy
Majesty.

16 When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glory shall appear.

17 When he turns him unto the prayer of the poor destitute: and despises
not their desire.

18 This shall be written for those that come after: and the people that shall
be borne shall praise the Lord.

19 For he has looked down from his sanctuary: out of the heaven did the
Lord behold the earth.

20 That he might hear the mour^g of such as be in captiui^ (...) deliver the
children ap^ed unto death.

21 That they may declare the (...) of the Lord in Sion: and his ^rship at
Jerusalem.

22 When the people are gathe^ed together: and the kingdoms (...) to serve the
Lord.

23 H^e brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.

24 But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: (...) for
thy years, they endure thoroughout all generations.

25 Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth: and the
Heavens are the work of thy hands.

26 They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they shall wax old as does a
garment.

27 And as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

28 The Children of thy Servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand
fast in thy sight.

PSALM CXXX.
OUt of the deep have I c^ unto thee, O Lord: Lord h^ my voice.

2 Oh let thine ears cou^ well the voice of my complaint.

3 If thou Lord wilt be extr^ to mark what is done amiss, (...) Lord who may
abide it?

4 For there is mercy with the therefore shall thou be feared.

5 I look for the Lord, my so^ does wait for him: in his word (...) my trust.

6 My soul flies unto the Lord before the morning watch: I say before the
morning watch.

7 O Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him
is plenteous redemption.

8 And he shall redeem Israel, from all his sins.

PSALM CXLIII.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, an^ consider my desire: hearke^ ^ ^

(...) ^ter not into judgment (...) servant, for (...) thy sight (...) ^o man
living be justified.

3 For the enemy has persecu^ my soul, he has smitten my (...) down to the
ground: he has ^d me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

4 Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within (...) is
desolate.

5 Yet do I remember the time past, I must upon all thy works: yea I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

6 I stretched forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a
thirsty land.

7 Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

8 O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust: show thou me y^ way that I should walk in, for I ^ft up my soul unto
thee.

^ ^ ^

^ ^ ^ me foor^h (...) of right^ ousnesse.

11 D^ (...) Lord, s^ thy names sake: (...) for thy righteousness s^e bring my
soul out of trouble.

12 And of thy goodness ^mine enemies: and de^y ^ll the^ that vex my soul,
for I am thy servant.

FINIS.

