GRANADOS Spiritual and heavenly Exercises. Divided into seven pithie and
brief Meditations, for every day in the week one. Written in Spanish, by the
learned and reverend Divine, F. Jews of Granado. Since translated into the
Latin, Italian French, and the German tongue. And now englished by Francis
Meres, Master of Arts of both Universities, and student in Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by James Robarts, for I. B. Anno. Dom. 1598.

To the valorous and noble minded Gentleman, Captain John Sammes, Esquire: F.
M. heartily wishes in this life, the health, years, and happiness, of Galen,
Nestor, and Augustus, and in the other, the delight, rest, and joy, of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.
THere be three things (Right worshipful) greatly desired in this life,
Health, Wealth, and Fame: and it is a question which of these is chief; the
sick says Health, the covetous commends Wealth, and both these place good
name last of all. But they be both partial Judges, because Health and Wealth,
though they be never so good, and so great, end with the body, and are subject
to time. But honor, fame, renown, and good report, do triumph over death,
and make men live for ever: Nunqua^ stigias fertur ad vmbras Inclyta virtus.

Immensum calcar gloria habet; there is not a greater inticement unto virtue,
then Fame and true glory: Spes famae solet ad virtutem impellere multos.

This made Alexander in honor of arms to emulate Achilles, Scipio Africanus to
imitate Xenophons Cyrus, Caesar to pattern himself by Alexander, Selimus
Prince of Turks to trace the steps of Caesar, and Carolus Quintus to fire his
thoughts at Philip Cominaeus his Lodouicus xi. King of France. Proceed (noble
and heroyick Spirit) with young Troylus to aim at Hectors glory. And as the
pregnancie of your Hopes promises to be an Huniades to the Turks, a Talbot to
the French, and a Drake to the Spanyard; so also be an Artaxerxes to
Hippocrates, an Alexander to Pindarus and Aristotle, a Scipio to Ennius, an
Augustus to Virgil, a Traian to Plutarch, and a Mecaenas to all Scholars. And
then as the sword does defend the pen of the Scholar, so the pen shall
grace the sword of the Soldier; and shall tunablie sonnet that paracleticall
verse out of Horace: Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori.

Learning indeed would be soon put to silence, without the aid and support
of noble, bountiful, and generous spirits. In hope of which aid and
supportation, I present these divine and celestial meditations unto your
Worship, which, under the title of your protection, may do as much good in
England, as they have done in Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, and Germany.
Lodouicus Granatensis the Author of these heavenly and spyrituall Meditations,
has so cunningly portrayed in this Treatise the myseries and calamities of
this life, and with such divine eloquence depainted the future blessedness of
the other, that for style he seems to me another Cicero, and for sound and
emphaticall persuasion, a second Paul. Whose divine spirit, and heavenly
writing, as it has moved the Italians Camillus Camilli, Georgius Angelierus,
Timotheus Bagnus, and Johannes Baptista Porcacchius to translate his works into
their language, and Michael of Isselt, to convert the^ into Latin, and
Philippus Doberniner into the German tongue, so also has it moved me, to
digest the^ into English; that now at the length our Country might enjoy that
rare Jewel, which those famous Countries do so highly prize. For further
commendation of the Author and this Book, I refer your Worship to the
present discourse, which I assure my self will work those motions in you,
that it shall neither yrke you of your pains, nor me of my labor. Thus
boldly presuming on your courteous acceptance, I commit you to his sacred
protection, who graceth here upon the earth the memories of the valiant and
virtuous by the pens of Scholars, and glorifieth them in heaven, with his
chosen men of war, who with Joshua have fought his battles, and with David
have unsheathed their swords to avenge his quarrel. London the 24. of
November. 1598.

At your Worships commandment Francis Meres.

The Contents of the several heads discoursed in this Book.
THE Prologue, and a brief manner of Meditation. Page 1. The first Meditation
for Monday: Of the misery in which man is created. page. 21. The second
Meditation for Tuesday: of sin, and what discommodities come by it. page, 39
The third Meditation for Wednesday: how dangerous it is to defer repentance.
page. 63 The fourth meditation for Thursday: of the contempt of the world, and
with what hatred, and diligence it is to be eschewed. page, 99. The fifth
Meditation for Friday: of the vanity of the glory, and magnificence of this
world. 120 The sixth Meditation for Saturday: how death is to be feared: and
that a Christian ought so to live, that death may never find him unprepared.
147. The seventh Meditation for Sunday: of the joys of the blessed in heaven,
and of the pains of the damned in hell. page, 166 Lastly, there is annexed to
these seven celestial Meditations, an excellent Exposition upon the one and
fifty Psalm. 208.
THE Prologue, and a brief manner of Meditation.
ALl things pass away, except the love of GOD. When as the wise man had
contemplated, and by long experience learned the mutabilitie of all things,
neither had found any constancy, or certainly very little, in any thing
created in this world, but many desires, and an insatiable thirst of men, which
violently forced them, to hunt after these transitory things; at length he
cries out. Vanity of vanities, Eccles, 1.
all is vanity and affliction of spirit. And when he had run through, and
experime^ted all things in the world, with a most wholesome council he
concludes his disputation, Eccle. 12.
saying; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days
come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them: whiles the Sun is not dark, nor the light, nor the Moon, nor the
stars, nor the clouds return after the rain. Fear God and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. And because the whole
safety of our souls, and all our blessedness depends of this council, it is
most aptly and fitly spoken of S. Gregory; That there is no such sacrifice
offered to the Almighty, as the zeal of the soul is: which shows by
wholesome doctrines the way unto celestial glory. I being therefore moved
by this zeal, although unworthy to teach, have gathered this short tractate
out of diverse authorities of holy doctors, that a soul drowned in the
pollution of sin, being convicted by these instructions and authorities of
holy men, and enlightened of the holy Ghost, might be reduced to her Creator
and Redeemer, as a straying and lost sheep, or at the length might know her
estate, and the errors and dangers, which she in this world is in, whilst
she continues in sin, and being touched with the sorrow of contrition,
might return unto God, and returning, might bring forth repentance, and
repenting, might possess with all the Saints, glory and celestial beatitude,
to the which she was made and created. But to this there is no other way, then
that, of which the Prophet speaks: This is the way, Esaias, 30,
walk ye in it, neither shall ye decline to the right hand, nor to the left.

Therefore it is needful for a Christian man, that is vvilling after this
wretched life to go to his desired home, besides prayers and common exercises,
to use also diligence, that his heart may be lifted up unto God, not only in
every place, but also that at all times, and in all businesses, he may carry
about with him cogitations, seriously employed about religious and godly
contemplations. As a Be delighted with the beauty of colors, A similie.
and sweetness of odours, does take somewhat from every flower, and does carry
it to her hiue, to make honey of it: so it is requisite that the servant of God
should take of all things created, which are presented unto his mind, as it
were certain spurrs pricking forwards unto devotion, and to the love of God,
meditating on them in his heart, with great delight with out intermission.

By this endeavor, at the length we shall bring it to pass, that upon the
alter of our hearts there shall alvvayes burn, the fire of divine love, we
being always busied in godly prayers, and devout meditations.

Therefore in the morning, What we are to do in the morning.
as soon as we awake, let us shut our gates against al earthly and worldly
thoughts, that so before all things, our Lord may enter in and have
admittance; let us offer unto him the first fruits of that day, and conferring
with him, let us do three things.

First, give him thanks for the rest he has given thee that night, and that
he has delivered thee from al perrillous and fearful fantasies, and from the
snares of thine enemy; and for all other benefits, of creation, preservation,
vocation, and redemption: that he has called thee to his faith, that he has
infused into thee good inspyrations, that he has freed thee from all danger,
that so long a time, with so great patience and mercy he has waited for thy
repentance. And to be brief, yield unto him most hearty thanks for all
blessings whatsoever.

Then offer unto him whatsoever that day thou shall either do or suffer; all
thy lalabours, all thy stepps, all thine exercises, and briefly, all that
which thou art to do, or to be employed in that day. Offer unto him in like
manner, thy self, with all thine, that al may redound to his glory, that he
may have a hand in all, and dispose of all, as it shall please his most holy,
will, none otherwise then if they were his own businesses.

Thirdly, desire his favor and grace, that thou may not co^mitt any thing
that day, that shall be contrary to his divine majesty. Beseech him that he
vvoulde aid thee against all sins, and especially against those, which
customarily thou art most inclined to, as are anger, vain glory, dissolutnes
in words, and such like: arming thy self with a firm resolution against all
kind of vices.

At night, What we are to do at night.
before thou go to bed, examine thy self with judgment, and call to mind,
whatsoever thou have that day either done, spoken, or thought against the
divine will: and recall all thy negligences, idleness, and slothful heaviness,
about the divine service and worship, and that so wickedly thou have forgotten
thy Lord God.

Desire God, that he would pardon all thine errors, and forgive all the sins
which thou have committed, and that he would bestow his grace upon thee, that
thou may correct and amend thy life. And when thou layest thy self down in
thy bed, think how thou shall lie in thy grave; and consider with thy self
how small a coffin will co^taine thy body, and end all thy meditations with that
prayer, which Christ himself taught his disciples.

As often as thou awakest in the night, What we are to do when the hour
sou^deth.
say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. Or some such like thing,
and as often as thou hear the sound of the hour, say; Blessed be the hour
in which our Lord Jesus Christ was borne and died for us; o Lord remember me
in the hour of my death. And consider how thy life is shorter by an hour
then it was before, and how by little and little, thy web is wouen-vp and
ended.

When thou sit down to eat, What we are to do when we sit at meat.
or risest up from the table, always remember the example of our Lord;
lift-vp thine heart unto thy GOD, and consider that it is he, that gives thee
meat and drink, who has created all things for thy use: render unto him
thanks for the food he sends thee, and ponder with thy self how many men
almost perrishe through hunger and want, then which thine estate is far
happier; remember with what ease and safety thou possessest those things, which
others can hardly compass with great danger and labor.

When thou art impugned or molested of the devil that ancient Tempter, the
best remedy is, if thou runnest unto the Cross, and behold hanging upon it
Jesus Christ, cruelly scourged, crowned with thorns, racked upon the
cross, having neither beauty nor co^linesse, riuolets of precious blood
gushing out of his body. Rembember that the chiefest cause, why thy Lord
hangs there, is none other, then that he might destroy the kingdom of
sin. Beseech and entreat him with great devotion, that he would not suffer
a thing so odious to reign in thine heart, or in thine eyes, which he with so
great cost and labor banished and destroyed; and say, o my Lord, thou hangest
here upon the cross, that I might not sin: and shall not this be sufficient
for me, that I may fly from sin? A prayer against temptations.
I beseech thee, o lord, by those thy most holy wounds, suffer me not at any
time to be forsaken of thee, when I come unto thee; yea o lord, show unto, me
the best haven, where I may be in most safety.

If thou shall reject and refuse me, whether shall I go? what shall I do?
what will become of me? who shall defend me? o my lord, help me, and defend
me from that dragon, seeing that without thee I can do nothing.

If thou shall fervently thus persist in hearty and earnest prayer, the
temptations shall be an occasion of a nobler crown, and they shall bring it to
pass, that thy mind shall be oftener lifted up to God, and the devil who came
with hope of victory, shall being vanquished, most shamefully fly away.
Among all these exercises, the sighs and gronings of the spirit are most
commendable, which are tokens of vehement desires, by the which the soul
being prevented of the holy Ghost, and wounded with the love of God,
sigheth, and groneth, and with great feruencie labors for the love of God,
and so desires this love, both with great instancie, and without intermission.

This meditation, and this holy exercise is so profitable, that if it be daily
done, or be used at meal times, at drinking times, in going, or laboring,
oftentimes is of greater dignity and efficacy, then other prolixe exercises, or
copious prayers.

This exercise is more profitably done by desires and inward sighings and
mournings, then by words: albeit words help at al times; which a man may now
and then utter after this, or such like manner.

O blessed Jesus, o the sweetness and delight of my heart: A Prayer,
o the life of my soul, when shall I please thee in all things and at all
times? When shall I perfectly dye unto my self? When shall I prefer thee
before all creatures? When shall there not live any other thing in me besides
thy self o Lord? Have mercy upon me o Lord, and help me. I salute thy wounds
o Lord, as it were fresh flourishing roses, hide me o lord in them, and wash
me in them, that I may be throghly clean, and inflamed with thy love. O Lord
God, o admirable beginning, o the piety of amiable charity; o the dearest light
of my understanding; o the rest of my will, when shall I fervently and
ardently love thee? Vouchsafe o lord to shoot through my soul with the dart
of thy love, vouchsafe to associate and unite me unto thee, that I may be one
with thee. O my desire: o my hope: o my refreshing and comfort. O that my
soul were worthy thine embraces, that all the drowsines and luke-warmnes of my
soul, might be consumed with the fire of thy love. O the soul of my soul: o
the life of my life, I wholly desire thee, and offer my self wholly unto thee,
wholly to thee that art all in all, one to one, and only to thee alone. O that
it had place in me, that thou spakest to thy Father; O holy Father, let them be
one, as we are one. John. 17.
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

I neither will nor wish any other thing, I desire none other thing, I entreat
none other thing of thee; for thou alone art sufficient for me. Thou art my
father, thou art my mother, thou art my defender, my leader, and all my good.
Thou art wholly lovely, wholy delightful, wholly faithful. Who was ever so
liberal that would give him self? who ever loved so tenderly, that would
deliver himself unto death for a vile creature? Who was ever so humble, that
has so debased and ecclipsed his Majesty? O Lord, thou despisest no man,
disdaynest no man, reiectest no man, that sueth unto thee: yea, thou call
and prouokest them to come and meet thee; for it is thy delight to converse
with the children of men.

O Lord, the Angels do bless and praise thee, what other thing have thou
found in us, but pollutions and blemishes of sin? Wherefore would thou be
with us to the end of the world? Was it not enough for thee, that thou
sufferedst for us, but that thou must leave thy Sacraments for a medicine unto
us, and thy Angels for our companions and protectours? And albeit we be
unthankful for so great benefits, yet thou would dwell among us, for thou
art so good and gracious, that thou can not deny thy self.

Therefore o Lord let us make (if so it please thee) a league and covenant: take
thou charge of me, and I will take charge of thee. Do with me o Lord, as it
pleases thee: for thou know what I want, and what is meet for me: I will
be thine, and no others. Give me grace o Lord, that I may not seek nor desire
any thing, but thee: and that I may wholly offer and yield up my self unto thee.

O sire, that enlightenest me: o charity, that inflamest me: o light
illuminating me: o my rest: o my life: o my love, who always burnest, and
never art extinguished: when shall I perfectly love thee? When shall I embrace
thee with the naked arms of my soul? When shall I despise my self and the
whole world, for the love of thee? When shall my soul with all her powers and
strength be united unto thee? When shall I be swallowed up in the bottomless
depth of thy love? O thou most sweet, most loving, most beautiful, most wise,
most rich, most noble, most precious, and most worthy to be loved and
worshipped, when shall I so love thee, that I may lie drowned wholly in thy
love? O the life of my soul, who did undergo the burden of death, that
thou might revive me, and dying did kill death: kill o Lord me also, that
is, slay all my perverse inclinations to evil; my will also, and whatsoever
hinders, whereby thou may not live with me. But after that thou have thus
killed me, make me to live with thee, by love, and a true faith: that I may
faithfully observe all thy commandments, and the precepts of my superiors,
and that I may only prosecute and follow those things, that are of the spirit.

O most bountiful and gracious Jesus, give me a perfect hatred and loathing of
sin; and a perfect conversion of heart unto thee, that all my thoughts, and
all my desires may be busied and conversant in thee alone, and about thee
alone. O life. without which I dye; o truth, without which I am deceived: o
way, without which I go astray: o salvation, without which I perrish: o light,
without which I walk in darkness. Do not o Lord, do not suffer, that at any
time I should be plucked away from thee: for in thee alone I live, and without
thee I dye: in thee I am safe, and without thee I perish: in thee I am some
body, but without thee I am no body. As I shall more manifestly declare in the
sequent considerations, which shall be unto me as a most clear glass, which
I looking into with open, steadfast, and constant eyes, shall see both the
magnitude and multitude of my miseries.

A SPIRITVA'L and heavenly Exercise, divided into seven pithy and brief
Meditations, for every day in the week one.
The first Meditation, for Monday: of the misery in which man is created.
THE Prophet Jeremy deploring the misery of his own condition, says; How is
it, Ierem. 20.
that I came forth of the womb, to see labor and sorrow, that my days should
be consumed with shame? If the Prophet sanctified in his mothers womb so
lamentably spoke of himself, what shall I miserable and vvretched man say,
conceived and borne of my Mother in sin? Hugo lib. 3. de anima.
Hugo de S. Victore does very well counsel us; o man, says he, learn to
know thy self: Thou art better if thou know thy self, then if neglecting
thy self, thou knevvest the motions of the stars, the virtue of herbs, the
complexions of men, and the natures of al heavenly and earthly creatures. For
many men know many things, and know not themselves, when as the knowledge of
our selves is the chiefest Philosophy.

Consider therefore o man, What man was before he was borne.
what thou wast before thou were born: what thou art now thou art borne until
thou return to dust: and what thou shall be after death. Before thou wast
borne, wast thou any other thing, but an impure and unclean matter, conceived
of the corruption of the flesh, in the pollution of pleasure, in the heat of
lust, and that which is vvorst of all, in the corruption of sin? Ponder also
with thy self, with what meat thou wast nourished being conceived in thy
mothers womb; surely with none other, then with impure, menstruous and
hurtful blood, which stays in women from the time of their conceauing, that
by it their young ones may be nourished in their wombes. Remember that GOD has
created thee of the slime of the earth, which is the basest element. He
created the stars and planets of fire, birds of the air, and fishes of
water: but men and other creatures of the slime of the earth. Therefore compare
thy self with the fishes and beasts bred of the water, and thou shall find thy
self of a more abject nature, and vilder condition, then they are. If thou
beholdest the fowls and creatures that live in the air, neither art thou to
be compared unto them: if thou considerest the nature of the Planets, stars,
and other things made of fire, thou art much more ignoble. Thou can neither
be compared to celestial things, nor be preferred before terrestrial: but if
thou comparest thy self to brute creatures, in these alone thou shall find
some semblance and likelihood with thy self, as the Wiseman testifies, who
says, That the condition of the children of men, Eccles, 3.
and the condition of beasts are even as one condition unto them. As the one
dies, so dies the other: for they have all one breath, and there is no
excellency of man above the beast. For man has not, as touching his body, any
more then a beast has, seeing both of them are framed and created of earth,
and both of them in like manner are resolved into earth. Remember that when thou
wast borne, thou wast brought forth into this miserable world howling and
weeping, as it were foreseeing, and therefore bewayling the labors, dangers and
dolors which in this world are to be sustained: and that which is vvorst of
all, deploring death it self. Wherefore, if perhaps thou be borne in a
noble and honorable place, neither remembrest how vile a beginning and how
abject an original thou had; if the beauty of thy countenance, and
comeliness of thy proportion, if the lineaments of thy body, if the favor of
the people, if the heat of youth, and abundance of riches take away the
knowledge of thy self from thee, yet nevertheless, if thou desire to know
what man is, hear what that most glorious Father S. Augustine says, S.
Augustine.
the star and light of the doctors of the church, hear I say what he says;
Wretched man, says he, what am I, but a vessel full of dung and corruption? a
stinking and detestable worm? poor, naked, subject to many necessities? who
knows not whence I came, nor whether I shall go. Miserable and mortal am I,
whose days vanish and fade as a shadow, whose life increases and decreaseth
as the Moon, and as a leaf upon a tree, now flourishing, and to morrow
withering. I am earth, misery, the child of wrath, and a vessel of indignation
and reprobation. I was borne in the corruption of sin, I live in misery and
labor, and shall end my days in grief and anguish.

And Saint Bernard says: Flesh with which thou have so great society, S.
Bernard in his meditations.
is none other thing but froth and foam made flesh: invested in a frail
ornament: but the time shall come, when it shall be a miserable and putrified
carcass, and the food of worms. For be it never so gaily garnished and
tricked up, it is always flesh. If thou diligently considerest, what goes
forth by thy mouth and nostrils, and the other passages of thy body, thou
never beheldest so vile a dunghill. Consider o man, (says he) what thou were
before thy birth; what thou art from thy birth till thy death; and what thou
shall be after this life of thine is ended. Certainly, thou vvast that thou
were not, after that thou haddst thy being of vile matter, thou wast
inwrapped in a most vile filme, and nourished in thy mothers womb with
menstrous blood. Thy coat was a skin, so attired and adorned camst thou unto
us.

And has beauty, favor, riches, and youth,
So sotted thy senses deuoyd of truth,
That mindlesse thou art how base was thy birth?
And that all men are dust, ashes, and earth?
Man is none other thing, but an unclean sperme, a sack of dunge, and food
for worms:

After a man a worm, after a worm, stinch and faetour,
So from a man to no man, is turned this creature.
Hitherto S. Bernard, with whom agrees Innocentius. Innocentius of the
miseries of man's life.
O indignity, says he* and vildnes of man's condition. Consider the plants and
trees, they bring forth leaves, flowers, and fruits, pleasant to the taste, and
delightful for smell: but wretched man brings forth pestilent and noysom
savors: and as the tree is, such also is the fruit; for an evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit. But will thou more manifestly know, what man is, after
he is borne? hear most patient Job, Job, 14,
Man says he, that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance and full of
trouble. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down, he vanishes also
as a shadow, and continues not. Why do we seek for the testimonies of men, let
us ask God himself, Gene, 3,
and he will tell us: Remember man that thou art dust* and to dust shall thou
return. This knowledge had holy Job, Job, 10,
when he said unto God: Remember I pray thee, o that thou have made me as the
clay, and wilt bring me into dust again.

O man of clay, why art thou proud? o dust, why growest thou insolent? o
ashes, for what would thou be commended, whose conception is sinful, whose
nativity is painful, whose life is labor, and death necessity? Why dooest
thou nourish thy body so delicately? Why dooest thou adorn that with so
precious garments, which after a while shall in the sepulcher be eaten of
worms? Why dooest thou not rather beautify thy soul with good works,
which shall be carried into heaven by the hands of good Angels? Why dooest
thou neglect thy soul, and so extraordinarilye cocker thy flesh? Behold
confusion and prepostrous order, the soul, which ought to rule, serves the
flesh; and the flesh rules which should obey. Why suffer thou the Lady to
be the handmaid, and the ha^dmaid to usurp authority over the Lady? Do
thou not know that thy flesh is a domestical and homebred enemy unto thy
soul, which under color of friendship, is more cruel then the most tirannous
enemy? When thou cherishest and delicately nourishest it, thou breedest and
bring up thine own enemy: when thou deckest and beautifiest it, thou armest
thine enemy against thee: when thou arraiest it in precious garments and
outlandish skins of wild beasts, thou robbest thy soul of all beautiful and
heavenly ornaments.

Thirdly, o sinner consider what thou shall be, when thou ceasest to live.
Certainly thou shall be none other, but a miserable and corrupted carcass, an
habitation and food for worms. If it please thee, view the bodies of them,
who are departed out of this life, and thou shall find nothing in them,
besides ashes, worms, stink, and lothsomnes. What thou art now, they
sometimes were, and what they are now, thou shortly must be: they were me^ as
thou art now, they did eat and drink as thou do. Job, 21,
They spent their days in wealth, and suddenly went down to the grave. See
how the flesh nourished in delights, now being meat for worms lies in the
grave: and how the unhappy soul descends, that it may be fuel for the
infernal fire, without any hope that ever the torments and punishments shall
have end. What shall the^ their vain glory profit them? in what steed shall
then the power of this world stand the^? what shall then their carnal
delights, and covetousness of riches help them? where are then their merry
disports? where is then their boasting, and presumption of false joy? O into
how grievous miseries are they fallen after a short pleasure? from a
counterfeit mirth they are fallen into assured misery, and eternal torment.
What happened unto the^, may also happen unto thee, for thou art both a man, and
compounded of the same dust and ashes, that they were framed of; man of earth,
slime of slime, and after death thou shall be turned into dust and ashes,
neither know thou where, when, or how. Wherefore, seeing that death waits
for thee in every place, if thou be wise, expect him in like manner at all
times, and in every place. Let the lovers of this world remember, says
Isidore, Isidore.
how short the felicity of this world is, how barren and slender the glory of
it is, and how weak and frail the power is. Tell me if thou can where are
the Kings, Princes, and Emperors of ancient times? where are the rich and
mighty men of this world? They are all passed away as a shadow, and vanished
as smoke: and if a man seek for them, he shall not find them.

What if we say, that many of those Kings, Princes, and Emperors, thought
that they should always conquer, and never die. O blind and ignorant,
behold, it is not so, behold the matter is fallen out quite otherwise, they
are dead, as other men are, their lyfes have failed them, as the lyfes of other
Princes, that lived and ruled before them.

What the estate of man is after death, Saint Bernard does very well teach:
What, says he, is more stinking then a carcass? what is more horrible then
a dead man? He that was of a beautiful countenance, and comely stature, whilst
he lived, after death lies with a ghastly and fearful face: for worms,
putrefaction and horror, follow a dead man. Which thing, seeing it is so, what
do riches, delicacies, and honors profit? Riches do not deliver from death,
nor delicacies from worms, nor honors from corruption. Chrysostom. Epist. ad
The odor. Laps.
And Saint Chrysostom says: Have thou not seen many, that have dyed amidst
their delights, even in their drunkenness, and in other fond pleasures of
this life?

Where are they now, that not long since ridd through the streets bravely
mounted, swelled with pride, richly attired in silks, guarded with attendants
and seruitours, smelling of perfumes, ointments, and spices, fawned upon with
flatterers and parasites, where is now all their pomp and vain toys? gone.
Where are now their large and costly banquets, their immoderate laughters,
their ease and idleness, their effeminate, luxurious, and riotous life's? All is
gone. What is become of their bodies, that ere while were vvayted upon with
so great troops, and were kept so neat and finicall? Behold, they are gone
down into the grave. Contemplat the dust, ashes, worms, the beauty of that
pulchritude, and thou will sigh bitterly.

Behold with diligence, and pry narrowly into each of their monuments, search
their graves and Sepulchers, toss and turn over their bones and ashes, thou
shall find nothing here but ashes: nothing besides the relics of worms,
which have eaten their bodies, and see what is the end of them, albeit they
lived in this world in delights and glory. I pray God, that thou may
diligently consider of these things, and that they may never slip out of thy
memory. But (o grief) the unhappy sons of Adam, neglecting true and wholesome
studies and endeavors, do seek for and hunt after vain and transitory
pleasures. If therefore, o my brother, thou will always in thine heart meditate
of these things, and consider the misery, and vildnes of this life, thou will
be humbled, and wilt detest pride, seeing that thou art not ignorant that pride
is the badge and cognizance, The devil is the King of pride.
by which the children of the devil are known: For he is, Job. 41.
as holy Job says, the King over all the children of pride. Gregory confirms
this; Greg. lib. 34. Moral, cap. 25.
Pride, says he, is a most evident token of reprobates: but contrarily
humility is a badge of the elect. Seeing therefore that every one is known by
that he has, he is easily found under what King he warreth. For every one
carries as it were a certain title of his labor, whereby he evidently
shows, under who^ he serves, that is, whether under Christ, or the devil. O
cursed pride, hated of GOD and men. This tumbled Lucifer headlong out of
heaven: banished Adam out of Paradise, drowned Pharaoh with his Army in the red
Sea: deprived Saul of his kingdom: transformed Nabuchodonozer into a beast,
and destroyed Antiochus with a most horrible and hideous death.

The second Meditation for Tuesday: of sin, and what discommodities come by it.
HE that commits sin, says the beloved Disciple of Christ, 1, John, 3.
is of the devil: for the devil sins from the beginning: for this purpose
appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the works of the devil. Sin
is so heavy a burden, that neither heaven, nor earth can bear it, but with
the Author and worker of it, it descends into hell. Every word, deed, and
thought contrary to the law of God, according to Saint Augustine, is sin:
which ought, none otherwise the^ hell to be eschewed of all them, who aspire to
the heavenly kingdom: and that for three causes, Sin is to be eschewed for
three things.
the first of which is, because it displeases God: the second, because it
pleases the devil: the third, because it is hurtful, and brings many
discommodities to man.

First, I say, thou ought to eschew sin, because it exceedingly
displeases thy Creator, in which place we are to consider, what God has done
by reason of sin. No man is ignorant that for sin God has destroyed the
works of his own hands: that for sin he has cast Angels out of heaven,
disparadiz'd men, and drowned with flood of waters all mankind, as the book
of Genesis witnesses. Other Kings and Emperors, that they may revenge the
injury done unto them of their enemies, do spoil and wast their Countries and
Dominions: but God subverted and destroyed his own kingdom, because sin had
entered into it. Neither does God only hate sin, but all that, which by any
manner of way pertains unto sin. Men although the wine has lost his virtue,
do not therefore cast away the silver bowls, in which the wine is, but
reserving them, they pour out the wine: but God not only casts out sin,
but also together with sin hurleth down headlong into the deepest Ocean of
hell the vessels, in which it is, which are creatures and reasonable souls,
made according to his own image, and redeemed with his precious blood.
Whereupon the wiseman says: Ungodliness, and an ungodly man are alike hated of
God. That most patient man Job says: Thou do visit me every morning, Job.
7.
and triest me every moment. Therefore in what should I hope, or wherein should
I trust, but in the mere mercy of God, and in the affiance of celestial grace?
For be it that I dwell amongst honest men, be it that I converse and diet with
religious, devout, and faithful friends, be it that I read holy Books,
godly Treatises, and sing heavenly Himnes, yet they little, or rather nothing
at all profit me, if the favor of GOD forsake me, and leave me to my
nakedness and necessity. Therefore there is none other remedy, but to embrace
patience, to deny my self, and wholy to yield up and offer my self unto the
divine will and pleasure. There was never any man so religeous, who did not
sometimes feel himself deprived of divine consolation, and that he wanted
the zeal and fervor of the spirit. There neither is, nor has at any time
been any Saint, whom temptation has not sometimes taken hold of. Certainly,
he is not worthy of that high and sublime contemplation of GOD, who before
has not for the love of GOD been exercised in sundry and manifold
tribulations. Almost alvvayes the praecedent temptation is wont to be a
token, that comfort is at the doors. Wherefore heavenly consolation is
promised unto them, that are approved and tried with temptations, which the
Scripture affirms, when it is said: To him that overcomes, Apoc. 2.
will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the mids of the Paradise
of God. Wherefore God has not either in heaven, or upon the earth so dear and
faithful a familier friend, who^ he deadly hates not, if he find deadly
sin in him. Wherefore albeit Christ loved Saint Peter entirely, yet he had
condemned him, if he had died in that sin, when thrice he denied his lord and
Master.

Secondly, Gods hatred to sin hereby also appears, that he would have his
only begotten Son dye for the sins of men, as Esaias testifies, saying: For
the transgression of my people have I stricken and plagued him. Esaias, 53.
And certainly the Son of God himself, that he might destroy sin, Ibidem.
delivered his own soul into the hands of death, as the same Prophet says.
Who was ever found boiling with so great wrath against his enemies, who that he
might destroy them, slew his only Son?

Thirdly, God plagueth and punishes sin every where.
Gods detestation to sin is hereby also gathered, that he has persecuted it
even from the beginning of the world, to the end, not in one place, but
wheresoever he found it. He found it in heaven, and thence he banished it; when
he saw it remaining upon the earth, he came in his own person, that he might
expel it thence, and at the last in the final judgment he will confine and
include sin within the limits and bonds of hell, as in his natural place, as
the Prophet testifies, saying; And he will cast all our sins into the
bottom of the Sea. Micah. 7.


Fourthly, how greatly sin displeases God, this similitude argues: A Simily.
without all doubt that fault is very odious and abominable, that causes a
Mother to cast her beloved Son into a burning furnace, and not once to assay
to take him thence again: so certainly there must needs be some great matter
in it, and exceedingly odious unto God, for which he should cast his children
into eternal flames, if he find sin in them; whom notwithstanding he so
loved, that he refused not to dye for them. Thou see here o sinful soul,
how odious and abominable all sin is unto God. Wherefore if thou desire to
please God, it is necessary, that thou keep thy self free and clean from
sin, so that it possess not the least place in thee. For she shall be
accounted a very unfaithful woman, A Simily.
who admits into her bed an other man besides her husband, but especially,
if she admit one, that is his enemy, and of whom he is to expect many
discommodities and injuries: so also unfaithful is that soul, which of
purpose and willingly gives place unto sin, which Christ our Redeemer the
true spouse of our souls hates so deadly; which wrought him so many
disco^modities, so many losses, so many torments, and for which, he was
hanged naked upon the Cross. Wherefore here it pleases and likes me well
to imitate that regal Prophet and svveete singer of Israel, and say: Create
in me a clean heart, Psalm. 51.
o God, and renew a right spirit within me.

We said that the second reason why sin was to be eschewed, Sin makes
the devil merry.
is, because it makes merry our ancient enemy the devil: which is gathered
by three signs and tokens. The first is, because he seeks for nothing in
the whole world so industriously: he hunteth not after gold, nor silver, nor
precious stones, but after souls, as it is figured in Genesis, where the King
of Sodom says in the person of the devil; Give me the souls, Genesis 14.
and take the goods to thy self. Saint Gregory affirms the same thing:
Gregory.
Persuade thy self, that the devil seeks for none other thing, then to
deceive and destroy souls: A Simily.
for as an Hawke desires nothing so much, as the heart of that bird, which he
pursues: so the devil desires nothing so much as the soul of a sinner.

The second sign, whereby we know that the devil does love sin is the
continual temptation, by which he impugneth and molesteth men, neither is ever
wearied in soliciting man unto sin. For there are almost now past six
thousand years, in all which time he has only applied himself to this
study, that he might sin, and make man to sin: neither is he tired, yea he
daily finds and inuenteth nevve kinds of sin, he is still nimbler and
busier in his endeavors and temptations, and daily brings men into new
errors, as we see in the book of Job. For when as God asked him, whence he
came? he answered: From compassing the earth to and fro, Job, 1.
and from walking in it. He is so busied in preferring sin, that he has not
time to take any rest, as Job testifies: They that pierce me through, Job, 30.
says he, do not sleep.

The third sign, that sin pleases the devil, is, that he can never be
satisfied with sin. For although infinite thousands of men have descended to
hell for their impiety and pollution of sin, of whom the devil is the
ringleader, yet he is not satisfied, but always hungerly, Like a roaring Lion
walks about, 1, Pet. 5.
seeking whom he may devour, as Saint Peter testifies in his first Epistle
general. He so hungreth and thirsts, as it is said in the book of Job, that
he drinks up the river, Job, 40.
and hastes not: and he trusts that he can draw up Jorden into his mouth.
His mouth is hell, and the river that runs into his hellish mouth are
sinners, who with great celerity, as swift rivers, have into his jaws, whom
he swalloweth up with great thirst and desire. It is reported in the life's of
the Fathers, that the Prince of devils did commend and honor one of his
train; yea, commanded him to sit in his chair of estate crowned, because
he had brought a certain religious man to the sin of luxury, whom he had
been enticing forty years, and could not bring him to nibble or byte at his
bayte.

Therefore mourn and lament o sinful soul, very bitterly, seeing thou have
so often rejoiced thy mortal enemies, by sinning so mortallie to thy great
loss and danger, and in steed thereof yield repentance, and a pure
conversion of heart unto God, that God and his Angels may in like manner
rejoice. For there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, Luke, 15.
for one sinner that conuerteth.

The third principal reason, The damage and hurt that comes to the soul by
sin.
for which sin is to be eschewed, is the great damage we reap by it. For
first by sin we are estranged from God, Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, Esaias. 59.
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. If all the
blessed Citizens of that heavenly Country could either sin, or would sin,
they should fall from heaven into the bottomless depth of hell, and should
utterly loose the amity and friendship, which they have with God. Heere-vpon
Augustine says: Augustine.
If thy faithful friend offend thee, thou think him worthy to be
reprehended: how much more worthy art thou to be blamed, if thou sinnest
against almighty God, thy most gracious and merciful Father?

Secondly, sin makes his when he had promulgated his decree as concerning
the reedifying of the temple at Jerusalem, added at the end of his letter
Pattens: I have made a decree: Ezra. 6.
That who soever shall alter this sentence, the wood shall be pulled down from
his house, and shall be set up, and he shall be hanged thereon, and his house
shall be made a dunghill for this. This vvood is our own consciences. We
have the like example in Ester, Ester, 7.
where Assuerus commanded Haman to be hanged. This is the sentence of GOD,
which he will pronounce at the last day against them, who shall be found to
have lived in their sins; let them be hanged up in hell.

wherefore Solomon says: Sin makes men miserable. Prou. 19.
Neither is a sinner only miserable, because he has not; but also because
he has lost himself, and his liberty: he makes himself the devils slave
and captive, neither can he make any spyrituall gain, nor do any thing in
this state acceptable unto God. Neither does he live, albeit his body breath a
little. Lib. 3. de consol. Philoso. cap. 1.
For a wicked man, as says Boethius, is not alive, but dead: for by sin he
has separated himself from the light; and is blind. The same testifies
Sophonias: Soph. 2.
They shall walk, says he, as blind men, because they have sinned against
the Lord. And David says: They have not known nor understood: Psalm. 21.
they walk in darkness, all the foundations of the earth are out of square.

Esaias in the person of sinners does more elegantly set them out in their
colors: Esaias, 59.
We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as one without eyes: we
stumble at the noone day as in the twilight: we are in solitary places, as dead
men. Sin is the same in the soul, A simily.
that rottennes is in an apple: for as that does corrupt the taste, smell,
color, and the whole beauty of the apple: so sin does rob the soul of the
dignity of grace, of the report of a good name, and of the comlines of all her
beauty. For this cause Esaias does compare sinners to the mire of the streets.
Esaias, 10.
Augustine also affirms, that a dead dog does not stink so filthily in the
nosethrils of men, as a sinful soul does before God and his Angels. August.
Ser. 144. de tempt.
And the same Father in a certain Sermon desirous to call a man from the way
of sinners, says: What does it profit thee, if all things be good in thine
house, and thou thy self be not good? Tell me, I pray thee, why would thou
have any evil or naughtines in thine actions, thoughts, or desires? and
would not have naughty grain; nor an evil tree, but a good one, a good
horse, a good servant, a good friend, a good child, and a good wife? But why
do I remember these great matters, when thou will not have a ragged, but a
whole garment, and to be brief a good shoe, and not one that is torn? Or tell
me of any thing, that thou wishest for, which is naught, or that thou desire
any thing, which is not good? I think that thou would not have a ruinous
house, but a good house: and will thou only have an evil soul? Wherein have
thou offended thy self? In what have thou deserved ill of thy self? Will thou
not have any thing evil among thy good things, but only thy self? Prefer I
pray thee thy life before thy shoes.

All things that are obuious unto thine eyes are good, beautiful, and
elegant, and thou love them, and art delighted in them, and how can it be,
that thou thy self wilt be evil, vile, impure, and abject? If all things,
that are in thine house could speak, they would cry aloude, and say: If thou
desire that we should be good, we also desire a good Master: and they
would exclayme against thee unto God, and say; O good God, thou have given unto
this man so many good things, and so much wealth, when as he himself is
wicked and evil, what do those things profitte him, which he has, when
as his understanding is blinded, and he possesses not the Lord, that bestovved
these things upon him?

The fourth damage is, Lib. 4. de consola. Philos.
Therefore Boethius says: If thou take goodness from a good man he shall
be a beast. And Aristotle says in his Ethics, that such a man is worse then
a beast. Neither does the holy Scripture dissent from them, Psalm. 49.
when it says: Man being in honor, has no understanding: but is compared
vnthe beasts that perrish.

The fifth damage is, that sin of the devil: hence is that of John: 1, John, 3.
He that commits sin, is of the devil. And our Lord says in the Gospel:
Ye are of your father the devil. John, 8.
Therefore o thou sinner how unhappy art thou, that feel so great losses and
damages? take pity therefore on thine own soul, and do not burden and
load it with sins.

These things being thus, remember o man, and acknovvledge these three main
and huge mischiefs, which sin brings unto thee, that is, the offending of
God, the rejoicing of the devil, and infernal torments. Consider furthermore
the noblenes of thy soul, and how dangerous thy wounds be, which could not
be healed but only by the blood, and wounds of the Son of God. Unless the
wounds of thy soul had been everlastingly mortal and deadly, the Son of God,
had not died for them. Therefore do not slightly prize or lightly weigh the
concupiscences of thy soul, which that same supreme Majesty of God did so
greatly and highly account of. He abundantly poured out tears for thee,
every night wash thou thy bed with tears, and water thy couch with continual
contrition. He shed his blood for thee: shed also thine by the daily affliction
of thine heart, and continual tribulation of thy spirit. Do not regard what
thy body desires, but respect what thy soul wills: for Saint Gregory
says: where the body lives a while in delights, there the soul is tortured
with perpetual torments. And by how much the body is afflicted in this life,
by so much the spirit rejoices in the other. Therefore Saint Augustine
admonishes us very well: Let us deny our own wills for Jesus Christ: for
they must once be forsaken: neither does it please God that for temporal
things we should loose eternal blessings. If thou wast permitted certain
years to live in the delights of this flesh, with this condition, that
afterward thine eyes should be plucked out, or that thou being deprived of all
delicates, should most miserably perrish through hunger and thirst, and
wretchedly contend with famine, affliction, and misery, I persuade my self,
that thou would never wish for such manner of delicats. What I pray thee is
this life? In truth it is not the space of one month; what do I say of a
month? Nay, it is not the space of one hour, not of a minute, no not of a
moment, if it be compared to that eternal beatitude, or to those torments of
hell, which have none end, and like which none can be thought of.

The third Meditation for Wednesday: how dangerous it is to defer repentance.
OUR Redeemer inuiting us all unto repentance, says: If any man will follow
me, Math. 16.
let him forsake himself, Luke. 9.
and take up his Cross, and follow me: for whosoever will save his life,
shall loose it. It is necessary, that all sinners do take up this Cross, and
carry it with perseverance, if they desire to reign with Christ Jesus.
Wherefore Saint Hierome writing to Susanna, says: that repentance ought to be
equal, or greater then the sins. Hier. in an Epistle to Susanna.
That repentance is necessary, says he, which may either equalize the faults,
or exceed them. And Saint Augustine says: Whosoever will be saved, it is
necesary that he be washed at the least with the tears of the contrition of
his heart, being cleansed before by baptism from all those blemishes and
pollutions, which sin had spotted and soyled him withal. But if thou shall
say, that this is a hard saying, and that thou can not forsake the world, nor
hate thy flesh, nor chastise thy body: hear what is said, not of me, but of
Saint Hierome: Hier in an Epistle to Iuliana. cap.
It is a difficult thing, nay it is impossible, that any one should enjoy both
present and future blessings: that he should fill his belly here, and his
soul there: that from delicacies he should pass unto delights: that in both
worlds he should be graced and carry his head aloft, and that he should
appear glorious both in heaven, and in earth. Which sentence Saint Gregory
confirms: Many, says he do desire to fly out of the exile of this present
life, unto celestial joy, who in the mean time will not forsake the pleasures
of this world. The grace of Christ Jesus does call them, but the concupiscence
of the world does detain the^. They desire to dye the death of the righteous,
but they will not live as they do: such shall everlastingly perrish, because
their works shall follow them. The austerity of holy John Baptists life, says
Saint Bernard, is a hard sentence of death unto sinners: who when there arose
not a greater then he among those that are born of women, did so chastise,
correct, and afflict his most innocent body: and ye have to be clothed with
silk, fine linen, and purple, and to fare deliciously. O wicked man, this is
not the Kings high way unto heaven. Remember the rich glutton, who was the
Lord of such great wealth, who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared well and delicatly every day, who afterward could not have one small drop
of water to cool his tongue, being tormented in the midst of the flames of hell.
Consider this o my friend, and repent, whilst thou have time. Hear what Saint
Gregory says: Although God promises pardon unto the penitent, yet he has not
promised to morrow unto a sinner. True repentance.
It is repentance to deplore sins past, and not to commit any hereafter.
Therefore it is very well said of S. Augustine: Vain is that repentance,
August. in his Soliloquies.
which the future fault does pollute: lamentations do nothing profit, if sins
be multiplied: it nothing avails to crave pardon for evils, if eftsoons thou
renuest and reiteratest thy follies. Three parts of repentance.
We must note for the further manifestation of this matter, that true
repentance does consist of three parts, which are, contrition of heart,
confession of mouth, and satisfaction of deed. For we have offended God three
manner of vvayes, by delight of thought, by lapse of tongue, and by pride of
works: and these three are to be cured by three contrary remedies, delight of
thought by the sorrow and contrition of heart: the lapse of the tongue by the
confession of the mouth: and the pride of works by upright and vncorupted
satisfaction. Of these three parts therefore we will speak, Contrition what
it is.
and first of contrition, which is a voluntary grief taken for sin
committed, with a purpose of confession, satisfaction, and hereafter not to
sin any more. Contrition must have four degrees according to Bernard: In his
16. Sermon upon the Cant.
Furthermore know, says he, that thou have wholly recovered thy wits and
senses, if thou feel thy conscience to be bitten with a fourefold
compunction, with a double shamfastnes, and with a double fear. Therefore in
thy plangors and lamentations for thy self, think of God thy maker, think of
thy father, think of him, who is bountiful and gracious, and think of thy Lord:
and know that thou art guilty in each respect; deplore and lament each
offense; thy fear does make answer to the first and last, and thy shamfastnes
to the two in the midst. Be it that thy Father does wink at thee, that he that
is bountiful and gracious does pardon thee: but thy Lord and Creator will not.
He that spared not his Son, will not spare the workmanship of his hands, nor a
wicked servant etc. We offend the Lord our God the Creator of all things: we
more wickedly offend our heavenly father, being so gracious and bountiful; who
does support, and nourish us, in which thing we are worse then dogs, who do
love and follow them, of whom they are nourished; but most vilely we offend God,
by crucifying again by sin our Redeemer, as much as lies in us, who has
redeemed us by his most precious blood, and has delivered us from all the
snares and entrappings of sins, from the cruelty of devils, and from infernal
punishments. We must be sorrowful for three things, for sin committed, for
good omitted, and for time lost. August.
Augustine speaks of the dignity of co^trition. The co^trition of the heart
avails more, then to go on pilgrimage throughout the world. And Cassianus
upon the Psalm, Cassianus upon the 120. Psalm.
I called unto the Lord in my trouble, says, the Lord does not know how to
put of him, who^ he knows to entreat him with a broken and pierced heart. And
Chrisostom says: Chrysostom. of the compunction of the heart.
It is only compunction, which makes a man to abhor purple, to desire
sackcloath, to work righteousness, to love tears, and to avoid laughter.

Of Confession, Confession In his 30. Sermon to the brethren in the wilderness.
which is an other part of repentance, S. Augustine says, that it is the health
of souls, an expeller of vices, a restorer of virtue, an impugner of wicked
spirits, a fear of hell, an impediment of the devil. O holy and admirable
confession, thou shuttest the mouth of hell, and openest the gate of Paradise.
And in another place: He that accuses himself of his sins the devil cannot
accuse him at the day of judgment, In his 5^, Sermon de tempore.
if in confessing them he blot those things out by repentance, which he has
done: neither does renew that again, which he has committed. But woe be unto
us, that when so many and so great blessings and benefits are found in
repentance, and yet there are so few found, that do take it upon the^.

Hereupon God complains in Jeremy, Ierem. 8.
saying: I harkned and heard, but none spoke right: no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying; What have I done. Hear what S. Isidore says: Isidor. lib.
de Etym.
It is confession by which the lurking disease of the soul is opened to the
praise of God, in hope to obtain pardon. Of which virtue Ambrose says; When
confession proceeds from a man, then the vengeance of God cease. And
Cassiodorus says; Jesus Christ is not their Judge, but their Aduocat, who
accuse themselves by their own confession. Leo also agrees with these: Leo in
a Sermon.
that is not to be condemned, says he, in judgment, which was purged by
confession. Go too therefore, my brother, and follow the council of Esaias, and
first recount thine iniquities, that thou may be justified. For the
confession of sins is the beginning of righteousness.

Of satis-faction, Satisfaction.
which is a third part of repentance, thus speaks S. Augustine: Augustine in
his Soliloquities.
Satisfaction is to cut of the causes of sin, and not to cherrish by
suggestions any entrance into the^. Gregory says thus: Gregory.
we do not satis-fie, although we cease from iniquity, unless, on the
contrary side we persecute by opposite bewaylings, the pleasures, which we
loved. Chrysostom consents unto this. The reconciliation, says he, ought
to be equal to the precedent offense: thou ought to be as ready to lament,
as to offend, and as thine intent was to offend, such also ought thy devotion
to be in repenting; for great sins do require also great grief and sorrow.

Wherefore, Eusebius says: A light and slight contrition, does not effect,
Hom 5, ad Monachos.
that those debts may be forgiven, to which everlasting death is due: neither
is a transitory satisfaction, sufficient for those evils, for which eternal
fire is prepared. There is need of much weeping, of much mourning, of great
grief of heart, to heal the griefs and sorrows of the heart. We must
endeavor with the whole contrition of the spyrite, that those old evils,
which as arrows stick in our consciences, may be pulled out. It is not
sufficient, with the lips only to say; I have offended, spare me, and remit
my sins. But we are presently weary, and look behind us, as Lots wife did;
wherefore we are diligently to consider the words of Bernard; He that perfectly
knows, says he, the burden of sin, and the plagues and greeua^ces of his
soul, he shall little or nothing at all feel the punishments and castigations of
his body, neither shall they be troublesome unto him, certainly persuading
himself that God will have respect unto him, and that he shall avoid those
things, which he was desposed and prepared to commit. Hereupon S. Augustine
says, Augustine in Psalm, 50,
writing upon the Psalm; Have mercy upon me, o God: Many there be, says he,
that are not ashamed to sin, but they are ashamed to repent. O incredible
madness, art thou not ashamed of thy wound, and art thou ashamed of the binding
up of thy wound? Is it not being naked more ugly? Run therefore to the Phision,
repent, and say; I do confess mine iniquity, and my sin is always before
me: against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil before thee.

Satisfaction consists in three things; In what things satisfaction
consists.
In prayer, Almesdeedes, and Fasting: which are as it were certain antidotes
against so many capital vices, by which we offend GOD: and these three vices
do arise from three principal enemies of our souls. Pride is ingendered of
the devil, covetousness of the world, and luxury of our own flesh: of which
thus speaks Saint John: All that is in the world, 1, John, 2,
is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Prayer
restrains pride, Almes-deedes banisheth covetousness, and fasting brideleth
lust. Furthermore, we always sin either against God, and so in like manner
prayer is opposed against all that sin, and by it we are accepted of God, as as
the Wiseman says: The prayer of him that humbles him self, Ecclus, 35,
goes through the clouds, and coaseth not till it come near, and will not
depart till the most High have respect thereunto: or we sin against our
selves, and against such a sin, fasting is effectual, according to that of
Augustine: Restrain and bridle your flesh by fasting and abstinence: Or we
sin against our neighbor, and here almes-deedes are of force; of which our
Savior speaks in Luke, Give alms, Luke, 11,
and all things shall be clean to you. For as water extinguisheth fire, so
almsdeeds quench sin. Almes-deedes are called the water of GOD, and a
precept of mercy commanded unto us of the son of God.

Wherefore for three causes we are bound to give alms, and to exercise the
works of charity: The fruits of almes-deedes.
First, because by mercy sin is wiped away: VVhereupon Solomon says: By mercy
and truth, Prou, 16,
iniquity shall be forgiven. The Scripture makes mention of that poor
widow, who having but a little oil, 2, King. 4.
and exercising mercy, filled all her empty vessels, and the oil was so
multiplied, that she had enough to pay her debts, and to satisfy all her
creditors. These empty vessels are the poor, whom we must bring into our
houses, Esaias, 58.
according to that saying of Esaias; Deal thy bread to the hungry, bring the
poor that wander, home to thine house, when thou see the naked, cover him,
and hide not thy self from thine own flesh. Like unto this is the counsel of
Tobias, saying unto his son; Give alms of thy substance; Tob, 4,
and when thou give alms, let not thine eye be envious, neither turn thy
face from any poor, least God turn his face from thee. Give alms according
to thy substance: if thou have but a little, be not afraid to give a little
alms. And so a little of this oil of mercy, shall more and more abound,
being increased with the augmentation of grace.

Furthermore, alms multiplyeth our temporal goods, Lib. 18. Moral. c. 10
as Gregory testifies, saying: we loose earthly things by keeping them and
preserve them by giving them away; And in another place: whatsoever is given
to the poor, if it be well considered, is not a gift, but a lone, because that
which is given, is received again without all hazard, or adventure with
advantage: as for example, 1, Kings, 1^
where the widows oil and meal is increased, who nourished Elias: whereby it
is manifest, that the poor do rather feed the^ that give alms, then are
fed of them.

Thyrdly, because alms is a work of mercy, which vvayteth upon the soul to
heaven, as S. Ambrose testifies, who says: They are not the goods of man,
which he cannot carry with him. Only mercy is a companion of the dead. O how
good and necessary a companion is alms for the dead? Therefore do not despise
such a companion, which like an Advocate goes before thee, and not follows
after; as those wretches do contemn it, who will not extend their alms in
their life time, being not unlike to them that cause light to be carrryed
behind them, who^ the Wiseman reprehendeth, saying: Say not unto thy
neighbor, Prou, 3,
Go and come again, and to morrow will I give thee, if thou now have it.

He that is rich ought to consider three things in giving his alms, Three
things to be considered in alms.
the first of the which is: that it is God that requires the alms, and that
he will have that mercy in the same account, as if it were done to himself,
according to that, which Christ says in the Gospel: Math, 25,
That which ye have done unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me.

GOD does beg of the rich money for the poor, of whom the rich daily desire
the kingdom of heaven. He therefore that denies alms to the poor, God
requiring it, it is greatly to be feared, least God in like manner deny unto
him the kingdom of heaven, and that he will not hear him, when he cries,
according to that of Solomon in his Proverbs: Proverb, 21
He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also cry, and
not be heard.

The second thing that a rich man ought to think of, being about to give
alms, is, that almighty GOD does require that for the poor, which is his
own, seeing that he is the Lord of all those things, which we possess;
therefore he is without doubt most ungrateful, that denies necessary alms
unto the poor.

David was far of from this ingratitude, when he said: Might, and power, and
glory, and victory, and praise (o Lord) are thine. For all things that are in
heaven, and in earth are thine: Thine is thy kingdom O Lord, and thou art
above all Princes, Riches and honor are thine. All things are thine, and we
give unto thee, that which we have received at thine hands.

And this cogitation ought the more to move us unto alms, because GOD
receives what we give, and does repay us not only our principal, but an
hundred fold. This is that, which Saint Augustine says: Augustine in his
Epistles.
If thou will be a good Merchant, and a gainefull Usurer; give that which
thou can not keep, that thou may receive what thou can not loose. Give a
little, that thou may receive an hundred fold, give a temporal and fading
possession, that thou may receive an everlasting inhearitance.

Therefore he is not only ungrateful, but also mad, who does not give unto
God his revenues, that he may receive them again with so great interest: when
as both the Jews, the Ethnicks, and the Moors, willingly do it. Wherefore my
dear Brother repent, and gather and lay up the treasuries of mercy in a safe
place, in celestial security, and not among earthly dangers. Consider that
the heart of a covetous man, is a pytte without a bottom; the more it
receives, the more it desires, neither is at any time satisfied as the
Wiseman says: A covetous man is not satisfied with money. Eccles. 11.
Woe be unto them that lay up their treasures in the earth: for their hearts
are afflicted, because they cannot enjoy their riches, and they keep them with
danger, and will they, nill they, they must at the last part from them, and
suffer punishment in hell.

Lay up thy treasure my deer and good brother, in thine own Country, which is
Heaven, where thou shall live always, and never have hope to enjoy these,
which are to be left in the earth: persuade thy self that those are thy
goods, which thou have laid out and bestowed on the poor; for those are not
properly thy goods which thou can not carry with thee. Hear what S. Ambrose
says: Ambrose in his offices.
Nothing does so much commend a Christian, as commiseration, and charity. And
saint Jerome says: Hiero. to Nepotianus.
I do not remember that I have read, that any one dyed an evil death, who
willingly exercised the works of charity. For they have the prayers of many,
and it is impossible but that their prayers should be heard. And Leo
commending this virtue, says; He shall receive many great blessings at Gods
hands, Leo of the apparition of our lord.
who lets not the poor depart from him without comfort.

Mercy is of so great virtue, that without it, others do not any whitte
profit. Be it that thou art faithful, sober, and chaste, and adorned with
vvorthier titles, yet if thou be not merciful, thou shall find no mercy.
And this may be enough to move the minds of men, that they may readily and
cheerfully take upon the^ this third part of repentance, which is
Satis-faction. Of this repentance, that we may return to our purpose, our
Savior says; He that takes not up his cross and follows me, is not worthy
of me. Which if it be true, we are to perform our repentance as speedily as
may be, yea in our youth: for then it is more profitable unto us, and more
acceptable to God, as the wise man teaches, saying; Eccles, 12*
Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days come
not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
the^. My son, defer not from day to day thy conversion unto the Lord, least his
anger come on a sudden, and condemn thee, and destroy thee in the time of
vengeance. Be not deceived with the suggestions of that cursed serpent satan,
which suggesteth unto thee hope of a longer life, and that thou shall repent
thee enough a little before thou dyest, that he unawares may oppress and
subvert thee, as the Wise man says: Ecclus, 20,
To promise unto thy self longer life, is great wickedness, and has
destroyed many, and has removed them as the waves of the sea.

It is evil, because it is contrary to reason and justice: It is wicked and
naught, to promise unto thy self a longer life.
worse, because it is against the sinner himself: but it is most vile,
ungodly, and cursed, because it warreth and fights against the divine will.
That it is evil, and contrary to reason and justice, is proved by three
examples.

time of repentance without fruit, in vain desire of the Lord, that the gate
may be opened unto them. The Prophet Malachie denounces a curse against such
an one. Malach. 1,
Cursed be the deceiuer, says he, that has in his flock a male, and voweth
and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.

Secondly he seems unto the Fathers: One cutting down wood, bound up a
burden of it, and then made trial whether he could carry it, but seeing
himself not able to carry the same, he cut down more wood, and made him a
greater burden, and by how much he was less able to lift it up, by so much he
augmented it. After the same manner do sinners, who deferring the time of
repentance, do increase the burden of their sinners.

For as S. Gregory says: Gregory.
the sin that is not foorth-with cleansed and purged by repentance, does draw
on another with his weight. Thirdly, is minded to dwell: but does pull down
with all his might and maine the house, which he has determined to inhabit?
Certainly, this man altogether works against the judgment of reason, and is
worthy to be counted both a fool and a mad man. This does a sinner, who
proroging his conversion to the hour of death, builds for himself a
habitation in the depth of hell, where notwithstanding, he desires not to
dwell. Fear and dread therefore that ancient saying: He that does any
thing against his own conscience, builds in hell.

Secondly, Hope of a longer life, is worse the^ the former circumstances in
respect of the sinner himself.
in hope of a longer life, something worse seems to be, then that has been
spoken, when it is to the prejudice of the sinner himself. And this is proved
by two examples.

The first is, because if any man had rather be sick, then sound: a servant,
then free: poor, then endued with some co^petent wealth: such an one should be
opposite and contrary to himself. A sinner is like to this man, because he had
rather live, nay lie dead in sin, which is a spiritual sickness and infirmity,
the^ be whole, strong, and sound. Wherefore a sinner is more cruel against
himself; for he had rather be dead then alive; sick, then sound; a servant,
then free: as it is in S. John: John, 8,
Who soever commits sin, is the servant of sin. And S. Augustine says:
August. in his 4. book of the city of God.
A good man, albeit he serve, yet he is free; but an evil man, although he
reign, yet is he a servant: neither of one man alone, but (that which is more
grievous) of so many masters as he has vices. The second example is, he is a
debtor, who takes any sum of money upon usury; for by so much more does his
debt and usury increase, by how much he is longer in discharging it; and to be
so much the more negligent in repaying it, by how much he is less sufficient
to repay, certainly it is hurtful and unprofitable to him self: Such an one
is a sinner, who perseuering in his sins, the longer he continues in them,
the more he increases the usury of his fault: and so much the more
punishment shall he at the length suffer for them. Hereupon S. John says in
his Revelation; Apoc, 18,
Inasmuch as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give ye
to her torment and sorrow.

Thirdly, we said, that the persuasion of a longer life was most vile, The
persuasion of a longer life, is most vile, and ungodly.
ungodly, and cursed, especially, because it directly fights against the
goodness of our Lord Jesus Christ: and this is manifested by three examples,
has borne arms under the colors of his adversary, would at the last return to
the service of God in his faint and feeble old age. Secondly, if any one had
received money, or other great riches the reproach and injury of his Lord,
Creator, and Redeemer: by sinning sundry and diverse ways, by offending the
goodness of GOD; and by making havoc of all his goods, but chiefly of his
soul, which is committed and commended unto him, as a most precious treasure.
Wherefore, S. Gregory said; Woe be unto me, if I shall negligently keep the
talent committed to me of the Lord, that is, my soul, redeemed with the
precious blood of that immaculate lamb, seeing also, that there is not any
moment of time, which I am not to give an account of.

to the enemies of his Lord; and should set before his Lord mustie bread,
unsavory meats, putrified flesh, corrupted fishes, and dead wine: do you not
think that this servant should badly fit the humor of his Lord? A wretched
sinner is like to such an one, who offers to the world, and to the devil,
who are the enemies of Christ Jesus his lord, the best and fairest flower of
his youth and strength: and to his God and lord, the worst part of his life,
barren and unprofitable old age. David did not so, who says of himself;
Psalm, 38,
I will keep my strength for thee o Lord. And the Wise man says, that from
his youth he sought for wisdom, Wised, 8.
which is true virtue. But of all them that defer repentance, Gregory in his
morals.
Saint Gregory says: He is far enough of from faith, who expects old age
to repent in. For it is to be feared, least while he hops for mercy, he fall
into judgment. For not any day is within his power, and therefore every one
ought to follow the counsel of Isidore, and convert himself with all the
diligence and have he can, unto the Lord; for if he linger and loyter, he
shall at the length be willing, but not able to turn himself.

Which things being so, repent my dear brother with all speed and celeritie,
and make no longer tarrying, least thou be reprobated and shut out with the
foolish virgins.

The fourth Meditation, for Thursday: of the contempt of the world, and with
what hatred, and diligence it is to be eschewed.
THE glorious Apostle S. John says; 1, John, 2,
Brethren, love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. For
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him: and the world
passes away, and the lust thereof. Saint Augustine expounding this place, In
his second tractate upon the Epistle of S. John.
says: What will thou do? whether had thou rather love temporal things,
and so pass away with the time, or Christ our Savior, and live for ever? If
thou shall love this world, it will consume and destroy thee; for it cannot
defend them that love it.

This World is as an excommunicated man: The world is as a man
excommunicated.
for as the Church does not pray for him that is excommunicated: so Jesus
Christ does not pray for the world, although he prayed for them that crucified
him. O how great madness is it to serve such a lord, who at the end of thy
service, is wont to give no other wages, but nakedness and desolation. A speech
and fact of Saladine.
So Saladine that great Soldane of Babylon, the conqueror of Asia, being at the
point of death, and seeing no hope of life to remain, commanded his
standard bearer to be called unto him, to whom he thus spoke, saying; Thou
had wont to carry mine imperial ensign before me, when I went to war;
now also carry the ensign of my death; which is this poor vvinding-sheete:
carry it through all the streets of Damascus, and cry: Behold the king of all
the East dies, and of all his spoils and trophyes, carries none other with
him, but this worn thredbare winding-sheete. The like is read of a certain
young king of Lothoringia, who being ready to give up the ghost, lying in a
most magnificent palace, and in a rich sumptuous bed, cried out with a loud
voice, that he might be heard of all; O lord Jesus Christ, how woorthily is
this world to be condemned. See in what stately and royal buildings I have
lived, and now vvretched creature that I am, know not whither this night
following I shall go, what Inn I shall have, or what manner of entertainment
I shall find.

Therefore o sinner fly from the world, fly I say, from the world, first,
because it leaves thee in so great need and misery. For as the Apostle Saint
James says; The amity of this world, James, 4,
is the enmity of God. Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world,
makes himself the enemy of God. And Saint Gregory says; A man is so much the
nearer unto God, by how much he is further of from the love of the world.
Gregory.
For this cause the Lord would be carried without the City, to signify, that
he had no part in the World: and whosoever will be pertaker of the fruits
of his passion, he must renounce the world, and separate himself from all
worldly conversation, if not in act, yet in desire: this is that which
almighty GOD commands by his Prophet, saying; Get ye out of Babylon, that
every one may save his own soul. Babylon, Upon the 7. chapter of Mich.
according to the exposition of Saint Hierome, is the house of confusion,
which is this world, in which confusion reigns every where, as well in the
Clergy as in the Layitie, as well in old, as young, as well in men, as women.
Therefore it is very well said of Saint John in his general Epistle; 1, John,
5,
The whole world lies in wickedness.

Saint Bernard also counsels us very well, Of conversion unto the Clergy.
chap, 30,
saying: Fly out of Babylon, fly and save your souls. Fly to the Cities of
refuge, where ye may both repent for sins past, and for the present find
grace, and safely look for future glory. Let not the anguish and remorse of
your sins hinder you, nor the austeritie of repentance deter and afright you.
For neither the passions of this time, nor the trybulation of this world are
worthy, for the fault past, which is remitted; for the present grace of
consolation which is bestowed; nor for the future glory, which is promised. To
be brief, there is no bitterness so great, which the Prophets meal will not
sweeten, which the wisdom of the tree of life will not make sauory. We are to
know, that the world is to be eschewed for four causes, the first of which
is, The world is to be eschewed for 4 causes.
because wise and circumspect men, are wont to fly and avoid infectious and
contagious places, especially if they be weak and sickly, or fear any
infirmity. Such a place is the World, which has in it many evils, and many
diseases of sin, we see also much filthiness, and many blemishes in it, which
co^taminate and pollute our souls: for sin it self is a contagious disease,
therefore not without cause we ought to eschew and avoid the society and
company of wicked and ungodly men; for it is not meet, that the whole and
sound should dwell with the leaprous and diseased: for the Wise man says: He
that touches pitch, shall be defiled with it, and he that companieth with a
proud man, shall put on pride.

Certainly says S. Ierom, nothing does so hurt a man as naughty company,
Tom. 9. Epi. Eusebius. ad Damasum de morte Hieron.
and evil society. For a man becomes such a one, as the company he keeps. The
Wolf does never dwell with the lamb: and a chaste man does fly the company of
the luxurious. I think it impossible, that a man should long continue honest,
who daily uses the society of wicked me^. With the holy, thou shall be holy,
says the Psalmist, with the innocent, thou shall be innocent, and with the
froward, thou shall learn frowardnes. For as evil company hurts, so good
company profits. Nothing can be compared to this treasure. He that finds
good society, finds life, and abounds with wealth. I speak truly and
confidently; a man is made very sildome either good or evil, but through
company and society. The heart of a child, is said to be as a Table in which
nothing is painted. Therefore that he receives from company, he keeps till
his old age, whether it be good or evil. These things spoke S. Jerome, being
ready to yield up the ghost. Therefore seeing that the world is so evil, we
ought to eschew and avoid it, as an ill neighbor, who can work us great
mischief by his neighborhood and vicinitie, and hurt us very much by sins
and sinners, of which it is full.

The second cause why the world is to be eschewed, The second cause why the
world is to be eschewed.
is, because wise and considerate men do avoid those places, in which they
fear the intrappings and snares of their enemies, least they fall into their
hands: and this is the revvard that the world rendereth unto her lovers, that
she at the length delivers the^ into the hands of the devils their deadly
enemies. The words of the the traitor Judas are to be referred hither, saying
to them, to whom he sold and betrayed the Son of God: Math, 26,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, and say peace be unto thee, that is he, lay hold on
him. Which words the world says also to the devils: to vvhomsoeuer I shall
give the kiss of peace, of riches, of pleasures and honors, lay hold on him,
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into hell. Wherefore, S. Gregory says
not without good cause; Gregory in his morrals.
It is a manifest sign of perdition, when the effect and event, does favor
affected iniquity, and no contrariety does hinder, what the perverse mind
has conceived. And Saint Jerome says: It is a manifest token of damnation, to
be loved of the world, to enjoy prosperity, and to have all things, what the
will desires.

Certain therefore it is, that they are exceedingly deceived in finding out
the way to felicity, who think that they may enter into glory, and into the
kingdom of heaven, by riches and pleasures.

The third cause, The third cause.
why we ought to eschew the world, is this, because wise and wary men do
fly and avoid dangerous places, such as the sea is, wherein we sail with
fear. Whereupon the Wiseman says; Ecclus, 9
They that sail over the sea, do tell of the dangers of it. David certifieth
us, The world is a sea.
that this world is a great and spacious sea, in which the greater part of the
mariners perrish. This is manifest, because as Bernard says, many do miscarry
in it, and few are saved. The world is as an Ocean, in which of four shyps,
scarcely one is saved; as the Deluge, in which so many thousand men were
drowned, and so few escaped: and as the Furnace of Babylon kindled with hell
fire, in which a man is set on a light flame with one word of the fire of
wrath, in which luxury does burn, and covetousness is inflamed by the only
look and aspect.

The fourth cause, why we ought to forsake the world, The fourth cause,
is, because every man that is wise, being admonished, ought to eschew that
place, in which his mortal and deadly enemy dwells. This place is the world,
which the devil our capital enemy inhabiteth; he has his signory and
dominion in this world, who always threatens destruction unto us, and
thyrsteth for our deaths. Therefore let us fly from the world, as from the
devil, according to the counsel of the Wise Man, Keep thee far from the man
that has power to slay. Ecclus, 9,


These reasons thus being set before our eyes, let us be wise: for we see
manifestly by these things which have been spoken, that the world cannot be
better overcome by any other way, then by flying from it. We have an example
of this in the life's of the Fathers, of Achrimus, who being Emperor, and
standing in his palace, prayed thus unto GOD. Lord I desire thee, show unto
me the way of salvation. And behold, he heard a voice saying unto him;
Achrimus, avoid the concourse and solemnities of the world, entangle not thy
self in the snares of human vanities, and thou shall be safe. At the hearing
of which voice, he betook himself foorth-with to a strict solitary course
of life. And saying an other time the same prayer, he heard a voice saying:
Fly, overcome, be silent and at rest. And surely these be the roots, and the
grounds not to sin. For by flying, the concupiscence of the flesh is
overcome, by being silent, the pride of life, and by being of a peaceable and
quiet mind, covetousness, and greedines of gain are subdued and overthrown.

Saint Isidore admonishing us that we should contemn the world, says: If
thou desire to live quietly, covet nothing that is in this world: cast from
thee what-soeuer may hinder thy holy purpose. Be dead to the world, and
therefore being dead, do not thyrst after glory, and thou shall live in
tranquillity and rest, being content with thine own. Despise that in thy life,
which thou can not keep in thy death. S. Augustine speaks thus of this
deceitful world: August. in his medita.
This life is a miserable life, a frail life, an uncertain life, a painful
life, an impure life, a life Lady of enormities, and Queen of pride, full of
miseries and errors: which is not to be called a life, but a death in which we
die daily, through sundry defections of mutability, and by manifold kinds of
death. A brickle life, an inco^stant life, which the faster it goes on, the
nerer it approaches to death, a deceitful and unsteady life, full of the
snares of death. Although it be replenished with these, and other greeuances,
sorrows, and inconveniences, yet (o grief) how many does it ensnare with
vanities, and how many are deceived with false and deceitful promises? And
albeit of it self it is so false and bitter, that it cannot co^ceale these
inco^ueniences from her blind lovers, yet it makes drunk an infinite
multitude of fools with the golden cup, which she bears in her hand. As they
are happy, so are they rare, that refuse her familiarity; that despise her
perfunctory joys: that contemn her society, least with this perishing
deceiuer they be also forced to perrish. This says he. Behold, says
Bernard, Bernard.
the world cries, I shall fail thee; and the flesh cries, I shall infect
thee: which then, o miserable sinner, vvilt thou follow? the failing world, or
the infecting flesh? Both of them are evil: therefore follow Christ, who will
refresh thee. But if all these things, my Brother, which thou have hitherto
read of, do not move thee, hear what the same famous Doctor of the Church,
Bernard says, of the lovers of the world: In his meditations.
Woe be unto those unhappy and wretched ones, says he, for whom is prepared
intolerable sorrow, incomparable stinch, and horrible fear. Woe be to them,
for whom is prepared that place, where nothing shall be heard but weeping and
wayling, lamentation and howling, mourning and gnashing of teeth: where nothing
shall be seen but the worm, ugly, deformed, and horrible tortures, and
terrible and fearful devils: where they shall call and seek for death, but
shall not find it: where there is no order, but where perpetual horror
everlastingly abides. How great fear, how great sorrow, how great mourning
will there be, when sinners are separated from the righteous, and delivered to
the power of devils, with whom they shall be cast headlong into the eternal
torments of hell, without hope ever to see the face of the Lord, or heavenly
glory: without any hope to be ever freed from those torments; where neither
the torturers shall be wearied, nor the tortures have any end: where death
shall never die, nor life bring any joy?

Tell me o sinner, Ierom upon the 17, of Matthew.
says S. Jerome, if we had the wisdom of Solomon, the beauty of Absolon, the
strength of Sampson, the long life of Enoch, the riches of Craesus, and the
felicity of Octauian: what would these things profit us, when as our flesh at
the length is to be given to the worms of the earth, and our souls to the
devils, to be everlastingly tormented with the rich Glutton in hell?

The shortness of time, the breuity of life, and the uncertainty of death
ought to move thee to contemn the world, and those vain delights that be in
the world. Wherefore Saint Gregory says: Gregory.
Reprobates do many things wickedly, because they hope to live long here.
Contrariwise, the righteous, whilst they consider the shortness of their life,
they avoid the sins of pride and uncleanness. Of the breuity of this life
S. James says, James, 4.
What is your life? it is even as a vapor that appears for a little time.

And Saint Augustine says, August. upon the 56. psalm.
If thou had lived all that time, since Adam was expelled out of the garden
of Paradise, even to this day, certainly thou should well perceive, that thy
life was not perpetual, which has so passed away: but the life of one man
what is it? add as many years as it pleases thee, add a very long and
lasting old age, what then? Is it not yet morning? Be it that the day of
Judgment is far of; assuredly thy last day cannot be far of, therefore
now prepare thy self; for as thou departest out of this life, so shall thou
be presented to the other life. This says he. And in another place: All the
time that we live here, is taken from life: so that the life present is none
other thing, but a short way, by which we pass unto death, Seneca in his 59.
epistle.
in which no man can long stay nor linger, or walk softly, and at leisure; but
every day thou must finish by little and little some part of thy journey.

All things pass away, says Soneca, and are in continual diminution and
augmentation. None of us is the same in old age, that we were in youth.

Not any one of us is the same in the morning, that we were the day before.
Our bodies pass away after the manner of running rivers: whatsoever thou
see, runs away with the time. Nothing remains steadie of all those
things we see: behold they are changed, whilst I speak, and I also am
changed. And in another place; In his book of consolation to Mat. chap. 22.
The Fates do ply their work, and do take away from us the sense and feeling
of our death; and that death may creep upon us more easily, it lurketh under
the very name of life. Childhood co^uerts infancy into it, youth childhood,
manly age youth, and old age takes away manly age. The very increases, if thou
do well account and think of them, will be found to be losses. If (my
dear Brother) thou let these things into thine ears, and meditatest on
the^ in thine heart, and well considerest them, thou will say, that thou rather
runnest unto death, then that thou can hope for long life.

The fifth Meditation, for Friday: of the vanity of the glory, and magnificence
of this world.
THE Prophet Baruch, detecting and laying open the great and intolerable
mockery of vain glory and riches, and the subtle deceits of this world, in
the third chapter of his prophecy says; Where are the Princes of the Heathen,
and such as ruled the beasts upon the Earth? Baruch, 3,
They that had their pastime with the fowls of heaven, and hoarded up silver
and gold, wherein men trust, and made none end of their gathering? For they
that coined silver, and were so careful of their work, and whose invention
had none end, are come to naught, and gone down to hell, and other men are
come up in their steades. Where are the invincible victors, and heroicke
conquerours of Coutries, who by their conquests purchased such tryumphs, and by
their riches prepared such magnificent feasts and banquettes? Where are the
Emperors and Captains of huge Armies? Where are the managers and tamers of
horses and other creatures? where are the Judges, tyrants, and great thieves
of the world? they are now nothing but dust and ashes. Look and look again,
look I say into their Sepulchers, whether this is a rich man, or that a poor
man? Whether this man is valiant, or that man faint-harted? toss and turn over
their bones, distinguish if thou can a rich man from a poor man, a valiant
man from a coward, a beautiful man from him that is deformed. Wherefore my
brother, let us be wise at the last, being admonished by this Scripture: and
let us assuredly persuade our selves that all man's glory, whence soever it
comes, is to be avoided of us. Why worldly felicity is to be eschewed.
First: because of his own nature it is vile: secondly, because it is
deceitful in his promises: thirdly, because it is vain, brickle, frail,
fleeting and momentany: fourthly, because it is evil and malicious in
rendering a reward. First I say, that man's glory is to be eschewed, because of
his own nature and condition is vile and base; as it is manifest in the first
book of the Macchabees, where Mattathias dying says to his Sons; Fear not
ye the words of a sinful man; 1, Macca. 2.
for his glory is but dong and worms. What in this world is more filthy the^
dong? What more vile then worms? Therefore if all man's glory consists in
dong, it is not to be desired, but avoided. Man's glory, A simily.
as the Philosopher says, is as corruption and the rottenness of vvood. Which
thing also experience teaches us: for as the little worm Teredo, that eats
vvood, in the night shyneth, and makes a crackling, but in the day time is
known to be a worm and putrefaction: so also vain glory shines and
glittereth with great pomp in the night of this world to weak and dim eyes,
which cannot judge but by outward appearances. But when that clear and bright
day of judgment shall come, wherein God shall reveal the darkest and
obscurest things of our souls, and shall manifest the secret counsels of
our hearts: then those, that seemed happy and glorious, shall be known to be
filthy, vile, and without any hope of salvation. Wherefore these mighty me^ are
like unto Owls, which flying in the dark do seem to cast some light from
them, but when the day arises they show black, as they are. If these
gloriosoes had eyes to look into their most vile riches, and to behold the
stinch and corruption of their own flesh, which shall be turned into ashes,
they that are now swelled and puffed up, and do despise others, through the
noblenes of their birth, their power and dignity, should well perceive how
abject, base, black, and corrupt they are. Wherefore I cannot be induced, to
think otherwise, but that if they would deeply consider and weigh these
things, they would presently cast out of their hearts all the earthly glory of
this world: In an Epistle to Iulia. chap. 4.
knowing, as Hierome says, that it is impossible, that any one should be happy
in both worlds, and appear glorious both in heaven, and in earth.

Secondly, The glory of ye world is unconstant.
the glory of this world (as we said) is to be eschewed, because it is frail,
and without any co^stancy or foundation: therefore it is like unto a smoke, or a
vapor, which the higher that it is lifted, the less it is seen: and to a
flower of a good sent and fairenes, which a little Sun-shyne does dry up in a
short time; is withered with a little blast of wind, and does loose all the
beauty and fragrancy. Such is the glory of the world, of which Esaias said:
All flesh is grass, and all the grace and glory thereof is as the flower of
the field. Esaias, 40.
The grass withers, the flower fades, and the glory thereof passes away.
Such are the lovers of this temporal momentany glory: vvorthily compared to
grass, which grows on the topps of houses to day green, and to morrow not
seen. Wherefore the Wiseman says: Ecclesiasticus, 10.
All power is of short continuance; and he that is a King to day, to morrow is
dead. Tell me where is the power and glory of King Assuerus, who governed an
hundred and twenty provinces? Where is the glory of great Alexander, at
whose presence the whole earth was hushed, 1, Maccha. 1
to whom all Kings and Tyrants paid tribute, as it is in the first Book of
the Macchabees? Where is the glory of that great Empire, by which he
conquered and subdued under him almost all the Kingdoms of the world? Where
are all the Princes and Potentates of the world, who reigned over both man
and beast? They are passed and gone away, as a stranger or a Soiournour that
tarryeth but for one day. Truly not one of them remains, all their days
were spente in vanity, and their years svviftly posted away.

Death fears no man: it swepeth all away without any difference or
partiality: it is a fierce cruel beast, that spares not any body, it takes
away both the king and the beggar, and makes all equal and alike.

Thirdly, The glory of ye world is deceitful.
the glory of this world is to be avoided, because it is deceitful, and does
perform none of those things it promises, but deceaueth all men in this
life. Which of the Princes, and Emperors has it not deluded, promising unto
them long life, peaceable honors, a quiet empire, when as it cannot prolong
man's life one hour? Who in earthly glory was like unto Alexander, who was
never subdued in any war, who always triumphed over his enemies, who
overthrew huge hoasts with a little army, who never besieged City, but he took
it, neither was there any province, which did not obey his Empire? But now when
he seemed an absolute conqueror, and purposed to pass the rest of his time in
peace and tranquillity, he was on a sudden poisoned. Tell me why do
thou follow and hunt after the glory of the world, which cannot succor thee in
death?

Fourthly (as I said) human glory and applause is to be avoided and eschewed,
The glory of ye world is evil and malicious in retribution.
because it is a very evil and naughty pay-mayster: for it promises glory,
and pays everlasting perdition, and eternal confusion. Wherefore the Lord
says by the Prophet; I will turn their glory into shame. Ose, 4.
So their strength shall be turned into weakness, their wisdom into
foolishnes, and their pleasures into punishments. For according to the quantity
of the falt, shall be the quantity of the punishment, which they shall be
tormented with. Hereupon Saint Hierome speaks thus to the lovers of this
fleeting and deceitful world; Woe be unto you miserable vvretches, who
endeavor to go to heaven by the way of riches and pleasures, and understand
not what our Savior says: That it is easier for a cammell to go through the
eye of a needle, Math. 19.
then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Remember that this
is a Divine sentence, and the words of him who says; Heaven and earth shall
pass, but my words shall not pass. O miserable vvretches, and more inconstant
then any wind; howl and mourn; who are only great and noble by the benefit
of fortune; but in deed are base, abject and blind with the smoke of vanity,
with deceaueable honors, and false dignities of this world. Do ye not see
the shortness of time, how death perhaps this might shall cut off the thread of
your lives, and that ye shall be tormented for ever in hell, where ye shall
always live, dying without end, yea more dying, then all the men that die in
the world? where no rest shall be given, but torments shall always live to
revenge? Where ye shall not only be tortured with men, but also with devils?
For so much the greater shall thy punishment be there, as thy glory was greater
here, and as thou have lived in greater delicacies and delights. See how our
Savior, that vncha^gable truth, al whose deeds and words are one instruction,
among his twelve apostles, who^ he choose, would have but one Bartholomew a
noble man, and one Matthew a rich man: he chose all the other poor men, and
fishers: that he might signify that the noble and rich men of this world, can
hardly be saved, and be made worthy of heaven. For if by one only sin man
became guilty of hell fire: how shall a rich man be saved, desirous and greedy
of populer applause, hunting after the frail and mortal glory of this life,
which is none other thing, then a filthy and impure vessel and receite for all
sin, full of pride and luxury, full of covetousness in the rich, mighty and
noble men of this world? These are thieves, that rob the poor of that they
should live by, who eat up their labors, killing and treading them under
their feet: when notvvithstanding God has blessed them with great
abundance of wealth, that they thereby might nourish the poor, and
religiously rule over them; who being drowned in riches, and delicats, and
swollen with costly meats, seeing the poor before their Palace gates naked,
and perrishing through hunger and cold, do not stretch out their hands unto
them, neither are moved with any pity: but gyuing themselves wholy to
plays, sportings, gamings, feastings, and banquets, utterly forget the poor,
the charge of whom is so often committed and commended unto the^ in the
Scriptures* neither do they remember God at any time, except perhaps lightly
and by the way cursorily and perfunctorily. Let them certainly persuade
themselves, and remember these things, when they shall feel and try them, that
a most strict and exact aceount shall be required of them, why they have not
distributed to the poor those things, which were superfluous unto them: and if
they cannot give an account, nor purge themselves, their souls shall suffer
intolerable torments in the deepest pit of hell. O how easily do they offend,
and how suddenly are they envvrapped in punishment, who do not consider,
how they must dye, or how God shall judge them? O how uncircumspect and
unhappy are they, that do not remember these things, and do not resist the
temptations of the devil: I dare boldly affirm, that if they did acknowledge
God to be their Judge, and think that they should die, that they would not sin,
at the least with so great security, all fear set apart. But now they come to
Church, not to hear the divine word, and to pray, but to see vanity, beuty,
and the pride of women. This is their thought, this their intent, and this
their sermon. There they talk and confer, how they may heap riches together:
there they dispute of the sundry fashions of apparel: there they inuit one
another to feasts and banquets, and to the dishonest delights of gluttony: of
whom S Bernard says; O wretches what do ye, who before the time do slay your
own souls, and corrupt and putrify your bodies? Tell me, whence comes
infirmity, whence grows the sudden death of young men, but of great
abundance of meats, and immoderate venery? Wretched are ye because ye think
that ye can delude God, but in truth ye deceive your selves* because ye
neglect your souls that ye may pamper your bodies; and so ye destroy them
both, before the time appointed. Your pleasure and rejoicing shall continue but
that short time, ye live, but after death your bewaylings and torments shall
endure with devils in hell for ever and ever: there shall be everlasting shame
and confusion: there shall neither be sumptuous banquets, nor delicate wines:
there with the rich Glutton, who in this world fared delicatly, ye shall crave
a drop of cold water, and it shall not be given unto you: for there no man
gathers, or reapeth any thing, but that he has sown in this world. What
then o miserable man do thou? Why do thou not repent? Why do thou not
amend thy life? O heart harder then a rock, why do thou linger? Why do
thou defer repentance for thy sins? Why do thou prorogue thy conversion?
Behold how death comes, running swiftly to carry thee away: the devil
stands ready, to catch thy soul, and the worms greedily expect thy flesh,
which thou have fatted with so fine cates, that they may have more abundant
and more toothsom food. Does not that horrible and fearful day of judgment
come into thy mind, in which thou shall not only render a most stricte
account of thy pride, gluttony, luxury, vain glory, vanity, and of thy time
unprofitably spent; but also of every idle word? Beware that thou fall not into
that dreadful condemnation, which the Son of God not now a Lamb, but a Lion
shall pronounce against the cursed, Math. 25.
saying: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for
the devil and his angels. Behold, says Bernard, o thou worldly sinner, how
far thou wanderest out of the way, if in this world thou seek for honors,
pleasures, and glory: for thou shall never find that here, which may satisfy
thee. If thou desire true joy and true glory, endeavor and labor to go to
heaven by the right way; where the joys are truer and better, then ever eye
has seen, or ear has heard, or has at any time entered into the heart of
man; I pray thee for those eternal and everlasting joys, neglect and basely
account of these transitory and momentary pleasures.

But what shall we say of them, who can neither be induced by the fear or
love of GOD, nor by the terror of death, nor by the horror of hellish
torments, to forsake their sins, yea, whom it repents that that they have
not power and ability to live as wickedly as they would, that they might
satisfy their lusts in all things? O miserable wretches, ye laugh in this
world, but ye shall weep in the other. VVoe be unto you, who desire
momentanie and fading pleasures, because ye shall suffer great and
everlasting torments. A little time yet remains: fill up the measure of
your iniquityes and miseries, that the indignation of GOD may be more
plentifully powered down upon you. Rejoice a little, give over your selves
to tryflings, to toies, fables, sportings, lies, contentions, and enmities, and
let no time pass you in vain. What do ye? Scrape together for your children
riches, honors, and dominions: purchase nobility and renown for them, that
they may do that, which ye left to do, and finish, what ye began: that ye
together with them may be tortured with greater torments.

But some man may say: An objection.
God is bountiful, gracious and merciful, he receaueth every sinner that
turns to him with all his heart, and he pardons all their faults. The answer.
True it is my brother, he is more merciful, then thou supposest, when he so
patiently suffers sinners, and so mercifully grants the^ space to repent
in, that they may amend themselves: and if they return unto him, he graciously
receaueth them.

But I would have thee to know, that as he is merciful in suffering,
expecting, and pardoning: so he is just in correcting and punishing. If thou
shall say: Albeit a man sin all his life time* neither do any good at all,
if he repent at the very point and instance of death God will forgive him all
his sins. O my brother, how vain is this comfort? How dangerous it is to
defer repentance to the hour of death.
How false and deceitful is this cogitation? for of an hundred thousand
sinners, that defer their repentance to the hour of death, scarsely one is
saved, and obtains remission of his sins. A man borne in sin, never
living according to the law of the Lord, without the knowledge of him, never
willing to hear the word of God, not knowing what sin is or what repentance
is, drowned in the businesses and cares of this world: afflicted with the love
of his children, whom he leaves: with the grief of his riches, which he
forsakes: tormented without hope ever to enjoy them again, what repentance can
he make: who if any hope of longer life or recovery did appear unto him, would
not be any whit careful for repentance? Of which I infer, that he that in
his youth, and whilst he is whole and sound, neither fears, nor blusheth to
offend God, is unworthy to have his sins forgiven him in the agony of death.
Late repentance sildom true.
For tell me what repentance is that, which a man makes, when he plainly
sees, that he can live no longer? yea, who would live more dissolutly, then he
did before, if he should recover his former health? Truly I my self have
seen very few rich men, who have repented at the hour of death, and
recovering again bodily health, have not afterward been worse in their
souls, then they were before. This I am assured and altogether persuaded of,
and I have learned it by long experience and observation, that they that
alvvayes sin without any fear, and never in health will set sin at
defiance, nor renounce their pleasures, that they sildome and very hardly have
an happy end, as says Saint Hierome. Wherefore my Brother, if thou have any
discretion, or if there be any light of reason within thee, despise and
forsake the riches, honors, and glory of this world, for his sake who created
thee, and who is ascended above all things. What shall it profit thee, if thou
gainest the whole world, and loosest thy soul? I know assuredly that the
honors and glory of this world are impediments of grace, and that which is
worse, hinderers of eternal salvation. For it is no where read, that ever any
man passed unto eternal glory by the pleasures and delights of this world. O
how vain and false is the glory, which men hunt after, and desire one of
another, and not of God? He that desires to be preferred before all men, it is
to be feared, least the higher he ascends, the greater will be his fall.
That Angel, was a Citizen and an inhabitant of heaven, who said; I will
ascend into heaven, Esaias, 14.
and exalt my throne above beside the stars of God: I will sit also upon
the mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North. I will ascend above
the height of the clouds, and I will be like the most high: But he was made
a devil, and fell into the deepest pit of hell. Therefore it is very well
said of Saint Augustine; O how happy is he, whose heart only burns
with a desire of heavenly glory? Who is not puffed up in prosperity, nor
cast down in adversity? Who as he has nothing in the world, that he
loves, so he has nothing that he fears? What other thing is the glory of
this world, but a tickling of the ears? O how cursed is he, says Anselmus,
and ungrateful, that seeks for the glory of this world? No honor is
got without trouble, no dignity without disturbance, no highness without
vanity. Wherefore, my brother, if thou would weightily consider of the great
danger, that follovveth vvorldly glory, without doubt thou would shun
and fly from all the vanity of this world: and thou would only desire
to enjoy that celestial beatitude, which all the Saints have obtained by so
great labors and afflictions, and now do enjoy with greater rejoicing.

The sixth Meditation for Saturday: how death is to be feared: and that a
Christian ought so to live, that death may never find him unprepared.
BE mindful, Ecclesi. 14.
says the wiseman, for death does not tarry: the remembrance of it is the
mother of many good things: for the same Wiseman says: Ecclesiast. 7.
Remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. And Saint Bernard says:
Continual remembrance of death is a great blessing. Bernard.
Let a man always carry this about with him, and he shall never offend. And
Saint Augustine says: Augustine.
There is not any thing, that more forciblie holds a man from sin, then the
continual remembrance of death. This makes a man humble and lowly: this
brings a contempt of earthly things, and induces a man to take upon him the
burden of repentance. S. Hierome also does subscribe unto these, Hierome.
saying; He that persuades himself that he shall dye, easily contemns all
things: he despises the pride of life, who remembers that ere long he shall
be cast into the earth: for he that knows that shortly, he must be put under
all men's feet, and be trodden upon by every one, he will not desire to be
extolled, or to be lifted above others: he that reme^breth that he must leave
all things by and by, contemns the lust of his eyes; but especially he
despises the concupiscence of the flesh, who considers that after a short
time his body shall be devoured of the worms of the earth. I would to God,
says S. Jerome, that the kings and Princes of the earth, and the possessors of
the riches of this world, would consider, how after a short space of time they
shall be carried out of their magnificent Palaces, and be enclosed and
included in a very narrow corner of a room: how they shall be carried out of
their glistering and famous buildings into a dark and obscure Sepulcher: out
of their golden and gilded houses, painted with most beautiful and most pleasant
flowers and picturs into a Sepulcher replenished with crawling worms, and
intolerable stink: out of their Palaces full of all the fine furniture and
riches of this world into an empty and hollow Sepulcher: out of Palaces, in
which a company of children and a troup of servants daily atte^ded, into a
solitary, desert forsaken Sepulcher, separated from all society and resort of
men. Tell me, where remains all that forepassed glory and pomp? Where is
the multitude of servants and attendants, that were wont to follow them? Where
are their costly and delicate banquets? They ioyed here a little time, and
lived in their Palaces, in the midst of the delights of this world; and now
worms in a Sepulcher do frollick and feed on them.

Of this remembrance of death, Petrus Damianus to a Countess.
Petrus Damianus vvryteth unto a certain Countess, saying; O that we would
remember, dear Lady, how the miserable soul is excruciated at the point of
death with horrible fear, cruel remorse, and sharp piercings, it being now
to depart out of the prison of the flesh. It shall remember vices and sins
committed, which are so strictly forbidden: It shall behold the precepts of
God, which it has not observed partly through negligence, and partly through
contempt; it shall lament the time spent without fruit, which was granted it to
repent in: it shall mourn and bewail, because it has so lately understood
the inevitable and immutable vengeance of condemnation. It shall be compelled
to forsake and leave the flesh, it shall desire to revoke and recall the time
past, but it cannot, neither shall it be heard. Looking backwardes, it shall
see all her life time, as the tract and step of one pace. And looking forwards,
seeing so everlasting an age of eternity, it shall howl and cry out, that in
so short a time it did not purchase that great glory, which the Saints shall
enjoy for ever and ever: it shall lament that for so small and momentany a
pleasure, it has lost the perpetual felicity of everlasting blessedness. It
shall blush and be ashamed, that for the flesh, which shall be cast unto worms
to eat, it neglected and despised it self, which should have lived in the
society and fellowship of Angels. And lifting up the beams of her understanding,
and considering of those immortal riches of heaven, and seeing that she has
changed them for the miseries of this life, she shall be exceedingly
afflicted, and utterly confounded. When she shall turn her eyes to view the
vanities of this world, and the darkness of the earth, she shall admire and
vvonder at the brightness of the light glistering above her, and shall
manifestly know that this world is night and darkness. The breaste shall
begin to pant and beat, The forerunners of death.
the forehead shall wax stiff, whence cold sweat shall issue: the eyes
shall grow dim, the ears deaffe, the nose shall sink down, the nosethrils
shall be filled with filth and corruption, the countenance shall wax wanne and
pale, the mouth shall be distorted and pursed, the lips shall grow blew, the
hands cold, the pulse shall faint and languish, now beating never a whitte,
now stryking softly, and sometimes creeping like a worm or a pysmier: the
feet shall wax cold, and the whole flesh shall turn to corruption.

Those antecedent tokens of death nearly approaching, Who stand by him that is
yielding up ye ghost.
and these nearer signs being at hand, the evil works, which she has done,
the words, which she has spoken, and the cogitations, which she has thought
upon, shall also approach: and both the works, words, and thoughts, shall be
witnesses against a miserable sinner: they shall stand in his sight: and will
he nill he, he shall be constrained to see them. At the one side of him there
shall be devils present, and at the other Angels: these shall comfort him
dying, the other shall accuse him, and both of them shall earnestly expect,
which of them shall carry him away with them. If there be in him signs of
piety and contrition, he shall be glad at the sight of the Angels, and he
shall take courage to depart with this sweet and happy company. But if on
the left side there shall be present so obscure and so hateful a multitude of
sins, so unclean and stinking, that the Judge cannot abide the smell of them,
the^ the miserable soul shall forthwith faint for fear, it shall be
disturbed with violence of perturbations, and shall be compelled to forsake
the prison of the miserable flesh. Then the soul shall run to the mouth, to
the eyes, to the ears, to the nosethrils; seeking which way it may get forth,
and finding all things shut up and closed, it shall break through, which when
it has so done, and shall look round about, casting her eyes on every side,
and seeing her self condemned, she shall curse and banne her self,
exclaiming, and crying out: O the cursed soul of one excomunicate of a thief,
of a Church robber, of an adulterer, of an usurer. And when the wretched soul
shall view the white and unspotted garment, that was given her in baptism, to
be now blacker then pitch, she shall sigh and mourn with great lamentation
and howling, saying: Woe is me, woe is me miserable wretch; who has changed
my garment? it was whiter then snow, and now it is blacker then pitch. Then
the devil will presently step forth, who will mock thee, and say; O my soul
do not marvel, behold it is I, that have prepared for thee this black
garmeut: with which vesture the greater part of the world is invested: to
which thou have always been obsequious, which thou have credited, which thou
with me have employed thy self in, always follovving mine advice and
counsel: therefore with me thou shall for ever dvvell in mine infernal
kingdom: where there is sorrow without joy, hunger without meat, thyrst
without drink, darkness without light, stink without sweetness, grief
without comfort, mourning without consolation, tears without ceasing, hideous
noise without silence, howling without melody, burning fire without
refreshing, a violent wind without calmnes, heat without end, and all evil
without any good. Therefore arise my love, and go with me; behold all the
infernal spirits do come to meet thee. Then also shall be present the Angel
of GOD, to whom the soul was committed, saying; Happy and blessed are they,
who in this world have not spotted nor blemished their garments. O unhappy
soul, o friend of devils, o the cursed creature of the omnipotent God. I
always stood by thee, and thou saw me not. I always admonished thee, and
thou would not hear me: I always suggested good counsels unto thee, and
thou would not believe me. Therefore now get thee gone to hell into the
handling of devils: that is, to the place of torments, which are prepared for
thee according to thy deserts.

Who can express the multitude of hellish fiends, that with great fiercenes
shall run to catch the unhappy soul, and carry it to everlasting torments,
who despitely insulting over it, and mocking it shall say; O how proud have
thou been heretofore? How delicately and sumptuously have thou banquetted?
How finely and curiously have thou been clothed? How valiant and prosperous
have thou always been? Tell us, why do thou not now eat, why do thou
not drink, why art thou not gallantly apparrelled? Why do thou not now
play and rejoice with thy wife, children, and friends? Then the miserable soul
shall curse the body, The soul shall curse the body.
saying: O temple of the devil, whose works have polluted me: o cursed earth,
o habitation of satan, arise now and go with me, and thou shall see the
place of torments prepared for thee: in which I shall dwell without thee till
the coming of the Judge: and then also shall thou come hither, and for ever
shall be tormented with me. Cursed be thine eyes, which would not see the
light of truth, and the way of righteousness: cursed be thine ears, which
refused to hear the words of eternal life: Cursed be thy nosethrills,
which disdayned to smell the most sweet savor of virtue. Cursed be thy
lips and tongue, and cursed be thy mouth, that would neither taste the joy
of glory, nor praise their Creator. Cursed be thy hands, which denied alms
to the poor: Cursed be thine heart, which brought forth so many, and so
unclean cogitations and counsayles: Cursed be thy feet, which would not
frequente the Church of Christ Jesus: Cursed be thy members, which never
brought forth the works of repentance: And cursed be all thy works, which
have deserved so cruel, and so endless torments.

Consider therefore my brother, from what great dangers and fears thou may
now deliver thy self, if so now through the fear of death thou endeuourest
so to live, that when it comes, thou may say with David: Into thy hands o
Lord I commend my spirit. Psalm. 7.
Learn now to dye to the world, that thou may live with Jesus Christ.
Learn now to contemn all things, that thou may freely enter in with
Jesus Christ, and enjoy all the blessings of his glory. Chastise now thy body
with repentance, that thou may then find most firm assurance. O how happy
and prudent is that man, who labors now to be such an one, as he will
desire to be in that doubtful and dreadful hour of death. Therefore now
contend with all thy might to be such an one: for thou know not when thou
shall die, neither what will happen unto thee after death. Do not rely either
upon thy friends, or thy children; for they will forgette thee sooner, then
thou think: and unless now thou disposest of all things, who can or will
hereafter dispose of them for thee? Be careful and provident: for it is
better to foresee, and prevent that day with good preparation, then to look
for help and aid of another. Therefore gather now immortal goods: give alms
in this life, make those holy and blessed ones thy friends, that when thou
departest hence they may receive thee into their everlasting habitations.
Gregor. de diuersis, cuius initi^m, dignu^ valde est.
For that glorious Doctor of the Church Saint Gregory says; that those things
are with great diligence to be considered of, and those works with many tears
to be meditated upon, which the Judge of the world shall exact of us, when
that hour of death shall come. And Saint Bernard says; O my soul, what fear
shall there be, when all are sent away, whose presence was pleasant unto thee,
whose sight acceptable, and whose neighborhood so familiar and thou altogether
alone enterest into that unknown region, and shall see those ugly and horible
monsters flocking to meet thee? Who will succor thee in a day of so great
necessity? Who shall defend thee from those roaring Lions greedy of their
pray? who shall comfort thee? who shall help thee? who shall conduct thee? But
happy is that soul, which confidentlie and boldly shall speak to her enemies
in the gate: why stand thou here thou cruel and bloody beast? Thou shall
find nothing deadly in me: which shall be entertained of Angels, defended from
the rage and violence of devils, and shall be carried into the bosom of
Abraham. Of death and the way of sinners in an other place also thus speaks
S. Bernard: The death of sinners is exceeding evil. Bernard in Epist 106.
And hear why it is exceeding evil: It is evil in the loss of the world:
worse in the separation of the flesh: but worst of al in the double torment of
the worm, and of fire. But of al it is exceeding evil, because the soul shall
be separated from the Divine aspect, and with great confusion shall be for
ever deprived of the sight of God. Consider, my dear brother, and mark, that
no man can eschew death, neither know the hour, nor change the time appointed
of God. But the death of the righteous is good, for they rest from their
labors; better for the nouelty of the life; but best of all for the assurance
and security of eternity.

The seventh Meditation for Sunday: of the joys of the blessed in heaven, and
of the pains of the damned in hell.
O Sinful soul, if these earthly things seem vile unto thee, and of no
price; lift up thine eyes, and behold heavenly things: consider with great
diligence, what things they be, and how great, which GOD has prepared for the
Elect. For they be such, and so great, that, as Saint Paul says, neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has entered into the heart of man.
Therefore we must know, that the delights of a blessed life are so many and
so great, that no Arithmetitian can number them, no Geomater can measure the^,
neither can any Grammarian, Logitian, or Rhetoritian express them, either by
words or reasons. Seeing neither eye has seen their greatness, nor ear has
heard of them, neither at any time have they entered into man's heart. There the
Saints shall joy, being circled and compassed with glory, beholding the
Divine essence above them, seeing the beauty of the heavens, and of all
creatures beneath them, viewing in themselves the dignity of their souls, and
glory of their bodies; and to be brief, having about them the society and
fellowshippe of all the Angels and blessed Spyrites. Hence it is that Anselmus
says, In his book of Similitudes, from ye 47, chapter, to ye 74.
that there are fourteen parts of that felicity, which all the Elect shall
perfectly have, when that general session is ended: Seven beatitudes
appertaining to glorified bodies.
seven of the body, and as many of the soul: the first of which is beauty:
for in that life, the beauty of the righteous shall be equal to the beauty
of the Sun, which shall be seven fold brighter, Beauty.
then it now is. VVhere-vppon it is written: That the just shall shine, Math.
13.
as the Sun in the Kingdom of God. The second shall be their agilitie,
Agility.
which shall be like unto that of Angels: for they shall be moved from
heaven to the earth, and from the earth to heaven, sooner then we can move one
of our fingers up and down. A simily.
We may behold an example of this velocitie in the beams of the Sun,
which at the Sun rising in the East are in a moment carried to the West:
that thereby we may consider, that it is not impossible, which we speak of
this our future swiftness and celerity, especially, seeing that greater
velocitie is wont to be in all things living, the^ in those things that are
liuelesse. The third part of their beatitude is fortitude; Fortitude.
for whosoever shall be accounted worthy to be numbered with the celestial
Citizens, shall excel in strength, so that no man shall be able to resist them.
For their fortitude shall be as great as that of Angels, with whom they live
in joy: for as their glory shall be a like, so their other gyfts shall be a
like. The fourth shall be free and secure liberty: Liberty.
for as nothing can hinder Angels, so nothing shall hinder the Saints, neither
shall any element whatsoever be able to resist them.

The fifth part of their beatitude is health, Health.
which shall be without infirmity. Of this health of the righteous, what
can be said better, then that which the sweet Singer of Israel speaks;
Psalm, 36,
saying: The health of the righteous is of the Lord. And to whom this sound and
true health is given of the Lord, what infirmity can any way touch them, or
come near them?

The sixth gift of beatitude, is an ineffable delight, Delight.
which shall make drunk the righteous, and shall fill them full, and wholly
replenish them with an unspeakable abundance of inestimable joy. What said I,
shall fill them full, and wholly repleanish them? yea, their eyes, nostrils, ears,
mouth, hands, throat, lunges, marrow, and their very entrails, and all and
euey part and member of them shall be filled with such wonderful sense, and
feeling of such exceeding and incomparable pleasure and delight, that the whole
man shall quaffe of the river of Gods pleasure, and shall be made drunk with
the plenty of his house; so that he shall stand amazed, and be altogether
astonished; and those things that he shall enjoy, shall be so great, that he
cannot desire greater.

The seventh part, Perpetuity:
shall be length and perpetuity of life; for whosoever he be that lives well
now, then he shall live as long as God. Whereupon it is written by the Wiseman;
Wise, 5,
The righteous shall live for ever, and their reward is with the Lord.
Moreover, the soul shall also have seaue^ beatitudes which are no less
glorious, then those of the body. The seven beatitudes which the souls of
the righteous enjoy in heaven.
The first is Wisdom, which in that glory shall be given unto it: for there
the soul of a simple Artificer, or a plain Countryman, shall have more
wisdom, Wisdom.
then all the Philosophers or Wise men of this world ever enjoyed here. The
righteous shall have such abundance of wisdoms in the life to come, that they
shall be ignorant of nothing, which they ought or would know. They shall be
filled with all perfect wisdom, and shall behold GOD face to face. Which
when he shall see, he shall behold the nature of every creature, which
consists better in GOD, then in it self.

Then likewise the righteous shall know and understand all things, which God
made to be known, as well those things that are past, as those things that
are to come.

There all shall be known of every one, and every one of all, neither shall
any man be ignorant of what Country, of what Nation, or of what kindred any
man is, or what he has done in his life.

The second beatitude of the soul, Friendship,
shall be the amity and friendship of one to another, as members of one body,
whose head is Christ Jesus the Lord. For God, and all other good men in that
blessed society, shall so unfeignedly love every righteous man, that they can
never hate him. As long and as well, as a man does love himself, so long, and
so well shall he love another that rests in the same fellowship with him.

But pass over these things, and contemplate him, by who^ these blessings come
unto thee, and thou shall perceive, that he does and will love thee more,
then thou can love thy self, or any other themselves: and thou will love him
above thy self, and above all others.

The third shall be concord: Concord.
for the body and the soul of every Saint, which disagreed in this life, shall
then very well agree, and be at peace and unity; yea, all the righteous shall
have such agreement and concord, as our eyes have in this present life. For as
one eye cannot be turned about, A similie.
with out the other be also turned, but they are always turned together one
way, even so the body and the soul, and the whole congregation of the
righteous, shall will no contrarieties, but shall always have the same will.
For we shall be one body, one Church, and the spouse of Christ. The will also
of almighty GOD shall not be contrary to thine, but thou shall will as he
wills, and he shall will in all things, as thou willest; for how is it
possible that the head should disagree with his body?

The fourth is Honor: Honor.
here we are borne of the corruption of the flesh, filled with many miseries,
destitute of comfort, subject to many infirmities and passions, and full of the
ulcers of sin, out of which GOD shall take us, and shall heal us, and
restore us to perfect health, and shall adorn us with the ornament of absolute
righteousness and immortality; shall adopt us for his sons and children,
shall make us inhearitours of his kingdom, and coheires with his only begotten
Son, our Savior, and shall make us to be called Gods by his own name. For
he says: I have said ye are Gods, Psalm* 82,
and ye all are children of the most High.

The fifte beatitude of the soul, Power,
is Power; for the righteous shall be able to do, what they will; because
they shall have the almighty agreeable to their wills.

The sixth beatitude, Security.
is security: For the righteous in that blessed estate, shall certainly have
and enjoy, what soever they do desire, neither shall they have any fear to
loose that they have, because neither they shall be willing to loose it,
neither shall God take it from them being unwilling.

The seventh and last beatitude of a glorified soul, Perfect joy.
is perfect joy, such as no man can comprehend; for there shall be thousands of
thousands, ten thousand thousands, and more then ten thousand hundred
thousands of thousands of the righteous, who^ none can number, and all shall
enjoy and joy in the same blessedness: neither shall there be any, which
shall not as much joy for an others felicity, as for his own.

And above all this, they shall rejoice with an admirable joy; seeing almighty
GOD, who^ they entirely love, more then themselves, and whom God loves, more
then they can love themselves. Therefore their joy shall be unmeasurable joy
shall be unto them both within and without, joy above, and joy beneath, joy all
about them, on every side, and every where full of joy.

But as the righteous shall rejoice by reason of so great joy and blessedness:
so on the contrary part, sinners shall be tormented with unspeakable tortures.
For as beauty, agilitie, fortitude, liberty, health, pleasure, and eternity,
is matter of rejoicing unto the righteous: so on the contrary part, the vglines
of sin, the burden of it, imbecility, servitude, infirmity, anxietie, and
everlasting death, shall with continual and most grievous torments afflict
sinners. For that security of eternity, and the life which the righteous
shall rejoice in, where they always enjoy the good blessings of God, shall
doubtless be a very great and a perpetual punishment unto the wicked, in
which they shall alvvayes find, that which they shall more and more hate. What
shall we say of wisdom? which as it shall be a joy and an honor unto the
righteous: so that, which the wicked have known, or shall know, shall be
unto the^ grief and confusion: the friendship which is joined with mirth and
rejoicing in the righteous, shall be great discord and affliction unto sinners:
for they shall have great discord, especially with those creatures, which they
heretofore loved in this world, and the creatures shall have the like with
them. And in the place of the power, that the righteous shall have, the wicked
shall have such impotencie, that they shall be able to do nothing as they would;
so that by the honor of the Saints they shall have eternal confusion.

Furthermore, as the friends of GOD shall be secure, that they shall not loose
their blessings, so the enemies of God shall loose all hope to be delivered
from those torments in which they live; who being created to enjoy heavenly
glory, are now for ever to live in the society of devils. To be brief, in
stead of the eternal and ineffable joy of the righteous, the wicked shall be
filled with exceeding sorrow, because they shall continually and without end,
suffer ineuitably all those miseries, which they shall feel themselves
compassed with. This says Anselmus, but much more copiouslie.

In this blessedness, as S. Augustine says, Augustine.
God shall fill and satisfy all the senses of the elect with inestimable joy and
pleasure, for he himself shall be the object of them all: he shall be a
glass unto their eyes; honny unto their mouths; music unto their ears;
sweet Balsamum unto their noses; a most delicate flower unto their hands: for
to this purpose God became man, that every man might receive by him internal
blessedness for his soul, in the contemplation of his divinity, and external
for his body, in beholding his humanity.

Briefly, August. in his Manuel, chap, 15,
according to the saying both of Saint Augustine and Gregory, there shall be so
great beauty of righteousness, and glory of everlasting light, that if we
should suffer torments every day, if we should abide for a long time the
pains and tortures of hell, that we might be admitted to see Christ in his
glory, if it were but one day, and have fellowship with his Saints, certainly
it were worth the suffering, that we might be made partakers of so great
blessedness and glory. Therefore it is said not without reason of the
Psalmographer, nor with a small desire; A day, o Lord in thy Courts, Psalm, 84,
is better then a thousand other where. And of Saint Bernard: Who can
comprehend in this life, how great the glory of the Saints of GOD shall be in
the life everlasting, who shall see God, and shall always be with him? who is al
in all? who is the cheifest good? in whom is exceeding blessedness and
unmeasurable joy? There is truth, liberty, love, and perfect charity: there
shall be eternal society, constant amity, and perpetual security.

Rightly therefore says that reverend Doctor Saint Augustine; O joy above all
joy, for a man to see the face of God, who has created, redeemed, and
glorified him: certainly this is the joy of the Angels, and of the Saints. For
as Saint Gregory says; GOD is of so admirable beauty, that the Angels, who
sit upon the Sun, do still desire to see him.

There as Saint Augustine says, In the sixth chap. of his Manuell.
is neither wicked men nor any kind of wickedness: there is no adversary,
nor any to resist; there is no manner of enticement unto sin, there is no
want, no reproching, no railing, no nicknaming, no accusation, no dissembling,
no fear, no disquietnes, no pain, no doubting, no violence, no discord; but
there dwells abundance of peace, fulness of charity, eternal praise and
thanks given unto God, secure rest without end, and alvvayes joy in the holy
Ghost.

Have thou heard, o my soul, how surpassing be the joys, how infinite the
mirth, and how incomparable and incomprehensible is the light of that heavenly
City? O happy joy, o true rejoicing of the Saints, who do continually
behold the face, and alvvayes possess the company of God himself. Therefore,
o my soul, let us willingly relinquish the desire of these earthly things,
let us banish out of our hearts, the joy of evil thoughts, and being inflamed
with the love of that celestial and everlasting joy, let us return and
travail toward the heavenly City, in which we are written and appointed
Citizens, as of the household of GOD, heirs of his kingdom of glory, and
fellow heirs with his beloved Son Christ Jesus.

If thou demaundest how this may be, August. in the 16. chap. of his Manuell.
or by what means and help? Hear what I shall say unto thee: The matter is put
in the power of the willer and dooer. The kingdom of heaven suffers
violence; the kingdom of heaven, o man, demands none other price, but thy
self: for it is worth so much as thou art: give thy self, and thou shall have
it. Why art thou troubled about the price? Remember that Christ has given
himself, that he might purchase of GOD his Father a kingdom for thee, so in
like manner give thou thy self, that thou may enjoy this kingdom, and let
not sin reign in thy mortal body, but the spirit for the obtaining of life.

O sinful soul, o soul full of misery; if these things do not yet move
thee, which I have spoken of the excellency and immensitie of that heavenly
joy, which the elect of God do for ever enjoy, that thou may purchase it for
thy self, both by repentance, and by divine grace: Consider, I pray thee, with
great dread and fear, the most miserable estate, the intolerable pains, and
the unspeakable torments of hell, that obscure and diabolical city, that by
the horror and terror of this consideration, thou may be converted with all
thine heart unto the Lord.

Therefore we must first know, The pains of hell shall be diverse.
that according to the diversity of sins, shall be the variety of
punishments. For as Saint Gregory says: We must know that there is but one
fire in Hell, In his 4. book of dialog. cap. 43, and in the 9, book of his
morrals, cha. 27
but al sinners are not tormented in it after the same manner: for every one
shall feel so much punishment there, as he has sinned here.

And as in this world we are al under one Sun, A Simily.
yet we do not feel the heat al alike, because one is more hot, and another
less hot: so there in that fire, there is not one manner of burning, because
here what the diversity of bodies does (for after one manner the fire does
burn chaff, after another wood, and after another iron) that there does the
diversity of sins: they have the same fire, and yet it does not burn all the
damned that be therein alike.

That fire shall be kindled with the wrath of the Judge, and shall burn
everlastingly, neither shall it need to be kindled the second time: as Job
witnesses who says: The fire that is not blown, chap, 20,
or as Pagnine translateth it, the unquenchable fire shall devour him.

Of the cruelty and torment of this fire, Sebastian says: That there is as
great a difference between material fire, and the fire of hell, as there is
between painted fire on a wall, and natural fire.

This fire shall some-vvhat shine, The fire of hell shall shine, to the greater
torment of the damned.
but it shall be no comfort unto the damned, but rather a greater punishment.
Whereupon Saint Isidore says: In hell there shall be a certain obscure
shyning, by which the miserable damned shall be seen, not that they may rejoice
in it, but that they may be more tormented, whilst one sees another. See
Gregory in the 9, book of his morals. chap, 49.
For then the wicked shall see those tormented with the^, whom they have
inordinatelie loved in this world, that they may now suffer punishment
according to the quality of the fault, and that that carnal love which was
preferred before the divine love, may be punishment with like vengeance in
their sight. Whether the damned do see the Saints.
Thus also is a doubt resolved, by which it was wont to be demanded, whether
the damned do see the glory of the Saints. To which question Saint Gregory
answers after this manner; In his 40. hom. upon the Euang.
That sinners may be the more punished and tormented, they shall both see their
glory who^ they have despised, and shall be tormented with their pain who^ they
have unprofitably loved. For it is to be supposed, that till the last
judgment, the wicked do see the righteous in glory and rest, that they seeing
them in joy, may not only be tormented with their own pument, but with their
blessedness. But the just shall always behold in torments the unjust, that
hereby their joys may always increase, because they see the evil from which
by mercy they are delivered: and by so much they shall render greater thanks
unto their Redeemer, by how much they see themselves delivered from greater
torments.

Neither shall this sight of the reprobates miserable and intolerable
punishment, any whit dim the clearenesse of the blessedness of the righteous:
because where there shall be no compassion of misery, there (without doubt)
shall be no diminution of the blesseds beatitude.

What if it be no marvel, if the sight of the damneds torments be unto the
righteous a cause of greater joy: seeing that in a picture, a black color is
laid underneath, that a white or a red color, may be seen more manifestly,
and bear the greater beauty? For as I said before, the joys of the
righteous shall so much the more increase, as they see the pains of the damned
increased, from which they have escaped. A saved Father shall not pity his
damned Son, neither shall the wife be sorry for her reprobate husband. The
damned shall see till the last judgment the glory of the righteous, not that
they shall know what it is, but only that they shall understand, that it is an
inestimable joy; and such an understanding shall be unto them both grief
punishment, and envy: but after judgment for ever they shall be deprived of
this sight: which shall be an exceeding grievous torment unto them, for they
shall always remember that glory, which they before saw, and shall think
themselves unworthy to behold so great happiness.

Here also an other question arises, Whether the damned do see what is done
in this world.
whether the damned do see what is done in this world? To which S. Gregory
answers in his Morrals, saying; They know not whether their children be
noble, or ignoble. As neither the living do know, what torments the damned
have. They know not what they are, who^ they have left in this world, for the
life of their soul is separated from their body.

Thirdly, it is doubted, whether the damned do wish, Whether the damned do
wish that all might be damned with them.
that all may come into hell to them? to which doubt it is answered: As the
Saints have perfect love and charity, so the damned do burn against all with
spite and hatred. Wherefore as the Saints do rejoice at another good, so the
damned do repine at it, neither is there any thing found at which they more
grieve, then at the glory of the Saints: and therefore they wish that all might
be damned, and they boil with so great envy, that also they envy the glory of
their own parents, although less, then they envy other men's glory: For this
cause yt rich glutton would not have his brethren damned.
for they know, that the nearer they are unto them, who are damned, that their
own punishment is so much the more increased. Which albeit they know, yet so
great is their hatred and malice, that they had rather suffer great torments
with many, then small discruciatements with a few.

Fourthly, it is wont to be demanded, Whether the damned shall remember what
they have done in this life.
whether the damned shall be mindful of those things, which they have done in
this life, to which S. Bernard answers affirmatively, and says; that this
remembrance shall more torment the^, whilst they remember the evils, which they
have committed, for which they are now afflicted, and the good things, which
they have omitted, by which they might have purchased the kingdom of heaven.
Hence it is apparent that there are two kinds of punishment in hell: Two
pun^shments in hell.
one of loss, and the other of sense, as the Divines speak. Christ remembers
the first, when he says; Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall
be hewn down. And the latter, when he adds; And shall be cast into the
fire. Of the punishment of sense Gregory speaks, saying; In hell there shall be
intolerable cold, unquenchable fire, an immortal worm, insufferable stink,
palpable darkness, torme^ters with scourges, an horible sight of devils,
confusion of sinners, and endless desperatio^ of any good. Therefore the damned
shall be full of all misery, affliction, and grief: for they shall have tears in
their eyes, gnashing in their teeth, stink in their nosthrils, houling in their
mouths, mourning in their throats, terrors in their ears, bonds and manacles
upon their hands and feet, and eternal fire burning all their parts and
members. Wherefore not without cause S. Augustine calls hell a den, full of
all kind of punishments and miseries. For this cause the Prophet says; Every
one shall be astonished at his neighbor, their countenances shall be black
with burning: And Baruch says, That their faces shall be pitchy and black,
through the smoke that is in the house. The greatness of the punishments in hell
may be also gathered, by the continual mourning and lamentation, which
grows through a desire of death, which shall not come at them, nor nere them,
wherefore they shall bite their tongues, and blaspheme their Creator, as Saint
John testifies, Apoc. 16.
saying; They gnewe their tongues for sorrow, and blasphemed the God of heaven
for their pains, and for their sores. The rigor of their torments shall be so
great, that despising life, which all so greatly love, they shall desire death,
which all men hate, and that very earnestly, as the same John witnesses, when
he says; In those days shall men seek death, Apoc. 9.
and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall slay from
them. What then shall we do says Chrysostom. For there shall be none other
thing, but mourning, trembling, and lamentation: there all repentance shall be
too late, help shall be wanting, punishments shall increase, neither is any
comfort or consolation ever to be looked for. O what terrors, what gripings,
what wearines, and what torments shall afflict them, that are boiled in this
purgatory? No tongue can express, what punishment it is, says Chrysostom, to
be deprived of the Divine sight. There be some of an absurd judgment, (...)
reparat. lapsi ad Theod.
who only are glad to think, that they shall escape hell. But I think it a
greater torment then hell, not to have attained so great glory. I do not
think that we are so much to sorrow for the pains of hell, as we are to
lament our loss, in that we are fallen from heaven; which is a torment in my
judgment above all torments. Hell, and the plagues of hell are intolerable:
yet if one should say, that innumerable hells were to be suffered, he should
say nothing, in respect of the loss of that heavenly glory, to be hated of
Christ, and to hear; Hom. 47. ad pop. Antioch.
I know you not. For it is better to be pierced thorough with infinite
thunderbolts, then to have that mild face turned against us, and that
peaceable eye disdayning to behold us. O let us never suffer this, o thou
only begotten son of God, and of the blessed Virgin; o let us never have
experience of this irrecuperable loss, and intolerable punishment. But woe is
unto us, in that we do not foresee this imminent danger: yea as secure,
impure, negligent, and without any regard we hasten with great celeritie,
to find out this insufferable and importable evil.

But some man will say: Whether it be justice, to punish a finite sin with
an infinite torment.
a finite sin ought not to be punished with an infinite torment. Almighty
GOD is just, and that which is finitely committed, ought not to be infinitely
plagued. Lib. 4 Moral. cap. 12.
To which Saint Gregory aunsvvereth; that he should say well, if the just
and stricte Judge should recompense and punish only the deeds, and not the
hearts of men. For the wicked did therefore offend finitely, because their
life was finite. But they would have lived without end, that they might have
continued in sin without end. For they more desire to sin, then to live:
and therefore they always desire to live here, that whilst they live they may
never cease to sin. Therefore it belongs to the justice of the strict Judge,
that they never want punishment, who were minded in this life never to have
wanted sin: and that no end of vengeance should be allotted unto them, who
would make no end of sinning, while they were able to offend. This says he.
Another reason is this: The greater the person is, who is offended, the greater
is the injury and offense, and deserves the greater punishment, as both
Aristotle and Chrysostom auerre. Arist. 7, Ethicorum.
For so great is the injury, as the person is great, against whom the injury is
committed. If the person be noble, a small injury becomes great; and if the
person be base and vulgar, a great offense, is accounted bur smally of.
Therefore because God is infinite in power and in goodness, the injury which is
offered unto him, is also infinite: and therefore it is requisite and meet,
that it be punished with an infinite and eternal torment. Wherefore, my dear
brother, thou seeing and understanding these things, and considering of them
daily and diligently in thy mind, be, I pray thee careful for the salvation of
thy soul. Let thine eyes always behold the cruelty, sharpnes, and greatness of
the torments in hell: alvvayes meditate upon those things, which are
profitable and wholesome for thy soul. For it is much better for thee, here
without intermission to lament thy sins, and in this world with fruit to
crave pardon and forgiveness of God, then hereafter for ever to bewail them in
the unquenchable flames of hell, without any profitte or remedy. In this short
course and pylgrimage of thy life, thou may by tears and repentance obtain
remission of thy sins, and blot out the hand-vvryting* that God has against
thee. Therefore mourn and lament a little in this world, least hereafter thou
mourn and lament without end: humble thy self a little here, least hereafter
thou be cast down into utter darkness, and into the everlasting flames of
hell. Blessed is he that watches and labors in this world, that he may be
found worthy in the day of judgment, of the society and fellowship of the just.
But wretched and miserable is he, that through his own fault and negligence
depriueth himself of this glory. For then shall God in the clouds take the
righteous, and shall carry them with him into everlasting joy. But sinners
shall be haled of devils in to euer-during and euer-burning fire. Who will
give rivers of water to my head, and fountaynes of tears flowing night and
day from mine eyes, that I may weep for my sins, and bevvayle my self, and
that I may entreat my Savior, that he would vouchsafe me his grace, that I
may not be found unworthy, when he shall come to judgment; least I hear that
fearful and dreadful sentence; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire: I know ye not: But that I may be worthy to hear that happy and most
sweet voice; Come ye blessed of my Father; inherit ye the kingdom prepared
for you? To the which my Lord Jesus Christ bring me, through the merrits of his
most sacred passion. Amen.

Laus tri-vni Deo.

FINIS.
AN Exposition upon the one and fifty Psalm. Have mercy upon me o God.

Written in Spanish, by the reverend and learned Divine, F. Jews of Granada.

Since translated into Latin, Italian, and French.

AND NOW ENGLISHED by Frauncis Meres Master of Arts of both Universities, and
Student in Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by James Robarts, Anno Dom. 1598.

TO THE RELIgious and devout Lady, the Lady Judith Kinaston, F. M. heartily
wishes the fruition of all blessings both of grace in this life, and of glory
in the other.
Two motives, right worshipful and virtuous Lady, have induced me to
dedicate this short, but sound and divine exposition upon the one and fifty
Psalm unto your most Christian Ladyship. The first is, your tender care, and
loving regard extended to my Love, my dear and espoused Second self. The
other is, your mindfulnes of my preferment, which if your Ladyship shall
effect, I shall continue my Thankfulness for all courtesies, in more spacious and
ample manner. In the mean season, let me entreat your Worship, courteously
to accept this small Present.

The Lord Jesus, in whose hand is the length of days, grant unto your Ladyship
a long, peaceable, and quiet life upon earth, replenished with affluence of the
best things, especially of that one thing, that our Savior in the 10 of Luke
told Martha was needful; Luke, 10.
that you may instruct my Mary to choose the good part, which shall not be taken
away from her: that you with all the elect of God, may be pertaker of that
everlasting joy, Esaias, 64. 1, Cor. 2.
which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has entered into
man's heart. From your Ladyships house nere Dowgate in London this 24, of
November. 1598.

Your Ladyships devout Orator, Francis Meres.

AN EXPOsition upon the one and fifty Psalm. Have mercy upon me o God.
O Lord, Diverse names of God.
thou that art the Creator and Maker of all this words frame, and al things
are thine, and the work of thine hands; yet nevertheless thou would only
be called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of whom thy chosen people
Israel were to spring, although most ungrateful: In favor of whom thou
did shevve thy power, and did work great and marvelous things, as well
in subduing and subuerting their enemies, which victories were full of all
admiration, as in staying the course of the Sun, and subiecting the raging
Sea; relentlesse stones, and mighty ryuers to their obedience, who warred
under thy banners; whereupon thou also art called a valiant and strong GOD, the
God of armies, and the Lord of hosts. But when this people grew rebellious
and of a stiff neck, then also thou did show thy self terrible and
fierce, and did govern them with an iron rod, with fear and trembling:
and those that would not be ruled by love and gentleness, and by fair means
would not walk in their duties, thou did punish by most swifte and horrible
plagues, and did reign vengeance upon them, that durst presume to offend
thy Majesty; so that thou did begin to be also called a GOD of vengeance:
so that at the hearing of thy name not only men, but also the Sea and the
elements trembled.

And so long as thy fury was not pacified by thy only begotten Son, the
gates of heaven were so shut up, that the iustest man alive might not pass
thorough them. Neither durst sinners, considering their vnwoorthynesse, and
their grievous sins, and seeing no other gates open in all this world,
besides those of justice and vengeance, venture to come near thee: for by
custom they had learned that coming unto thee for remedy, they found
damnation: approaching for salvation, they tasted death; because thou wast
called a consuming fire.

Many o Lord being daunted with this fear, did wander up and down sinking
under the burden of desperation, having no hope to find any mercy. Others
being separated from thee by ignorance, did go astray as sheep without a
sheepeheard, bleating up and down in this world. Therefore said David; Say
unto my soul I am thy salvation; as if he should say: My ears are full of
terrible names and fearful tytles, let the time come, in which by a new name
thou thy self may promise salvation to my soul. And this shall be, when thou
shall be called Jesus, that is, a Savior. This in times past said David in the
person of all men.

But after that thou did remember thy mercy, and the promises made unto the
Fathers, that is, that the time should come, that thou thy self would put
on our humanity and misery, when I say, thou wentest out of the hal of thy
power and justice, and coming unto us did enter into the Palace of thy
mercy and benignity, thou did abundantly fulfill to all, whatsoever thou
had promised to any. But that great follovver and Apostle of thy Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, 2, Cor. 1.
first began to call thee the Father of mercy, and the GOD of all consolation.

A Father, that he might signify, that like a Father thou would help us:
A God, because thou can help whom thou please.

So that sinners seeing thee to have gone out of the hall of thy severity, and
to have come into the Palace of thy mercies and consolations, seeing thee
clothed on every side with their vestiments, and made one of their household;
they would no more wander and vage up and down, but being united to thy
most holy Church, they come to thy throane with sincere faith, and firm hope,
desiring remission of their sins.

Thou have done o Lord, as hunters use to do, who that they may not fear the
vvilde beast, do cloathe themselves after the color of the mountain: so also
thou tookest upon thee an earthen vesture, like us, that thou might take
whom thou would. For as thou did show thine omnipotency in times past, by
power and reuengement: so thou now would show thy mercy by pardoning and
forgyuing. For to remitte an offered injury, is no lesser glory, then to
revenge it, yea it is greater glory to forgive it. Therefore there is not,
neither can there be a sin so great, which thou do not forgive to him
that is penitent.

If a sinner had been so unhappy, that considering the greatness of his sins,
he had not seen thy power and goodness, he had dispaired of pardon, and had
said that, which in times past our first brother Cain said, and after him
Judas, that is, My sin is greater then can be pardoned, and had laid violent
hands upon himself.

Therefore let him now rejoice, and lift up his eyes to heaven, whence comes
aid and help to all them, that are found in the tribulations and miseries of
this world. Let him open the eyes of his soul by faith, and let him behold
round about him ensigns and banners displayed; not banners of war, of
vengeance, or of justice: but of pity, of mercy, of pardon, of friendship,
and of reconciliation to all them, that desire it in truth. Let him behold
those honored and graced in this Palace, who were wont to be his adversaries
and enemies.

There he shall see that great and famous sinner Magdalen received into favor.
There he shall see those humbled, and brought low, who supposed themselves
wise and holy men; and them exalted, who confessed themselves sinners, and of
no merit. There he shall see that sinner S. Peter, who was a perjured denier
of his Master, to be made a pillar of the Church. There he shall see Saint
Paul, that wolf and persecuter of the flock, to be made a vessel of election.

Therefore let all sinners com, let the^ come I say to this palace of mercy;
and let them constantly and assuredly believe, that no man in the world does
hereafter so sin, or can sin, that he cannot or may not obtain remission
at Gods hands for all his misdeedes: neither that any enmities, or quarrels
can arise to that height and pass, which can utterly shut up the gates of
frindship and reconciliation.

Wherefore, I feeling my self burdened with the weight of my sins, and
swallowed up in the gulf of misery, and desiring especially the sight of the
eyes of my soul, which errors and foul enormous sins have shut up and
blinded, and with greater desire and thyrst desiring and thirsting for thy
grace, and favor, then the Heart or the Hunter does the water brooks, I come
to the throne of thy grace, entreating and beseeching thee o Lord, with that
humility, which the greatest sinner can come withal, knowing his vnvvorthines,
and his enormities done and committed before his eyes, who once gave him both
being and life, and after he had lost it by sin, and returned again by
repentance, eftsoons restored it: before his Majesty, who with his only
Word, that is, with his Wisdom, created and made all things of nothing:
before him, in whose power it is, not only to create a thousand other worlds,
but also to do those things, which can neither enter into the thought of
Angel, or any other creature. Before him, I say, I come, and say,

Have mercy upon me, o Lord. And because, o my Lord, I have no merrits, by
which I may boldly presume to come unto thee, (for I am not only unworthy
of this thy great mercy, but have also justly deserved damnation and
destruction in hell) I desire this.

According to thy great goodness. According to which, if we well consider, how
thou have always used it toward sinners, I believe, and am verily persuaded,
that thou art more easy to be entreated, and readier to forgive, then I
through my weakness and infirmity am prone unto sin. And because my sins
have so increased, and risen to that height, that they are come into the
presence of thy divine Majesty, behold it was in my power to fall, and through
mine own fault have I gone astray: but to rise again, and come home is not in
my power, except thou succourest and releeuest me with thy singular and
especial grace: therefore I humbly desire thee to have mercy on me, According
to the multitude of thy mercies. Thee I say, I most humbly do beseech, who
have been so pitiful and merciful toward sinners, that of unclean and
filthy wretches, thou have made them holy and righteous men, that with the fire
of thy love, which (as the Prophet says) thou thy self art, calling thee a
fire, which does consume, thou would purge, burn up, and utterly consume,
all mine iniquities and imperfections: making me of a stonecold sinner, a most
ardent lover, and fervent follower of thee, and of thy precepts and
commandments. Neither only purge me from my sins past, but Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin. Wash me so, o
Lord, and so cleanse all mine inward parts, that there may not any thing
remain in me, that may solicit me to sin again. Give me strength and
fortitude, to overcome the world, the devil, and the flesh, least I return to
mine old ways and former errors. And because I know, o Lord, that no man
does live, that of himself can be justified in thy sight and presence: and
that thou do only will this, that he that desires to have forgiveness of
his sins, do acknowledge and confess himself a sinner, and that he lament
and bewail his misdeedes; I being such a one, do say: For I acknowledge my
faults: and my sin is ever before me. I do acknowledge, I say, my faults,
and confess them not only outwardly, but also inwardly. For although there
are some, that being spotted and polluted with vain hypocrisy, and with some
other vice do deceive men under a shadow of piety, yet Lord no man living
can possibly deceive thee with a show of outward sanctity, if inwardly he be
not so indeed.

I have learned by experience, that the inward sin is opposite and contrary
to every one, which accuses without intermission, and gnaweth the conscience
like a worm: by the gnawing of which, that horrible voice of the damned
arises, Wised, 5,
who say: We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction,
and we have gone through dangerous ways: but we have not known the way of
the Lord.

The Heathen in times past, did confess their errors and offenses to Mars,
Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, and to other vain Gods, and fictions of Poets: and
many at this day do offend, because they have riches, honors, and the glory
of this world, and do confess that they have offended against all these,
because they have erred, and by the means of them, have not attained unto
their desires. But I o lord do contemn all these, and do confess my sins
unto thee, because Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy
sight. For all my sins are against thee, as against the Lord, the maker, and
preserver of all things, from whom they cannot be hid, but are open to the
eyes of thy divinity, as all other things are, whether they be in heaven, in
earth, or in the depth of the Sea. And truly my sins and transgressions be
so many and so great, that some being in the same state of damnation with me,
and not considering of thine omnipotency, but measuring thee according to
their own frailety and weakness, have in their perverse cogitations,
descended into judgment against thee, saying; My sins are greater then can be
forgiven. And giving no credit to thy words and promises, suppose that thou
art angry and cruel, and do think upon punishment and vengeance, and not
upon pardon and forgiveness. And such when they shall see, that thou, o my Lord,
do forgive me my sins, will be of another mind, and be confounded in
their judgments, and shall confess that which thou spakest by thy Prophet,
Esaias, 55,
saying; As the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher the^
your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. Therefore have mercy upon me,
o Lord, and blot out mine offenses; That thou may be justified in thy
sayings: and clear when thou art judged. But if a greater acknowledgement of
them be necessary for the remission of my sins, or if it carry any show of
excuse to repeat them from the first beginning and original, I say, o lord,
and plainly confess, that I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my
Mother conceived me. And that through that old transgression of our Father
Adam, which he has traduced and conveyed to all his posterity, which has
made us subject first to bodily death, and the^ to spiritual: to both which
deaths we had still been subject, unless the second heavenly Adam, Christ
our Lord and thy beloved son, had freed and delivered us from them by his
most precious blood, and had instructed us by his doctrine and examples, and
had showed unto us the true way, by which we might again return to that
first estate of innocence, in which we were created in the garden of
Parradice. Gene, 3*
For thou love truth in the inward affections, and shall make me to
understand wisdom in the secret of mine heart. For seeing that thou art that
ineffable and unspeakable truth, which thou love, and which is acceptable to
all thine: by observing it according to thine own promises, thou gave him
who is the desired of Nations, and promised in thy law, that is, thy self,
that we being delivered from the fear of our enemies, might serve thee, not
with that old servile love, which was for fear of punishment and vengeance:
but with a filial love, as a Lord and Father, who never cease to shower
down his benefits upon us his children. Which love and name of children we
have obtained by Jesus Christ, thy Son our lord: for by the virtue of his
merrits, and because he would be our brother in this world, he has given
us boldness, that we dare with confidence call thee Father, and thou also
call us sons: not natural Sons: for Christ alone is thy only begotten
and natural Son, and of one substance with thee; but we are adopted
sons, by which adoption, if we do our duties, we come to the inhearitance
of thy kingdom with him, therefore to us being such Thou have manifested the
sescrete and hidden things of thy wisdom. That is, the mysteries of our
redemption, which neither Socrates, nor Aristotle, nor Plato, nor any other of
the Grecian or Roman Philosophers, could ever find out by all their
immeasurable study and long searching: yea thou have showed, that al those
things, in which they placed the last end and chiefest felicity, to be mere
foolishnes, and extreme vanity; and that which they supposed foolishnes, thou
have showen to be true wisdom, that thou might declare, and manifest, how
little man's strength can prevail without thy help, and that thou might give
an example, that none hereafter should trust to his own wit or power: but
thou do give joy and strength to them, that with humility offer unto thee
their misery and weakness: and him thou fillest with thy wisdom, that with
a sincere mind offers unto thee his ignorance: and to be brief, him thou
iustifiest, that yields up himself unto thee humbled as a sinner. Which
seeing it is so, I desire thee, O Lord, That thou would purge me with
hysope, and I shall be clean: that thou would wash me, and I shall be
whither then snow. VVash me, o Lord with the water of that fountain, which
flows to eternal life, which thou did promise to the woman of Samaria,
and purge me with the hysope of thy grace: and with the fire of thy love and
charity, burn away all the errors of my frailetie, and all my wickedness,
and then I shall be cleansed from all my sins: then I shall return unto the
state of innocence, then I shall be more pure, and whiter then the whitest
snow. Then Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones
which thou have broken may rejoice. Then all my senses, which hitherto served
the world, the flesh, and the devil; that lay drowned in pleasures and world
lie delights which are rather to be called sorrows, miseries, afflictions, and
confusions, shall receive of thee joy, gladness and rest: and they shall begin
to hear and taste, how good and sweet, o lord, thy Spirit is to them, that
serve thee with humility. I having tasted of thy Spirit, my flesh and bones
which are now broken, because they served earthly and vile things, shall
return with gladness to the obedience of thy Spirit: They shall taste of the
high mysteries of thy works, and shall know a great part of thy goodness and
graciousnesse, which both heretofore thou have used, and still use daily to
all the nations of the world: wherefore they shall persecute those things
with a deadly hate, which they have passed through, and that which heretofore
was sweet and pleasant unto them, now they shall esteem it bitter: and that
which they refused as bitter, now they shall desire it as most sweet, and shall
give thee immortal thanks, because thou have delivered them out of the depth
of misery, in which they wallowed, being deciued with a false vizard of
pleasure and gladness: and because now o lord, through thy gracious goodness I
am come to the knowledge and detestation of my sins, being the ready way to
salvation, O Lord I pray thee, Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my
misdeedes. Turn thy divine face, I say, the beholding and contemplating of
which is eternal life: deal not with me after my deserts, but look upon me
with the eyes of thy mercy, and take from me all my wickedness. Purge me, o
lord, and cleanse me, not only from sins past, but from all those, that may
happen to me hereafter. Create in me a clean heart, o God, and renew a right
spirit within me. Take from me my stony heart, which hitherto has delighted
it self with the love and contemplation of abject and unclean things, and
therefore it is unclean and polluted, I pray thee o lord take this from me,
and vouchsafe to create another in me, clean, pure, and chaste. Take from me
the spirit of pride, of vainglory, of covetousness, of luxury, and of many
other vices and slaueries, which has reigned in me, and renew within me a
right, mild, and humble spirit, which may thirst after all righteousness.
Thou know, o lord, that we are earth, and a mass of iniquity, and that
unless thou do support us with thine hand, we cannot do any thing, but that
which is earthly, there-I pray thee; Cast me not away from thy presence, and
take not thy holy spirit from me. But always direct me and preserve me with
thy right hand, that I may say as the Prophet said in times past; The Lord is
my Shepherd, Psalm, 23,
I shall not want. Take not from me thy holy Spirit, the true comforter of
the afflicted who is the way of truth to all them, that as wanderers, lost, and
desolate, do enter into the blind Laborinth of this world, yea rather Lord
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.
Give me grace, that by meditating on those things, which thou have wrought
for our salvation, and workest daily, and in beholding thy will, who desire
not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted and live, I may enjoy
that true joy, and rest, which they enjoy, who being guilty of eternal
death, do hear that their sins are forgiven them; not of the^, that have no
power to do it, but of him that is omnipotent, who can neither deceive nor be
deceived: who as he cannot die, so he cannot fail in his promise.

Take from me o lord, the spirit of bondage, which I have hitherto obeyed, and
strengthen me in thy love and grace, with thy royal and free spirit, not
subject to the world, the flesh, or the devil, that we may serve thee with
joy, in the perfection of the works of righteousness, in the liberty of the
Gospel, to the which we are restored by thy Son Christ our lord and
Savior.

And then, o lord, I being strengthened by thy mercy, I shall not only be
free, and clean from all sin: but I shall march into the field as a courageous
warrior, and valiant captain, and I shall teach thy ways unto the wicked,
and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Who seeing me to be made of wicked
just, of weak mighty, of a servant free, of a subject thine adopted son,
and considering this to be done not by man's strength, but by divine power,
they will be converted unto thee with all their heart, and with all their
soul. But I pray thee, o my lord, and the GOD of my salvation, whilst I am
conversant with wicked, perverse, and ungodly men, do not suffer me to sin
with them, or to pollute my self with their blemishes. But Deliver me from
blood-giltinesse, O God, thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue
shall sing of thy righteousness. As the sun with his beams does pierce
and penetrate all things, A Simily.
both pure and impure, and is not only not polluted, but also does purge
those things that are infected and corrupted: so I being clothed with the
beams and heat of thy charity and love, may with out spotte and blemish be
conversant among the impure and unclean. This if thou vvilt grant me, my
tongue being directed and guided by thy grace and aid, shall plant thy
righteousness in their hearts, and they shall be deceived, when they shall think
that it is my work, seeing that it is thine. For of my self I am not
sufficient to do it, nay I am not able to speak a word without thy help and
grace. That therefore they may acknowledge this, and yield thee thy due praise,
and not bestow it on me, Open thou my lips, o Lord, and my mouth shall
show forth thy praise. And now o lord, I offer thee my spirit afflicted and
troubled, because I have offended thee, to which I add a purpose of amendment.
Which sacrifice I know does please thee, and to be that, which thou requirest.
For thou desire no sacrifice, though I would give it, thou delightest not in
burnt offerings. For now is the time, in which no burnt offerings nor
ceremonial sacrifices do please thee, or shall at any time hereafter content
thee: for thou art a Spirit, and wilt be worshipped in Spirit. And therefore
The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart (o God)
shall thou not despise. And because I know that no man in this world, so
long as he lives, does come too late to desire mercy and favor at thy hands:
but that he shall always find thee ready to give it unto us, therefore I
desire thee again; O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls
of Jerusalem. Deal with me o Lord graciously and mercifully, according unto
thy good will and pleasure, and give me grace, that the decayed and ruinous
walls of my soul, which are able to hold out no force of the enemy, may again
be inwardly reedified, that I may offer unto thee the true works of inward
righteousness, which presently shall follow the outward, being signs of the
inward. From whence afterward as from a lively fountain, shall flow the
edifying of my neighbor, from which duplicity of works shall arise a sweet
harmony, acceptable unto thy divine Majesty, and a sacrifice joined to that,
with which thou thy self said, that thou art well pleased; For then shall
thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the burnt offering and
oblation: then shall they offer calves upon thine Altar. All these things, I
say, o Lord shall they offer upon thine Alter as a new sacrifice, of which the
Prophet spoke; This shall please the Lord better then a young bullock, Psalm
69.
that has horns and hoofes, that is, the humanity of Christ our Redeemer thy
Son, and his sacrifice; by whose merrits our works before unworthy, and of
no value, are made grateful and acceptable in thy sight.

After this manner therefore o Lord, both I, and others with me, who have
been sinners, living now in thy worship and service, will say: Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning,
etc. We will praise and glorify thee always both in this world, and in the
other, as the Father, Creator and maker of all things; and thy Son, the
Divine Wisdom, as him, by whom we alone are worthy to be called, and to be in
deed thy Sons; and the holy Ghost, as the Doctor and Teacher of grace, the
Comforter, Patron, and Leader to all good purposes. Who in the distinction of
persons, in a perfect Trinity, in the unity of substance, and in Majesty do
live and reign, without beginning, without end, for ever and ever, world
without end. Amen.

A most devout Prayer of the name of Jesus.
O Good Jesus, o sweet Jesus, o Jesus the Son of the virgin Mary, full of
pity and mercy. O sweet Jesus have mercy upon me, according to thine infinite
goodness. O bountiful Jesus, I an unworthy sinner do pray thee, by that thy
precious blood, which thou did shed upon the Cross, for sinners and ungodly
men, that thou would wash me from all my sins, and that thou would not
despise thy servant, who humbly prays, and calls upon this most holy name
of Jesus. This thy name Jesus is a sweet name, yea it is sweeter then any
Nectar or Ambrosia; this thy name Jesus is a saving name. For what is Jesus,
but a Savior? Therefore o good Jesus, who of thy goodness have created me, and
with thy precious blood have redeemed me, do not suffer my soul to be haled
down to hell, by reason of my many and great transgressions. Let not mine
iniquities, o good Jesus, condemn my soul, created of thine infinite goodness.
Acknowledge in me, o good Jesus, and challenge, what is thine; that is, my
soul: and take from me that which is another, that is, all my sins and
enormities. O good Jesus have mercy upon me, as long as I am in this world,
least I be condemned in that fearful day of judgment. O good Jesus, if I a
perverse sinner shall deserve according to thy justice to be damned, by reason
of my grievous and enormous sins, I humbly appeal from thy severe justice,
to thy gracious and pitiful mercy: assuredly trusting, that thou my Lord
Jesus wilt be gracious and merciful to my soul, as a gracious Father, and a
merciful GOD. What profit, o good Jesus, will there be in my flesh, if my
soul go down to hell?

For it is certain o Lord, that no man in hell, shall yield praise to thy holy
name Jesus. O most merciful Jesus, be merciful to us. O most sweet Jesus,
deliver us from all our tribulations and anguishes. O good Jesus, be gentle and
kind to us wretched sinners. O most holy Jesus, associate our souls with thine
elect in heaven. O most pitiful Jesus, the salvation of all them, that hope
in thee, comfort us. O Jesus the Son of the most holy virgin Mary, bestow on
us thy mercy, grace, wisdom, charity, chastity, humility, and patience in
all our adversities and extreamities, that we may always bless, glorify,
honor, and praise Jesus. Amen.

Laus tri-vni Deo.

FINIS.

