The chief and pryncypall Articles of the Christen faith, to hold against
the Pope, and al Papists, and the gates of hell, with other three very
profitable and necessary books the names or tyttels, whereof are conteyne in
the leaf next followynge. Made by Doctor Marten Luther.

To the Reader.
In this book shall you find Christian Reader the right probation of the right
Old Catholyke Church, and of the new false Church, whereby either of them
is to be known.

Read and judge.

i. The chief Articles of the christen faith, to hold against the Pope, and
all Papists, and the gates of hell. ij. The Confession of the Faith of Doctor
Marten Luther. iij. Of the right Old Catholyke Church, and the new false
Church, whereby either of them is to be known. iiij. The three Symboles or
Confessyons of the Christen faith, in the Church vnfourmely used.
Doctor Marten Luther.
Wittenberg.
Preface of D. Marten Luther.
THese Articles have I compyled, and for our part delivered up. Which also
are received of ours and vnyformely confessed, and concluded.

That they should (if the Pope with his adherentes, would ones be so hardy,
without lyeng and dissimulation, with earneste and truth, to keep an unfeigned
free counsayll, according to his duetye) be openly delivered up, and the
confession of our faith declared. But for as much as the Romyshe court so
terribly fears a general Counsayll, and so shamefully abhors the light,
that also they, whithe be of his own side, are put to despair, as though he
would never abide a free Counsayll, much less keep it himself. Whereon, as
reason requires, they take occasion to be offended, and moved to no small
encombraunce thereouer. As they that there by perceive rightwell, that the Pope
would rather see, the hole Christianite cast away, and all souls damned,
than he would suffer him self, or his, to be reformed, and a measure to be
set unto his Tyranny.

So have I notwithstanding willed these Articles by open printe, to be brought
to light to the intent, that if I should chance to dye, before any Counsayl
were kept (as doubteles I look for none other) seeing these wretches so
shamefully abhorring the light and eschewinge the day, take such intolerable
pains to delay and hinder a free counsayll. Whereby they that shall live and
remain after me may have my witness and confession to show, above and besides
that confession, which I did setfurth before, wherein also I have persisted
hitherto, and will persiste by Gods grace.

For what should I say, unto whom should I complain. I am yet a live, I
writ, preach, and read daily, yet are there such veninouse people, not
only among the adversaries, but also false brethren, which feign to be of
our part, that take upon them, to interpretate my writtynges and teachynges
directely against me. Even before my face, that I may hear. Although they
know fulwel, that I teach otherwise, and would color their poison with my
labors, and seduce the people under my name, what will be done then after my
death.

Yea I should by reason make answer to all things, whylest I am yet on live.
Yea again, how can I alone stop all the mouths of the Devil? Specially of
such (as they are all poisoned) as will not hear, nor mark what we do writ.
But only practyse with all diligence, how they might most shame fully
peruerie, and infecte our words, in all letters. Unto such to make answer.
I remitte unto the devil, or at the last unto gods indignation according to
their deseruynge. I remember often the good gerson, which doubts, whether men
ought to writ any good thing openly, if men do it not, then are there many
souls lost, that might be preserved. But if men do it, so is the devil
ready at hand with innumerable evil infected mouths, which all things do
infecte and perverse, so that the fruit is kept back, how be it, what they get
by it, is openly seen. For sense the time, that they have so shamefully lied
against us, and would uphold the people with lies has God nevertheless g^ue
forward with his busynes, and has made their number still to decreasse, and
ours to increace, and has put the^ with their lies to confusyon, and yet does
more and more.

I must recyte a Story. There was sent hither to Vvittenberch, a certain
doctor out of France, which said openly before us: That his king was surely
certifyed, that by us, there was no Church, no Superiorite, no matrimony, but
went one among another like beasts, and that every man did what he would.
Now judge, how shall they in the later day before the judgment seat of
Christ look upon us, that have by their writtinges infourmed the said king, and
also other Countries such rude and gross lies to be very true? Christ the
Lord and judge of us all knows right well, that they lie, and have lied, his
judgment must they hear again, that am I sure of, God co^uerte them that are
to be converted, to repentance. To the other it shall be said, Vvo and Alaes
for ever more.

And that I return again to my purpose, To see a right Counsayll I would
truly be very glad, where by many matters might be redressed, and the people
eased, Not that we have need of it. For our Churches are now trough Gods
grace, with the sincere word, and right use of the Sacraments, with
knoweledge of all manner of States, and right works, so illumined and set
in order, that we for our part, care for no Counsayll, neither do we look or
hope for any better reformation in these Articles by the Counsayll.

But there see we in the Bysshoprykes every where, many Parysshes void and
desolate, which might cause a man's heart to break. And yet neither Bisshops
nor Chano^s care ho we the pore people do live or dye, for the which Christ
nevertheless suffered death, and should not hear the same speak with them as
the right shepeherde with his sheep. In so much, that I am afraid, and
dredefull, least he let one day an Angelical Counsel pass over Doucheland,
which might utterly destroy us all, even as Sodom and Gomorre, seeing, we are
so obstinate, morkyng, and gestyng with the Counsayll.

Besides these necessary Church matters, are there also in the lay state
innumerable great faults, which had need of redress. There is discord
between Princes, and States, Usury and covetousness are broken in, eue^ as a
mighty floude, and counted even laufull and decent, wilfulnes, uncleanliness,
presumption excess in apparel, in eating, playeng, bragging, with all manner
of ungodliness and iniquite, disobedience of the subjects, familye, and
workmen, the inhaunsynge of al occupations and also of husbandemen (and who
can recyte it al) have so prevailed, that with ten counsaylles and twenty
Conuocations it will not be brought again to the right trade.

If men would handle such chief points of the spiritual and temporal
estates, which are against God, in the Counsayl, then should they have enough
to do, even all hands full, So that in the mean season, they should forgette
all children plays, and foolyshnes of long gowns, great crowns, broad
gyrdels. Bysshoppes and Cardinals hattes or staves, and such other
iugglynges. When first we had executed the Commandments and ordinance of
God, both in the spiritual and temporal estates, the^ should we find time
enough to refourme meats, garments, cronnes, and c^pes But when they devour
such camelles, and instead hereof will see a moote, let the beam alone, and
judge the chippe, than might we also well forbear the counsayll.

Therefore have I set but few Articles. For as much as we besides that, have
of God so many commandments to do in the church, in the superiorite, within
the housse, that we can never be able to perform them. Who then? or what
does it auayll? to make besides them many decrees and Statutes in the counsayl.
Specially seeing these chief points commanded of God, are not regarded nor
observed. Even as though he should set by our iuglynge tromperies, because we
tread his earnest commandments under our fete. But our sins suppress
us, and suffer not God, to be merciful unto us, neither do we also repent,
but will moreover maynteyne and uphold all abomination.

O Lord Jesus Christ, keep thou Counsayll thy self, and deliver thy people by
thy glorious coming, It is done with the Pope and his adhere^tes. They will
none of the: Therefore help thou us poor and miserable, which sygh unto the,
and seek the with earnest, according to the grace, which thou haste given us,
through the holy Ghost, which lives and reygneth, with the and thy father,
praised for ever and ever. AMEN.

The first part is of the high Article of the Godly Majesty, as
i THat Father, Son, and holy ghost in one godly essence and nature, three
sundry Persons, is one only God, which created heaven and earth.

ij That the father of none, the Son of the father is borne, the holy ghost,
from the father and the son procedynge.

iij That not the father, nor the Holy Ghoost, but the Son is become man.

iiij That the Son so is become man that he was conceived by the holy
Ghoost, without the help of man, and borne of the pure holy virgin Mary.
After that suffered, dyed, was buried, Descended into hell, rose again from the
dead. Ascended into heaven, sittynge on the right hand of God, shall come to
judge the quick and the dead, etc.

As the Symbol of the Apostles, Item of S. Athanasius and the common
Cathechismus for Children, do teach.

These Articles are in no controversy nor variaunce for as much as of both
parties, we knowledge and confess the same, wherefore it is nedeles to entreat
further there of at this time.

The second part is of those Articles that concern the office and work of
Jesus Christ, or our redemption.
Here is the first and Chief Article.
THat Jesus Christ our God and Lord, suffered death for our sins, and
rose again for our Justification. Roma. iiij.

And that he only is the lamb of God, which bears the sins of the world,
Johan.i.

And that God has laid all our sins upon him. Isaie. liij.

Item, They are all Sinners, and are justified frelye without deserving, by
his grace through the redemption of Jesus Christ in his blonde, etc. Roma. iij.

For as much now, as this must be believed, and otherwise can not be obtained
or comprehended, by no work, law, nor deserving, So is it clear evident and
sure, that only such faith makes us righteous.

As Roman.iij. S. Paull says. We suppose that a man is justified by faith,
without the deeds of the law. Item, That he only be counted just, and a
iustifyer of him that believes on Jesus.

From these Articles may noman shrynke nor give back any thing, yea though
heaven and earth should fall, and what soever will not abide for there is
none other. Name given unto men, were in we may be saned, says S. Peter
Acto. iiij. And by his strypes we are healed. Isaie. liij,

And upon this Article stands all whatsoever we teach and live against the
Pope, devil and world. Wherefore we must be very sure thereof and doubt
nothing, Or else all is lost, and the Pope and the devil must obtain the
victory and right against us.

The ^. Article.
Mass in the Papacye.
That the mass in the Papacye is the greatest, and most horrible
Abomination, as that which directely and vyolently stryueth against this
Chief Article. And yet above and before all other Papisticall Idolatries, has been most highest and fairest. For it is supposed, That such an offer, or work
of the Mass (done also by a leaude Person) does deliver man from sin, both
here in this life, and yonder in Purgatory. Which only belongs to the
lamb of God, as is above said.

From this Article also may no man swarne or give back. For the first Article
will not suffer it.

And if there were any Papists of descretion, any where, men might common with
them measurably, and reasone with them after a gentle fasshion. Namely wherefore
they did stick so fast to the Mass? Seeing it is nothing but man's
invention, not commanded of God. And inventions of man may we let fall, As
Christ says matthei.xv. In vain do they worship me with precepts of men.

Secondarely is it a thing not necessary, which without sin or fear may
well be left.

Thirdely, may the Sacrament be had after a godlier and better way (yea only
after a Godlyer fasshson) after Christ's institution. What is it then, that
for an invented and on necessary thing, which otherwise may be had well, and
much godlyer, men will compelle the world to miserye and necessity?

Let it be openly preached unto the people, how that the mass, as a thing
invented by man, may without sin be omitted, and that noman is damned,
because he does not regard it. But may well without mass, and by a bold
mean be saved. What will ye lay, if the mass as then do not fall by her
self, not only among the folysshe people, but also among all ryghteous,
godly, discrete, God fearing hertes? Much more if they hear, that it is a
dangerous thing without Gods word, and will, imagyned and invented.

Fourthely, Seeing such innumerable, and ineffable abuses, in all the world,
by byenge and sellinge of the mass are risen, ought men by reason to let her
go, and even to resist, only such abuses, although she had in her self
some good and commodious thing.

How much more ought men to let her go, for to avoid such abuses for
evermore, seeing that she is hole unnecessary, unprofitable, and dangerous,
and that men may have all things more necessary, profitabler, and surer
without the mass.

Fyftely, for as much now as the mass is, or can be none other (as the Canon
and al Books say) but a work of men (also of a lewd person) whereby one
will reconcyle him self and other with him to God, obtain and deserve grace
and remission of sins (for so is she kept, when she is kept most holiest,
what should she do else?) Then ought and must she be condemned and rejected,
for this is directly against the chief article, which says, that not a
wicked or good mass servant, but the lamb of god, and son of god bears
our sins.

And if for a good intent, one would pretend to husel or communicate him
self, that is not right, for if he will communicate a right, so has he it most
surest and best in the Sacrament, ministered after the institution of Christ.
But to communicate him self is a man's To communicate him self.
phantasy, unsure, and not necessary, and also forbidden. Neither does he
know, what he does, whylest he without the word of God, follows men's
imaginations and inuentio^s.

Even so is it not laufull (although all were well besides) that any man will use
the commune Sacrament of the church after his own devotion, and play there
with, without the felloweshyppe of the Church, after his pleasure, without
Gods word.

This article of the mass shall be all the hole matter in the Counsayll. For if
it were possible that they should grant and give over unto us all other
Articles, yet can they not grant nor give over this Article. Campegius.
Even as Campegius said at Augspurgh, that he would rather be torn in pieces,
than he would forsake the mass. Eue^ so will I also, by the help of God, be
resolved into ashes rather then I will grant any mass servant, with his
works, be he good or evil, to be equal with my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ or above him. And thus are we parted, and remain one against another
for ever. They perceive fulwell, that if the mass do fayll, the popysshe
kingdom is laid. Wherefore rather the^ they will suffer the same, they will
kill us all if they may.

Besides all this, has this drago^s tayll, the mass, caused and brought in
much poison and dregs of diverse kinds of Idolatrye.

Purgatory.
First Purgatory. There have men handeled and made market with soul masses,
dirges, seuenthes, trentalles, months minds and years minds, and at the
last with the common weakes mind and all Soulen day, and beaderolles. In so
much that the mass almost is used only for the dead. Notwithstanding that
Christ did institute the Sacrament only for the living.

Therefore is Purgatory with all the pomp of Gods service and pourchace of
the same to be counted for a mere diabolical illusion. For it is also against
the Chief and principal Article, that only Christ, and not man's works
must help the Souls. Besides that also we have no charge nor commandment
given unto us concerning the dead. Wherefore it may well be left, and
omitted although it were neither heresye error nor Idolatrye. Augustyne.
The Papists allege here Austyne and certain Fathers, that should have
written of the Purgatory, thin king that we do not see, for what purpose, or
to what intent they use such sayenges. S. Austen does not writ, that there
is a purgatory, neither has he any Scripture mouynge him thereto: but he does
leave it in dubitation, whether there be any or not and says, That his mother
desired, That she might be remembered at the altar or Sacrament. Now all these
things are nothing but man's devotion, of one simple person alone, which
make no Article of our faith, for that belongs only to God.

But our Papists, do wreste such saynges of men and allege them for this
purpose that men should believe, their shameful, blasphemous, accursed year
markettes, of soul masses to be offered in purgatory etc. It will be long, or
they shall prove this out of Austen. When they now shall have put away the
year markett of Purgatory masses, whereof s. Austen never dreamed. Then will we
commoue with them, whether S. Austens words, without scripture, ought to be
allowed or not, and a memorial to be kept of the dead at the Sacrament or not.

It can not be allowed, that of the works or words of holy fathers me^ will
make Articles of the faith For else it must also become an Article of faith,
whatsoever they had, of meats, apparel, houses, etc, as has been done with the
pardons and relics. But the word of God must make Articles of faith, and no
man, neither also any angel

Rumblynge spirits
Secondarely is thereof ensued, that the evil spirits have used much knauerie,
that they as me^nes souls have apeared, requiryng masses, dirreges,
pylgrymages and other almose deeds with unspeakable lies and subtelties. Al
which things we have be^ compelled to take for articles of our faith, and to
live thereafter. And the pope confirmed the same, as also the mass and all
other abominations. Here may also be no shrynkyng, or giving over.

Pilgrimage.
Thirdely, pilgrymages. There was also sought, masses, remission of sins and
Gods favor, for the mass did rule al. Now is this sure, that such
pylgrimages, are without Gods word, not commanded unto us, also not
necessary, for as much as we may have it better, and may leave the^ without
any sin or danger. Why do men leave at home their own parysshe, Gods
word, wife and child, etc: which are necessary and commanded, and run
after, the unnecessary, uncertain, damnable, deuelysh errors and superstious?
But that the devil has ryde^ the pope to praise and confirm such things,
whereby the people by heaps did fall from Christ unto their own works, and
became Idolatrers, which is worst of al. Besides that, that it is a thing not
necessary, not commanded not counsaylled uncertain, and also perilous:
therefore is here also no shrynkyng, or geuyng over. And let this be preached,
that it is unnecessary and also dangerous, and see then where Pilgrimages thal
become.

Fraternities.
Fourthely the fraternities, where as the monasteries, minysters, also Vicaryes
have, bequethed, and dealt about (for a mean and reasonable price) all manner
of masses. Good works etc. both for the quick and the dead. Which is not
only mere invention of man, without Gods word very unnecessary, and not
commanded. But also against the first Article of the redemption, and therefore
in no wise to be suffered.

Relics.
Fyfthely, The relyques, wherein so many manifest lies, and foolysthenes has been found, of dogs bones and horse legs, that also because of such
knavery, whereat the devil did laugh, they ought to have been condemned long a
gone, although there were any goodness in the^. And helpdes this also it is a
thing, without Gods word, neither commanded nor counseilled, hole
unnecessary and unprofitable, and that which is worste of al it must work
Pardon and remission of sins, as a good work, and a Gods service, as also
the mass etc.

Pardon
Sexthely here unto belongs that lovely Pardon, which is given both for
quick and dead (but yet for money) and that arraunt Judas or Pope, therein
does selle the merits of Christ with the superfluous merits of all Saynctes,
and the universal Church and all which things are not to be suffered. And
also are not only without Boddes word, nedeles and not commanded. But also
against the first Article, For the merits of Christian me^ are not obtained, by
our works or money. But by faith through grace, without any money or
deserving. Not by the Dopes authorite but by the preachinge, of Gods word.

Of worshippinge of Saynctes.
Worshipping of Saynctes.
Vvorshippinge of Saynctes is also one of the abuses of Antichriste, repugnaunt
against the first Chief Article, and takes away the knoweledge of Christ.
Also it is not commanded, nor counseylled, neither has it any example of the
scripture. And we have it al, a thousand times better in Christ, although it
were of like goodness, as it is not.

And although the Angels in heaven do pray for us (as Christ him self does
also) Likewise also the saynctes in earth, or paraue^ture also in heaven, yet
does it not follow thereout that we should worship the Angels and
saynctes, pray unto them, fast, and keep holy day for them, keep masses and
offerynges institute Churches, aulters, gods seruyces, and serve them more
other ways, and take them for helpers in our necessities, and diuyde all manner
of help among them, and appropriate unto every one a synguler and peculiar
thing as the papists teach and do, for that is Idolatry, and such honor
belongs only to God. For thou can as a Christian and saint in earth
pray for me, not in one, but in all manner of necessities. How be it, therefore
may not I worship, adore, keep holy fast, offce, keep mass, to thy glory
and honor, and set upon the my faith, concerning salvation, for I may
fulwel honor, love, and thank the otherwise in Christ.

When now such Idolatrous honor of the Angels and dead saynctes shall be
done away, then shall the other honor be without hurt or damage, yea sone
forgotten. For if the commodity and help, both, bodily, and ghoostely, be no
more to be hoped for, then shall they leave the Saynctes in rest fulwel, both
in the sepulchers and also in heaven. For noman will greatly remember, extime,
nor honor them for naught, or for love.

And in summa, whatsoever the mass is, whatsoever comes thereof, or soever
what depends thereon, the same can not we abide, and must needs condemn it,
that we may keep the holy Sacrament, purely and surely after the institution
of Christ, used and received thorough faith.

The iij. Article.
Mynsters and cloisters.
That the mynsters and monasteries in times past edifyed for a good intent for
to educate men of erudition, and honest discrete women, should be set
again in such and order, where by me^ might have, Pastors, Preachers and
other ministers of the Church. Also other necessary Persons for the te^porall
Governance, in Cities and Countrees. Also well taught ladies, brought up for
housewyues and house kepers, etc.

If they will not serve for this so is it better, that men let them lie
void, or break them down there that they with their blasphemous Gods
service invented by man, should be kept and taken, as a thing somewhat
better, then the Common Christen state and Offices and Ordinances of God
instituted. For all the same is also against the first Chief Article of the
Redemption, of Jesus Christ.

Besides that, that they also (even as all other inventions of men) are not
commanded, not necessary, not profitable, and also make dangerous and vain
labors. Eue^ as the Prophets do call such Gods service. Auen, that is,
labor.

The.iiij. Article.
The Pope is not the head of the Church
That the Pope is not, Iure diuino, or by Gods word, the supreme head of the
whole Christianite (for that pertayneth to one alone, which is called Jesus
Christ) But only. Bishop or Curate of the Church of Rome. And of such as
willingly, or by man's Creation, or temporal power have given them selves
under his. Cure and governance, Not under him, as under a Lord, but by him as
Brethern and fellows in Christ. As also the old Counsaylles, and the time of
S. Ciprian do declare.

But now a days, dare no Bishop presume to call the Pope Brother, as in
those days, but must call him his most gracious Lord, yea though it were a
king or Emperor. This will, may or can we not take on our Consciences. But
they that will, may do it with out us.

Out of this follows. That what soever the pope, by such false, froward,
blasphemous, usurped power, has done and pretended, has be^ nothing, but a
deuelysshe act, and deed, and yet is, (except that, which belongs to the
temporal governance, wherein also God permits oftentimes much good to be
done unto the people by a tyrant, and evil person) to the destruction of the
universal Catholic church (as much as lies in him) and for to distourbe the
first chief Article of the redemption by Jesus Christ.

Popysh bulls and books.
For there be al his bulls and books, wherein he roareth, like a lion (as the
Angel Apocalipsis.xij. does prefigurate) that no christian can be saved, except
he be obedient and subject unto him in all things, what soever he will, says
and does, which is none other, but thus much to say. Though thou believe never
so well in Christ, and have al things in him, which are necessary to
salvation, yet for all that is it all in vain, if thou take not me for thy
God, and be obedient and subject unto me. Notwithstondynge that it is manifest
that the holy Church was without Pope at the least above five hundred years.
And unto this day the churches of the Grecians, and of many other languages,
were never under the pope, nor be not as yet. So is it then (as often has been
said) an invention of man, not commanded, nedeles, and in vain, in so much
that as the holy Catholic church, may forbear such a head well enough, and
might have continued better, if such a head had not ben reared by the Devil.
And also the papacye is not commodious in the church, for it uses no Christen
office, wherefore the Church ought to remain and continue without a Pope.

And I put case, that the pope would grant, that he, not Iure diuino, or by
the commandment of God, were superior: but to the intent that thereby the
unity of the Christianite, against sects and heresies, so much the better
might be entertained, and that therefore must be a head, whereby all the rest
might take hold, and that such a head ought to be chosen of men, and stood, in
man's power and authorite, the same head, to change, and to degrate as the
Counsayll of Constaunce kept and used even the same trade, with the Popes, for
they deposed three, and elected the fourth. I put case now, (I say) that the
Pope, and the sea of Rome, would grant and accept such things, which
nevertheless is impossible. For he must suffer his whole dignity, state and
governance to be turned and changed with all his laws and Books, Summa, he
kan not do it.

Notwitstondinge all the premises could not help the Christianite, and there
should rise many more sects than before. For seeing me^ should not be bound
to obey such a head by the commandment of God, But of man's good will, it
should very lightely and sone be despised, and at the last not be esteemed as a
membre. And also it must not always be at rome or in any other place. But
whersoeuer, and in what Church, God had given such a man as should be mete
for the same. O what a wild and dissolute thing should that be.

Therefore can the Church be never better governed and mayntayned. Than that we
all live under one head Christ. And that the Bysshoppes like in office
(although they be unlike in gifts) earnestly agree and hold together, in
unity of doctrine, Faith, Sacraments, Prayers, and works of love. According
to the writtinge of S. Jerome. That the Priests of Alexandria together and in
common did govern the Churches, As the Apostles did also. And after them all
Bysshoppes in the whole Christianite, until the time that the Pope did exalte
his head above all.

To set himself above and against God.
This part shows evidently, that he is the right Antichrist, which has set
and exalted him self, above and against Christ, whylest he will not suffer
the Christians to be saved, without his jurisdiction which notwithstondinge
is vain, not ordained of God, nor commanded, This is called properly to set
him self above God, and against God, as saint Paul says. Such things does
neither Turk nor Tatter, be they never so great enemies to the Christians. But
permit to believe in Christ, whosoever will, taking bodily tribute and
obedience of the Christians.

But the Pope will not suffer to believe, but says, me^ ought to obey him, and
so doing, they should be saved. How be it, This will we not do, but rather
dye therefore in the name of god. This comes al thereby, that he Iure diuino
would be called the superior over the Christen Church. Therefore has he made
him self equal with Christ, and has set him self above Christ, as the head.
After that a Lord of the Church, and last of all has suffered him self to
be boasted Lord of all the world, and even a GOD in earth. In so much, that
he presumed also to command the Angels in heaven.

Popysh doctrine.
And when a distinction is made between the Papisticall doctrine, and the holy
scripture, or an egal comparyson it apereth evidently, that the popyshe
doctrine, even where as it is best, is taken out of the civil and Heathen
laws, and teaches worldly busynes and judgments, decrees
as his decrees declare. After that does she teach ceremonies of Churches,
raiment, meats, Persons, and of such children games, vysers, and fowls
babels innumerable. But in all these not one word of Christ, faith, and
Gods commandments.

Taste of all is it nothing but al deuelysshe, whereas he sets furthe his
lies of masses, purgatory, Cloysteringes, propre works and Gods seruyces
(which is even the right Papacye) over and above god, condemns slays and
punyshed al Christians, that do not exaite and worship such his abomination
above all things.

Papistcal governance.
Therefore, as littel as we may worship the devil him self, for a Lord or God,
even so lyttel may we also suffer his Apostle the Pope or Antichrist in his
jurisdiction, to be our Lord or head, for lies and murder, destruction of
body and soul everlastingly, this is proprely his papistical governance. Even
as I have declared the same in many books.

In these four Articles shall they have enough to condemn in the Counsayll.
For they can nor will not leave or grant unto us, the least membre of any of
the said Articles, wherefore we must be sure of this, and stedfastely trust,
that God has apprehended his adversary, and shall suppress him both by his
spirit and also by his coming. Amen.

For in the Counsayll shall we not stand before the Emperor or te^porall
powers (as at Augspurg) which made a very gracious Proclamation, and caused the
matter to be heard favorably. But we shall stand there before the Pope and
the devil him self which intends not to hear. But even to condemn,
murder, and to co^pelle to Idolatrye. Wherefore here we may not kiss his
fete, or say, ye are my souereique Lord. But even as in Dachary the Angel
said to the devil God reprove the Datan.

The third Part of the Articles.
The pieces or Articles following, may we with learned and discrete persons, or
among our selves dispute and discuss for the Pope and his kingdom does not
pass much upon them. For by the^ is no Conscience but money, honor and power
is all.

Of Sin.
Original sin.
HEre must we knowledge, as S. Paull Romans v. says. That Sin came by that
only man Adam, through whose disobedience all men are become Sinners, subject
unto death and the devil, This is called the Original Sin or capital sin.

The fruits of this sin are consequently the evil works, which in the ten
commandments, Fruits of the original sin.
are forbidden as unbelieve, false faith, Idolatry, to be without the fruits of
god, arroga^cye, despair, blyndnes: and su^ma, not to know god, nor to
regard him. Consequently, to lie, to swear by the name of god. Not to pray,
not to worship, not to regard gods word, disobedience unto the parents,
murder, uncleanliness, to steal, to begyle etc. This original sin is such a
very deep and evil destruction of nature, that no wit does know her: but
must be believed through the revelation of the scripture. Psalm. li. To. v. Exo.
xxxiii. Gene. iii. Therefore is it nothing but error and blyndnes, contrary to
this Article, whatsoever Theologiens have taught.

Doctrine of the scoole theologiens.
i Namely. That after the original fall of Adam, the natural power and strength
of man, remained hole and and vncorrupt. And that man have of nature a right
discretion and a good will eue^ as the Philosophers teach the same.

ii Item that man has a free will, to do good, and to leave evil, and
contrariwyse, to leave the good undone, and to do that which is evil.

iii Item that man may by naturell power and strength, do and keep all the
commandments of God.

iiii Item that he may of natural power love God, above al things, and his
neighbor as him self.

v Item when man does so much as lies in him, that than God gives him his
grace.

vi Ite^ that wha^ he will receive the sacrament, it is not necessary to have a
good purpose to do good. But that it is sufficient, that he have not an evil
purpose to do syn, so exceeding good is nature, and the Sacrament so mighty.

vii That it is not grounded in the Scripture, that the holy ghost with his
grace and assistence be necessary and requisite for to do good works.

Such, and such like Articles many be trough misvnderstandynge and ignorance,
both of sin, and also of Christ our savior, crepte in, and they be even the
right doctrine of the heathen, which we can not suffer. For if this doctrine
be true, then dyed CHRIST in vain, seeing there is no wicknednes or sin in
man wherefore he ought to dye, Or else he dyed only for the body, and not for
the soul also, forsomuche as the soul is safe, and only the body worthy of
death.

Of the law.
Wherefore the law is given.
Here hold we that the law is given of God, first for to anoyde sin by
threatenynge and fear of punishment. And also by promyses, and offeringe of
grace and benefits. Howbe it all this, as concerning iniquity, for as much
as sin has wrought in man, is very evil chanced. Raw and wicked persons
For some are thereby become worse, As they that be enemy to the law, because
she forbids that, which they would feign do. And commands that which
they are not willinge to do, In so much that where as they may co^uenie^tly
without punyssheme^t, they do more against the saw now, than they did
before. These are eue^ such raw and wicked persons, which cease not to do
wickedly, where as they may have time and place,

Ipocrytes and false saints
The other, become blind, and arrogaunt, thinckynge that they do keep and can
keep the law of their own strength, as even now was rehearsed above, of the
Scool Theologie^s. Out of these come the Ipocrites, and false saynctes.

Office and power of the law
But the Chief and pryncipal office, or power of the law is, that she open the
original sin with all her fruits, and show unto man, how depely his nature
is fallen, and how miserably it is destroyed, as unto whom the law must
declare, that he has no God, nor yet regards God, but worshyppeth strange
Gods, which, before or without the law he could not have believed. Therewith
becomes he fearful humble, abashed, desperate, and would feign be helped,
but knows not how, and begins to become enemy unto God, and to murmr,
etc. This is it, that Saint Paul says. Romans iii. The law causes wrath. And
Romans v. Sin increasseth thorough the law. Roma. iii. v.


Of Penance.
This office keeps the new Testament and teaches the same also, as S. Paul
Romans i. does, saying: The wrath of God apereth from heaven, against al men.
Romans i.
Item iii. All men are debtors before God. And no man is ryghteous before him.
Romans iij
And Christ Ioh. xvi. The holy ghost shall rebuke the world of Sin. Ioh. xvi
This is eue^ the tho^derbolt of god, wherewith he strikes down al in one
heap, both the open sinners, and the false saynctes, and suffers none to
have right, but dryueth them all together into fear and desperation. This is
the hammer (as Jeremy says) Ie. xxiij
my word is a hammer that breaks hard stones. Right contrition.
This is not actiua contritio, a made repentance. But passiua contritio, the
right repentance of the heart, the sufferyng and fellynge of death.

Beginning of right penance.
And this is even the beginnynge of the right Penance, and man must here hear
this sentence, It is al in vain with you all, whether ye are open sinners or
saynetes, ye must al become, and do otherwise than ye are and do yet. Be ye as
great, wise, mighty and holy as ye will, here is no man ryghteous.

Promise of grace
But unto this office, does the new Testament by and by minister, and add the
comfortable promise of grace through the Gospel, which must be believed, as
Christ says Marc. i. Repent and believe the gospel. Mar. i.
That is become and do otherwise, and believe my promise. And a littel before
him John is named, A preacher of repentance, for the remission of sins. That
is, he should rebuke them all, and make them sinners, that they might know,
what they were before God, and knowledge them selves, as damned people, and so
to be prepared for the Lord, to receive his grace, and of him to hope and
accept remissyou of sins. For thus says Christ him self. Luce, xxiiij.
That repentance and remissyon of sins must be preached in his name, among
all nations. Luce. xxiiij


Office of the law without addition of the Gospel
But where as the law does drive this her office only, without addition of
the Gospel, there is death and hell. And man must despair, eue^ as Saul and
Judas did according to the saying of Saint Paul. The law slays through
Sin. Comfort of the Gospel.
And again, The gospel does not always use one manner or f^ssyon to give
comfort and forgeuenes. But by the word, sacracrament, and such like, as we
shall hear, to the intent that the redemption be plenteous by God, according as
the C. xxx. Psalm says, against the great captivity of sin. Psalm. C. xxx.


But now must we make a comparyson between the false penance of the
Sophistes, and the right Peuaunce, whereby they may both so much the better
be understand.

Of the false Papisticall Penance.
Impossible was it, that they should teach right of Penance, whylest they
knew not the right sin. For (as is said above) they hold a wrong opinion,
concerning the original sin. Doctrine of the scoole Theologyens.
For they say, that the natural powers of man, did remain hole and
incorrupt, And that the discretion of man can teach right, and the will of man
can do right thereafter. And that God undoubtedly gives his grace, when a man
does so much, as is in him, after his free wyli.

Out of this must needs follow, that they only repented the Actual Sin, as
evil thoughts, whereunto the Actual deed did consent (for evil motyons,
lusts, desires, and appetites, was no sin with them) evil words, and evil
works, which the free will might and could fulwell have left undone.

And to such penance they put three parts, Contrition, Confession, and
satisfaction, with this comfort and promise, that if a man had right
contrition were duly shryuen, and made satisfaction, than had he there by
deserved, forgeuenes, and had made satisfaction for the sin before God. And
so they taught the people in Penance, to trust in their own works. Thereby
came this word in usage, when the common Shrifte or Confession was read to the
people. Spare me Lord god etc. preserve my life, until I may do penance for
my sins, and amend my life.

Here was no Christ, nor any thing of faith remembered. But men did hope by
their own works to overcome ^ynne, and to quench it before God. To that
intent did we also become Priests and freers, because we would set our
selves against sin.

Contrition.
As touching contrition, thus was the matter handled, for as much as noman was
able to call to remembrance al his sins (specially such as were committed
throughout the hole year) they did co^ueye the matter thus, when the forgotten
sins came afterward to remembrance, than must they also be repented and
shryuen etc. And thus they ware committed to the mercy of God. Furthermore, for
as much also, as no man knew, how great the contrition should be, that it
might be sufficient and satisfactory before god, they gave this comfort.
Contritio. Attritio
He that could not have contrition, should have attritio^, which may be called
half contrition, or a beginning of contrition, For they understood neither of
both, neither know they yet what it does mean, as littel as I. But such
attritio was counted contritio, when men went to be shryuen.

And when it came to pass, That one or other said, that he could not repent
nor be sorry for his sins, as might chance in louinge of harlottes or desire
of vengeance etc. than did they demand, if he did not wysshe, or would be
glad, that he might have contrition? if than he said, yea, (for who would here
say, nay, except the devil him self) than did they accept it for contrition,
and forgave him his sins upon this his good deed. Here induced they S.
Bernarde for an ensample. etc. Here does it appear, how the blyndenes of
man's wit does grope in Gods causes, and seeks comfort in her own works,
after her own imagination, and can not ones think on Christ or on faith.
Now if men behold it by the light. So is such Coutrition, a made and
innented imagination, of man's own power, without faith and without
knoweledge of Christ, wherein sometimes, the poor sy^ner, when he remembered
his lusts or vengeance, would rather have lawghed than wept, except such as
contrary wise by the law were pynched a right, o^ were plaged of the devil in
vain with a sad spirit. Otherwise, was such contrition doubteles, clean
hypocrisy, and did never ky^ the lusts of sin. For they were constrained to
repent, not withstondynge, that they would lesser have sinned more, if it
had been without danger.

Confession. To shryue all sins.
Conceruyng confession, this was the order, Every man was bound to rehearse all
his sins (which was a thing impossyble) this was a great martyring of the
conscience. But such as he had forgotten, were remitted unto him upon this
condition, that wha^ they should come to his remembrance, he should be
bound to confess them. Thus could he never know, when he was shryuen clean
enough, or when the shryuynge should ones have an end. And was also sent to
his works, and thus comforted. The cleuer he were shryuen, and the more he
were ashamed, and so reuyled him self before the Priest, so much the sooner
and better did he satisfye for the sins, for such humilite did deserve grace
before God.

Here was also no faith, nor Christ, And the effect of the absolution was not
told unto him. But in recytynge of sins, and being ashamed was all his
conforte. But it is unspeakable, what martyr, wickedness, ungraciousness, and
Idolatrye has been brought up through this confession.

Satisfaction.
Satisfaction is yet the wyldest thing of al. For noman could know how much
he ought to do for one only sin. I omit then for all. But here found they
a pretty deuyse. Namely, that they ordained a small satisfaction, which men
should be able enough to keep, as fine Pater nosters, one days fasting etc.
with the rest of the penance, where they sent into Purgatory.

Here was also a great calamite and necessite, some thought that they should
never come out of purgatory. For as much as according to the old canons seven
peers of penance was dew for one deadly sin. And yet stood our confidence
also in our works of satisfaction. And if the satisfaction might have been
perfect, than should out confidence have been wholly set thereon, so that
neither faith nor Christ should have been profitable or necessary, But she was
impossible. For if a man so should have done penance a hundredth years, he
should not have known, when he had made an end of it, that was as much to
say, as always to repent still and never to come to repentance.

Pardon
And here came the holy See of R^me to succor the poor Church, and invented
the Pardons. Thereby did he remitte, and ease the satisfaction. First one year,
seven years, an hundred years etc. And parted it among the Cardinals and
Bishops, that the one could give a hundredth years, the other a hundredth days
of Pardon. But to take away the whole satisfaction, did he keep only for him
self.

Golden year.
When now such things began to bring in money a pace, and the bull market
waxed good, than did he inuente the golden year, or pere of grace, and laid it
at Rome, and that was called remissyon of pain, and sin. Thither ran the
people. For every man would feign have been eased of the heavy intolerable
burden. This was to find out the treasures of the earth, and them to exalte.
Incontinently after hasted the Pope further with all speed, and made many
golden years or peers of grace one upon another, but the more he did devour
gold, the gredyer did his gull wax. Wherefore afterward he did send it out
into the countres by his legates until al Churches and houses were made full of
golden peers.

Last of al did he also rabe in Purgatory among the dead, First with in
stitutyng of masses and dyrges, afterward with the Pardons and golden years.
Insomuch that within a while the souls waxed so good chepe, that he did
deliver them for three half pe^s the piece.

Yet could not al this help for all that. For the pope notwithstanding that
he taught the people to trust and to put their confidence in such Pardons, yet
does he himself make it unsure again. For he sets in his Bulls, that
whosoever wy^ be partaker of the Pardon or golden year, must be contrite and
shryuen, and also give money. Now have we heard above, that such contrition
and confession, by them is unsure and hipocrisy. In like manner also did noman
know, what soul was in Purgatory, And although there had been any, yet
know no man, which of them had repented and confessed a right. And so did he
take the dear money, and comforted them in the mean season with his authorite
and Pardons, and yet sent them again to their usure works.

Good works and ryghteousnes sold which was ouerp^us.
Now if there ware any, that did not think them selves gilty of such actual
sins, in thought, word or deed. Even as I and such other frekes and
priests in cloisters and mynsters would be, which with fasting, wachynge,
praynge, saying of mass, hard raiment and couches etc, defended our selves
against evil thoughts, and would be holy with earnest and by force or
violence, and yet the Original evil wherein we be borne, sometime in sleep did
(as also S. Augustyn and Jerome with other knowledge and confess) according
to his kind: yet did every man hold of other, that some were so holy, as we
taught, that they were without sin and full of good works. Insomuche that we
thereupon, did part and sell unto other of our good works, and the overplus,
more than was necessary unto us, for to obtain salvation. This is true, and
there are sealles writtynges and examples enough in hand.

These had no need of repentance, for what should they repent? seeing in
evil thoughts they did not consent? what should they confess, why lest they
did abhor words? Wherefore should they satisfye, seeing they were not
giltye of the deed? So that they also might sell unto other poor Sinners, th^yr
ryghteousnes which was more then requisite. Such Saints were also the
Pharisees and Scrib^s in Christ's time.

John Baptiste the right preather of repentance.
Here comes the fyery Angel S. John, the right Preacher of penance, and
stryketh with a thonder bolthe together in one heap, sayng: Repent. Now
think they, we have repented al ready. These do think, we have no need of
repentance. Mat. iij
But John says, Repent both, for ye are false repenters, than are these
false saynetes, and have both need of remissyon of sins, for as much as ye
both do not yet know, what the right sin is, I omit that ye should
repent it or eschew it. There is none good of you, ye are full of unbelief,
blyndenes, and ignorance of God, and his will. For there is he manifestly of
whose plentifulnes all we must receive grace for grace, and no man without him
can be righteous before God. Ioh. i
Therefore if ye will repent, repent truly. For your penance is in vain. And
ye Hypocrytes that have no need of repentance, ye progenye of vypers, who has
certified you that ye should escape from the wrath of God to come?

Even so preaches also S. Paul. To. iij. saying. There is none that
understands none ryghteous, none that seeks after God, none that does good
no, not one. They are al gone out of the way, and are made unprofitable. Romans
iij Psalm.xiiij. liij. and L. xliij


And Act. xvij. But now God bid beth all men every where repent. Al men says
he) none except that is a man. Act. xvij


Right repentance.
This repentance teaches us to know the sin, namely, that with us all is
lost, and that even hear and skin be naught, and that we must be renewed
and become other men.

This repentance is not, patched, vnparfect, and beggarly as the other, which
repented the actual sin, neither is it also unsure, as the other. For she
disputes not, which be sin, and which be no sin. But she breaks al in
pieces, and says. That it is al sin, and nothing but sin with us. what
should we seek long, and make division, distinction, or difference.

Contrition.
Therefore is also here contrition not unsure, for there remains nothing
whereby we might think any good, to satisfye for sin. But a bare, and sure
fayntnes in all that we are, think, speak, or do. etc.

Confession.
In like manner, can also confession not be false, unsure, or imperfect, for
whosoever confesses, that al things are no thing but sin, with him,
comprehends al sins, and leaves none be hynd, neither does he also for
get any.

Satisfaction.
Even so can not the satisfaction also be unsure, for she is not our, unsure,
synful work, But the passyou and blood of the innocent lamb of God, which
bears the sins of the world.

Right repentance.
Of this repentance, preaches S. John and after him Christ in the Gospel,
and we also. With this repentance do we thruste down to the ground the Pope
and al whatsoever is builded upon our good works. For it is al builded upon a
rotten vile ground, which is called good works, or law, notwithstanding
that there is no good work, but all evil works. And that no man fulfylleth
the law (as Christ Ioh. vij. says) but al men transgress it. Ioh. vij.
Therefore is that buyldyng altogether false lies, and hypocrisy, where as it
seems to be most holy, and most fairest.

And this repentance continues among the Christians until death, for she
sighteth with the remnaunt of sin in the flesh, throughoute the whole life.
As Saint Paul Romans vij. witnesses, that he did stryne with the law of his
members etc. To. vij.
And that not by his own power, but through the gift of the holy ghost, which
also follows the forgeuenes of sins. The same gift cleanses and wepeth
away daily, the remanaunt of sin, and labors to make man right, pure, and
holy.

Of this knows, neither Pope Theologians, Iuristes, nor any man. But it is a
doctrine from heaven, declared by the Gospel, and must be called heresy, among
the ungodly saints,

Again if there should come any sectysshe spirits, as paradue^ture there are
some ready at hand, and at the time of commotion, come even to mine own face,
which hold opinion that al such, as ones have received the spirit or
remissyon of sins, or are become Christians, and afterward sin again, do
continue nevertheless in faith, and that such sins are nothing prejudicial
unto the^, and cry thus. Do what thou list, if thou do believe, all is
nothing, for faith quenches al sin, etc. And say moreover, if any man sin,
after the faith and spirit that tha^ he has never had the faith, and
spirit a right. Of such frantike men have I had many before me. And I fear
that yet in some there reigns such a devil.

Therefore is it necessary to know and also to teach, that if the holy people
above that, that they yet have and feale the original sin, against the
which also they daily repent, and strive, any way fall in open sin, as
David in aduoutry, murder and blasphemye of God, ij. Re. xi
that as then the faith and spirit has been away. For the holy ghost
suffers not sin to bear rule and to get the upper hand, that the be
committed. But hyndereth and defe^deth that she ca^ not do what she will. But
if she does what she will, then is faith gone, and the spirit is not there,
for it is as Saint John says, i. Ioh, iii
whosoever is borne of God, sins not, and can not sin. And it is also very
true as the same Saint John writteth, i. John. i
if we say that we have no sin, we lie, and gods truth is not in us.

Of the Gospel.
We will now return again to the Gospel, which gives not always one
manner of way, counsel, help, and remedy against sin, for God is
abundantly rich in his grace. First thorough the word by the mouth of the
preacher, wherein is preached remissyo^ of sins, throughout all the world,
which is the proper office of the gospel. Secondly, through baptism. Thirdely
by the blessed Sacrament of the altar. Fourthely by the power and aucthoryte
of the keys, and also per mutuum colloquium, et consolationem fratrum,
Matthei. xviii. Vbi duo fuerunt congregati. etc.

Of Baptism.
Baptysme is nothing else, but the word of god in the water, commanded
through his institution, or as S. Paul says, Lauacrum in verbo, as also
Augustyn says. Accedat verbum ad elementum, et fit Sacramentum. Thomas Aquinas.
And therefore hold we not with Thomas, and the freers, which neglecte the
word (Gods institution) and say: That God has laid a spiritual power in
the water, which wassheth away sin through the water, Scotus
neither do we hold with Scotus, and the barefote freers, which teach, that
baptism does wasshe away sin, by the assistaunce of Gods will. So that
this clensynge is done only through the will of God, and not at al, through the
word, or water.

Baptism of children
Of the baptism of children, hold we that the children ought to be baptized,
for they perteyne also to the promised redemption made by Christ, and the
church ought to minister it unto them.

Sacrament of the altar.
Of the Sacrament of the altar, hold we that Bread and wine, at the supper,
is the very body and blood of Christ. And is not only ministered and received
of ryghteous, but also of wicked Christians.

And that men ought not to minister it only under one kind, and that we have
no need of that high conning which teaches us, that under the one kind is as
much, as under both, as the sophistes and the counsayil of constaunce do
teach. For though it were even true, that under the one be as much as under
both. So is not yet that only kind the whole order and institution, by
Christ instituted and commanded.

And in especyal do we condemn, and curse, in the name of God, al those that
not only both kinds do refuse But also arrogantly and contemptuously
forbid condemn, and blaspheme the same, for he resye. And set the^ selves
therewith against and above Christ, our Lord and God.

Of the Transsubstantiation, do we regard the spiteful Sophistrye nothing at
al, whereas they teach, that bread and wine leave or lose their natural
substance, and that only there remains the lykenes and color of bread,
and no material bread. For it agrees best with the scripture, that there be
and remain bread, as saint Paul does call it himself. i. Cor. x
The bread which we break. And so let him eat of the bread.

Of the keys.
The keys are an office, and aucioxite, given unto the church by Christ for
to bind and lose sin. Not only the gross and we I known sins, But also
the subtle and secret sins, which God knows only, As it is written,
Psa. xix
who can tell how often he offends? And Paul Romans vij. complayneth himself,
To. vij.
that he with the flesh serves the law of sin. For it lies not in us,
but in God, to judge what how great, and how many the sins be, as it is
written. Psalm.C. xliij.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. And Paul. i. Corinth. iiij. says also. i. Corin. iiij.
I know naught by my self, but I am not therefore justified.

Of confession.
Absolution.
For as much as the absolution or power and authorite of the keys is also a
remedy and conforte, against sin and the evil conscience, instituted by
Christ in the Gospel. So ought the confession or absolution in no wise, to be
abolysshed in the church, specially for the fearful consciences sake, also
because of the young raw people, whereby they may be examined and infourmed in
the Christen doctrine.

The rehearsal of sins ought to be free.
But the rehersall of sins ought to be free for every man, whatsoever he will
rehearse or not rehearse, for as long as we be in the flesh, shall we not lie,
when we say: I am a wretched man, full of sin. Romans vij, I feel another law
in my members. etc. To. vij.
For seeing Absolutio priuata, proceeds from the office of the keys, ought
she not to be contemned, but kept in high reverence, as al other offices of
the Christen church.

And in these poynctes, concerning the owtewarde word pronounced by the mouth
of the minister. We ought surely to a bide by this, That God gives to no man
his spirit or grace, but only through or with the forsaid outward word
before going. Enthusiastes,
Wherewith we us defend against the Enthusiastes, That is spirits, which
boaste themselves to have the spirit, without and before the word and
thereafter judge, interpretate and deem the scripture or word pronounced by
mouth, according to their pleasures, mynster
as he of minster did, and yet many do now a days, which between the
Spirit and the letter will be sharp judges, not knowing what they say
affirm or ordeyne, papacye
For the Papacye also is all together Enthusiasmus, wherein the Pope does
boaste, that al laws be in the coffer of his heart, and that whatsoever he
judges and bids with his church, should be spirit and right, although it
be above and against the scripture or Gods word.

This is the old devil, and the old serpent, which made Adam and Eua also to
become Enthusiastes, Genesis iij.
bring inge them from the outward word of God, upon spiritualite, and their
own fantasyes, and yet did it also by other outward words. Even as also our
Enthusiastes, condemn the outward word, and yet cease not themselves to
speak: but fylle all the world with their babbling and writtyng, as though the
spirit could not come through the scripture, or word of the Apostles
mouth. But that he must come by their writtynges and words. Wherefore do they
also not cease from preaching and writtynge, until the spirit him self
come into the people without and before their writtynge as they boaste that he
is come into the^ without preaching or scripture? whereof to dispute more at
large here is no time. And we have in other places handled it sufficiently.

For they also that believe before their Baptism, or become faithful in their
Baptism, have it through the outward word aforegoyng, as the old which are
come to vndersto^ding must needs have heard before, that whosoever believes
and is baptized shall be saved, notwithstonding that as the first, they not
beleuynge after ten years received the spirit and baptism.

And Cornelius Act. x. had heard long before by the Jews, of Messiah that
was to come, Actu. x.
whereby he was ryghteous before god. And his prayer and almose accepted in
such faith, (eue^ as Luke calls him righteous and fearyng God) and could not
believe, nor be righteous without such words, or hearing going before. But s.
Peter was feign to declare unto him, that Messyas (in whom to come he had
thitherto believed) was now come, and that his faith concerning the Messiah,
that was to come did not hold him captyue any longer with the hard herted
Jews, but might know that now he must be saved through the present messiah,
and that he should not with the Jews deny, nor persecute the same etc.

Summa the Enthusiasmus sticks in Adam and his children, from the beginning,
until the end of the world, grafted and planted in the^ of the old dragon,
and is occasion, might and power of all heresye, also of the papacye and
machomette. Therefore ought and must we abide by this, that God will not handle
with us Christen men, but by his outewarde word and Sacrament. And all
whatsoever is boasted of the spirit without this word and Sacrament is
diabolical.

For God would also first appear unto Moses through the fyery busshe, and
the outewarde word. Exo. iij.
And no Prophet, neither Elias, nor Eliseus did receive the spirit without
the ten commandments. iij. Reg. xvij. in. Reg. xix.
And John the Baptiser was not conceived, without the before going word of
Gabriel, neither did he leap in his mothers belly without the voice of Marie.
Luc. i


And S. Peter says, ij. Pet. i
The Prophets spoke not by the will of man, but being moved by the holy Ghoost,
as the holy men of God. But without the outewarde word were they not holy,
much less, should the holy ghost have moved them to speak, being yet
unholy, for they were holy, (says he) when the holy Ghost spoke thorough them.

Of the Curse.
Great curse.
The great curse, as the Pope does call it, do we take for a mere temporal
correction, and touched not us ministers of the church.

But the lesser, that is the right Christen curse, That the open stubborn
sins should not be admitted or suffered to come unto the Sacrament, or other
communion of the church, until they amend their lives, and eschew sin. And
the preachers ought not to myngle the temporal correction with this spiritual
correction or curse.

Of anoyntynge, consecratynge, or calling.
If the Bysshoppes would be right and true Bysshoppes, and earnestly take upon
them the ministratio^ of the Church and the Gospel, it might be granted and
permitted, for love and unities sake, but not of necessite, that they should
ordeyne and confirm us, and our preachers, but yet al disguysyng and
fantastical of ungodliness, and bragging set a part.

But now that they are not right Bysshoppes, neither also will be: but worldly
Lords and Princes, which neither preach, nor teach, nor baptize, nor
communicate, nor yet will exercise any manner of work or office of the church,
yea rather which diffame, vex, persecute, and condemn such offices, and the
setters forth thereof, so may not yet the church for their sakes be destitute of
ministers.

Therefore according as the old examples of the church, and of the fathers
teach us, will and ought we our selves to ordeyne discrete persons, to such
offices. And this can they not forbid or let us, even according to their own
law. For their laws say: That such also, as are ordained, eue^ of very
heretykes, shall be called, ordained, and still remain, Eue^ as S. Jerome
writteth of the churches of Alexandria, that at the first they were governed of
the bysshoppes through Priests and preachers indifferently and in commune.

Of matrimony concerning Priests.
That they have forbidden matrimony, and have charged the Godly order of
priesthode with perpetual chastity, that have they done without alryght and
reason. But have handled in that, like Antichristysshe, tyrannyouse, arraunt,
and wicked persons, and therewith given occasyon, of all manner of horrible,
execrable, and innumerable sins of uncleanliness, wherein they stick yet. And
even as littell, as we or they have authorite, and power, of a man to make a
woman, or of a woman to make a man, or neither of both. Eue^ so littel have
they had authoryte and power, to separate such creatures of God, or to forbid
the^ honestly and according to the law of matrimony, to dwes together.
Therefore will we not consent into their ydel celibate, nor suffer it. But we
will have matrimony free and at liberte, according as God has ordained and
instituted the same. And will not rent nor hinder his work. For S. Paul says,
That it is a deuelyshe doctrine.

Of the Church.
We grant not unto them, that they are the church, for they are not the
Church, neither will we hear, what soever they command, or forbid under
the name of the church. For thanks be to God, a child of seven years old
knows what the church is, Church
namely the holy beleuyng, and the sheep that hear their shepeherdes voice. For
thus pray the children, I believe one holy catholyke church. This holiness
stands not in surplices, shaven crounes, long gowns and other of their
ceremonies by the^, above the holy Scripture, invented, but in the word of God,
and in right faith.

How man is justified before God, and of Good works.
Whatsoever thereof hitherto and always I have taught, know I not in any
wise to alter, Namely, that we thorough faith (as S. Peter says) Act. xv.
get another new and pure heart, and that God, for Christ's our mediators
sake, will count, and does count us, very ryghteous and holy. Although the
sin in the flesh be not clean extinguysshed, or dead, yet will he not reken
nor impute it unto us.

And upon such faith, renewynge, and remissyon of sins, follow then good
works. And whatsoever in the same is also yet synful and vnparfect, shall not be
counted for sin or imperfectnesse, even for the same Christ's sake, But the
man shall be called, and also be ryghteous, and holy throughoute both in his
person, and in his works, of mere grace and mercy in Christ poured out and
dilated over us.

Therefore can we not boaste many deserts of our works, if they be looked upon,
without grace and mercy. But as it is written, he that reioyseth let him
rejoice in the Lord, that is, That he has a mercyful God. s. Cor. i.
So is it al good. We say also, further: that if good works follow not, so
is the faith false, and not right.

Of Cloister vows.
For as much as the Cloister vows fight quite and straight against the
chief and princypal article. So ought they to be clean abolysshed. For they
are those, whereof Christ speaks, Mat. xxiiij. Ego sum Christus etc. Matthew.
xxiiij.
For he that voweth to lead a cloister life, the same believes, that he ledeth
a better life, than the commune Christen man, and will by his works, not only
bring him self to heaven, but also to help other to heaven, This is to deny
Christ. And they boaste by their S. Thomas, that cloister vows be equal with
baptism. This is a blasphemye to God.

Of man's institutions.
That the papists say, that men's institutions, serve for the remission of
sins, or deserve salvation. That is vnchristenly and damnable. As Christ
says. Matthew. xv.
In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrynes which are nothing but men's
precepts. Item ad Tit. i. Aduersantium veritatem. Tit. i.
Item where as they say. That it is damnable to break such institutions,
That is also untrue.

These are the articles, whereunto I must stand, and will stand, until my
death, God willing, And know nothing therein to alter nor to give back. But
if any man will give back any thing, let him do it upon his own conscience.

Hallowynge of churches Christenyng of bills.
Last of all is yet the Popes Iouglinge bag behind, of foolyshe and
chyldysshe Articles, as of hallowynge Churches, Christonynge of bills,
Baptisynge of altar stones, and biddynge of Gosshippes thereunto, that gave
somewhat thereto, etc. Which Baptisynge is a slander and mock, of the holy
Baptism, so that it ought not to be suffered.

After that, of halowyng of lyghtes, candels, palms, Lakes, wafers spyces and
worthes etc, which nevertheless can neither be called hallowed, nor yet be
hallowed, but is a mere mock and deceyte. And of such iugglynge castes, an
innumerable sort, which we commit unto their God and to themselves, to
worship, until they wax weary. We will not be entangled therewith.

The confession or knoweledgynge of the faith of Doctor Marten Luther.
FOr as much as I se, that sects and errors from day to day do more and more
increase, and that Satan does not cease from his fury and Tyranny: To
the intent that not from hencefurthe, during my life or after my deceasse, any
might come, and take hold of me, and falsely interpretate my writtynges, for
to stablysshe their errors thereby, even as the Sacramentaryes, and
Anabaptists began to do. So will I by this writtynge before God, and all the
world, knoweledge my faith from piece to piece, whereby I intend to abide and
persevere until my death, and therein (which God vouchesafe to grant me) to
depart out of this world, and to come before the judgment seat, of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

And if any man after my deceasse should say, if Luther were a live now, he
would teach and take this or that article otherwise, for he has not scanded
and examyned it sufficiently etc. To this I answer now as then, and than as
now, That I by the grace of God, have most diligently and most earnestly
remembered, and pou^dered al these Articles, and have examyned searched and
often retracted them again and again throughout the scripture, and will so
surely and stedfastely fight for them, as I have all ready foughten for the
Sacrament of the altar,

I am not now dronken, nor unadvised, I know right well what I say: And also
feel ryghtwel, what charge it is unto me against the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ to the last judgment. Therefore let no man make a geste or a
trifelynge matter of it, For it is earnest unto me. For I know Satan, by Gods
grace, a great part, Seeing he can peruerte and tangle the word of God, and
scripture, what would he not do with mine, or with other men's words?

I First I believe with heart, the high Article of the godly majesty, That
Father, Son, Holy Ghooste, three several persons, is one right only,
natural, true God, maker of heaven and earth, in all things contrary to the
Arrianes, Macedoniens, Sabellines, and such like heresies. Gene. i. according
as all that has be^ holden and kept hitherto, both in the Romysshe Church,
and in all the world by the Christen Churches.

Second person in God.
II Secondarely, I believe, and know that the Scripture teaches us, that the
second Person in God, namely the Son, is only become very man, of the holy
Ghoost, conceived without the help of man, and borne of the pure blessed
virgyn Mary, as of a right natural mother, according as all the same. S. Luke
does clearly describe, Luc. i.
and as the Prophets have declared, So that not the Father or the holy Ghoost
did become man, as certain heretykes have taught.

Also that God the Son has not only taken upon him the body, without a
Soul (as certain heretykes have taught) But also the Soul that is, a whole
perfect manhood, And the right seed or Child, promised to Abraham and David,
and is borne a natural son of Mary, In every condition and shape a right
man, even as I am my self and al other, except that he was borne without
sin, only of the virgyn by the holy Ghoost.

And that the same man is very God, as an everlasting inseparable person
become of God and man, so that Mary the blessed virgyn is a very right mother,
not only of the man Christ, Nestorianes.
as the Nestorians teach, but of the son of God, as saint Lucas says Luc. i
That holy one, which shall be borne in thy shall be called the Son of God.
That is my Lord, and the Lord of all men, Jesus Christ, the only right
natural son of God, and Mary, very God and man.

The son of God suffered for us.
Also I believe, that the same son of God and Mary, our Lord Jesus Christ
suffered for us wretched sinners, was crucified, dead and buried. Whereby he
did deliver us from sin, death, and everlasting wrath of God, through his
innocent blood, and that he rose again the third day from death, and
ascended into heaven, and sits on the ryghthand of God the Father almightye,
a Lord above all Lords, King over al Kings, and above al creatures in
heaven, earth, and under the earth, over death and life, over sin, and
ryghteousnes.

Al men borne in sin.
For I knowledge and can testify by the scripture, that al me^ came of one man
Adam, and of the same thorough the birth bring with them, and inherit, the
fall, trespass, and sin, which the same Adam in Paradys, Genesis iij
through the deuyls wickedness did perpetrate and so with him are borne in
sin, live and dye, and must be condemned to everlasting death: If not Jesus
Christ were come to succor us, and as an innocent lamb had taken upon him,
al our transgressyons and sins, satisfied for us by his passion, and yet
daily stands and makes intercessyon for us, as a true merciful mediator,
Savior, and only priest and Bishop of our souls. Esa. liij. Romans ij Gal.
iij. i. Tim. ij Heb, vij. ix. Io xvij. i. Ioh, ij


Hereby do I reiecte and condemn as for a mere error, all such doctrine as
commends our free will, as that whih stryueth clean against such help and
grace of our savior Jesus Christ. For seeing without Christ, death and
sin be our Lords. and the devil our God and Prince, there can be no
strength nor power, no wit nor understanding, whereby we be able to prepare
our selves or to think toward the righteousness and life. But must he
blinded and captyue, at the deuyls and sins own commandment, to do and to
think, whatsoever pleases him, and is contrary to God, and his
commandments.

New and old Pelagians
In like manner do I also condemn both new and old Pelagianes, Original sin.
that will not grant the original sin to be sin, but that it should be a
lack or impediment. But for as much as death goes over al men, must needs the
original sin, be no ^mal fault, but an excedyng great sin, as s. Paul
says Romans vi i. Co. xv
The reward of sin is death. And again sin is deaths styng. Ose. xiij
So says also David Psalm. li. Psalm, li.
Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Be says not My mother has conceived me with sins, but I, I, I am shapen in
wickedness, and my mother has conceyned me in sin. That is, I am growe^ of
sinful seed in my mothers womb as may be gathered of the Ebrewe text.

Furthermore, I do reiecte and condemn also, as mere deuelysh sects and
errors, al orders, rewels, cloisters, mynsters, and al what soever of men,
besides and without the scripture, is invented and instituted, stablysshed with
vows and plightynges, notwithstondyng that many great Saynctes have lived
therein, and as the electes of God, at this time thereby have be^ seduced, and
yet at the last by the faith in Jesus Christ were delivered, and escaped. For
seeing such orders, inpusters and sects, to that intent have lived, and are
kept, that by such ways and works men will and may be saved, and escape
from sin and death. So is it an open abominable blaspemy, and denyeng of the
only help and grace of ^ure only Savior and Mediator Jesus Christ. Act.
iiij.
For there is none other name given unto us, whereby we may be saved, but
only this, which is called Jesus Christ. And it is impossyble, that there
should be more Saviors, ways, or means to be saved, than through the only
righteousness, which is our savior Jesus Christ, which is given us freely
and setforth of God, as our only mercy seat. Romans iij. Romans iij


It were well good, if Cloisters or inpysters were kept and mainteyned to this
yntent that young people therein might be taught the word of God, the
Scripture and Godly nourtoure, whereby might be educated brought up and
prepared, men of learning and discretion, apt for Bysshoppes, Curates and all
manner of mynisters of the church, and also me^ of learning and discretion,
for the governance of the publyke weal, and honest discrete learned women
which afterward might know, how to keep house Christenly, and to bring up
children. But to seek there a way of salvation, that is a deuelyshe doctrine,
and a faith diabolical.i. Timot. iiij. i. tim. iiij


Holy orders of God instituted.
But the holy orders, and right Mynsters of God instituted are these three.
Priesthode, matrimony, and te^porall power. Church ministers.
Al such as are found in the cure or ministration of the word be in a holy,
right good order and state, acceptable unto God, as they that preach, minister
the Sacraments, they that procure and further the common box, clerks, boys,
or servants, that serve such persons, etc. All these be pure holy works
before God.

Father and mother.
In like manner, whosoever is a Father and mother, and rules his own house
honestly, and brings up children, in Gods service. This is also mere
holiness, and a holy work, and a holy order.

Children Family
Item, where as the children, or familye be obedyent to their parents, or
rulers, is also mere holiness, and whosoever is found therein, is a living
sayncte upon earth.

In like manner also, Princes, or superiors, Judges, Officers, Chauncelers,
Scrybes, servants, mayde^s, and al they that do serve such, moreover al such
as mekely obey, is al mere holiness, and a holy life before God. Superiors
Subjects.
Because that these three states or orders are comprehended and establyshed in
Gods word, for whatsoever is grounded upon Gods word, must needs be holy,
for Gods word is holy and sanctifyeth althynges, that be of it, or in it.

Christian Charity
Besides these three estates or Orders, is now the commune order of Christian
Charity and love, wherein me^ do not only serve the three orders, but also
every nedy person in general in all manner of benefytes, as to refresshe the
hungry, and the thursty etc. to forg^ue unto the enemies. Matthew. xxv.
To pray for all men upon earth, suffer al manner of wrong upon earth.

Behold, these are called good works every one. And yet is none of these
Orders a way to salvation. But the only way remains above all these,
namely, the says in Jesus Christ. To be holy, and to be saved.
For there is great difference, between to be holy, and to be saved. We are
saved only through Christ. But we be holy, both through such faith, and
also by such godly estates and orders. The ungodly may also have many holy
things, and yet are they not saved thereby, for our God will have such
works of us, to his praise and glory, and all they that so are saved in the
faith of Christ, do such works and keep such Orders.

The estate of wydowes and virgyns
And whatsoever has been said of the state of matrimony, the same must also be
understand of the estate of Wydowes and virgins, for they belong also to the
house, and to the house keeping. If now these orders and godly estates do not
work salvation, what should than the deuelysh mynsters and cloisters do,
which are come up bare and naked without Gods word, and besides that strive
and rage furiously against the only way of faith?

Holy Ghoost
Thyrdely, I believe in the holy Ghost, which with the father and the son is
very God, and from the Father and the son everlastingly proceeds. But a
several person, in a Godly substance and nature. Through the which, as a
lively, everlasting Godly gift, and grace, are al faithful people garnysshed
with faith and other spiritual gifts, raised up from death, delivered from
sin, and made joyful and confortable, bold and sure in conscience For this
is our rejoicing if we do feel the witness of this spirit in our hearts,
that God will be our father, forgive our sins, and has given to us
everlasting life, freely, And that al through the merits of Christ, which
by his death has purchased for us such a spirit, and that we our selves
through our works can deserve nothing, but is given to al them that hear the
word of God, and embrace it.

These are the three Persons, and one God, which has given him self whole and
all unto us, with all that he is and has. Father
The father gives him self unto us, with heaven and earth, and all creatures,
that they must serve and be profitable unto us. How be it this gift was
darkened through the fall of Adam, and become unprofitable. Son.
Therefore did afterward the son also give him self unto us, al his works,
death, wisdom, and ryghteousnes, and reconcyled us to the father, whereby we
are quickened again and justified, and also may know and have again, the
Father with his gifts.

And because that this grace could profit no man, if the were kept so close
and hydden, that she could not come unto us. Holy Ghoost
Therefore comes the holy Ghooste and gives him self also, whole and al unto
us, which teaches us to knoweledge such benefytes of Christ showed unto us,
helps us to receive and keep them, profitably to use and distribute them, to
increasse and forther them. And does even the same inwardely and outewardely. In
wardely, through faith, and other spiritual benefits. Outewardely through the
Gospel, through Baptism, and the Sacrament of the altar, through the which
as by three means, or ways, he comes unto us, and puts in our mind the
death, of Christ in us, and makes it profitable to our salvation.

Baptism.
Therefore do I hold and know, that like as there is but one Gospel, and one
Christ. Even so is there also no more but one Baptism. And the Baptism in it
self, is a Godly Ordinance, even as his Gospel is also. And like as the
Gospel, is not false or untrue, because some do falsely use, or teach or
believe the same. Even so is not Baptism false, or untrue, all though some did
receive it or give it without faith, or did otherwise abuse it. Anabaptists.
Donatistes.
Wherefore I do utterly reiecte and condemn the doctrine of the Anabaptists,
and Donatistes, and whatsoever they be that Baptize again.

Even so do I speak and knoweledge Supper of the Lord
also of the Supper of the Lord, that even there by the very body and blood in
bread and wine monthely is eaten and dronken. Allthough the Priest which
does minister the same, or they that do receive it, did not believe, or did
other ways abuse it. For it stands not in man's believe or unbelieve. But in
Gods word and ordeyninge. Except, that they before did alter and falsely
interpretate Gods word and Ordinance, as the present enemies of the
Sacrament do, which in deed have nothing but bread and wine. Because they
have not also, the words and ordinance instituted of God. But have perverted
and altered the same after their own fanthasye.

One holy Catholic Church
After this, I believe, that there is one holy Catholic Church upon earth, that
is the felloweshippe and number, or congregation of all Christians, through
out the whole world the only Spouse of Christ, and his mystical body,
whereof also he is the only head, and that the Bisshoppes or curates are not
heads, nor Lords nor brydegromes of the same, but ministers, friends, and as
that word, Bishop sygnifyeth, Overseers, surueyours, and Purueyers.

Christianite dispersed in all the world.
And the same Christianite is not only under the Romysshe Church, or Pope, but
dispersed throughoute the whole world, as the Prophets have showed, Psalm. ij.
Psa. xix
that the Gospel of Christ should come in all the world. Psalm. ij. Psalm.
xix. So that under the Pope, Turks, Perses, Tatters, and every where the
Christianite is dispersed bodily. But congregated spiritually in one Gospel and
faith, under one head which is Christ. For the Papacye is undoubtedly, the
right kingdom of Antichriste, or the right tyranny against Christ, which
sits in the tempel of God, and rules with traditions of men, as Christ.
Matthew. xxiiij. and Paul.ij. Thessa. ij. do declare, Matthew. xxiiij. ij. these ij
How be it besides this also, the Turk, and al here syes, wheresoever they
be, belong also to this abhomynation, which is prophesied to stand in the
holy place. But nothing like unto the Pope.

Remissyon of sins.
In this Christianite, and whereas she is, there is remissyon of sins, that is
a kyngedome of grace, and of the right Pardon, For even there is the Gospel,
Baptism, the sacrament of the altar, wherein remission of sins is offered,
given and received, and even there is also Christ and his spirit and God.

And without this Christianite, is no salvation, nor remissyon of sins. But
everlasting death, and damnation. Although there be great apearaunce of
holiness, and many good works, yet all is in vain. And this remissyon of
sins, is not at one time, as in Baptism to be looked fore, Nonates.
as the Nonates do teach, but as often and many times, as man has need of the
same until the hour of death.

Popysh Pardon
But the Pardon which the Romyshe Church has and gives is a blasphemous
seduction, and deception, not only because that it is a several thing
invented, and set up, over and besides the common remission Which through out
the whole Christianite, through the Gospel and Sacraments is given, and
thereby the commune remission is dishonored and fet at naught, but also
because it stablyssheth and groundeth the Satisfaction for sins upon men's
works and merits of Saynctes. Notwithsta^dinge that only Christ can satisfye
for us, and has satisfied for us.

To pray for the dead.
For the dead, for as much as the Scripture makes no mention there of, hold
I that of free intention it is no sin, thus or in like manner to pray, Lord
God if the Soul be in such case, that she may be helped, vouchesaf to be
merciful unto her, etc. And when that is done ones or twyse, then let it
suffice. But the diriges, and Soul masses and yearly minds, are not
auayliable. And it is the devils fair or market.

Purgatory.
We have also nothing in the Scriptur of Purgatory, and it was surely brought
up by Robyn good fellow, or by such illusio^s of the devil. Therefore hold I
that it be not necessary to believe one, how be it all things are possible
unto God. And he could punysshe the Souls well enough after their departinge
from the body. But he has not declared it by word or writtinge, wherefore also
he will not have it believed, how be it I know will a Purgatory besides, but of
that is not to be taught in the congregation, nor yet to be handled against it
with foundations and vigilies.

Worshipping of saynctes.
Of worshipping of Saynctes, have other taken in hand, before me. And it
pleases me, and I believe it also, that only Christ ought to be worshipped as
our mediator, this gives the Scripture and it is sure. Of worshippinge of
Saynctes is nothing in Scripture. Therefore must it needs be unsure, and not to
be believed.

Vnctio^
The vnctio^. If she were kept according to the Gospel. Mar. vi. and Iac. v.
might be suffered. Mar. vi Iaco. v.
But to make a Sacrament there of is in vayn For eue^ as in the place of
diriges and Soul masses, well might be made a sermon of death and everlasting
life, And so prayed by the buryal, and rememberyng our end, (as it appears
that the elders have done) do were it also well done, that men went to the
speak, prayng and geuynge good exhortacyons. And if me^ would anoynte him with
oil besides, should be free and at liberte in the name of God.

Confession.
Of Confession, hold I and know that she ought to be free without
compulsyon, not bound with laws, to any time, person or fasshyon, But for as
much the absolutyon, which is spoken therein and received (which is none
other but Gods own word, and also ought to be received none otherwise then
if God did speak it him self) So do I take confession for such Absolutions
sake, to be a wholesome confortable, profitable thing wherein a sorrowful,
miserable conscience, may seek and find conforte and help. Rehearsal of sins.
And whosoever does despise it that he despyseth Gods word, and is not worthy
of the sacrament, how be it the rehersall of sins is not necessary, but it
is sufficient, that a man notifye that thing, which at that same time does
prick or encombre his conscience.

Matrimony Priesthode.
Even so need not men also to make a Sacrament of matrimony, and priesthode. For
they are nevertheless holy orders enough in them selves. Therefore is penance
nothing else, but the exercise and power of baptism. That these two
sacraments remain baptism, and the supper of the Lord besides the Gospel,
wherein the holy Ghoost does plenteously offer give, and word remissyon of
sins unto us.

Mass
But for all abhominatio^s do I hold the mass which is preached and sold for an
oblation or sacrifyce, and good work, whereupon now all mynsters and cloisters
do stand, but God willing shall shortly be laid. For although I have been a
great shameful, abominable sinner, and have spente, and lost my youth also
damnably, yet are these my greatest sins, that I have been such a holy freer,
and with so many masses by the space of xv. years have so abhominably offended,
martyred and plaged my dear Lord. But thanks and praise be given unto his
inestimable goodness, for ever, that he has brought me out of such
abomination, and yet daily preserves me, (although I am very unthankful)
and strengthened me in faith.

Chastity. Poverty. Obedience.
Wherefore I have persuaded, and yet do persuade, to leave and forsake the
mynsters, and cloisters with their vows and to give themselves abroad in the
right order of Christ, to the intent that men may escape from such abhominatyon
of masses, and blasphemous holiness, as chastise, pouerte, obedience, whereby
men intend to be saved, for as godly as it was in the primitive church, to
keep virgyns, so abominable is it now that men thereby deny the help and
grace of christ, For we ca^ live well enough virgyns, wydowes, and chaste,
without such blasphemous abomination.

Images
Images, belles, mass garments, dechynge and trymynge or Churches altar
lyghtes, and such like, hold I indifferent, and at liberty. How be it, I
take Images out of the scripture, and of good hystoryes, very profitable,
wherefore I hold not with the destroyers of al Images.

Resurrection of the dead.
Last of all I believe the resurrection of the dead at the last day, both of
the good and the badde, that eue^ there every man may receive in his body,
according to his deserving, and that the good shall live perpetually with
Christ, and the wicked dye everlastingly with the devil, and his Angels, For
I hold not with them that teach. That the deuyls also shall at the last come
to salvation.

This is my faith, for thus believe all true Christians, and thus teaches us
the holy Scripture. But what soever I have here spoken to little, shall my books
sufficiently testify and declare.

Wherefore I desire al faithful hearts to bear my record, and to pray for
me, that in this faith I may persevere and make mine end. For (which God
forbid) if I should through temptation persecution or necessite of death
say any other thing, It should be false, and I will knoweledge openly by this,
that it is false and of the devils inspiratio^, whereunto help my, my Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ, blessed for ever and ever.

AMEN.
Of the right Old Church, what, where and who she is, and where by she may be
known.
THe cause, where fore the papists do call us heretykes, is this. They say,
that we be fallen from the holy church, and have set up another new church.
Here upon is to be answered. For as much as they boaste themselves, that they
be the right church, so ought they to prove the same, if they by any ground
(for we desire not much ground) prove the same, then will we yield our selves,
come and say: Peccauimus, miserere nostri. But if they ca^ not prove it, the^
must they needs confess (be it willyngly or unwillingly) that they be not the
church, and that we ca^ not be heretics, for falling from that vile church.
Yea whylest there is no mediation, so must we be the church of Christ, and
they the church of the devil, or contrariwise. Therefore lies very much on
this point, that me^ prove, which is the true church. As long as that proof is
not there, it is in vayn that the one part boaste the^ selves the church, and
call the other heretykes, The one party must needs be false and wrong. Two
manner of churches.
But there be two manner of churches, from the beginning of the world until the
end the which s. Angustyn calls Cayn, and Abel, And the Lord Christ
commands us, that we should not receive the false church and discerueth him
self two churches one true, another false Math. vij. Beware of false Prophets
which come unto you is shepes clothing etc. mat. vij.
Vvheras Prophets be, eue^ there be churches, wherein they teach. If the
Prophets be false, tha^ be the churches false also, which believe and follow
the prophets. Now could we never as yet hitherto obtayn of the papists, that
they would show, wherefore that they are the right church, but they stand only
upon the saying of Mat.xviii. That men must hear the church, or else they
must be lost. Matthew. xviij.
And yet in the same place Christ says not, who, where, or what the church is:
but wheresoever the church is, even there should me^ hear her. Eue^ thatsame
do we confess and say also. but we ask, where, and who is the church of
christ, not of the name, but of the being do we ask

Like as if I should ask a dronken man being halfstepyng half wakyng, or a
fool I pray the tell me, who, or where is the Church? And he should answer
me, ten times one after another, nothing else but thus, me^ ought to hear
the Church. How should I hear the church not knowing, who or where she is?
Yea say they we Papists, have abyde^ in the first old church from the
Apostles time hitherto, therefore be we rightly descended from the old church,
and remain hitherto, but ye be fallen from us, and are become a new church
against us. Answer, But how then if I should prove, that we abide by the right
old church: yea that we be the right old church? and that ye be fallen from us,
that is from the old church, and have reared a new church against the old
church: that same let us hear.

Baptism.
First, will nor can no man deny this, that we as well as the papists came out
of the holy baptism, and are called christians of the same. Now is baptism no
new thing, nor yet of us at this time invented, but it is eue^ the same old
baptism, that Christ has instituted, wherein the Apostles and the primitive
church, and all christians thereafter, hitherto are baptized. Have we now
the same baptism, and the first old (and as in Simbole stands Catholice,
that is the hole christen) church and are even baptized in the same, then
belong we surely in the same old and hole christen church, which with us
together, and we with her together come of one manner of baptism, and is
concerning baptism, no difference. Baptism is the chief and first sacrament,
without the which al other be nothing, as they must confess the^ selves.
Therefore ca^ not the papists, with the truth call us a new church or
heretics, sense we be children of the old baptism, as well as the Apostles
the^ selves, and the hole Christianite. Ephesians. iiij
One manner of baptism.

Supper of the Lord.
Secondarely, will noma^ deny this, That we have the blessed Supper of the
Lord, like and even, as Christ him self has instituted. And the Apostles
there after, and the hole Christianite has used, So that we eat and drink
with the universal Christianite, of on board, and receive with them one manner
of old sacrament, and have therein nothing renewed nor channged. Wherefore we
be with them one manner of Church, or as S. Paull says i. Cor.xi. one body,
which eat of one bread, and drink of one drynk. i. Cor. xi
Wherefore the Papists can not call us heretics or new Church, except they
must call Christ, the Apostles and the universal Christianite heretykes
before, even as they do in deed. For we be with the old Church, one Church in
one Sacrament.

Kayes.
Thyrdely, can noman deny. That we have the right old kayes, and use them none
otherwise, then to bind and to lose sins that be all against Gods
commandment, as Christ has instituted them, and as the Apostles and the
universal Christianite have used them hitherto. And have also one kaye and use
with the old Church, wherefore we be the same old Church, or at the least in
it. For we make no new keye, nether make we new laws, nether do we there
with, exclude kings and Princes and their te^porall powers. But only shut
the sinners out and into the kingdom of heaven like as the old Church has
done (by the commandment of the Lord) where in the Papists do falsely belie
us, yea blaspheme the old church, the Apostles and Christ him self in us.

Office of preaching.
Fourthely, can noman deny, That we have the office of Preachinge, and the word
of God syncerely and rychely, earnestly teachinge and dryuynge the same,
without any manner of addicio^s of new propre man's traditions. Eue^ as Christ
has commanded. And as the Apostles and the universal christianite have done:
we inue^te no newelties. But we hold us and abide by the old word of God, as
the old church has had it. Therefore be we with the same, the right old
Church, as one Church that teaches and believes one Gods word. Wherefore
the Papists again blaspheme Christ him self, the Apostles. And the universal
Christianite, when they call us new and heretics. For they find nothing by
us, but the old fasshion, of the old Church, that we be like unto the same,
and be with her one Church.

Symbolum or Cred of thapostles.
Fyfthely, ca^ noma^ deny, That we hold, believe, sing, and confess. The Creed
or Symbolum of the Apostles, the old faith of the old Church, in all things
like with her not making or adding any new thing there unto. Vvherby we
perteyne in the old Church and be one with her. Therefore let not this piece also
be imputed unto us of the Papists with the truth, as heresy and new Church.
For he that beleueh and holds with the old Church the same is of the old
Church.

Praye^
Sixtely, noma^ can deny this, That we have one like prayer, with the old
church and the same Pater noster, not inuentinge any new or other. And sing
eue^ the same Psalms with one accord of mouth, and heart: laudinge and
tha^kyng God, like as Christ has taught the same, and as the Apostles and the
old Church have used the same, And commanded us to follow the same example.
So that the Papists again for this can not call us heretics or new Church,
but they must first of all blaspheme Christ him self, with his dear old
Church.

Worldly power.
Seuently, can noman deny, That we with the old Church both teach and
affirm. That men ought to honor the temporal Powers, and not to curse them,
nor yet compel them to kiss the fete of the bishop of Rome. Which also we
have not invented of new. For S. Peter.ij. Pet. ij. curses those that should
newly inue^te and cra^tely do such things. ij. Pet. ij
And S. Paull. Roma. xiij. is on our side. To. xiij.
And also the old and vninersall Christianite. So that in this thing also, we
may not be called new, as the Papists blaspheme God him self in us, But we
be, and perteyne in the old holy Apostolic Church as the right children and
members of the same. For we have taught true obedience always to be done unto
our hyer powers, whether it be to Emperor or Prince, which also we have done
oureselues, and have prayed for them heartily.

Matrimony.
Eyghtely, can noman deny. That we ^aude and pr^yse Matrimony, as a Godly
blessed, and acceptable creation and ordinance, for the fruit of the body, and
against the fylthynes of the flesh. And have not of new inuete^ted the same
by our selves, neither is the use there of newly by us imagined, much less,
as of new teathers forbidden. But even as God from the beginnynge has created
and Christ confirmed. The Apostles and the old Church, have honored and
taught the same even in the same old rule of Gods institutynge have we
abyden. And be therein agreeable with the old Church, yea and right kind
members of the same. So that men may see how the Papists again carnally, lay
unto us ne we fanglednes.

Persecution for the words sake.
Nynthly, can noman deny. That we have even the same sufferinge, (as S. Peter
says) which our brethren have in the world, we be persecuted in all
parties, yea slain, drowned, hanged, and all manner of torments is laid unto
us for the words sake, and it gothe with us even as with the old church. And
be in this point above measure like unto the same. So that we may well say.
We be the right old church or at the least her comparteners and like fellows
in sufferinge. For we do not inuente such things of new, but we feel it well
enough. Yea we be eue^ (as the old church is also) like unto the Lord Christ
him self upon the cross.

There stand before the cross, Annas and Caiphas, with the Priests, and
blaspheme the Lord. Also besides that they have crucified him. Even like as the
bishop of Rome, Cardinals, and monks, have judged, condemned and
murdered us, and have shed our blood, and sclaunder us yet besides that.
There stand the soldiers, that is The worldly powers partly and sclaunder us
also. Moreover the vnthrif^ the murderer on the left hand. H M. with his
consortes, whom god has judged and hanged in chains in hell, must also there
unto add his sclaundering. In so much that this pere as an old sign of the
old church, abundantly may be seen on us.

The church uses no ve^gaunce.
Tenthly, can noma^ deny, That we also do not shede blood again, nether
murder, hang, and revenge our selves as we oftentimes might and yet could
do. But eue^ as Christ, the Apostles, and the old church has done. So we
suffer exhort, and pray for the^. Also openly in the church, in the letany and
sermons, like as christ our Lord has done and taught, and the old church
also. So that here in also we behave our selves comfortable to the old
fasshion of the old church.

For as much now as the papists know that we in all such points, an
whatsoever there be more of them be conformable unto the old church, and may
lawfully be called the old church (for so much as such points be not now,
nor of us invented) It is a merueylous case, how they may be so bold, so
shameless to belie and to condemn us, as though we were fallen from the
church, and had begone a new church. Notwithstonding, that they ca^ not
find, any newelties by us, that was not used in the old and right Church,
in the Apostles time. In so much that I think verily. This be the time,
Whereof Daniel.vij. says. Dan. vij.
The old aged sat him down, after that the lift horn had ended his
blasphemynge and the judgment given. For the primitive old Church breketh
forth again (like as the son after the clouds, behind the which clouds
the same son was, but not so bright shyninge) And that presumptuous horn
shall perisshe. And all shall have an end, as even there is contained, and the
work it self declares where of to dispute, is no time here.

But might any man say. There is yet a fault in one thing, namely in fasting
for ye heretics fast not (say they) Oh Lord God, if fasting be a point
belonginge to us of the old Church then is it a piteous case, if it be a piece
perteynynge to the Papists of the new Church, so is it that they fast not.
And live ryotously also upon the fasting day, more than upon the holy day.
Yea we do not only fast. But suffer (with S. Paul) hunger, i. Cor. ij
which we may easily perceive by our pore Curates their wines and children
daily, and by many other pore folks more, out of whole eyes the hunger does
appear, and have ska^te bread and water, and besides that they go finger
naked, having nothing of their own. The husbandman and the Citezen gives
nothing. The nobilite takes, so that there be few of us that have ought, and
yet can not help enery man. Thereto should mynsters and cloisters serve. But
the other he dro^ued in covetousness. Laza^ dies hungry
In so much that Lazarus must dye for hunger. Wherefore the Papists laugh, how
be it, they declare thereby, that we be the old thurch, which suffer the skornes
of the devils children to our hynderaunce.

Hereby have we now declared, and showed, that we be the right old Church,
and with the universal Catholyke Church one body, and one communion of
Saynctes. Declare now also ye Papists. That ye be the right old Church, or
like unto it. But that be ye not able to do. But I will prove, that ye be the
new false Church, which ever is falling away from the right old Church,
and becomes the harlotte and scoele of the devil.

Of the new false Church, what, where, and who she is, and whereby men shall
know her.
New baptism and holiness in Poperye.
First ye do not abide by the first old baptism, for ye have of new invented
many other baptismes. And teach that the first baptism, through sin be
lost, and that man must make satisfaction by his own works. And specially,
that by mo^kery a man becomes as pure, as if he come out of the baptism of
Christ. Whereby ye have filled the world with Churches and Cloisters.

Satisfaction.
And thie point, Satisfaction is the beginning and occasion, door and entrance
into all abomination of Popery, like as in the Church, Baptism is the
beginning and entrance to all grace and remission of sins. For where as
baptism is not, there helps nothing Sacrament, keys nor any other thing,
if the Satisfaction had not ben enterprysed, than should not, Pardon,
Pilgrymage, Fraternite, Mass, Purgatory, monkerye, Mynsters, and the most
part of all abomination, have been invented, and the Papacye should not have been so large and fat. Therefore have they well named the same a Baptism in
their Church, that has wrought so many Baptismes, Sacraments and remissions
of sins, yea also high holiness, that is the same their own righteousness,
and work holiness, whereof we have written not a little. Who has commanded
you or where is it written? Where do ye find in the old Church, that ye may
inuente such baptismes and holynesses? Who is here an heretic and new
church.

Pardon.
Secondarely, have ye driven your Pardons throughout all the whole world as a
baptism, yea as a flood that wassheth away sins. In so much that there is
no corner in the world wherein your Pardons have not ben sold and given. And
all the world is full of Bulls and writtynges. Who has commanded you? or
where is it written? Where do ye find it in the old church that ye may
stablysshe such a new baptism and wasshinge away of sins? who is here the
heretical new church. Are ye not it eue^ the hooryshe church of the devil.

Holy water and ^ast.
Thyrdely, have ye drynen the holywater and (...), not only in all churches but
also in every corner as a clensynge (or baptism) of sin, and have also
taught great witchecrafte therein. As dist^ (...) A^uam sale shows: Who has
commanded you this. Vvher is it written. Vvher do ye find it in the old church,
or institutio^s of the Apostles. Who is here the new affallig church.

Pilgremages.
Fourthely have ye instituted Pilgremages for to merit Pardon, or fergeuenes of
sins, which for as much it is done without the office of the keys, through
your own merits, is also a new other Baptism, or clensyng of sins. Who
has commanded you where is it written. Where do ye find it in the old
church, that ye should institute such new remission or bapti^me. Who is here
the new run away Church.

Fraternity.
Fyftely, have ye erected fraternities innumerable. In so much that ye have also
filled the world with Bulls and lettres, and all for Pardon and remission of
sins, and deservings. Which only is the office of the holy Baptism and
sacrament. Who has commanded you. Where is it written? Where do ye find
it in the old Church, that ye have authorite to induce such new remissions
or merit? And who can rehearse, how many manners of new fasshions ye have
invented, to forgive sin for money or propre deservings. Who is here the
new Church, with new doctrines and Sacraments, whereof neither Christ,
Apostles, Scripture, nor yet the old church have any thing known.

Sacrament of the altar of the universal Church robbed.
Sixthely, who will rehearse all the abominable newellies which ye have invented
in the high worthy holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Who has
commanded you. Where is it written, where do ye find it in the old church.
That first may take and rob this Sacrament from the universal church, and
leave only the one kind, and appropriate the hole only to the Priests.

Secondarely, also the same only kind, not to teach and increase faith but
to change it into a work of obedience of the Church.

Thyrdly. The ho^e sacrament (if it else as than be a sacrament) not in the
remembrance of Christ, of him openly to preach, and to give him thanks for
his passion. But to selle it unto the other for a Priest offer, and propre
deserving of a wicked person, and to make the souls in purgatory partakers
thereof, and to alter it most abhominably and blasphemously for all temporal
necessities, even as a heathen service of Idolles yea as a shameful iuglynge,
Whereby ye have stilled and defaced, the remembrance of Christ (for the
which Christ did institute it)

And notwithsta^dinge that ye were else, so pure a church, as the Apostles
church, and yet much purer. Nevertheless does this only abominable, horrible
piece which by the counsayll of the devil ye have inverted of new, make you a
new of falling heretical church, yea an earthy whoor of the devil, and a
scoole of hell. For this part is so abominable, groundeles and evil, that in
this life, no tongue can express, nor no heart co^prehende it, until the later
day appear.

Read, gather and heap all the mischief to gether. Whatsoever the devil with
you all against us ca^ imagine and lie a thousand times as much intre to it,
yet for all that will it not be a small chippe in co^paryson of this great
beam^, where on not one, but douteles all the devils, with all the Craftyest
k^aues, in six hundredth years have builded. This is one of the right points:
Abhominatio^ in holy place.
Which Christ calls an abhominatio^ to the holy place. Vvherfor not only we
should and must flee from you, as from the great wrath of God. But also heaven
and earth tre^bleth, and abhorret such a den of thieves, for this piece does
not only cause no church to remayn. But also makes thereof the foulest
doug^hill of the devil, that is in earth.

The Turk, Tatterues and Jews be nothing like, so evil a de^ne of
murderers, as the Popyshe church is in this one point. For they only deny
Christ, and turn their back toward him. But these take him here before
the, spitte at him, scorn him, blaspheme slander, defame and marter him, and
play a more horrible passion with him then was done unto him corporaly by the
Jews. He go your ways now boaste your selves the holy church from the which
we be fallen. The devil abide with you in such a church, and all such as hold
w^h you in that trade, God save us from it, even as he has graciousely pluckte
us away from it, wherefore be laud and praise unto him for ever.

Seuently, who has commanded you to make this neweltie? That ye have made new
keys and wrought two false warthes, wherewith ye do not forgive sin, nor yet
withhold it, as the old keys do with us, And in the universal old church.
But ye do institute of new sin, and murder, whereas else be none in your
run away, and murtherysshe church, whereby with importable and innumerable
laws, ye entangle and bind the Christen consciences, ye treathen and kill,
for eating, drynkyng, clothyng places, days, and such like outward things,
which Christ has given free. Colloss. ij. and the old Church has kept
without any sin or fear. Collo. ij
Besides this, ye put down Kings and Princes, as though ye were God your
selves. How is here falling away, or new church? The devil abide with you
in this blasphemous, murtheryshe, synful, and damnable peace we be come again
to the old church, lauded and praised be god.

Eyghtly, who has commanded you, over and above the manner of the old
Church, and contrary to the commandment of christ, to preach other wise
tha^ he has commanded? Matthew. xxviij. Go and teach the^ to observe what
soever I commands you. Matthew. xxviij.
He says not whatsoever seems to you right and good Ioha^. xiiij. The holy
ghost shall teach you al things, and bring to your remembrance, whatsoever I
have told you. Ioh. xiiij


Men's tradicyons, and lies in the Papacye.
But ye have filled al churches and schools so full of your dregs and do^g
that is man's doctrine and lies, and arrayed al places so foul with your vomit
and filthynes, that (as Esaias says) no more room is left, and yet ye will be
called the church.

Private mass.
And this point is besides the private mass, also one of the worste
abominations, whose hurt and plage ca^ not be grounded nor expressed, whereby
ye have edifyed a new church for the devil, and have served him with the same,
In so much that it is nothing but soul murder, and the very Molech, deuourer
of children, which suffers not (as yonder Molech did) the souls of the
children to be saved, although they were burned corporally, but contrarywyse
suffers the body to live a short space, but the soul burns perpetually.
Molech Leuit. xviij. Leui. xx Hiere. xxxij.
I can not for trembling recyte much of the calamity of the innumerable
false Idolatrous murtherysshe doctrine in Poperye, this is, our new goodly
Church.

Bodily head of the Romyshe Church
Nynthly, who has commanded you this froward new fang lednes in the Church,
which is a spiritual kyngedome, that ye set up a bodily head, namynge him the
most holiest: for as much as there can be none other, but a spiritual h^ade,
which is Christ? This is the thy^e abhominatio^ most damnable, in your most
holy, yea most hellysh ^we church. For the old church knows nothing
there of, for she ^bydeth by her head, even as we out she knows that it is
the devils own creation, and should come, even for sins sake, according as
she has declared it.ij. Thessal. ii. The man of sin, and child of
perdicion shall set himself in the tempell of God, and show him self as
God. ij. Th. ij.
Even so has Daniel said also, that he should despise the old church and the
God of his fathers, and set up another new God, and new church (that may
help him to stablysshe his new God). Da. xij.


Who has now the new offallynge Church, have it the old, and we, which
do abide by the right old head, and abhor the new deuelysshe head: Or have
they it, That worship the new deuelysshe head, kiss his fete, and recey^e
blessyng of his two fyngers, that exalte his doctrine above the word of God,
and honor not the old right he^de with one knelyng, yea also not o^es
remember him, and his blessing, vhich he has purchased for us with ^ys hole
body and blood?

But this desolation is so ^homynable and horrible, Abomination in Popery
that to speak of it a littel, helps nothing, And yet no Angels long is
able to declare it sufficiently. That thing which Gods own monthe names
abomination, must needs be a greater abomination, than all tongues can
express.

Vvorshyppyng of saints
Tenthly, who has commanded you to set up this new Idolatryer? That ye do
institute worshippyng of saynctes, Canonyse saynctes, ordeyne fastings and
holy days, to honor them, even as though they were gods themselves, that
men do put their trust and confidence in their merits, more then in Christ
himself, and in his blood and merits, whom you have set forth and declared
unto us, as a judge, whom we must pacifye and obtain grace of him, by his
mother, and by the intercession and merits of all saynctes, with our holy
service.

Churches of the heathen.
In so much that your church in this article is become nothing else, then
the churches of the heathen, which worshypped, Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Diatra,
and other dead persons, And like as the Romans in their city of Rome did
edificate a Pantheon, Even so have ye also builded a Pantheon, that is a
church of all the deuyls. This shall ye not find in the writtynges of the
Apostles, nor in the young Churches after them, which in times past also would
not suffer the Images of fayncies, so that much blood was shed for it, I
omit that they should worship and pray to the saynctes, which only is dew
to god,

Matrimony condemned.
Eleuently, who has commanded you to make his new joy. That ye condemn and
sclaunder matrimony, and judge it unclean and uncomely, for gods service,
have ye that of the Apostles or of the primative old church? Yes truly, for S.
Paul says.i. tim. iiij That ye should come under hypocrisye and depart and
step a side from the faith, and old church, as a very harlot of the devil,
which should receive such doctrine of the devil, and preach against
matrimony, and yet live your selves in dissemblyng chastity, that is in all
manner of uncleanliness. i. tim. iiij


This neweltie sewe with her noble fruits, that the ground will bear you no
longer. And God with his judgment has bego^ne to preasse into it, and to
hallowe this new holy church even into hell fire, And will not be entreated to
the contrary. This know we, Thanked be God.

Abuse of the te^porall sword in the papacye
Twelftly, who has commanded you to make this newnes? That ye rule and war
with the worldly sweard and use the same for the most part, for to shede
innocent blood? Have ye seen ye sharp eyed flitter myse, that the Apostles or
old church subdued the world with the sword, or augme^ted the church by
battayl? whence come ye then I pray you, that boaste your selves successors
of the old church, and call us the new waueryng Church, which notwithstanding
hold with the old church, and came of the same But ye came of that run
away the deuyls harlott your new murtherysh and lyenge Church.

Purgatory relics.
There are yet many more of those new knackes, as purgatory, relics
hallowynge of churches, and of such swarmynges, the hole decrees and decretall
with other innumerable books full of clean new inventions, whereof the old
Church, and the Apostles never knew. But who is able to recyte all the
multitude of this fond or duste, yea poison and deuelysshe lies: This shall
suffice at this present, to show, how shamefully the Papipistes, by their. H.
M. lie, when they call us to new, run away. Heretical church. But that their
broken edged sword, gothe throught their own heart, and appears evidently,
that they have forsaken their old Church, and her old brydegrome, and are
run away from her, as an archedeuils harlot, which is not only heretycal,
(for that word is to littel and to honest for such shameful knauerye) but
the Antichristishe harlot, and gods enemy, yea that exalts her self above
God (even as her brydegrome would do also in heaven) the deupls last and most
shameful spouuse. ij. Th. ij


But we, for as much as we eschew and abhor such deuelysshenes and newnes,
and hold our selves again to the right old church the virgyn and pure
spou^se of Christ. Are we undoubtedly the very old Church, without all
hooredome, and newnes, which remains hitherto unto us, and we come of the
same, yea be regenerate of her, as the Galathians were of S. Paul. For we did
also of late stick earnestly in the hinder part of the hellysshe hoore the
Popes new church, which we lamente that we have so shamefully spente so much
time and pains in the same den. But thanks and praise be to God, which of
that read blasphemous harlot has delivered us.

If yet such newnes in the Papacye were but slyghte newne or could be, then
were they after some forte for tranquillities sake to be suffered, like as one
wears and suffers his new coat. But now cleaves this deuelysshe poison
and infernal murder there on. The bishop of Rome will have his men's
tradicyons to be taken for gods service, etc.
That the commandment of the church, must be called holy Gods service,
good life, spiritual conversation, wherein a man deserves grace and life (if
he observe it) either wrath and death (if he do not observe it). This is of
lies to make truth of the devil God, and of hell to make heaven, And contrary
wise.

Therefore is the popysshe church so full of lies, deuyls Idolatrye, hell,
murder, and of all mischief that it swarmeth. And it is here time to hear the
voice of the Angel. Apo. xviij. Come away from Babylon my people, that ye be
not partakers in her sins, that ye receive not of her plages, for her sins
are gone up to heaven etc. Apocal. xviij.


Image of the later judgment.
In times past, where as the paynters painted the later judgment: Payntyng of
the popyshe church
they feigned hell a great drago^s head with a very wide mouth, wherein in the
mids of the flame stood the Pope, Cardinals, Bysshoppes, priests, monks,
Emperor, Kings, Princes, and all manner of men and women, but no young
children. I could not deuyse of a truth how the Popysshe church might or
could be more goodly, compendiously and playnelyer painted or descrybed, for
doubteles she is the devouring of hell, where unto she abides the Pope
himself, and deuoureth all the world in the botomeles pit of hell, through the
devils mouth, that is through her deuilysh preaching and teaching. Surely it
has not be^ inverted of a foolysshe fellow, bylyke out of Esaias. v, where as
he says, Esaias. ^
hell gapeth and opens her mouth marvelous wide, that their pride and
boastynge both her rycheme^ and welthe with such as rejoice therein, may
descend into it. But if it did chance to be made so unadvisedly or unawarely,
truly then is it an Image very well happened, to set out to the simple man the
popysh church, to the intent that he may be ware of it, and flee from it, which
has devoured al, save the young christened children, whereof we shall entreat
more here after.

Here will and may they say, why do thou revile us so shamefully, as a new
run away Church, seeing we have also the Baptism. Sacrament, keys, Creed,
and Gospel, as well as the old church, of the which we did descend. And
thou thy self above have granted, that even we as well as ye, proceed from
the Old Church.

I make answer, It is true, I grant that the church wherein ye sit, comes
from the old Church, as well, as we, and has also even the same Baptism,
Sacrament, keys, and text of the Bible, and the Gospel, And I will praise you
yet hyer, and knowledge that we, of the Church under you (not of you) have all
things received, what will ye more? Are we not honest enough? Will ye not from
hencefurth leave us vncherked, by the name of heretykes. We cannot take you
for Turks nor Jews (as is above specifyed) which be out of the Church.

But this say we, that ye do not abide by it, and become the run away,
departing hourysh church, (as the Prophets use to call it) which abides not
in the Church, whereof she is borne and nourysshed, ye run out of the same
Church, and from the right husband or bridegroom (as Hoseas says of the
people of Israel) to the devil Baall, Molech, Astaroth, understand ye not
this. I will tell it you.

Departing from the right church unto the false.
Ye are all undoubtedly baptized in the right baptism of the old church as we
specially in chyldhode, and whatsoever so baptized, lives and dies, until in
the seuenthe or eyghte year, before it have understanding of the hoorysshe
Church, of the Romyshe Bishop, that is surely saved, whereof we doubt
nothing, but wha^ it comes to age, and hears your lyenge preachynges, of
your deuelysh newelties, believes and follows the same, Than becomes it a
deuelysshe harlot with you, and falls away from his baptism and brydegrome
(as has chaunched unto me with other) buyldeth and trusts upon his own
works, even as ye hooremongera, in your hoorehouses and devils Churches
preach, notwithstondyng that it was baptized, to trust and build only upon
his only dear brydegrome, and ^ure Lord Jesus Christ, which has given him
selves for us.

And it goes even like, as if an honest young fellow, should bring up a
poor youge, beggerysshe, comfortles maid, for to be his spounse in time to
come, and make himself sure with her, and she should keep her self chaste and
honest, vntylshe were man able. And as then turn her eyes, and beheld other
fellows, that should like her better, wax hoote and be set on fire upon them,
and forsake her hertely beloved and true brydegrome, which had delivered,
nourysshed, kept, brought up, clothed, decked, trymed, and kept her gaye, and
suffer her self of every man to be made an harlot.

This harlot which before was a pure virgyn, and dear spouuse, is now
adeuorced run away aduontresse, a house whore, a chamber whore, a keep
whore, which in the house in maystres, and has the keys, beds, kytchen,
celler, and al things in her power so abominable, that in comparyson of her,
the common free harloties heggehoores, feldwhoores, landwhores, campwhores, be
in a manner holy. For this is the right archewhore, and properly a devils whore.

Of such whores speaks Oseas, Ose. i
and yet more roughly, and almost to rough, the Prophet Ezech. Cap. xxiii.
which ye may read, Ezech. xxiij.
if ye will know what manner of harlot your church is For such a whore do I
mean, when I name you an offallyng, run away harlot, which in your youth
were baptized right Christians, in our dear Lord, and did live certain years,
as the old Church. Afterward wha^ ye waxed great, and came to understanding
(even as I my self with all other did also) ye saw and heard the goodly
ceremonies of the Popysh church, besides that, the advantage, honor, and
authorite, which shine and glyster therein, yea the supersticious, holiness, and
solemn Gods service, and counterfaicte kingdom of heaven, forgetting your
catholyke faith, baptism and Sacrament, and became the carnal Scolers and
young harlotts of that Leua the Archewhore (as the Comedyes say, until ye old
whores make again young harlottes, and so forth increase and augmente the Popes
ye the deuyls church, and seduce many of the right virgyns of Christ, so
borne by baptism, making them also in process of time to Archewhores. This I
suppose bespoke^ plain enough that ye and every man may understand, what we
mean. For though ye count such newelties among you for tryfles, ye which
have no god, nor regard him, nevertheless is it before god, horrible,
abominable, Idolatry, murder, hell, and al myschyef, which God can not abide,
wherefore he will conde^pne that Archeharlot for ever.

Thereof prophesied Peter, ij. Pet. ij
where as he speaks of you such new Prophets and churches.ij. Pet. ij. They
speak swelling words of vanity, and they entyse through lusts in the
voluptuousnes of the flesh, the^ that were clean escaped, but now are
wrapped in errors, They promise the^ liberte, remission and Pardon, where as
they them selves are the bond servants of corruption.

Item, They were escaped from the fylthines of the world, through the knowledge
of the Lord and of the sauyor Jesus Christ. And are yet tangled again therein
and overcome. And so is the later end worse with them then the beginnynge. It
were better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness, then after
they have known it to turn from the holy commandment, that was given unto
them. It is happened unto them according to the true Proverb. The dog is
turned to his own vomet again. The sow that was washed in her swymmynge is
turned again to her wallowinge in the mire.

This are ye, and so have I ben also. There have ye your new, of fallinge and
run away church plain enough described, and clear enough set out before
your eyes. For we knowlegs not only. That ye with us are come out of the
right Church, and have swymmed with us in bapfisme and are washed through the
Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ as S. Peter here says. But say
also that ye are in the Church, and also abide therein. Yea verily, that ye
therein sit and rule as saynete Paul prophecieth. ii. These. ij.
That the cursed Antichriste shall sit in the Tempell of God (and not in a
horse stable) etc.

But of the Church, or members of the Church, are ye no more. But in that
holy Church of God, do ye execte this your new of fallinge Church, the
whorehouse of the devil and innumerable whore domes and Idolatryes or
Newelties, whereby ye seduce, the Christened and redeemed souls with you. And
devour them through helles mouth in the botomles pytte of hell, with
innumerable flocks. To the harrible pitiefulnes and disquietnes of heart, of
all them that with spiritual eyes see and know the same.

But it is God, that through his wonderful almighty power, by you among so
many abhominatio^s, and deuelyshe whoredoms yet saves the yo^ge babes,
through baptism and some old folks, but very few that in their end have
turned again to Christ, of which sort I have known a great nombre
myself. So that for all this: The right old Church with her Baptism, and
Gods word does still remain among you. And your God the devil through so
many new Idolatries with all your deuelysshe whoredom was never able to
destroy it clean.

Church in Elias time.iij. Reg. xvij.
Even as in the time of Elias, when all (how be it they were all Gods people,
that is, such as were called the holy Church, and boasted that God which had
brought them out of Egypt) was full of Baall, Idolatrye and whoredom in all
the whole land, that there was not one altar left for God. And yet for all
that were reserved seven from thousand men, of all the multitude of thousands,
among the which were the Chyefest and the best, which went all to the devil.
And in the wilderness under Moses al dyede sauinge these two Joshua and Caleb.

Gods work is called, Consummans and abbreuians, that he saves a certain
few by his grace. When the whole multitude in his wrath perissheth whereof S.
Paul Romans x. plenteously writteth. Romans x.


Eue^ so did Daniel also propbecye long before. Da xij.
That under Anthechrist should be a time of wrath, and such trouble as never
was upon earth. And S. Paull which takes his prophecye out of Daniel even
there says also. ij. These. ij.
That God shall be displeased, and suffce to come mighty erroures, because me^
received not the love of truethe that they might be saved.

Heretics arrianes.
I pray you, let us behold our own hittories, that is, The histories of the
Christianite. Under Constantius the son of Constantyn was the indignation of
God so great, that the heretics of the Arrians, had taken in all the churches
of the world, except twa^n. And notwithstondinge at that time were the
Bysshoppes, and also the Arrians them selves learned, wise, honest, honorable,
and earnest men before the world. What should than be under the Bishop of
Rome. Where as no Bishop knows nor exercy seth his office. But lives
Epicuryshly and hoggysshly. There must needs be the very devil.

Wherefore the miserable, blind, hardened Popyshe ashes, much less
understand, What Church or God is then a Cow or Sow understands. The
church is a high, deep, hydden thing, that noman may know her nor see. But
only, must be taken and believed by the Baptism, Sacrament, and word, Man's
doctrine, Ceremonies, Shaven Crounes, long gounes Bishops battes, and the
hole popyshe rablement does lead far wide from it, eue^ into the very holl.
I omit that it should signify the Church. For to the church pertayne also
naked Children, man, woman, Ploweman and Citegen, which have neither shaven
crounes Bysshoppes hattes, nor yet mass garments upon them.

Distinction / between the right and the false Church.
Papists set as much by ma^s doctrine as by Gods word.
HEre might the papystes paradue^ture desire, yea they will have it by
compulsion. That such new Articles of their new Church, should besides the
old Articles of the old Church be observed or suffered, if not they would
have us to be heretics, and tyd out of the way. For the Popysshe Ass, is
such a dull Ass, that he neither can nor will learn to discern between
Gods word and man's traditions. But keeps both like.

This do they declare thereby. That they now often have intended, to make with
us an accord or agreement and made as though they would something abate,
and that we should also abate some what, to thinte^t that both to gether
might be stablysshed show be it they never minded the same earnestly. But
only to rent us away and to trouble us.)

Papists.
Nevertheless men may see so much therein how that they have set them selves
above God as the Antichristifshe blasphemours, Thinking that that the doctrine
should be right as long as they will. And when they will no more that then it
should no more be right. For they would have the authorite, somewhat to abate
thereof or not, at their pleasures. And even as they give it or take it, even
so should we receive it. Offringe us such an abominable filthnes, shameless,
with out any semblaunce, very openly. Whereby they them selves declare, that
they have no more a subtle devil, that rydeth them as they had a certain
hundredth yares a goue. But the co^prehe^sible Tulpyn, Clubbyshe devil, that
can couloure him self no more for iniquity.

Gods word to abate or change
For, seeing they offer them selves somthinge to abate, desyring the same also
of us, they do testify: That they regard as much, Man's doctrine, as Gods
word. It lies not in God him self to abate or change his own word. For he
can not deny and alter him self. And his word abides for ever. Wherefore
whosoever should undertake to abate or alter it, the same must needs have a
hyer Power and authorite then God him self. For he would not have altered
Moses law, if he had not before by his word promised to alter it. Wherefore
also noman will entreprise the same then the Antichriste, as Daniel. xij. and
S. Paul do say. Da. xij.
Which exalts him self above God, namely the Papacye.

What should men now handle with such people, yea with such dull and gross
asses, which suppose, that Gods word is a reed which is moved with every
blaste of wind hither and thither, whereof they have the rule. Or (as they do
rather think) that it is a counter, which after their damnable frowardnes
must signify according as they cast or lay it upon the rule. Even so
pretely do they understand, what the church is, yea even therewith show they
abounda^tly, that they despise God and his word highly and moreover set them
selves above God and can not be his Church.

The holy Christen Church. (I talk now with our own fellows. For with the
Popyshe asses. Clutters and stones, is no understanding) seeing nor hearing,
is not a reed nor Counter. No, she wauereth not, nor gives back, as the
devils harlott the Popyshe church, which like an aduou tresse, thinks that
she ought not to cleave unto her wedded husband. But that she may lawfully
swerve, give back, and admit, even as the whoremo^ger will have it. But she
is (says S. Paul) i. Ti. iij.
a pyller and ground of the truth. She stands sure (says he) and is a sure
ground. And not a false or deceyuable ground. But a ground of truth which
neither lies nor deceyueth, neither gothe about with any lies. But whatsoever
wauereth or doubts, the same can not be truth.

And whereto were a Church of God profitable and necessary in the world, if
she would waver, and be unstable of her words? Or institute every day some
new knacke, and now give this, and now take away that, yea where unto were
such a God profitable, that would teach us so to wayuer and to doubt?
Theologyes of the Papists.
as the Theology of the Papists teachet, that men must doubt of mercy.
Whereof is written enough besides. For all though the Papists in all other
causes had overcome, yet be they condemned in this Chyef Article, that they
teach. That we must doubt of the grace of God if we be not worthy enough
before, through our oune satisfaction, or merits, and intercession of
saynctes. There be their Books, writtinges and seals Cloisters, Mynsters, and
also yet their bailey shaven Crounes and masses to bear witness.

And for as much as they teach this Article, that they stoude upon their own
works and doubts, as they can none other. So is it evident, that they must
needs be the Church of the devil. Ways unto salvation.
For there can be no more ways, than these two. The one, which trusts unto
Gods mercy. The other that buyldeth upon our own merits and works. The
first is the way of the old Church, and of all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles as the scripture witnesses. The other is the way of the Roomyshe
Bishop, and of his Church. This can noman deny, no, not H.M. and all the
devils them selves. There stands (as often has been said) record, Books,
Bullus, Sealles, Vvrittinges, Mynsters, Cloisters, so that it may be testified
by all the world.

And there is S. Pet. Act. iiij. There is none other name given, whereby we may
be saved, but only Jesus Christ. Act. iiij.
Against this says the king of Rattes at Rome, No not so. But there are many
other names whereby the people must be saved, specially. Mine name after that,
all such as I will S. Frauncys, Dominyke, and all propre works that bring in
money unto me. And lay king and Emperor under foot. Here is holiness and
salvation, Christ is no more necessary nor profitable, etc.

Church of christ suffers no lies nor false doctrine.
But to come again to our matter. That the Church of Christ does not lie nor
deceive, must they confess them selves in despite of their hearts. Where
would they else become? They must say: That she is a rock Matthew xvi.
against the which hell gates can not prevail. Math. xvi.
Or as S. Paul gloseth the same, a pillar and ground of truth. i. Ti. iij.
This (I say) to grant, we thank them not. Even so says also the Creed of
the children that she is a holy Catholyke church. And S. Paull i. Cor. iij. The
tempel of God is holy which ye are. i. Co. iij
But whosoever defyleth the temple of God, him shall God destroy. Therefore can
and may the holy church a bide no lies, nor false doctrine. But she must teach
nothing but mere holiness and truth, that is only the word of God. And if
she teach any lie, then is she clean Idolatriouse and the whorys church of
the devil.

Gods service of the kings of Israel.
What did it profit unto the kings of Israel, to boaste that they served the
God of Israel, which had brought them out of Egypt. There with named and
meaned they. The very God of their fathers. And did also observe the whole law
of Moses. But for as much as they besides that, did also honor Calves or
Baal, or at the least there with, of man's imagination. Did institute new
Gods service, to the honor of the very true God So was it all lost. For
against the same was Gods commandment. Thou shall have none other God
besides me.

And Moses Deu. iiij. and xij. had commanded, Deuteronomy. iiij. xij.
that they should not pretend any newenes or alteration, or of their own
imagination, saying: What soever I command the that shall thou do. Thou shall
take nothing from it, nor put any thing there unto. Thou shall not turn
from it to the left hand nor to the right hand, That is. Thou shall neither
make it better nor worse, neither diminyshe nor alter any thing. Whereof we
read in the Prophets in diverse places, how that they rebuked kings.
Priests and the people because they invented daily new ways, and did not
abide in the right way and only pathe.

Only the way unto salvation is the word of God
For whatsoever steppeth a side from the word of God (which only is the way)
as he says, I am the way, the truth and the life, Io. xiiij.
appear it as good and fair as it may. So is it notwhitstanding doubtless,
error, lies, and death. For it is without the word of God, that is without
the way, truth and life. And what need should we have of the word, if we
without the same could find ways for our selves? Psalm. xxix.
For the word is only the lantern of our fete, and the light of our
paths, which lights in the dark places of the word, as S. Peter says.
ij. Pet. i
As that keeps not the same always before his eyes whither can he go else,
than in darkness. So that light is in darkness to the intent that we should
guide our selves thereafter in darkness.

New articles in the new papisticall church
Now let us behold the new Articles one after another, which are come up in
the new church of the Romyshe Bishop. So do we find, that they be al
without Gods word, that is without way, truth and life, only of man's
devotion or good semynge or of the Popes iniquite inverted. Therefore as the
Papisticall church is full of Pardons, propre merits. Fraternities,
worshippinges of saynctes, monkerye, masses, satisfaction, and such like of
the above named percelles, as Gods services. Even so is she therewith, full of
Errors, lies, Idolatrye, unbelieve, Murder, and summa full of all devils
churches. For they can not say that, the word of God teaches such points.

Church can not err.
But now that they must confess, that the holy Catholyke Church must be holy
and a ground of truth, without error and lies. Quia Ecclesia non potest
errare. So must they likewise confess, that they are not, nor yet ca^ be the
same holy church seeing they be full of such abominable errors, lies and
Idolatrye. But they are the very run away, depa^tinge, wicked harlott of the
devil, whom she follows and serves in such horrible lies.

But might some simple hearted soul (as men call them) say: What might it
hurt, that men kept the word of God, and did suffer besides that, all these
pieces, or at the least some of them that might be suffered, likewise also to
remain. To this I make answer. They may be called goodherted people. But they
be evil hearted, and deceyuable hearts, or people. For thou hear that it can
not be. To teach any other thing besides the word of God. To serve any other
besides God, besides the light of God ordained in darkness, to light another,
It is doubteles and erroneous wysshe, and an error, yea although it were but
one clause only.

For the church should nor can not teach any lie or error, No, not in any
point. If she teach one lie, then is it al false, as Christ says. Luce. xi.
Luc. xi. Take heed therefore that the light be not darkness in the, if now thy
body be thorouly light, so that it have no part of darkness, than shall it be
whole light, that is, it must be light altogether, and no part of darkness
there remayuynge. Only Gods word or truth, and no error, nor lie, must
the Church teach, and how were it also possible to be otherwise? sey^ge
Gods mouth is the Churches mouth, And again, God can not lie, no more can
the church also.

Distinction between the doctrine, and the life.
TRuth it is, to speak after the life, that the holy church is not without
sin, according as she knowelegeth in the Pater noster, forgene us our
trespasses. Mat. vi
And i. John. i. if we say, that we have no sin, we lie, and make God a
liar, which calls us all sinners. i. Ion. i
Roma. iij. Psalm.xiiij. and.li. But the doctrine may not be sin, nor
repronable, neither is she comprehended in the Pater noster, where we say:
forgive us our trespasses, for she is not of our doing, but even Gods own
word, which can not sin, nor do vnryghtuousely. Romans iij psa. xiiij Psalm. li.


For a preacher ought not to pray the Pater noster, nor to seek forgeuenes of
sins, when he has preached (if he be a right preacher) But he ought to
say and boaste with Ieremye, Lord thou know, that whatsoever is gone out
of my mouth, is right and pleasant unto the. Ier. xvij
Yea he must boldly say with Saint Paul and with all the Apostles and
Prophets, Hec dixit dominus, Hec dixit Dominus.
This has God spoken him self, Et iteru^, I have been an Apostle and a prophet
of Jesus Christ in this sermon.

Here is it not necessary, yea not good, to ask forgeuenes of sins, as
though he had taught vntrewely, For it is Gods word, and not my word which God
may or can not forgive me, but must confirm it, laud it, croun it, and say:
Thou have taught the truth, for I have spoken by the, and the word is mine.
Whosoever can not boaste this of his preaching, let him cease from preaching,
for he lies undoubtedly and blasphemeth God.

If the word should be syn or untrue where after should or could the^ the life
be directed? there should surely the one blind lead the other, and fall both
in the pit, if the leadlyne or square rule should be false, what should or
could the master then frame thereafter? There should the one crooked make the
other, without end or measure. Even so here also, can the life well be sin
and unrighteous, yea alas it is to unrighteous, but the doctrine must be live
right and sure without al sin. Church teaches only Gods word.
Therefore must in the church, nothing but only the sure, pure, and only
word of God be preached. If the same fail, then is it no more the church, but
the scoolehouse of the devil. Like as an honest woman (as the Prophets use
such illusyons evermore) ought to hear no more, but her husbands word within
the house and to be dwarde, for if she hear any other man's word, which
perteyneth not to her husbands bed, then is she surely a harlot.

Al these things are spoken to that end, that the church must only teach
Gods word, and be sure of the same, whereby she is called the ground and
pillar of truth, and builded upon the rock, holy and unrebukable, Church can
not err.
that is, as we say right and truly, The church can not err, for Gods word
which she teaches, can not err. But whatso^uer is taught otherwise, or
doubted, whether it be Gods word or not, thatsame can not be the churches
doctrine, but must be the devils doctrine, lies, and Idolatrye. For the devil
can not say (seeing he is a liar) and the father of lies, this says the Lord.
But as Christ Ioh. viij. says. John. viij.
Er proprijs, Out and of him self must he speak, that is lie. Even so must
also al his children, without Gods word, speak of them selves that is lie.

Now behold my dear friend, what a wonderful thing is it, that we so surely
teach Gods word, and yet be so weak and for great humilite so fearful,
that we do not gladly boaste our selves, That we be the church, witnesses,
ministers, and preachers of God, and that God speaks through us etc.
Notwithstanding that we be the same undoubtedly, for so much as we surely have
and teach his word. This lowelynes and fearfulnes comes thereby, that we do
earnestly believe, Gods word to be such a glorious and excellent thing, that
we knowelege our selves to unworthy, that through us such a great thing
should be spoken and done, which live yet in flesh and blood.

Nature of false Prophets.
But our adversaries, devil, Papiltes, seetes, and all the world, they be bold
and unshamefast, and dare folyshely proclayme, for great holiness, here is God,
we are Gods church Ministers, Prophets, and Apostles, like as al false
Prophets have done always. But lowlynes and fear in Gods word has
always ben the right token of true holy church, boldness and presumptuousnes in
ma^s imagnation has been the right token of the devil, as it may also plainly
be perceived in the papistical decrees.

This is spoken of the doctrine, whithe must be pure and sincere, namely the
dear blessed, holy, and only word of God, without any addition. But the
life, which daily must frame purifye and sanctified it self, after the
doctrine is not yet al pure or holy, whilst this worms, bag flesh and
blood lives. Samaritane. Luce. x
Nevertheless, whilst he is a purifyenge or sanctifyeng and still forth suffers
himself to be healed, by the Samaritane, and does not destroy himself
further more and more in uncleanliness, It shall be graciously, for the words
sake, through the which he suffers him self to be cleansed, remitted, freely
and clearly forgeuen, and not imputed unto him, and must be called clean. For
thereby becomes not the holy catholyke church a harlot or unholy, whylest
she cleaves purely and surely to the word (which is her holiness) and abides
in the same. Ye are clean says Christ. Ioh. xv. not for your sake. But for the
words sake, which I have spoken unto you. Ioh. xv.


Holiness of the word and pureness of the doctrine
For the holiness of the word, and the synceryte of the doctrine is of such
efficacye and surenes, that if also Judas, Caiphas, Pilate, Pope, and the
devil him self should preach the same, or truly baptize (without addition
purely and uprightly) yet nevertheless the right pure word, and the right
holy Baptism should be received, for as much as there must always be
hipocrytes, and false christians in the church, and one Judas among the
Apostles.

Impurite of doctrine
Contrariwyse, is the impuritie of the doctrine, if it be not Gods word, or
without Gods word, such an evil poisoned thing, that through S. Peter, yea
an Angel from heaven should preach it, yet is it accursed. Galat. i.

False teachers abide not in the church.
Therefore, false teachers, and baptisers, or false Sacramentaryes can not be,
nor abide in the church, as the Psalm.i. says. Psalm. i
For they do not only contrary to the life, which the church must suffer,
specially, wha^ it is secret. But also contrary to the doctrine, which must
light and shine openly, for to frame the life thereafter.

This has been taught from the beginnynge, as S. John says. i. Ioh. ij.
They are from us, but not of us. And in ecclesia sunt, sed non de ecclesia.
Item, Numerus, Sed non merito. And such like. Whereout we have this
distinctyon. They are not al Christians that have the name.
They be not al Christians, that profess the name of a Christian. But when it
comes to pass that there happens variaunce in the doctrine, then parts
the one from the other, and then appears, who be the right christians, namely
they that have Gods word syncerely and purely. Let this suffice at this
time, of the right church.

Of restitucion of the churches Goods.
IF now the Papists shall or can prove, that they are the right holy Church,
and that they have taught none of the above mencyoned whorysh Churches articles
and inventions, or have none of them, or that our Articles are not the right
old churches articles, which we have not invented nor imagyned, Then must we
needs knowelege our selves to be heretykes and steppers a side. If they can
not prove this* Then must they contrariwyse knowledge themselves to be the very
whorysshe church of the devil, which from Christ her Lord is run away,
and has suffered her self of the devil, through new and other doctrine, to
be abhomynably defiled. This after my judgment must be sure, although Jews
and Heathen, or whatsoever has yet man's wit, should be judges between us.

If they be not the Church, but the deuyls harlot, which continued not in
Christ. So is it groundely and myghtely concluded, That they ought not to
possess the church Goods. Much less to move this strife (wherewith
hitherto they trouble and disease Emperor and king) that they should be put in
again by us, and the goods restored again unto the^. For that is eue^ as
much, as if the deuyls should desire of the Angels, that they might be set
again in heaven, notwithstanding, that they know and confess, that they did
not continue Gods angels but became Gods enemies, which belong to hell fire.
Or that I speak of men, It is eue^ as much, as if a thief or murderer would
demand restitution of such money and goods as he had stolen and robbed,
which being taken from him, were laid under judgment, or were restored
again to the right owners, if not, then would he threaten to become a H. M.

But for so much as in earth in this matter is no judge, for they are become
parcyal and because the chief judges have made themselves, is their judgment
of no valor, according to al laws, and even so littell alowable, as the
judgment of us, which are the contrary part, is accepted of them, therefore
must we let it pass, and abide the right judge, But if there were a judge in
this matter in earth, should this judgment find it self, That they (of the
one party) not only have no lawful cause to demand restitution. But were
worthy to be expelled out of the world, and to be served, as the King John
served the Baalites, and as King Iosi^ did serve the priests at Samaria, and
Bethel. iiii. Reg x. xxiij.
For they are (as above is declared) before God according to the judgment of
holy Scripture, the right den of murderers, and the deuyls harlot whereout
follows, that they, the Goods of the Church, that is, of the poor
Christianite (as robbers of archechurches, and Gods thieves) have pulled unto
them, and unjustly keep them in possessyon, wherefore yet to their hynderaunce
they follow, both in body and honor, temporal and eternal destruction.

For this can a child of seven years old, yea a nyged foull, tell and reken
upon his fyngers (how be it, that the gross Popysshe ass, with his damnable
confederates, kan understand nothing) That the laudable old, Emperors,
Princes, Lords, and good people, doubteles, have not be^ of that mind, and
will to give their Goods, to that intent, that therewith should nothing but
devils harlottes, an Idolatry, be instituted, decked, and honored Much less,
that they there with should bring up and mainteyne, Soulmurtherers, church
robbers, and Gods thieves, But the dear churches and scooles, that is the holy
word of God, the office of preaching, and other service of the church,
Theologiens, Curates, preachers, besides that also poor folks, wydowes, the
co^fortles and sick to maintayn, to the praise and honor of god. Churches
goods.
For they are not called the goods of harlots, murderers, blasphemous of god H.
M. nor goods of the devil, but the goods of the church, which even now, not
only of the spiritual devils whores in the popysshe den of murderers, in
most abominable wise, by Symonye and all manner of blasphemye be bought,
sold, stele^, robbed, and consumed, but also of the corporal whores and
knaves, in most vnshamest wise be consumed and expended, much worse then was
done at Sodoma and Gomorra. In so much that they give not one halfpenny
toward the mayntenaunce of a poor Priest, Scholar or poor man, for they
be not worthy also for to do such a small good deed, But instead thereof, as
the foolyshe Epicuriens, they do mock and laugh to scorn, both God him
self, and the word of his Church. Yea this is the goodly holy church,
which yet dare boaste them selves holy, Count the churches goods for their
own, and demand restitution, but he shall not tarry long that shall give the
right restitution, unto such desperate, self willed scorners, and tyrannous
murderers.

i. But for as much as we have no judge upon earth, So will we besides that,
that we have the judgment of God the highest judge in his holy Scripture,
also use their own judgment and witness of the Papists, in the mean while
for us against them. For thus said Duke George of unworthy memory. That he
knew very well, that there is much abusyon crepte into the Church, But that
a lowsy freer out of a Cave should take in hand such reformation, were not
to be suffered, well he confesses (and doubtless not he alone) that your church
is full of abuses, that is as much, as it is not the pure right Church, For
that should be holy and pure without al additions, I omit, without any
abuse, as the Creed says, I believe one holy Catholyke Church.

ij. So have ye for your part, altogether, in the convocation at Auspurgh
desired the Emperor, to handle with the Romyshe Bishop, that he would
send no more Pardons in Douchelande, seeing it is despised. Pardon
Here do ye confess your selves, that your Pardon is a despised thing, that
is, an abuse, and Idolatrye, for if ye did count it right and good, as a pure
Gods service, ye could not with good conscience despise it, and despre to
have it abolished. There witnesses your conscience by your own word, That
your church be an Idols house and vnpure, which has served, and yet does
serve the devil, and not God, with false vile and beggerlye Pardons.

iij. Thyrdly, did even there the Cardinal of Ment^ say, what will we much
dispute, They have one Article, which we know, and can not deny, but that it
is right, namely Matrimony, and yet we can not accept the-same. And though he
of Me^tz should never say it, yet are ye your selves more so overcome in it,
that many of you, which will be the best, such things openly confess. Now
tell me: Think thou that it is a small deuyls whore, that has kept,
instituted taught, honored, and maynteyned, such a terryble Article, that is
Idolatrye in her Church, that men should count Gods creation, work,
ordinance, and blessing, damnable, accursed, and the greatest sin. What
evil more abominable could the devil Gods enemy him self institute, if
he would institute any thing against God?

How could your Church be holy by such abomination, yea, though ye
altogether hadd lived chaste virgyns, and yet hadd served such Idols. For
God did forbid it you, as a doctrine of the devil.i. Timo. iiij. i. Ti. iiij
And what fruit and holiness, such Idol and his Idol service has wrought in
your Churches, must ye your selves lament For there is Rome, the Bysshoprykes,
the hole spirituality, which bear witness, yea their sins have filled
heaven and earth with abomination and blood shedinge. Where is here your
holy Church. Which with such abomination so detestably is made a whore by
the devil?

Consilium.
And what have ye done your selves, that now ye desire a Counsayll now promise
it, now delay it, and now again say it? Is your Church holy. Why is the
then afraid for a Cou^sayll? What needs she a reformation or Counsayll? has
she need of a Counsayll why is she holy? Will ye also refourme your holiness.

We for our part did never desire a Counsayll for to refourme our Church.
For God the holy Ghoost has by his huly word hallowed our Church Long a
god, yea rather swepte away from it all Popysshe whoredom and Idolatry, that
we have all things (praised be God) pure and holy, The word pure, the
Baptism pure, the Sacrament pure, the ^eyes pure, and all what soever
belongs to the church have we pure and holy, without all man's tradition,
addition, and fylthynes. The life (as above declared) goes not fully
thereafter, as we would feign see and wys she, where upon the Prophets and
Apostles them selves also complain. But that perteyneth yonder where, as we
shall be like unto the Angels.

How be it we desire a counsayll for this intent. That our Church might be
heard, and that our doctrine might come abroad freely to the light, wherewith
your whoredom in the Papacye might be spyed and condemned, and that every man
that there by is seduced, might be with us converted to the holy Church, and
increased with us in the same. But here have, ye not the pose with your God the
devil. But ye Flyttermyse, Molles, Nightrauens, and night Owls, which can
not abide the light, let and defend with all power and craft, that it come
not there to, that the truth might come to light, be heard and handled.

Notwithstanding, God goes forward still and brings the light as broad,
yea to more ye let it, to more it does increase. That at the last ye shall be
feign to suffer it with all shame and damage. And how much that such your
fugitive, astonyed desperate, eschewinge of the light, does fear us or animate
you, let your own conscience and heart declare unto you:

For as much now, I say, ye knowledge your self and must confess, what a
fylthy Church ye have. I speak not now of the life. But of the doctrine,
that ye have so many horrible lies, and false doctrines, and besides that ye
will not leave it. So must ye consequently confess also, that ye are not the
holy Church. But the devils Curche, specially such as hold there on, and
compelle there to. For they worship the devil willingly in his lies, whylest
they know, that they be false Articles. But such things do ye even from the
highest, the Romyshe Bysshopp, down unto the loweste Priest, or freer. This is
the right kernel of the best sort, which ye in especial call your Church,
and what soever is more of your adherentes among the layte. For such as be
sorry for it, perteyne not in your deuelysshe church But in our, that is: In
the old right holy church.

Furthermore, for so much as we have such your own witness and judgment, so
can ye not call us heretics or fugitives. But must give us right, as unto the
right church which forsakes such your known abhominatio^ and false
articles. And again knowledge your selves, as the right devils church, for
so much as of your self ye fortify and keep, known abominable, and false
Articles, and compelle there unto. That ye ought not to clay me the churches
Goods to be re^dred unto you as a spoil. But that ye are bound, all such
goods a^ye yet have in your custodye, as Gods thieves and church robbers, to
forsake. And to restore and re^dre them unto the right church. And though
your forehead were never so hard and shameless, as the Prophets say, which
can not be ashamed, must ye nevertheless say your selves here in, that such
judgment is right. For at the last should also, wood, stones, mire, and donge
cry out against you. Whylest it can be none otherwise. But that an arraunt
whore, can not be on honest virtuous virgyn. Therefore ought she also to be no
church, rule no church, and have no churches goods. This is the sum
thereof.

That which is Gods, may not be gegeuen unto The Emperor.
THat they more our do call us disobedient and causers of insurrections, because
that our Princes do not obey, The^perours Edicte or commandment, where in
our Churches and doctrines are condemned. There do we boaste and thank God,
which gratiousely has kept us, that we are not found with you in such
damnable obedience. For there stands God, which forbids us, saying: Eeue
unto Cesare that which is Cesares, and give unto God that which is gods.
Psalm.cxv. he has given the heaven unto the Lord. But the earth unto the
Children of men, heaven or the kingdom of heaven goes not to love of the
Emperor. And god can not be themperours love man. But the emperor ought and
must be called gods lonema^. And as Sprach says also. God has ordained to
the lauds Dominions. But in Israel is he Lord him self: God will alone, and
him self rule in the church. Such rule did he never give from him, or out of
his hand as the, lx. Psalm. witnesses. God speaks in his holiness.

Therefore must ye Papists fight out this Article of Obedience, with God him
self, and not with us, and make us certain and sure before, that we (as ye do)
may give unto the emperor that which is Gods. Or else we will not do it. But
take your sklaundrynge and lyenge, for great joy where with ye bear us
witness, and knowledge that we take not from God that which is his, and give it
to the emperor, and so ye help us with your pestiferous lies, to boaste this
truth that we live not in your accursed obedience.

For God has commanded the emperor ye all his augels and creatures, that they
shall teach none other word in his kingdom, that is in his church as S. Paul
Gal. i. shuteth a terrible thonderbolt, saying if an Angel from heaven teach
you any other thing, the^ that ye have received, hold him accursed. Galat. i
Now have we above recyted retteyn of the innumerable newelties of other
doctrine (that is, as S. Paull does here call it, Anathema, accursing
damnation, malediction) wherewith your Popysshe new whore, and devils church
is filled. Therefore can not the Emperor nor any other creatur compel us to
such accursed obedience, yea he ought to keep him self with us from it, if he
will not with S. Paul's thunderbolt, be accursed and stryke^ into the pit of
hell.

God has committed unto the emperor enough, more than he is able to execute
namely, the kyngedome of the earth, that is body and Goods, there has his
office an end. If he above that, lays hand on the kingdom of God, then
does he rob God of his own, which is called, Sacrelegium, Sacrilege, or
Gods theft. Or as S. Paul Phil ij. does name it. Phil. ij.
Rapina^ diuinitatis. If a man be like unto God which he can not be the same,
must he inte^de to rob it. For it can not be given unto him, here to is an
only heyr alone, he has not robbed it, nor willed to rob it (as the devil
in heaven and Ada^ did in Paradys). But it is given unto him from the father
everlastingly and borne unto him by nature.

They that now do entice the good Emperor Charlles to this, or do such thing
under his Seall, be even as holy Creatures as the Serpent in Paradys. The
Emperor should continue under God. And attend to the office unto him
appointed (as well as all Creatures) For God will here, that is in the church
speak alone, and suffer none other.

Like (that I may declare it plainly) as a married man, or a brydegrome may,
will distribute many manner of offices in his house, he may call the one
servant Emperor, and the other king, and commit unto them al his goods,
to this his lands, to the other his vynearde, Cattle, fysshes, rayme^t money,
and Goods. But in the Chamber or in the Brydes bed, may no servant be
found, whether he be called Emperor or king. For that is death (says Salo.
Prouer. vi.) for that perteyneth only to the brydegrom. And here ought the
bryde to hear nor know none other word but only her Brydegromes As John the
Baptist says he that has the bryde, the same is the Brydegrome. John. iij
Even so can and will God suffer none other besides him in the church. There
should nothing, but he him self or his word be heard, or else should she
be a whore and not his Bryde.

By this may men will understand what ye Popysshe ashes make, when ye call
us Stirrers of Sedition, because we do not obey with you, the Emperors
commandments. Namely this do ye make, ye knowledge, that we leave the
spouse of Christ, immaculate to her Lord Christ, and also his bed
undefiled (...) true obedient Iosephes, Gene. xxxix.
and minister besides in our appointed Offices, Contrary wise, that ye as the
burning whoremongers and aduoutrers, that is damnable robbers of God, or
heavenly Sedicioners, do break into the Lords Bryde chamber, and will make of
his spouse a harlott. But he stryketh you with blyndnes, even as the Sodomites,
that ye can not find the door, and permits you therefore, to find whores and
Aduoutrers like unto your selves. Which obey unto you, and goo to the devil
with you.

And Su^ma, as is aforesaid? Fight it out before with God, that we may hear
and learn, somewhat else in the Church contrary to Gods word, Item, that
your above reherserd new percels, be Gods word. And that ye are the holy
Church. Then shall ye have right and we shall gladly be obedient, what does
it prevail. I pray you: That ye cry the Consequente so loud, and let the
Antecedente alone? For the stry^ is not about the Consequente, as ye mad
fowls do cry. But about the Antecedent, Ponatur, Ecclesia cer to, et
obedientia sequetur necessario. E contra, Non posita Ecclesia. Nulla sequitur
obedientia. Ex natura relatiuorum. If there be else yet a sparkle of logyke
with in you. This be at this time said of the Church against the
sclaunderous mouth of the Papists.

The three Symboles or Confessions of the Faith of Christ, used in the Church
vnifourmely.
The Symbol of the Apostles.
THe first Symbolum, or Confession of the Apostles is truly the prettyest,
which briefly and rightly comprehends the Articles of our Faith very goodly
and is also easy to learn for the children and the simple, and sounds thus.

I believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

And in Jesus Christ, his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of the virgyn Mary. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was
crucified dead, buried. And descended into hell. And the third day, he rose
again from death he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God the father almyghtie. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead.

I believe in the holy Ghoost. The holy Catholyke Church. The communion of
saynctes. The forgeuenes of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.

Symbolum Athanasij.
THe second Symbolum of Athanasius is longer, and settethoute more rychely and
plenteously the one Article, because of the Arria^s namely, that Jesus Christ
is the only Son of God and our Lord. In whom we believe even with the same
Faith, wherewith we believe in the Father, as the text says in the first
Symbol. I believe in God, etc. And in Jesus, etc. For if he were not very God
then must he not with like Faith, like unto the Father be honored. This
disputes and dryueth S. Athanasius in his Symbol. And it is a very defense of
the first Symbol.

Who so ever will be saved before al things, it is necessary that he have the
Catholyke faith.

Which faith, but if every man will keep whole and inuiolate, without doubt
he shall eternally perysshe. This truly is the right Catholyke Faith, that
we worship one God in trinite, and the trinite in unity. Neither confondinge
the persons, neither seperatinge the substance. The person of the Father is
one. The person of the Son another. The person of the holy Ghooste another.
But of the Father of the Son, and of the holy Ghoost, there is one divinity,
equal glory coeternall majesty. Such as is the Father, such is the Son,
such is the holy Ghoost. The Father is uncreate, the son uncreate, the holy
Ghost is uncreate. The Father is immeasurable, the Son immeasurable the holy
Ghoost immeasurable. The Father is everlasting, the Son everlasting, the holy
Ghoost everlasting. And not withstanding, there be not three everlasting, but
one everlasting. Even as there be not three uncreate, nor three unmeasurable, but
one vncreat and one unmeasurable. In like manner is the Father almighty the
Son almighty, and the holy Ghoost almighty. And yet be they not three
almighties, but one God almighty. So the Father is God, the Son is God, the
holy Ghoost is God. And yet be there not three Gods but one God.
So the Father is the Lord, the Son the Lord, the holy ghoost the Lord.

And yet be they not three Lords, but one Lord.

For as we be compelled by the christian verity, to confess separately every
one person to be God and Lord.

So are we prohibit by the Catholyke relygyon of Christ's faith to say: that
there be three Gods or three Lords.

The father is made of none, neither crated, nor gotten.

The son is from the father alone neither made nor created, but gotten.

The holy Ghost is from the father and the son, neither made, created, nor
gotten, but procedynge.

And so is there but one father, not three fathers, one son, not three
sons, one holy Ghoost, not three holy ghoostes.

And in this trinite, there is none before or after another, nothing more or
less.

But all the three persons be coeterne and coequal to them self.

So that by all ways as now it has been above said, the trinite in unite,
and the unite in trinite may be worshypped.

He therefore that will be saved, let him understand thus of the trinite.

But it is necessary unto everlasting health that every Christian believe also
faithfully the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It is therefore the right faith, that we believe and confess, that our Lord
Jesus Christ the son of GOD, is God and man.

He is God by the substance of the father, gotten before al worlds, and he is
man by the substance of the mother, borne in the world.

Perfect God, perfect man, being of a soul reasonable, and of flesh humayne.

Equal to the father by his Godheade, less then the father by his ma^heade.

Which though he be God and man, yet is there not twain, but one Christ.

Truly he is one, not by the turnyng of his Godheade into manhead but by
assumptynge of his manheade into Godheade.

Yea he is one, not by co^fusyo^ or mixture of substance, but by unite of
person

For as the reasonable soul, and the flesshely body, is or makes one man, So
God and man is one Christ.

Which suffered death for our salvation, descended to hell, and rose from
death the third day.

Which ascended to heavens, sits on the right hand of God the Father
almightye.

From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead.

At whose coming al men must rise with their own bodies.

And shall give account of their own propre deeds.

And they that have done well, shall go into everlasting life, they that have
done evil, into everlasting fire.

This is the catholic faith, which except every man faithfully, and
steadfastly do believe, he can not be saved.

Symbolum Ambrosij, and Augustini.
THe third Symbol should be S. Augustyns, and Ambroses and after S. Augustyns
baptism have been song, whether that be so or not, there is no danger in it,
whether a man believe it, or not. It is nevertheless a propre symbol or
confession (whosoever be the master or author) made after the manner of a
song, not only to knoweledge our faith, but also therein to praise, and to
thank God, And sounds thus.

We praise the O God. We knowledge the to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship the, the father everlasting.

To the al Angels cry a loud, the heaven, and al powers therein.

To the Cherubyn, and Seraphyn continually do cry.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles praise the.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise the.

The noble army of martyrs praise the.

The holy Church throughoute all the world does knoweledge the.

The father of an infinite majesty.

Thy honorable true, and only son. Also the holy Ghoost the conforter.

Thou art the King of glory o Christ.

Thou art the everlasting son of the father.

When thou tokest upon the to deliver man, Thou dyddest not abhor the
virgyns womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpenes of death, Thou did open the
kingdom of heaven to al beleuers

Thou sit on the right hand of God in the glory of the father.

We believe, that thou shall come to be our judge.

We therefore pray the to help thy servants, whom thou haste redeemed with
thy precious blood.

Make them to be nombred with thy saynctes in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage.

Govern them, and lift them up for ever.

Day by day, we magnifye the.

And we worship thy name ever world without end.

Vouchesafe O Lord to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy light upon us, as our trust is in the.

O Lord in thy have I trusted, let me never be confounded.

The Symbol of Nyce.
I Believe in one God the Father almightye, maker of heaven and earth, of all
things visyble and inuisyble. And in one only Lord Jesus Christ, Gods only
son, which was gotten of the father before al worlds God of God, light of
light, very true God of the very true God, gotten, not made, equal with the
father, by the which al things be made.

Which for us mankind, and for our salvation came down from heaven, And
was incarnate by the holy Ghoost, of the vyrgyn Mary, And became man,
crucified also for us, under Po^ce Pilate, suffered and buried.

And rose again the third day, according to the scriptures, and ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of the father, and shall come again with
glory, to judge the quick and the dead, whose kingdom shall be endeles. And
in the Lord the holy ghoost, which quickens, which proce death from the
father and the son, which with the father and the Son together is
worshypped, and together is glorified, which has spoken through the Prophets.

And one holy Catholyke and Apostolyke Church.

I knoweledge one baptism, to the remission of sins, and I abide the
resurrection of the dead, and the life, of the world to come.

AMEN.
A singular and fruteful manner of prayeng, used by the famous clarke Doctor
Marten Luther, and compple^ at the desire and instaunce of a special friend of
his, upon the Lords prayer, the ten commandments, and the xij. Articles
of the Christen faith, no less necessary, then profitable.
First when I feel, that through straung deeds or thoughts, I am be come
cold, and unlusty to prayer, even as the flesh, and the devil are always
ready to let and hinder prayer. I take my book of Psalms, get me into my
chamber, or if the day and time so require into the church to the
congregation, and begin mouthely by my self, to say the Ten
commandments, the Creed, and after as the time does serve me, certain
sayenges of Christ, Paul, or Psalms, even as the children do.

Therefore is it good, that the prayer be used for the first work in the
morning, and for the last in the evening. And that a man beware with all
diligence of these false deceyuable thoughts, which say, Tarry a littel
within this hour will I pray, I must do this or that before, for by such
cogitations and thoughts, comes a man from prayer upon works, which do
hold and compass him in such wise, that nothing is done in prayer that day.

And albeit that some works may be fall, which be as good as prayer, or
better, specially when necessitye does require them, as there goes a Proverb
under the name of Saint Jerome, Every work of the faithful is a prayer. And
another Proverb, he that labors or works truly, prays double. Which
must be spoken out of this ground, That a faithful man in his labor does fear
and honor God, and thinks on his commandments, so that he will do wrong
to no man, nor steal, nor circumuent or deceive any man, And such cogitations
make doubteles of his work a prayer, and besides that a sacrifyce of praise.

To the contrary whereof it must also be true, that the work of an infidel is
a mere cursyng, and he that works unfaithfully, curses double, for the
cogitacyons and thoughts of his heart are such that he despyseth God and
thinks to transgress his commandments, to do his neighbor wrong, to
steal, and to deceive such cogitatio^s, what are they else but mere
cursings against God and man, by the which his work and labor becomes
also a double curse? whereby he curses him self, and such men do also remain
at the last beggars and of no reputation. Of this continual prayer does Christ
speak undoubtedly Luc. xi. Luce. xi.
that we ought to pray without ceasyng, for we must be ware of sin and
wrong without ceasyng, which can not be done, if we do not fear God, and
have his commandments before our eyes, as the first Psalm says: Blessed
is that man, which thinks on the law of god night and day. Psalm. i.


How be it, we must also beware that we do not use our selves from the right
prayer, and prescribe unto our selves at the last, necessary works, which
notwithstanding are not to the purpose, and are thereby at the last made
slouthful and unlusty, cold and yrkesome or loathsome to prayer, for the devil
is not slouthful nor unlusty or ydel about us, Also our flesh is yet to
quick and iocunde inclyned and proved to sin, and against the spirit of
prayer. Job.i. i. Pet. v


Now when the heart is warmed thorough such speaking of the mouth and is come
to it self, Then knele down, or stand with thy hands folden, and thine eyes
erected into heaven, and say or think in the shortest manner, that thou can.
Oh God our heavenly father, I am an unworthy pore sinner, Lu. xviij
not worthy to lift up mine eyes or hands toward the, or to pray,
notwithstanding forasmuch as thou have commanded us al to pray, and also have
promised to hear us, and besides that have taught us thy self, both words
and manner, through thy dearly beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ, I come
upon this, thy commandment, to be obedyent unto the trustyng to thy gracyous
promise, and in the name of my Lord Jesus Christ, I pray with all thy holy
Christians in earth, as he has taught me. Mat vij Luc. xi. Ioh. xiiij xv. xvi.
Mat. vi Luc. xi.


Our father which art in heaven etc. Hole out from word to word. The first
Peticyon.
After that repete one piece, or as much as thou will, namely the first
peticyo^. Hallowed be thy name and say. Oh Lord God and merciful Father,
vouchesafe I beseech the to sanctifye thy name, both in our selves, and in all
the world destroy, and put down al abhominacyon, Idolatrye, and heresye of
the Turk, of the Pope, and of al false doctrine, and erronyous spirits,
which falsely bear thy name, and so shamefully abuse it, and so abhominably
blaspheme it, saying and boastyng, that it is thy word and the churches
commandment, notwithstanding that it is the lie and deceyt of the devil,
whereby they seduce so many poor souls in all the world under thy name, and
besides that also kyl, shede innocent blood, and persecute, thynkyng thereby
to do the a high service.

O Lord God, here convert and let, Convert them, that yet shall be
converted, that they with us and we with them may sanctifye and praise thy
name, both with pure and true doctrine, and also with a good holy life and
conversation, And resist, or let them, that will not be converted, that they
may cease to abuse, blaspheme, and dishonor thy holy name, and to seduce the
poor people, Amen.

The second Peticyon. (Thy kyngedome come) saying.
Oh Lord God, mercyful father, thou see that not only the wisdom and
discretion of the world blasphemeth thy name, and gives thine honor to the
lie, and to the devil, But also al their power, might, richesse, and honor,
which thou have given them upon earth, to rule in the world, and to serve the
with the same, is set and stryueth against thy kingdom, they are great, mighty,
and many thick fat and full, and plage, hinder, and destroy the small heap
of thy kingdom, Those that be weak despised and feawe, will they not suffer
upon earth, and think nevertheless thereby to do thy a high Gods service. O
Lord God father almightye here convert and resist, Convert them that yet
shall be children and members of thy kingdom, that they with us, and we with
them, may serve the in thy kingdom in true faith, and perfect love, and may
come out of this kingdom into everlasting kyngedome. And resist them that
will not suffer their power, and might to be turned away, from the destruction
of thy kyngedome, that they being deposed from their seat, and being humbled
may cease. Amen.

The third peticion. (Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven) saying.
Oh Lord GOD father almighty, thou know that the world, if she can not
bring thy name to naught, ^ destroy thy kyngedome, imagines wickedness night
and day, vsyng many crafty Imaginations and diverse subtle devices,
counsaylynge and whysperynge together, they consorte and strengthen them
selves, threatenynge and cursynge, being full of all evil will against thy
name, word, kyngedome and Children, how they may destroy the same. Therefore
oh Lord God and Father, convert and withstand. Convert those, that shall
yet know thy good will, that they with us, and we with them, may be obedient
unto thy will, and upon the same, willingly, patiently and gladly suffer, all
evil, cross and adversity, and may herein know, prove and understand thy
bountiful gracious, and perfect will. And withstand them that will not
desiste and cease from their furye and ragynge, hatynge, threatenynge, and
evil will to do mischief. And dissipate and confound their counsayll their
wicked imaginations and devices, that they fall upon their own heads, as
the.vij. Psalm syngeth. Psalm. vij
Amen.

The fourth Peticion. (Give us this day our daily bread,) and say.
Oh Lord God Father everlasting, grant us also thy blessing in this
temporal and bodily life, give us graciously thy peace, defend us from war
and enemitie. Give unto our souetain Lord the King and Protector prosperity
and health against his enemies give them wisdom and understanding, that the
may govern his terrestrial kyngedome quietly and healthfully. Give to al
kings, Princes and Lords good counsayll, and will to entretayne their laud
and subjects in tranquillite and good justice, specially help and further our
sovereign Lord the King under whose protection and defense thou do preserve
us, that he being preserved from all evil, false from false tongues and untrue
subjects may rule godly and bleffully. Give to all subjects grace truly and
faithfully to serve and to obey, Give unto all estates citezens and
husbandemen that they may be good, and deal lovingly and faithfully one with
another. Give gracious wether, and fruits of the field. I commend also unto
the house, farm, wife and child, help that I may will rule them, and Godly
educate an bring them up. Withstand and hinder the destroyer, and all wicked
Angels that do hurt and hynderaunce herein, Amen.

The fyfte peticion. (Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive the^ that
trespass against us,) and say.
Psalm, cxliij.
O Lord God Father almighty, enter not into judgment with us, for in thy
syghte is no man lyuinge righteous. Oh count it not unto us for sin that we
(alas) are so unthankful for thine inestimable benefits ghoostly and bodily,
and that we do daily stumble and sin many times, more than we know and can
perceive. Psalm. xviij.
Psalm.xviij. But regard not good Lord how good or wicked we are. But have
respect to thine inestimable mercy given us freely in Christ thy dearly
beloved son. Forgive also al our enemies, and al them that do us displeasure
or wrong, even as we also forgive them withal our hearts. For they do thereby
unto them selves the greatest displeasure, in that they offend the in us. And
we have no pleasure in their destruction. But would rather se them saved with
us Amen. And whosoever feleth him self here, that he is not ready and willing
to forgive, may call for grace, that he may be willing to forgive. But this
belongs to the Sermon.

The syxth petition. (And lead us not into temptation,) and say.
O good Lord, God Father almighty, keep us wakyng^ and lusty, fervent and
diligent in thy word and service, that we do not wax ydell slothful and
unlusty, as though we had now all things, that the rompinge devil do not
begyle and overtake us, and spoil us again of thy most holy word, or stir
up discord and Sects among us, or lead us otherwise into sin and shame,
both spiritually and corporally, but give us trough thy Spirit, wisdom and
power, that we may valiauntely withstand him, and get the upper hand of
him, Amen.

The seventh peticion. (But deliver us from evil,) and say.
O Lord God Father almighty. This miserable life is so full of Calamities and
wretchedness, so full of periculositie and unstableness, so full of infidelity
and iniquity (as S. Paul says. The days are evil) Phil. i. Gal. ij. vi.
that we should by reason, be weary of this life and desirous of death. But thou
O Father know our weakness. Therefore help us to go safe thorough such
manyfolde euilles and iniquities, and when the time comes give us a gracious
hour, and a blessed departinge out of this valley of wretchedness, that we do
not fear death nor be faint hearted, but may commend our souls into thy
hands with a sure and steadfast faith, Amen.

Last of all mark that thou must always make the Ame^, strong, and doubt
nothing. But that God is thine undoubtedly with all his graces, and say yea to
thy prayer. And think that thou do not knele and stand there alone. But
the universal Christianite or all righteous Christians with the, and thou
among them in an uniform prayer, which God can not despise. And go not from
thy prayer before that thou have said or thought. This prayer is heard in the
sight of God. This do I know surely and undoubtedly. That is, Amen.

Also thou shall know, that I will not have all these words spoken in the
prayer. For thereof should at the last grow babbling and a vain mo^belinge,
being read out of the book after the letters, even as our Ladies Psalter
has been among the lay people, and the prayers of Priests and Monks. But I
will thereby have the heart stirred and instructed, what cogitations or
thoughts it ought to use in the Lords prayer. But such thoughts or
cogitations can the heart (when it is through warm and lusty to pray)
express well enough with far other words, yea also with fewer or more
words. For I my self also, will not be bound to such words and sillables,
but speak the words to day thus, to morrow otherwise, according as I am
warm and lusty, how be it as uere as I can, I abide by the same sense and
meaning. It comes also often to pass that I come in one point or peticion,
into so plenteous digressions and thoughts, that I leave all the other six.
And also when such rich and plentyfull cogitation, come we ought to let the
other prayers alone and to give place to such cognitations and to hear them
gentely, and not to hinder them in any wise. For there preaches the holy
Ghoost him self. And one word of his preachinge is far better than a
thousand of our Prayers. And I have also oftentimes learned more in one
prayer, than I could have gotten by much readinge, and enditynge.

Therefore lies the greateste vtilite in this, that the heart be made void and
lusty to prayer. As also Eccles^. says. Eccli. xviij.
Before thou prayeste, prepare thy soul that thou be not as one that tempts
God. What is it else but to te^pte God, wha^ the mouth babbleth and the heart
is scatered else were? Esa. xxix.
As one Priest prayed, which prayed on this wise. Mat xv
Deus in adiutorium meum intend, servant have thou, made ready the carte?
Domine ad adiuuandum me festina. Maid go thy ways, and milk the cow. Gloria
patri and filio and spiritui sancto. Run hoerson that a mischief on the etc.
Of which kind of prayers. I have heard and known many in my days in the
Papacye, and all their prayers for the most part be after that sort. Thereby
is god but mocked, and it were better that they did play in stead of such a
prayer. If they would or could do no better thing. For I my self have
Prayed many such horas Canonicas in my days (which now I Lamente) that the
Psalm or hours was at an end, or ever I was were, whether I was in the
beginning or in the myddeste of it.

And although they do not all come out with it so rudely myng lynge their
busynes with theirprayers by mouth as the above named priest, did yet do they
so in their thoughts, casting the hundredth among the thousand, and when it
is out, they know not what they have done, or how they are come to the end,
they begin at Laudate, and by and by their minds run at rouers, so that I
think, that no ingling can come before any man, which should move him more to
laugh, than if he might se the thoughts, which a cold, undevout heart,
choppeth together in prayer. But now I see well enough thanks be to God, that
it is not well prayed, if a man forgette what he has said For a right prayer
thinks on all the words and thoughts from the beginnynge, unto the end of
the prayer.

Like as a good diligente barber must have his mind and eyes very sharply
fixed, and attendaunt upon the rasoure and upon the hears and forgette not,
where he is in shauinge or cuttynge. For if he should be full of words and
bablinges, or think and look some other way he might cut away a man's
mouth and nose, yea also his throat. So hole will every thing have a man, if
it shall be done as it ought to be done, with all his wits and members, as
men use to say. Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus. He that
thinks many manner of ways, thinks nothing at all, neither does he any
good. How much more will prayer have the heart alone, hole, and only, if
else it be a good prayer.

This is brefely spoken of the Pater noster or prayer, as I am wont to pray my
self. For even yet at this day I suck on the Pater noster, as a Child, eat
and drink as an old man, and can not be satisfied of it, and it is also to me
the best prayer, eue^ above the Psalter (whom not withstandinge I love not a
littel). Truly, it appears that the right master has ordained and taught
it. And it is pity, and great pity, that such a prayer of such a Master,
should be so babbled and blabberede, without all devotion in all the world.
Many men pray paraduenture every year certain thousands of Pater noster. And
though they should pray so a thousand years, yet have they not tasted nor
prayed oue lettre or tittel thereof. Summa, the Pater noster is the greatest
martyr (as well as the name and word of God) in earth. For every man does
plage and misuse it, few there be that do consorte it in the right use.

But when I have time and place before the Pater noster. I do also in like
manner weth the Ten commandments, and rehearse one piece after another, that
I may be made apt. (As much as is possible) to prayer. Making of every
commandment four parts, or a fourefolde garlande As I take every
commandment, first as a doctrine, even as it is in him self, remembringe.
What our Lord God therein so earnestly requires of me. Secondely do I make a
thanks geuinge thereof. Thirdely, a confession. Fourthly, a prayer, namely
thus, or with such like thoughts or words.

I am the Lord thy God, which have brought the out of the Land of Egipte, out
of the house of bondage. The first commandment. Thou shall have none other
Gods but me. Thou shall make thy no graven Image, neither any similitude that
is in heaven above either in the earth beneth, or in the water, under the
earth. Thou shalt not worship the^ neither serve the^ etc.
Here do I think, First that God requires of me, and teachet a hartty
confidence in him, in all things, and it is his great earnest, that he will be
my God, and so must I take him upon pain of damnation. And that my heart
should not trust nor buyld upon any thing else, whether it be goods honor,
wisdom, power, holiness or any creature. Seco^darely, I do thank his infinite
mercy, that he so fatherly gives him self to me damned creature, here
benethe, and offers him self to me vndesyred, unsought for and undeserved,
to be my God to care for me, and will be my conforte, defense help and
strength. Notwithstanding that we pore blind creatures have sought so many
manner of Gods, and yet should be feign to seek, if he did not cause him self
so openly to be heard and did not offer him self unto us in our humayne
language, that he would be our God. Who is ever able sufficiently to thank
him for this? Thirdely do I confess and knowledge my great sin and
unthankfulness, that I so shamefully throughout al my life have despised, and
littel regarded this hoo^some doctrine and excellent gift, and have so
abhominably with innumerable Idolatries provoked his wrath and indignation,
wherefore I am sorry, and cry for mercy. Fourthly do I pray, saye^g: Oh my God
and Lord help me through thy grace, that I may daily better learn and
understand this thy commandment, and do thereafter with a hearty confidence,
keep my heart, that I be no more so forgetful and unthankful, that I seek
neither trust nor conforte in any other Gods, nor in any Creature. But that
I may continue only, syncerely and purely by the mine only Lord God and
Father, Amen.

After this (if I have time and space) the second commandment, also digested
into four parts, on this wise.

The second commandment. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain. For the Lord will not hold him gyltelesse that takes his name in
vain.
First, I do learn, that I must keep the name of God Glorious, Holy and clean
that I shall not swear, curse or lie thereby, that I shall not be proud
seeking mine own honor and name, but that I shall humbly worship adore,
praise and boast his name. And let all this be mine honor and reioysinge, that
he is my God, and that I am his poor creature, and unworthy servant.
Secondarely, I do thank him of his glorious gift, that he has reveled and
given me his name, that I may boast of his name, and be called a servant or
Creature of God, etc. That his name is my refuge, as a sure hold (as Solomon
says) to the which the Righteous does fly, and is saved and defended.
Thyrdely, I do confess and knoweledge mine abominable and grievous sins,
which I have committed against this commandment, from my youth where as I have
not only left worshipping, boastinge and honouringe of his name, but also have been vntha^keful for such gifts, and have abused the same to al manner of
ungraciousness, with swearing lyeng, deceyuing. etc. Wherefore I am sorry, and
desire grace and mercy etc. Fourthly, I do pray for help and strength, that I
may from hence forth learn this commandment, and keep my self from such
shameful unthankfulness, abuse and sins, against his holy name, but that I
may be found tha^keful, and in the true fear and honor of his name.

And as I have said before in the Pater noster, so do I admonysshe again,
that in case the holy Ghooste should come among such thoughts, and begin
to preach in thy heart with rychely illumyned cogitations, Then give him the
honor, let these cogitacyons go, which thou have taken in hand, be still, and
hear him, that can do it better than thou, And whatsoever he preaches, the
same mark, and note it, then shall thou se marvelous things (as David says)
in the laws of God.

The third commandment Remember the Sabbath day, that thou sanctifye it.
Herein do I learn first, that the Sabbath is iustituted, not for to go
ydell, nor for carnal pleasures, but that he should of us be sanctified, but
through our works and doings is he not sanctified, for our worhes are not
holy, but through the word of GOD, which only is (...) hole pure and holy,
and sanctifyeth all whatsoever is accompanied with it, whether it be time,
place, person, work, rest. etc. For through the word are our works also
made holy, as Paul says. i. thy. iiij.
i. Thy. iiij. That also al creatures are sanctified through the word and
prayer, Therefore do I knowledge herein, that at the furthest upon the holy
day, I ought to hear and to remember the word of God, and after that to
thank him in the same word, and land him for all his benefytes, and to pray
for my self and all the world, whosoever does thus use him self upon the holy
day, does sauctifye the Sabbath day, he that does it not, does worse than
they that labor or work upon it.

Secondarely I do give thanks in this commandment, for this great fair
been fyte and grace of God, that he has given us his word and preaching, and
commanded us specially to use it upon the Sabbath day, which treasure no man's
heart is able sufficiently to remember, for his word is the only light in
the darkness of this life, and the word of life, of conforte and of al
salvation, And wheresoever this sweet and wholesome word is not, there is
nothing, but fearful and horrible darkness, error, corruption, death, all
evil, and the Deuyls own Tyranny, as we see daily before our own eyes.

Thyrdely, I do confess and knoweledge my grievous sins, and my shameful
unthankfulness, that I have so lewdely spent the holy days in my time, and so
contemptuousely despised his holy word, and have been so stouthful, unlusty and
loathsome to hear the same. I omit that I should have desired it most
heartily, or that ever I should have given him thanks for it, and so have
suffered my dear Lord and God to preach unto me in vayn, not regardyng this
noble treasure, but treading it under my fete, which he has suffered of me
with mere godly patience and bountyfulnes, and has not therefore ceased from
preaching unto me stilfurth, and from calling me to the salvation of my soul
with all fatherly and Godly love and faythfulnes, wherefore I am sorry, and cry
for mercy and forgeuenes.

Fourthly, I do pray for my self, and for all the world, that our heavenly
father vouchesafe to keep us by his holy word, and not to take the same from
us, because of our sins, unthankfulness and slouthfulnes, That he will
preserve us from all sectysshe and erronyous spirits, and false doetrynes, and
send us faithful and true laborers in his harvest, that is, true and good
curates and preachers, Give us grace also, that we may humbly hear, receive
and honor the words of them, as his own word, and besides that may heartily
thank and laube him for it.

The fourth commandment. Thou shall honor thy father and thy mother.
First do I learn here to know God my creator, how wonderfully he has
shapen me with body and soul, and given me life through my pareutes, and has
given them the mind that they as the fruyie of their body have served me, with
all their power, brought me into the world, educated me, te^ded me, governed
me, and brought me up with great diligence, care danger, labor, and travail,
and has preserved me his creation unto this hour in body and soul from
innumerable dangers, and necessities, and has also oftentimes delivered me
from them, as though he created me a new every hour. For the devil would
not have us live the space of one moment.

Secondarely, I do thank our rich and bountyful creator for me self and for all the world, that in this commandment he has instituted and preserved the
increase, multiplication and entretaynement of mankind, that is, house and
Town, being or oeconomyam, and Politiam, for without these two beynges or
regimentes, the world were not able to continue one year, seeing withoure
worldely governance, there can be no peace, where no peace is, there can be no
house hold, where no household is, there can neither children be brought
furthe nor educated, And the estate of fatherhode and motherhode should
altogether cease, But therefore is this commandment ordained, which keeps
and entretayneth both housekepyng and Townekepynge, and commands the
children, and the subjects obedience. It does also look to it, that it be
done, or if it be not done, it leaves not the transgressors unpunished, If
this were not the children through their disobedience would have destroyed and
made waste the housekepynge long a goo, and the subjects through their
sediciou in like manner the Towneshyp or Townekepyng, for so much as the number
of them does far excede the number of parents and rulers, Therefore is this
benefit also inexplicable. Thyrdely, I do confess and knoweledge mine
execrable disobedience and sin, that I contrary to this commandment of my
God, have not honored nor obeyed my parents, that I have oftentimes angered
and troubled them, and have taken their fatherly correction vnpacientely,
murmured and grudged against them, despised their true exhortacions and
admonicions, and have rather followed wicked persons and evil company,
notwithstanding that God himself curses such disobedyent children, Exo. xx
and denies them long life, even as we se very many that therefore do
perysshe before they attain to man's state, for whosoever will not obey his
father and his mother, must obey the hangeman, or else otherwise lost his
life wickedly through Gods indignation. etc. For all these things am I sorry
and I pray for grace and mercy.

Fourthely I do pray for my self, and for all the world, that God will give
his grace, and pour out his blessyng plenteously, both over the houskepynge,
and over the Townekeping that we from hencefurth may wax good, keep our
Parents in honor be obedyent to the rulers, withstand the devil, and follow
not his entysynge to disobedience and discord, and so help with the deed to
amend house and land, and to entretayne the peace to the laud and praise of
God, and to the vtilite and profit of our selves, and that we may knoweledge
these his benefytes, and thank him for them. Here ought also supplication to
be made for our parents and magistrates, that God will give them
understanding and wisdom peaceably and godly to defend, and to govern us,
That he will preserve them from Tyranny, furye, and vntragyousnes, that they
may seek the honor of Gods word, and not persecute it, nor do any man
wrong, for such great gifts must be obtained by prayer, as Saint Paul
teaches, or else is the devil the highest Abbot in the court, and it goes
evil and wyldely to work.

And when thou art also father and mother, than is it here time that thou
forgette not thy self, nor thy children and familye, but that thou pray
earnestly, that our mercyful father, which has set the in the honor of his
name and office, and will have the also called father, and honored, will give
the grace and blessing, godly, and christenly to rule and to educate thy wife,
children and familye, give the wisdom and power, well to bring them up, and
give them a good heart and will, to follow and to obey thy doctrine. For the
gifts of God are both children, and the good proof of them, both the well
chaunsynge, and the continuynge of them in goodness, else should a house be
none other, but a hogs stye, yea a scoolehouse of unthrifts, as we may se
by the ungodly rude people.

The fyfthe commandment. Thou shall not kylle.
Here do I learn first, that God requires of me, that I should love my
neighbor, so that I should not hurt him in his body, neither with words,
nor with deeds, nor revenge me self upon him, or endamage him, through anger,
impacience, envy, hatred or any malice, but should know that I am bound to
help, and to counsayll him in all the necessities of his body, for he has
commanded me by this commandment, to keep my neighbors body, and
contrarywyse commanded my neighbor to keep my body, And as Syrach says, he
has committed unto every one of us his neighbor.

Secondely, I do here thank the unspeakable love care and faythfulnes
toward me, that he has ordained such a great, strong, defense and wael
about my body, Psalm, xxxiiij.
that al men are bound to favor and to defend me, and contrarywyse I also
toward al me^ in like manner, he does also straightely command it to be
done, and if it be not done, he has commanded the swearde to be used for the
punysshement of them that do it not, To. xiij.
else if this his commandment and ordinance were not, the devil would make
such a murder among men, that noman should be one hour in sanegarde of his
life, even as we se, it come to pass, when GOD is displeased, and punyssheth
the disobedyent and unthankful world.

Thyrdely I do here Confess, and lamente mine and the worlds iniquity, that
we are not only so unthankful for these his fatherly love, and care for us,
but also that (which is to shameful) we know not these commandments and
doctrine, neither will learn them, but despise them, as though they pertayned
not to us, or as though we had no thing to do with them, being also
careless, and making no conscience of it, that we do so despise, forsake, yet
also persecute and hinder our neighbor, contrary to this commandment, or
also kyl him in our hearts, followynge our anger fearsnes and al iniquitye,
as though we did well in it. Truly here is it time to lament and to weep over
us wicked persons, and blind, wild, ungracious people, which tread,
pusshe, scratche, rent, byte and eat our selves one among another, as the
unreasonable and fear beasts, not fearing this earnest commandment of GOD.
etc.

Fourthely, do I pray, that our merciful father will teach us to know this
his holy commandment, and help, that we may also guide our selves to live
thereafter, Save us all together from the murderer, which is master of all
murder and destruction, and give his plenteous grace, that the people (and we
with them) one with another may be frendelye meke and gentle, and that one
may heartily forgive another, and that the one do Christenly and brotherlye
bear the others fault and burden, and so live in true peace and unite, as
this commandment teaches and requires.

The sixte commandment. Thou shall not break wedlock.
Here do I learn again what god requires of me, and what he will have of me,
namely, that I should live chastely, honestly and measurably, both in
thought, word and deed, and leave every ma^s wife, daughter and maid
undefiled, but help, deliver, defend, and do al whatsoever partayneth to the
preservation of their honor and honesty. Also help to stop the ungracious
months, that do cut away or steal their honor or honestye. For all this I am
bound to do, and God requires of me, that I shall not only leave my
neighbors wife, and his undefiled, but also shall be bound to help, to keep,
and to save his honor and honestye, even as I would that my neighbor should
do to me in like case, and use this commandment toward me and mine.

Secondarely I do thank the heavenly father for this his grace and benefyte,
that with this commandment he takes in his tuition, protection and defense,
my husband, son, servant wife, daughter, maid, and commands so
earnestly and strayghtly, that they shall not be defiled, for he gives me safe
conduyt, He does also execute it, and leaves it not unpunished, although he
should do it him self, noman escapes him, he must either pay it here, or
else at the last receive his reward for such pleasures in hell fire. For he
will have chastity, and will not suffer adulterye, even as we se daily in all
impenitent and ryotous people, that at the last they are ouertake^ by the wrath
of GOD and shamefully destroyed, or else it were not possible to any man to
keep his wife, child or family one hour in honestye and clenlynes, for the
unclean spirit, for they would use mere dogs feasts, and bestyal a
co^uersacion, even as it comes to pass when God in his displeasure
withdraws his hand, and lets all things go at large.

Thyrdely, I do confess and knowledge my sins (and the sins of all the
world) which I have done against this commandment, all the days of my
life, whether it be in thought, word, and deed, and have not only ben
unthankful for this his goodly doctrine and gift, but also have murmured and
grudged against god, that he commanded this clenlines and chastity, and has
not left all manner of uncleanliness and vngraciousenes at liberty and
unpunished, have also despised and condemned wedlock etc. Even as the sins
of this commandment are of al other the rudest and most known, which are
not hydden nor covered. Wherefore I am sorry etc.

Fourthely, I do pray for my self and for all the world, that God will give us
grace, to keep this commandment with lust and love, that not only we may
live chastely our selves, but also help and counsayl other thereto.

Even so do I proceed with the other commandments, if I have time and space,
or if I amlusty, for as I have said, I will have noma^ bound to these my words
or thoughts, but only have showed mine example, which may follow, whosoever
will, or amend it whosoever can, and take before him at one time all the
commandments, or as many as he will, for the soul when she desires a
thing, be it good or bad, if it be earnest unto her, can think more in the
twynkelinge of an eye, than the tongue is able to speak in ten hours, and
the pen to write in ten days, such a swyfte subtle and mighty thing is
the soul or spirit, therefore can she soon execute the ten commandments
throughout all the four parts when she will, and is earnestly disposed.

The seventh Commandment. Thou shall not steal.
First do I learn here, that I shall not take my neighbors goods, nor have
them against his will, neither preuely nor apearily, that I shall not be untrue
nor false, in occupyenge, seruinge or labouringe, whereby I might get my
goods theuysshely, but shall live and earne my lyuinge in the sweat of my
brows, and eat mine own bread with all truth. Genesis iij
Ite^, that I should help, that my neighbors goods through the above named
poynctes be not taken away from him. I do learn also, that God by this
commandment does, assure and defend me my goods, of Fatherly care, and
great earnest, for so much as he commands, that nothing shall be stolen
from me. And if it be not obeyed, he has ordained a punysshement for it, and
has committed the gallows, and cord to master John, or if he can not, than
does he punysshe him self, that at the last they must become beggars.
According to the common proverb, he that loves to steal in his youth goes
a begginge in his age. Item, wrongfully gotten goods do not prospere. And
evil gotten, evil spent.

Secondarely, I do thank his truth and goodness, that he has given to me and
to all the world such a good doctrine, and therewith also protection and
defense. For if he did not defend, noman were able to keep one penny, or a
morsel of bread in his house.

Thirdely, I do confess al my sins and vntha^kefulnes, how soever I have
done any man wrong or falsehode, all the days of my life. etc.

Fourthely, I do pray that he will give grace, that I and all the world may
learn and remember this his commandment, and also take amendment thereof,
that there may be less stealing robbinge, spoylinge, falsehode, and wrong and
briefly, that through the later day (to which end the prayers of all saints
and Creatures are directed Romans viij.) an end may be made of al. Ame^.

The eight commandment. Thou shall bear no false witness against thy
neighbor.
This teach us First, to be true one to another, and to eschew all manner of
lies and schlaunders, gladly to speak and to hear the best of other. And
hereby is a wall and defense ordained for our good name and innoce^cye
against the evil mouths and false tongues, which also God suffers not
unpunished, as has been said of other Commandments.

Therefore ought we to thank him both for the doctrine and for the defense
which he gives, is so graciously by this commandment.

Thirdely ought we to confess and to desire mercy that we have so
vntha^kefully and synfully spent all the days of our life, with lyenge, with
false and evil tongues against our neighbor. Whom notwithstanding we owe
delyueraunce and preservation of all his honor and innoce^cye, even as we
would be done to our selves.

Fourthly, we pray for help to keep this commandment from hencefurth and for
a wholesome tongue, etc.

The nynth and tenth commandments. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors
house, nor his wife, etc.
This teaches us first, how that we by no color of right or Justice, shall
put our neighbor besides his goods or whatsoever is his, but help, that he
may keep it, even as we our selves would, that other men should do to us.
And it is also a defense against the spiteful inventions and prankes of the
wittye men of the world which nevertheless at the last have also their
punysshement.

Secondarely ought we to give thanks for it.

Thirdly, to confess our sins with sorrow and repentance.

Fourthly to pray for help and strength that we may wax good, and keep these
commandments of God.

Whosoever now has time superfluous, or else is Lusty, may do in like manner
with the Creed or believe, and make a fourefolde garlande thereof. But the Creed
has three great Principal parts or Articles, according to the three persons
of the Godly Majesty, even as they are divided before, and also in the
Catechismus.

The first Article of the Creation. I believe in God the Father almighty, maker
of heaven and earth.
Here shyneth first a great light in thy heart. If thou will have it. And
teaches the with few words that, which can not be expressed with all
tongues, nor written with many books, Namely what thou art, whence thou come,
and whence heaven and earth do come. For thou art the creation, making,
Creature and handy work of God. That is, of thy self, and in thy self, art
thou nothing, can nothing know nothing, and art able to do nothing. For
what wast thou a thousand years a gone? What was heaven and earth six
thousand year agone? Even so hole nothing, as the thing is nothing, which
never shall be made. But whatsoever thou art knoweste, can or may, the
same is the creation of God, even as thou do here confess with thy mouth,
wherefore thou have nothing to rejoice of before God but that thou art
nothing at all, and that he is thy maker and creator, and can turn the to
nothing every momente. Of this light knows the imagination of man nothing
at all. Many high learned men have sought and searched, what heaven and earth.
Man and creature might be, but they have not found it. But here says our
belefe, that God made all things of naught. Here is the pleasant garden of
the soul to walk in, in the works of God, how be it, it is to long to
writ of it at this time.

Secondarely, ought we here to give thanks, that we through the goodness of God
are made of naught, and are daily preserved of naught such a goodly creation,
which has body and soul, discretion and the fine wits, etc. and ordained
Lords and rulers over the earth, fysshes, fowls and cattle. Hither belongs
the.i.ij. and.iij. chapter of Gene.

Thirdely ought we to confess and to lamente our unbelieve and unthankfulness,
that we have not regarded believed, remembered nor knowledgede the same, worse
then the unreasonable cattle. etc.

Fourthely, to pray for a true and sure faith, that we may from hence-furth
earnestly believe and take the true God for our Creator, according to the
saying of this Article.

The second Article of the redemption. And in Jesus Christ his only son our
Lord. etc.
Here shyneth again as great a light, and teaches us: How we are redeemed
through Christ the Son of God from death wherein we are fallen after our
creation through the sin of Adam, and must eternally perysshe. And here is it
time, like as in the first Article thou must also count thy self for one
among the creatures of God and doubt nothing therein. Even so must thou
count thy self also for our among them, that are redeemed and doubt
nothing at all. And set by every word the first word (our) as Jesus
Christ our Lord, even so like wise, our suffered Our dead, our risen,
that he be all hole ours. And that thon art also under the same our, even as
the word it self does give it.

Secondarely we ought heartily to give thanks for this great grace and be glad
of this redemption.

Thirdely, bitterly to Lamente and to confess our shameful unbelieve and
doubtefulnes, concerning this grace, Oh what a heap shalt thou find here
for to remember, how much Idolatrye thou haste used contrary to this, with so
many seruynges of saynctes, and innumerable works of thine own, which have been quite and clean against this redemption.

Fourthely must thou pray that God will keep the by the true and sincere faith
in Christ thy Lord, from hence forth unto the end.

The third Article of the Sanctification. I believe in the holy Ghoost, etc.
This is the third great light, which teaches us. Where this Creator and
redemer in earth externally is to be found and to be taken, and where al
things shall become at the last, whereof there were much to say: And briefly
this is the sum. Whersoeuer the holy Catholyke Church is, there is found
God the Creator, God the redemer, and God the holy Ghoost, that is to say:
which daily sanctified through forgeuenes of sins, etc. And the Church is,
whersoeuer Gods word is truly preached and knowledged of this faith. Here
haste thou again many things to remember of all that the holy Ghoost does
daily exercise in the church. etc.

Therefore give here thanks, that thou art also come and called into this
Church.

Confess and Lamente thine unbelieve and unthankfulness, that thou have not
regarded all this. And pray for a right sure faith, which may continue and
abide, until thou come where as all thing shall continue for ever, that is,
after the resurrection of the dead in the life everlasting.

AMEN.
A prayer against the Pope and the Turks, the Mortal enemies of Christ and
of his Church.
Heavenly Father, full well have we deserved, to be corrected of the.

But correct us Lord thy self according to thy mercy, and not after thy
fury. It is better for us to give our selves into the correction of thy
hands, than in the hands of men or of the enemy, as David prayed also. For
great is thy mercy. We have sinned against the, and have transgressed thy
commandments.

But thou God almighty Father know, that we have not sinned against the
devil, Pope, or Turks. And that they also have no authorite nor power us to
correct. How be it thou can and may use them, as thy fearful scourge,
against us, which against the have offended, and deserved all myschief.

Yea dear God, heavenly father, we have done no sin against the^, wherefore
they might lawfully punyssh us. But much rather would they, that we with the^
most abhominably should sin against the. For they regard it not, if we to
the were disobedient, blasphemed the, used al manner of Idolatry (as they do)
and went about with false doctrine, false faith, and with lies, and committed
against the aduoutry, uncleanliness, murder, theft, robbery, Sorcery, and al
manner of enyl. But this is our trespass against them, that we preach, believe,
and knowledge the, God the father to be the only true God, and thy well-beloved
son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy ghoost, to be one only God, yea
this is the sin that we commit against them, but if we should deny the,
then should the devil, world, pope and turcke fulwel leave us in rest,
according to the saying of thy dear Son, if ye were of the world, the
world would love her own. etc.

Here show thy mercy, O merciful father over us, and earnest judge over our
enemies, for they are more thine enemies then ours. Because that when they
persecute and stryke us, then do they persecute and stryke thy for the world,
which we preach, believe and knowledge, is not ours, but thine, and the work
of thy holy ghost in us.

The devil will not suffer such things, but in stead of the he will be our god,
instead of thy word he will stablis she lies in us. The Turk will set his
Machometh in the rowme of thy dear son Jesus Christ. For he speaks evil of
him, and says: That he is no right God, and that his Machomet is hyer and
better then he.

If it be sin, that we hold, knoweledge and boaste the father, and the Son
and the holy Ghoost, for the true only God, Then art thou the sinner thy
self, which workest this in us, and commaundest us to do it. Therefore do they
hate, stryke, and correct thy self, when they for such matters, do hate
stryke or punysshe us.

Wherefore awake O Lord God, and sanctifye thy name, whom they blaspheme,
strengthen thy kingdom, which they distourbe in us, and let thy will be done,
which they will quench in us, and suffer not thy self so to be troaden under
fete for our sins sake, of them, that do not correct our sins in us, but
would quench in us thy holy word, name, and work, to the intent, that thou
should be no God, and have no people to preach, believe, and knoweledge the.
Vouchesafe o Lord gracyously to hear this our petition, and do according to
our believe and trust, By the dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ, which
lyneth and raygneth, with the and the holy Ghooste world without end.

AMEN.
FINIS.
Seek peace and ensue it.

Psalm. xxxiij. i. Pet. iiij. printer's device of Walter Lynne

Imprinted for Gwalter Lynne, dwelling upon Summers kaye, by Byllinges gate. In
the year of our Lord God. M.D.Xlviij.

Cum Gratia, et Priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.


