THE PHAENIX IN HER FLAMES. A TRAGEDY.

The Scene, Arabia.

The Author, Master William Lower.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Micha^l Young, 1639.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, MY Most honored Cousin, Thomas Lower Esquire,
humbly; Health and Happiness.
Sir,
IT was once disputed within me, whether to give this poor Phaenix birth or
burial, whether to commit her to the fire, and suppress her in her ashes, or
let her ascend again in her own nature and live; there was only one reason
to persuade the former, and that was your favorable and courteous approbation,
diverse considerations to urge the later, but the chiefest of all her
imperfections. I have adventured notwithstanding by virtue of your patronage,
to expose her to the public view and censure of the world, no longer now
behaving my self as I have scene a timorous young soldier at his first
entrance in the war, ducke down the head at every shot of the enemy, but
rather as a bold and experienced Martialist under your Colors, run
resolutely on up to the Canons mouth of the most carping and most malicious
Critic whatsoever, needing no other fortification then your protection, which
is a sufficient guard and defense against their strongest invasion. Cherish
this innocent bird that flies into your bosom for sanctuary, respect her for
her rarity, though she can plead no other merit, and in lieu of such noble
favor, she has vowed (when she expires) to make her self in her flames your
sacrifice, as I

Your servant, WILLIAM LOWER.

Prologue.
THis air shall be perfumed, and every sense
Delighted with sweet smelling frankincense
And aromatic fumes: for please you know,
Gentle Spectators, from our Scene does grow
Abundance of such fragrant stuff, you will see
A Play that breathes Arabian spicerie,
And such a doleful story as may take
Your minds to see a Prince and Princess fate
Presented, and their hard adventures shown,
Yea make you weep, and think they are your own:
Our Poet fears none but the common wits,
Who think a Sceane's not good unles it fits
Their merry humors with some apish toys,
And peevish jeasts fancyed by girls and boys,
Despised by abler judgments, who desire
A sad and solid matter, such a fire
Is kindled for you here; we fear no blame
Shall brand our Phaenix in her Funeral flame.
Dramatis personae.
The King of Arabia. Amandus Prince of Damascus. Consolario his Tut^ur. A
Colonel of his. A Gentleman of his. Perseus Prince of Persia. The Ambassador
of Egypt. Alecto Nephew to the King. 5 Thieves. Rapinus. Captains of the
thieves. Praedarius. Lucinda Princess of Egypt. Sara her Maid. Phaenicia
daughter to the King. Saba her Maid. Her Doctor. Besides Messengers and
attendants.
The Phaenix in her Flames. A Tragedy.
Actus Primus, Scena Prima.
Amandus, Consolario. Cons. SIr, do not grieve, it is the chance of war,
Cheer up, and triumph in despite of fortune,
What falls without the compass of redress
To sorrow for, argues a feeble spirit,
And it does nothing suit your Princely mind
Too much to yield to passion.

Amand. I confess,
Moral Philosophy does teach as much,
And you have given me precepts, read me lectures
Of fickle fortunes mutability,
How madly, and without consideration,
She does confer her favors, yet my sufferings
(How great you know my faithful Consolario)
Are of that nature, as but counterpoiz'd
In equal balance with weak humane frailty,
They would in spite of my resistance weigh me
Down, down unto she ground.

Cons. How noble Prince,
Your passion has unrectifi'd your mind,
And lead you into error, did you never
Read and believe what Scipio Affricanus
Said unto some commanders of his army?
That he did show a greater magnanimity
In mastering the affections of his mind,
Then in o'rethrowing armies, conquering kingdoms.
Apply this noble Roman, to your self,
Sweet Prince Amandus, what although your state
Be desperate now, your Country almost ruined,
Your army fled, and your chief City strait
Besieged by these Barbarians, if you can
Bear with a constant patience what the will
Of heaven does lay on you, no doubt you shall
Purchase a greater glory to your self
By manly suffering what yon cannot help,
Than Geolon the Tartar, though the fates
Surrender fair Damascus to his hands.

Amand. Why should the partial fates be so unjust,
So cruel to me? had my fortune been
Good as my right, the lot of grief had fallen
Upon another soil: and thou my Country,
My dearest Country, had not felt these wrongs,
These miseries of war thou now sustainest;
The careful husbandman had then enjoyed
His harvest to himself, and reaped the fruits
Of his own labors, had not seen his house
Burnt to the very ground, his Vineyards spoiled,
His fields laid waste; the woeful father then
With bleeding heart had not beheld his daughter,
His fairest daughter ravished in his sight,
And his chaste wife lie prostituted to
The lust of common soldiers, whilst al^^
He stands spectator of the loathed Scene,
Whose death at last shuts up the tragedy:
These things had never happened if my c^^se,
Had been considered, nor this (...) Ci^y
(Whose lefty turrets wrap themselves in clouds)
Had never been begirt thus round about
By foreign foes.
Enter a Gentleman with a letter. What news bring you my friend?

Gent. Sir, heavy news, this letter will inform you
Sent from the Governor, which to bring hither
In a disguised shape, I passed the guards,
The trenches and the camp of Geolon,
With thousand hazards of my life, all which
I reckon not to do my Noble Prince,
My Prince Amandus service.

Amand. You are welcome,
And we congratulate your safe arrival;
But in what state did poor Damascus stand
When you departed thence? how victualled?
How furnished with ammunition was it?
How long can it hold out? first I will hear
Your sad relation ere I break the seal.

Gent. O Sir, I Am sorry my unworthy mouth
Should be the organ to convey a sound
Unto your Princely ears, so harsh as this,
So doleful, so unpleasant, I would rather
Be silent in a story of such woe;
Yet since you do command me, know my Liege
The City is distressed for want of food:
All their provision is consumed and spent,
And nothing left for to sustain their lives.
These two months have they fed upon the flesh
Of horses, dogs, and cats, now they are driven
To such an exigent, as they begin
To eat sod leather, yea the excrement
Of men and beasts, and which is more, their flesh,
Their proper flesh: this day within Damascus,
I saw a sight which grieves me to relate,
It did appear so horrid, 'twas a woman
With hunger pined* who had not eat a bit
In seven days space of any ^ustenance,
Fore'd with her knife to cut her infants throat
That sucked upon her breast, to satisfy
With its sweet flesh her ravenous appetite:
And for the ammunition of the town*
As powder, bullets, match, and such materials
O^ war, it is almost spent, for three years ^^ege
Cannot but empty well the magazine;
Yet notwithstanding all this misery,
(Such as the like I think was never heard
Or seen in any age) they are resolved
(So much their loyal hearts affect their Prince)
Never to yield the town, so long as any
Survives to make resistance, and despise
All quarter, all reward that has been offered
By Geolon the Tartar*

Amand. Cons^^^^o,
Where are you now with your Philosophy?
You Are gone, you are gone, will you preach patience yet
To wretched me your pupil? can you open
Your mouth to that ^^^ect in such a deluge,
In such an inundation of my woes?
No, it is in vain, I can receive no comfort:
Open ye watery sluices of mine eyes,
And let out tears enough to drown my heart,
My heart that is gaul'd for poor Damascus sake,
And my dear friends within: O had the heavens
Showered cataracts upon me, had their plagues
Drunk up my moisture, till my shattered bones
Had crumbled into dust, had I excused
My country with my fall, my peaceful ashes
Had filled their urne in silence, whereas now
Even life is tedious.

Consol. Sir, I am your tutor,
And I must chide you though you are my Prince,
When I perceive you err as now you do
Through weakness of your you^* e^^e I should show
No love nor duty, these gray hairs of mine,
Which time has turned into a silver hue,
Know something of the world, and my experience,
How ere you slight it, has seen many changes
And alterations wrought in mighty states.
I have waded through the various passages
Of a long life, and therefore can instruct
Your youth in the right way, if you but lend
An ear unto my counsels: hark my son,
I Will tell you plainly, you degenerate
In this intemperance of your grief,
From the brave stock of your progenitors,
Your royal predecessors; fie for shame,
Wrong not your virtue to be desperate,
O bury not in the forgetful grave,
Nor drown in this Laethean flood your glories,
Your former glories purchased on your foes
By your so often relieving of your country*
Rowse up your drowsy spirits, and mitigate
Your swelling passions, till I find a way,
A way to cure your sorrows.

Amand. Heaven reward thee
For this sweet Balsom thou have powered into
My wounded heart, your words have eased me of
A great part of the burden which oppressed me,
And I refer me wholly to your wisdom,
To perfect what you have so well begun;
Now to my letter, here is sad matter sure.
Opens and reads the letter. Sir, so miserable is the state and condition of
the town for want of food to sustain us (as this bearer can more particularly
inform you) that unless we have speedy relief, I fear Damascus will be
taken in upon an assault, for our me^ are so weak through hunger, as they are
scarce able to come up and visit the breach, notwithstanding we are resolved
rather to dye there, then surrender: so much we prefer your good before our
own safety.


Amand. Now Consolario, what will you advise me
To do in this extremity of fate?
Hark how the Ordnance battereth the walls
Of yond fair City, how the Musketeers
Discharge whole volleyes; it is some salley sure,
Made by the brave besieged; how do I talk,
They are too weak, too feeble to attempt it,
Poor hunger-sterv'd souls; may it not be
A Mine sprung in the rampire of the town,
And an assault made? O I fear it is so,
My mind presageth ill, mine arms, sa, ^a,
I Will once again attempt for to relieve it,
Although repulsed last.

Consolar. Sir, it is in vain,
They are too strong entrenched for your weak power
To make an entrance, had you not experience
Too sad, last time by l^sse of your own blood,
And slaughter of your men, what folly 'twas
For to attempt impossibilities?
You may fall on, and loose your self and soldiers
Unnecessarily, and to no purpose:
But this yon cannot term true ^ortitude,
But rather rashnes^e and temerity;
For it is a policy in war, sometimes
For to preserve your soldiers, as it is
At other times to put them upon service:
But it is not proper now, stay and attend
The sequel of this business.
Enter a Colonel. Colonel,
Can you inform the Prince what did occasion
The shooting that we heard now nee^ the town:
V* as it a sally* or a triumph made
By the Tartarians for their good success.
In conquering this Kingdom?

Colo^ Neither Sir,
But an assault alas upon Damascus,
A soldier that escaped, told me the manner,
And thus it was: After the enemy
Had sprung their Mine, which levelled the rampire,
And made a breach that eight might march in front:
They did assault it with their multitudes,
And furiously fell on: thrice the besieged,
Though hunger-sterv'd, repulsed them, thrice they were
Enforced to quit the breach, some had their brains
Dashed out with stones and beams, others with flailes
Received their deaths, and some whose limbs were rent
To pieces with grenades, but at length,
Fresh succors from the quarters coming down,
And Hydra-like increasing, they prevailed,
When all our men were slain in the defense,
Before they entered: only this poor soldier
Escaped whilst they were pillaging the town,
From whom I learnt this sad intelligence.

Amand. Now fortune do thy worst, and if thou can,
Make me more wretched, I Will no longer now
Fl^tter thy malice; since mine eyes have seen
The final period of my Countries fate.
Come Consolario, thou and I, and these,
Will travel like poor pilgrims through the world,
For I am weary of this desolation,
And as we pass through this and to'ther Realm,
We will inquire their state, that I may find,
If possible, a partner in my grief.
Dear Colonel, dismiss that little Army,
That little remnant which the wars has left me;
Bid each man seek his safety where he can,
And tell them if Amandus ere may hope
To see a change of fortune, and enjoy
Hereafter better days, he will then think
Upon their faithful service, and reward them,
When all these gusts of sorrow are blown over,
In ample manner. Now let us obey
Our stars, and follow where they point the way.

Exeunt. Rapinus, Praedarius. Rapin, Brother Praedarius, could thou not find
in thy heart to turn Orator now, and bestow thy best Rhetoric in praise of
our most noble profession.


Praedar. If my education, friend Rapinus were answerable to my desire, I
should write whole volumes upon that subject, so much am I taken with it.


Rapin, How right you jump upon my humor, for when I do reflect with
judicious eyes upon the poor state and condition of our former life, and weigh
it with this glorious change, I magnify my self beyond measure for
entertaining such brave sparks of honor and true fortitude in my breast, which
has kindled my affections to these worthy exploits.


Praeda. And now since you bring that into our remembrance, let us consider
what poor mechanic rascals we were, under what slavery we lived, how oppressed
by hard and u^urping Landlords, and the like?


Rapin. All this is true, and much more we suffered, but how are these times
altered since? how do we live now my friend? nothing inferior in command to
the King of Arabia himself; are not all these mountains ours? these caves and
forests ours? these deserts and wildernesses ours? are we not safe in these
fortifications from the greatest powers that can possibly invade? we need not
now fear the King nor his imposts, he shall now make us amends, and pay
tribute of all such goods as pass this way under our jurisdiction.


Praedar. Tribute say you? it shall be tributus t^^alis, not a part, but all
shall be confi^cated to our use: all travelers whatsoever, whither Arabians,
Jews, Turks, Persians or Egyptians, whose occasions bring them hither either
as pilgrims to Maecha, or as convoyers o^ rich merchandise over these deserts,
must here be content to do hom^g^* and unload their commodities to enrich the
brave montaneers.


Rapinus How commendable therefore i^ this course of (...) how profitable unto
us, as when w^^lth and rich boot is as it were every day offered to our
possession, nothing is required from us but a little valor to make us masters
of infinite treasures.


Praedar. And what care we though they brand our foreheads with the names of
robbers, thieves, out laws, rebels, renegados, and such like, whilst we live
rich and brave and enjoy our pleasures.


Rapin. True, but we can give our selves when we list other attributes,
taking upon us the glorious name of soldiers, which we worthily merit in
exposing our lives, to purchase wealth and honor, to so many hard and
dangerous enterprises.


Praedar. Rightly spoken, for confirmation whereof witness so many skarres
upon our bodies, so much treasure in our Caves, so many Captives in our
chains, all symboles of our mighty darings.


Rapin. But I marvel we have had no doings today, will there be no Market
think ye? no travelers? no carriages? no Camels, no Dromodaries? no boot?
it was not wont to be so, how comes this change in the name of Mahomet, what is
the clock prithee Praedarius?


Praedar. It cannot be less then six, for Apollo has left dallying with
Aurorae more then an hour ago.


Rapin. By Fermagant this is strange, we were wont to be at our prey as soon
as they at their play, how comes it we hear not from our sentinels we sent
out to discover.


Praedar. Hark I hear them coming, they should bring good news by their
joyful acclamations.


Enter four or five of the thieves with shouts and cries. Rapin. What news
soldiers, are there any travelers stirring this morning, or Caravanes driving
over the mountains? speak quickly, we are rusty for want of action.


1 Thief. Noble Captains as we sa^e to discover the plain, from the top of
yonder mountain, we might perceive to descend great troops of people, but
the distance of the place suffered us not to discern whether they were
travelers, pilgrims, or merchants.


Rapin. Which way come they, and whether do they bend their course?


2 It should seem they come from Alexandria, and are traveling toward Ormus,
for they take that way.


Rapin. Then they are rich witho^t question; courage my hearts, we shall be
all made by Mahomet; need we animate them Praedarius with an Oration?


Praedar. It will not need, for you see no dullness in them to the business,
too much whe^ting will take of the ^dge of their courages.


3 Captain Rapinus.


4 Captai^e Praedarius.


5 What do you mean to delay the time so long in talk, and let this rich boore
in the mean time slip out of ^ur hand^.


Rapin. It Is well considered, and we are glad you are So forward in the action;
now my friends Let Us fall one bravley, thus I do dispose you; Some 50. shall
lie close in ambuscado Behind the thicket that is within the valley; Discover
not your selves before you hear Their Cammels pass beyond you, then break
forth And give a sudden onset; fifty more Shall be obscurd from sight behind
the mountain That lies upon the right hand, and commanded If it stand with the
liking of Praedarius By his discreet conduct; the rest with me Shall guard the
passage over the bridge, and lie Along the crystal River, which so gently
Glides on the left hand by the (...) foot. There is no other passage but those
three, Which thus blocked up, the prey must needs be (...); Now every man unto
his charge; we aim ^ our attempts at naught (...)


E^^unt. Enter Rapinus and Praed, again with their rabble of thieves, and the
boot brought in in bags. Rapinus. Have we not reason my masters, to adore
the deity of Fortune, for still favoring our attempts, sure we are much
indebted to that goddess for her continual blessings, and we should be very
ungrateful if we did not acknowledge it.


Praedar. We are in a double manner bound to her courtesy. First for this
wealth, next for sending such a cowardly guard to convoy it, for had they
behaved themselves valiantly, we had not been masters of our prey, but
returned home well beaten for our labors.


Rapin. But no more of this, I am glad we have it: now we will divide it
equally among our selves; your share Praedarius shall be the Jewels and Plate,
the Money, Merchandise and other commodities shall be evenly distributed
amongst our men, and for mine own part I desire nothing but the fair Lady.


Praedar. Ha the fair Lady I must not condescend to that, she is my prisoner
taken by my own hands, and therefore belongs to me as a guerdon of my
valor, take you the jewels, and leave me the Lady.


Rapin. By Termagant thou art a villain, and shall not live an hour for
contradicting my will.


They both draw. Give up all claim to her, or thy life Praedarius.

Praedar. Never, thou shall write that resignement with thy blood, and seal it
with thy heart.


Rapin. Then have at thee -- they fight.


1 Forbear good Captain Rapinus.


2 Captain Praedarius what do you mean, will you kill one another for a
woman, a pox on her, let her be common to both, peculiar to neither, enjoy her
alike by turns.


3 She will find you both employment enough I Will warrant you.


4 She looks like a free mettall'd beast that will not faint in a double
careere.


5 When you have spurred her sufficiently, and she begin to grow dull for your
service, turn her over to us that we may back her.


Rapinus She shall be mine, and who dares lay claim to her besides, forfets
his life.


Praedar* She shall be only mine maugre the devil himself.


1 Assuage your furies (I beseech you) and let me decide the business
between you, since you both claim her particularly to your selves, and
neither will yield thereunto, refer your selves to the Ladies own choice,
and be content to stand to her election.


Rapin. I am content -- I know I am the properer man -- aside.


Praedar. I subscribe to it willingly -- she must needs choose me for many
respects, whose deserts cannot but be discerned by her affectionate eyes --
aside.


Rapin. Methinkes I am embracing her dainety body already, whilst thou
Praedarius stand'st as an envious spectator of my happiness.


^raedar. Alas poor fool how thou art deceived, thou imbracest Ixion like but
a cloud in thy imagination, while the Lady Juno the true substance is reserved
for me; mark thou the event to thy shame Rapinus.


Rapin. I come Lucinda, thy Rapinus comes
To court thy beauty, who in spite of fate
And all the opposition of the world
With this right hand will guard thee, though a troop
Or armed Fiends stood up, grant me but Love
I Will hold thee then though rivalled by Jove.
Exit Rapi^us.
Praedar. But that I know Lucinda never will gra^^
When she perceives Praedarius rivals him
Her lovely guardian, I do see her eyes
Dart amourous glaunces on me, and her hate
To him shall be discerned in his fate

Exit Praedarius. 1 Thief This is good they are gone and left all the boot
behind, but twill not be amiss to discover if the coast be clear or no. Ha,
ha, ha, they are gone sheere away by this light, was it not sport camrades to
see them fight one with another, what fools were they to fall out in that
manner and leave this unregarded?


2 Let them still disagree so, we fare the better for it, if this occasion had
not happened we had fingered but a little share of this wealth, I can tell ye.


3 This bag is mine.


4 And this is mine.


1 But where is my part then?


2 And mine, by Mahomet we will not be thus used.


1 This is good in faith, whilst we are talking you are taking, my masters you
are best let us share with you, give me this bag Sirrah.


2 And me this, or by.


5. It Is in vain to strive, you shall get nothing that way but blows, do you
not know that possession is a main^ point of the Law.


1 Cheat us and jeere too, Rogues our parts are your heart^ -- they fall
together by the cares.


Rapinus, Praedarius. Praedar. How now what is the matter here, fighting about
the prey, we'll have you all hanged for this you slaves.


1 Thief. Good Sirs be patient, and by your good savours, let me tell you we
did but follow your example, and we know it is a chief maxim in war that
Soldiers are bound to follow their Leaders.


2 Besides Sirs our quarrel bears a better color with it then yours, being
for gold and jewels, yours but for a pretty Wench, pardon our saucy talkings.


Rapin. Well for this time we pardon you, yet because you shall learn next
how to behave your selves better, and to make use of a booty when it is offered
unto you, we will case you of this burden, come your bags, Sir your bags.


Praedar. And yours Sir, dispatch we must have them all,
Henceforth my friends agree, and differ not
In the division of your boot, nor give
The world occasion to traduce our fame
By confirmation of this proverb old,
When thieves fall out, true men come by their gold.

Exeunt. Finis. Actus primi.
Actus Secundus, Scena Prima.
Perseus, Embassad^ur of Egypt. Perseus What should I think my Lord of this
delay,
That holds so long the Princess of my life,
My fair Lucinda from me, do not you
Measure the time, and wonder what should be,
The occasion of her stay? me thinks it is strange!

Embas. I wonder not at all Prince Perseus,
Nor scarce expect her yet, for but consider
The distance of th^se kingdoms, and the tract
Of ground 'twixt Egypt and the Persian Realm,
And you must then conclude that this is not
A work of three days journey.

Pers. Then my hopes
And languishing desires to see my love
Err in the computation of the time,
Fancying three days three years, but by your leave,
Was It not reported in this Court of Persia
More then a moreth agone that she was ready
With her Egiptian train to take her journey?

Emb. It Is true 'twas so reported, yet it might
Be a false rumor, grant the contrary
That truth and it concurred, yet many things
Happen you know between the cup and the lip.
The Princess then might have been indisposed
To health and sick and so unapt to travel,
Or else he royal Father and my king
(Which heavens defend) might be affected with
His old disease, and she loath to depart
Before he had recovered better state;
Innumerable other things might happen
Which now I cannot think of, but suppose
She had at home no let or interuption,
Yet must they pass the red sea, or be forced
To come about by Istmus overland,
Then travel through the deserts of Arabia,
Which is a tedious way and not so soon
To be o'recame as you suppose it is.

Perseus. It may be so, my Lord Ambassador,
These are the reasons or such like as these,
But my Prophetical my Delphick mind
Prompts me alas unto another cause
More probable, I fear that glorious Orb
Where my fair star moves in (I mean your land,)
Made glorious by her luster, and envied
By all the neighboring kingdoms round about,
Should now grow proud, and scorn her beams should grace,
Besides their own, another Hemisphere,
What think you Sir of this?

Embas. It cannot be
Your princely mind should harbor such conceit,
To think our land so dull, as not to see
The greatness of this empire, and the honor
Egypt receives to match with Persia;
But I interpret o^herwise your speech
Applying it unto the power of love,
Whose force is such as it will draw a man
Into Poetic raptures,

Perse. I approve
Your judgment in the art, when I but name
Lucinda, that bare sound strikes heavenly music
Into my soul, and makes my thoughts harmonious,
Each syllable therein is a strong charm
To hold me in the labyrinth of love;
Fairest Lucinda why do thou with-hould
The day so long, and suffer Perseus
To live in night wanting thy wished presence,
^ill thou appear I can behold no sun
No beam of comfort, that bright wagoner,
Who does begin his progress in the East
And ends it in the West, each day surrounding
The compass of this lower world, infuses
No light into my senses, for he stays
To borrow some of the^; bright star appear.

Embass. Now Sir I see love has divinely wrought
Upon your inward faculties, that could
Beget so high a strain as you have used
In admiration of the loud obeict;
Put love they say is ^urse of poetry.

Pers. I think no less for for ere I was in love
Before Lucindas beauty kindled had
A sacred fi^e in my enflamed breast,
I knew not what it was to poetize,
But now I Will cloth my lines in sable weeds,
And vent my thoughts in an Elegiack name,
I^le sing sad songs until my mistress comes
For to inspire me better; O I cannot
B^are with her absence, what think you my Lord
Is she upon her journey^ that I may
My self in person with some ^roopes of horse
Ride sorth to meet her on the way as far
As the wild deserts of Arabia stretch
To safe conduct her hither.

Embass. Noble Prince
I do believe she wants no strong convoy
To guard her over the mountains, and more strength
Added, I think would be superfluous,
For ^ure the King knowing the passage well
How danger^us, how long and troublesome
Would never consent she should go weakly guarded,
But you may do your pleasure.

Enter a Messenger in haste. Pers. Friend, what news
Bringst thou unto the Court? what speaks thy face
Commixt with dust and sweat?

Messeng. Redouted Prince,
It speaks in characters a story which
Will make you sad to hear, and me to speak,
Which thus I read unto you, our fair Prin^esse,
The beautiful Lucinda traveling through
The Country of Arabia, for to meet
Her happiness in Persia with a guard
Of some few horse and foot, was set upon
By soldiers, what they were I do not know,
Their number was ten times as much as ours,
Yet we so long resisted as we could,
Until the most part of our men were slain,
Then some were forced to save their lives by flight^
Some three or four, no more of which small number
I write my self, who took my journey hither
Alone to give you notice what befell us;
Let not my news great Prince, exclude my welcome.

Embas. But what befell the Princess all this while,
Her Ladies and attendance?

Messen. Taken prisoners
By two that seemed to command the rest
With all their plate and jewels.

Embas. Know you not
In what part of that fatal soil befell
This sad disaster, or by whom 'twas done?
Was It in Arabia faelix, or desert,
Or Petrea else?

Messen. 'Faith Sir I was never
There in my life before, nor did I then
Enquire the true denomination of it,
And therefore cannot satisfy you in
The thing you do demand^

Embas. But you can tell me
The nature of the place and Country, then
I Will satisfy my self: was it sweet and lovely,
Perfumed with spices and rich Frankincense,
Or was it a rocky soil, and mountainous,
Wild, unfrequented, full of caves and dens,
Of wood and desert, you can tell me this?

Messen. I Am sure it was not spicy, for it had
A bitter smacke, we proved it to our cost,
Some never could digest it: Frankincense
There was not any, I should smell it then:
Mountains I saw, and unfrequented paths,
Resembling well a desert: this is all
I can inform you of by circumstance.

Perseus. How Is this? am I awake, or in a dream?
Dead, or alive? what Apoplex was that
Tied all this while my tongue from breaking forth
Into wild exclamations? O my heart!
My better part, Lucinda prisoner!
Heavens what a sound is that, no death so fatal,
So doleful to my thoughts, Lucinda taken
By thieves and out-lawes, worse, and Perseus
Uncertain where she is, still worse and worse.
What shall I do, dye? that were to no purpose,
And leave her unredeemed: no, I Will first
Raise a great Army, and lay waste that soil,
That fatal soil which first procured my woe:
I Will cut off this distinction of three names,
Arabia faelix, Petraea, and Deserta,
And bring them into one, and that is the later:
Cosmographers shall never divide the land
Into three parts, Arithmeticians neither
Shall work it as a fraction, but entire,
An entire ^umber, termed by all deserta:
The Phaenix shall no longer harbor there,
Or if she do, we will destroy the Spice^
Where with she always built her funeral pile
To burn her self to ashes* and the^^by
Hinder a second birth: what will we not
Do to revenge this wrong? the worst of ils
That can be thought of is not bad enough
For to afflict that Country which detaines
My fair Lucinda from me: I have not
The patience to dispatch an Embassage
And to expect reply: I Will go my self
And by my armies march, my cannons mouth,
My trumpets warlike sound, my beating drum,
The King shall know the business why I come.

Exeunt. Amandus, Consolario, Colouell, Gentleman. Amand. Then you dismissed
the army.

Colon. As I was
Commanded by your Highness, so I did.

Amand. But did you tell my loving friends and soldiers,
That in this grateful heart of poor Amandus,
Was treasured up their love and faithful service,
Never to be forgotten.

Colon. Sir, I was not
Wanting in the least part of my commission.

Amand. How did they take my leaving them, and this my separation.

Colon. At the first unkindely,
Because you would not take them as a guard
To safe conduct your person, yet when I
Enforced your love by binding arguments,
They did submit unto your will, and stood
No longer to dispute it.

Amand. Yet their hearts
Were grieved I make no question, for their loss
And desperate fortunes.

Colon. Not so much my Lord
For their own fortunes, as for yours appeared they
Troubled in mind, for when I drew them all
Into a Ring, and told your mind unto them,
From every common soldiers eye, gusht forth
Rivers of tears, and after from their hearts,
Brake forth these exclamations: O my Prince,
My dearest Prince, why should the partial heavens
Deal so unjustly with thee, or their malice
Injure thy goodness? why will thou depart
So weakly guarded, and expose thy self
Yet longer naked to the stroke of fortune?
Why should we be excluded (...) thy pre^ence?
Yet since it is his pleasure, we will no longer
Dispute the reasons why, but yield unto it:
Heavens prove propitious, let his smiling stars
Shed pleasing influences over his head,
And guide his journey, let the froward fates
See and repent the wrong they did unto him,
And recompense his loss with interest
For all his sufferings: O what cause have we
To grieve for him, for never in any age,
Have subjects boasted (...) a sweeter Prince.

Amand. This makes me melt again, and to deplore
Their miserable state and sad condition
That were so touched with mine; but Consolario,
What desert soil is this, that so well suit^
My desert mind? what solitary land
That mockes my far more solitary heart?
What air do we now breath in?

Consol. Sir, this Country
Is termed the deserts of Arabia
Where we now travel in.

Amand. Not that same Country.
So famous for the Phaenix and her nest,
And for that second Phaenix, rare Phaeni^ia,
(Far more to be admired then the first)
The Arabian Kings fair daughter.

Consolar. No my Lord,
That Is called Arabia ^aelix, this deserta,
So infamous through thefts and ^^bberies
Committed on all travelers by the thieves
And out-lawes of the Country, who frequent
These Caves and Mountains, this and the other part
Make but one kingdom, 'twas not my advice
You came this way, you know I told you of
The danger by the robbers.

Amand. Prithee tell me
What should they rob from me that I should shun them?
What have I left that I should fear a thief?
A jewel, two or three, poor paultry toys
To loose, when I before have lost a kingdom:
You Will say they will take my life, alas they will not
Be so compassionate to ease me of
A burden so despised, under which
I faint, and panting breath this air of woe.

Consol. Nay good my Lord, no more of this discourse,
You promised once a manly resolution
To tugge with fortune, will you fall again
Into relapse of grief, and sad remembrance?
How poor this shows in you!

Amand. Well, I Will forget it,
And find some other talk: you told me now
This was a part of fair Arabia,
Termed deserta, and another part
Hight Faelix, there is another yet besides,
Or else the history is false that writes it,
How name you that?

Consol. That Sir is Petraea,
So called of Petra, the chief City in it,
Or else because it is rocky.

Amand. Which of these
Arabia faelix, Petraea or deserta
Is that sweetsoyle so much commended for
Her gummes and spices, odours, and perfumes?
I Am sure it is not this.

Consol. No, that is Faelix,
And rightly bears it that denomination;
For it is a happy Country, no delight
But flows abundant there, embroydered ^ields,
Fair meadows, pleasant groves, clear cristall brooks,
Sweet lovely Cities, garden^ diapred
All over with Flora's richest tapestry,
Are seen there all the year, continual spring
Dwells in that coast, white hoary bearded Hyems,
Never shakes his snowy tref^es, nor his frost
Nips the fair flowers that beautify her breast,
Nor boisterous Bor^as with his winter blasts,
Shakes her fair fruit, but delicate Favonius
Creeps gently over her fields with flowery breath
Creating gummes and spices; sure it is
The garden of the world; the Phaenix else
Had never chose that place above all other
To recreate her self in: your Damascus
Is but a desert if compared unto it.

Amand. But good old man, have you forgotten that,
Before the Tartar did invade my land,
We had laid down our travel there to see
The much admired Phaenicia, when the sight
Of this fair picture did captive my heart:
What motion do I feel again within me,
To blow the fire raked in forgetful ashes,
And half dead in Damascus?

Enter Praedariu^ with 5 thieves. Praedar. Stand, and give up your purses, or
your lives, We require one or both.


Amand. Do thou not see us Stand with our swords drawn, mine I thus give up
into thy body, --


kills Praedarius. 3 thief What shall we do? our Capt killed, let us fly.


Gent. As thou have lived with him, so shall thou die
And serve him in the other world

kills the third thief. 4 thief. But I
Served him for fear, not love, and should be loath
To wait on him to hell (...) such a ^^^ney.

Colo^. Villain forsake thy master, that thou shall not my sword shall keep
thee in thy true obedience,


Killes him, the other three escape to Rapinus. Consolar. Bles^^d deliverance!
we have cause to thank
The heavenly powers for this our victory,
And preservation.

Gentle. With what confidence
Of good success their Captain gave the onset?
But when the Princes conquering sword dispatched him
How soon his thieves were quel'd.

Consolar. Sweet Prince I fear
More storms for in this clouded Wilderness
They are most frequent, and I doubt the worst
Is not blown over, let us therefore have our journey
To shelter us in safety.

Amand. I Will not be
Averse unto good counsel though I value
This life at a low rate; now let us direct
Our steps toward that happy soil you spoke off,
That I may see though now with humbled eyes
Phaenitia fair, the minion of the skies, --

Exeunt. Enter Rapinus wounded, with all his rabble of thieves leading in
between them Amandus, the Collonell and gentleman also wounded, Consolari^
following after weeping, then enter Lucinda. Rapinus See fair Lucinda mine,
what triumphs we
Bring to adorn thy conquests, see what captives
Are ready here to wait upon thy triumph,
See what a purple flood has issued forth
From these two gaping wounds which I received
To bring these precious jewels to Lucinda,
And yet she kills Rapi^^^ with disdain,
Did ere your eyes see fairer?

Lucinda Never true lie,
And I believe this Kingdom yields none such,
They speak the owner some great personage*
From whom did you (...) them*

Rapin. From that captive
Who killed Praeda^ius and thus wounded me,
And made such havocke of our men, he now
Shall lie in durance for it.

Lucinda Heavens what a wonder,
What an Ange^like object strikes mine eyes,
In masculine appearance! -- aside.
Were you Noble
These j^wels were a ransom to redeem him,
And set his friends and him at liberty
At least to bar hard usage.

Rapin. If it be
Your pleasure to command their free enlargement,
I seal unto it, for fair Lady know
You carry such divinity about you
As it converted has and almost altered
(I speak it to my shame) my former nature,
But had I still continued as my self,
I had not begged this favor, which you know
I might command at pleasure.

Lucinda You are angry
And all this while mistake me, ^ as little
Desire their liberty as you your self,
But I would have them used in gentler manner
Then other prisoners for these jewels sake,
Which take me more then all the wealth you ere
Presented me withal.

Rapin. This cheeres me yet
That now at length, one of my offerings are
Accepted by my goddess; captives kneel
And reverence her deity whose breath
Has freed you from a servitude more dark
Then hell it self; now this must be your prison
This Cave of mine, till we determine further.

Lucind. Would I might be his ^ayl^^^ and his surgeon,
(...)* his wounds bleed -- (...)
Sir you will loose your prisoners
Unless some care be taken for their wounds,
Their death can do no service, first I Will dres^^
Your hurts* and then for pities sake apply
A plaster unto their^.

Rapin. Do what you will

Lucinda Your wounds are deep Sir -- dresses him.

Rapin. I believe they are,
And you have one fair Lady too wants ^en^ing,
I hope one day to search it and return
Your courtesy again in a kind nature. -- aside

Lucind. This salve will cure it.

Rap^n. I bele^ve no less,
There is great ve^tue in 't derived from you.

Lucind. Come let the dress you Sir.

Amand. Me gentle Lady,
No let me bleed to death, like Seneca
Go sleeping to my grave, your pains were ill
Bestowed on one that is weary of his life;
Show your compassion one my friends, and then
You shall ^blige my ashes in their urne
To bless your bounty.

Lucind. I Will not be denied,
Your friends I care for too -- sure Laedas swannes
Were black compared to this more whiter ski^^e,
No silk so soft -- aside
Now I have done with you.
As I have been your Surgeon be mine too,
Would he did know my wound -- all aside.

Amand. To speak my thanks
Would come to short by far of what I think;
I Am sorry Madam your so pr^tious salve
Should wasted be on such a wretch as I,
It better were reserved for nobler uses.

Lucind. Now Sir you must receive too from my hand,
This plaster and your cure.

Colon. I kiss those hands
That daigne me such a favor -- dresses him.

Lucinda. You must feel
The virtue of my salve too.

Gentle. As we have
The bounty of your noble disposition,
For both our humble thanks -- dresses him,

Rapin. Come have you done,
You dwell too long there and neglect a cure
Worth all the rest, Rapinus heart is sick,
And craves a plaster, wounded by your love,
A patient in your care to be preferred
Before a thousand captives.

Lucinda. May be so,
But yet repent not charitable works
Upon the poor distressed, if gentle nature
Move not your heart to this, yet let the thought
That they may do good service in your wars,
(Since you your self have seen the valor tried)
Work that effect upon you.

Rapin. You plead strongly,
And I cannot repugne your argument;
But are all Ladies so compassionate
And pitiful as you? I think they are not.

Lucinda. They are indeed, cur sex hates cruelty.

Rapin. Then you should hate cruelty in love.

Lucinda. That Is in another nature.

Rapin. Come sit down,
How long have you professed surgery?
I never saw you practice it before.

Lucinda. I learnt it from a child.

Rapin. It Is a fine art
And well it does become a Ladies hand
Gently to touch a wound, but I forgate
To ask my prisoners what and when they were,
And to what place they traveled, pray demand.

Lucind. I will Sir -- this suites well with my desire -- aside
Fair Sir may I request to know your state,
Your name and country, whence you come and where
Your journey lay when this captivity
Befe^l you on your (...)?

Amand. Courteous Lady,
You first demand my state, I can resolve you
In these two words; it is poor and miserable,
Made so by fortunes malice, and my stars.
My name I humbly crave I may conceal,
My Country is Damascus, and therein
As in a book you may read out my story;
Have you not heard the fall of that brave City?

Lucinda Yes, and the same of that more braver Prince
Admired Amandus, I believe you have
Some near relation to him.

Amand. Yes, in fortune
I have indeed, for I suppose our sufferings
Are much alike.

Lucinda So are your names and natures;
I make no question, if they were revealed,
But I have found enough.

aside. Rapinus He will not tell
His name it seems

Lucind. That matters not at all,
I gather by his words he is some Knight
Of sad Damascus, or some kinsman of
Th'unfortunate Amandus.

Rapinus Very likely,
But we spend too much time in this discourse.
What do I mean? I have not yet given order
To put out sentinells upon the hills
For to discover boot; come will you walk
And take the air a little? prisoners come
You shall receive a dram too and no more
But to prepare your stomachs against the time,
I Will weane you from it.

Amand. Weane me from my breath
Of life, and then I Will thank thee in my death.

Exeunt Enter the three thieves 1 thief This is worse and worse by the
Almanac.


2 thief Alkeron, fool thou would say, we do ^ot use to swear in that
phrase.


3 thief Besides, there is no sense in Almanacke.


1 thief I say there is good sense and meaning in it, if you had the wit to
conceive it.


2 thief As how prithee?


1 thief As thus, grossum caput, it is worse and worse by the Almanacke, that is
as much to say, it is worse with us this year then 'twas the year before.


3 thief 'Faith thou say true, thou have opened and applied the point too
very handsomely, I commend thy wi^ for it.


1 thief Besides, did I not shift an oath too very prettily^ observe my
religion in it as well as my wit.


2 thief I thought thou had sworn.


3 thief And so did I by the Alkeron.


1 thief But to our first discourse before you int^rrupted me: is it not worse
and worse with us every day than other? we were wont to have some feeling of
the gain, as well as of the pain, and to share with our Captains, now we
must be contented to stand to his courtesy, devil share him for it.


2 thief We lost our best Captain when we lost Praeda^ius, would Rapinus had
excused him, we should had better days then.


3 thief What fools were we to save his life, when he lay at the mercy of
the stranger, I repent it now most heartily,


2 thief And so do I, but had we known he would reward us so, and give us
nothing for our labors, he should have gone to hell for me, I would never have
staid him.


3 thief And the more to torment his Ghost, we would have made his foe and
conqueror Captain in his place.


1 thief If he continue thus dogged, we may do it yet by some trick or
other, let him (...) too much provoke us.


2 thief All his mind is upon the wench by Mahomet, all is given unto her,
nothing unto us but a bastinado now and then, shall we endur't?


3 thief And yet for all so much treasure as he gives her, of my conscience
she gives him nothing in return thereof, no not so much as her maydenhead.


1 thief Her maydenhead, 'twas a question if she had that to give him.


3 thief Then not a vaulting turn, not one single career, not a foot in the
stirrup, or term it what you will.


2 thief Nay, I believe scarce a dry kiss unless by force.


1 thief Then he is a precious coxcombe, if I were he, I trow she should give
me a dry and a wet kiss too by her leave.


3 thief I am clean out of charity with him in good faith.


2 thief And so are we all for his hard dealinges.


1 thief But we must smother our discontent as well as we can.


2 thief What shall we do now?


3 thief To our old trade, to watch for others Profit.


2 thief Come let us away then, we shall be found tardie else, and perchance
told so much by a dumb instrument called the cudgel.


1 thief Indeed he speaks oft^n to us in that language.
But come camrades the times may altered be,
When we shall speak that speech so well as he,
And make him understand us when we call,
As he does make us now, this may befall.

Exeunt* Finis Actus secundi.
Actus Tertius, Scena Prima.
The King of Arabia, Alecto. King IN midst of storms, and these tumultuous
times
Of war and blood, in midst of troubled seas
Of foreign states, how safety do we sail
And steer our course, Alecto, in a calm:
No dusky cloud lowres on our ship of state,
No winds of adverse fortune shake our peace,
But smile and gently breathe a quiet gale:
Blessed stars that reigned at our nativity,
Kind Planet, under whose sweet influence
We were brought forth, dear fortune that conferred
This happiness upon the Arabian King.

Alecto It cannot be denied Sir, but you are
As much indebted to the gods for favors,
As any mortal Prince, and in some things
Enjoy prerogatives above them all,
As in the wealth and beauty of your land:
Your subjects love, your peace with foreign Kings
That are your neighbors. Lastly, in this point,
Which makes you more admired then all the rest,
In having such a daughter, who for virtue
And beauty both cannot be paralel'd
By any other Princess, and I think
Has not her equal in the world besides.

King She is my chiefest joy I must confess,
And the sole staff of my declining age.
I undervalue far my Crown beneath her,
My gold, my jewels, yea although I were
Possessed of the worlds vast treasury,
It were but dross unto my darsing dear,
My dear Phaenicia, all my care and study
Is how to see her married as ^^comes
The daughter of a King, and the great dower
Dame nature and her fortune both will leave her*

Alecto This likes me not, I Will thwart it what I can,
For to advance my love and proper fortunes. --
aside. But royal Sir, have you proposed yet
A match unto the Princess?

King Yes, and have
Showed her the portraitures of diverse Princes,
Of Persia, of Tartaria, of Austria,
Of Egypt, Babylonia, and the rest,
To make her choice, but yet she likes not any.

Alecto That Is good, she likes a substance, not a shadow: --
aside. This makes for me.
What does she then object
An't please your royal Majesty?

King That she is
Not yet disposed to marriage, pleading youth
And ignorance in what does suit a Bride.

Alect. That Is nothing, she will be soon instructed by
Her husband in that duty.

King Yet I will not
Force her affection; she desires to have
Two years yet added to her age, before
She would determine marriage; but you left
The clause imperfect, when you did digress
From what we first discoursed, and fell upon
The praises of my daughter, now no more
Of this, but enter on the first again;
What was it nephew?

Alecto Sir, I was applauding
Your happy state and fortune, and what cause
You had to thank the gods for benefits
You did enjoy above all other Princes,
Yet to the end you might not think your self
In earthly pleasures absolutely happy,
And so grow proud, there lies a bar between you
And the full consummation of your bliss.

King A bar, what is it? it shall be then removed,
And the way cleared.

A^ecto There Is difficulty in it*
I mean the thieves and our laws of your Country,
Who make your land unfree, and hold by force
The third part of Arabia, (...)
Who rob your self and subjects of their goods,
Usurping privil^dges, and exacting
Tributes an dues of every passenger,
Stranger or other wise that trave^^ that way.

King This takes away much from my true content,
( I must confess^) and troubles me the more,
Because I know not which way to redress it.
You know we have left no way unattempted,
To drive them thence, yet failed in our desire,
Because of their retrait into the (...),
Which for our army is inaccessible.
Many complaints are preferred unto us,
Not only by our subjects, but by others
Against these rebels ^or their goods extorted,
Who do demand from us all restitution,
As if those thieves were under our command:
Yea, many Kings our neighbors have dispatch^
Ambassadors about it to our Courts
Whose Caravans and treasures have been robbed,
Passing the deserts by these mountaineers,
Demanding for their loss, full satisfaction,
Who have departed hence much discontented:
This in the end I doubt will raise a war
Between us, and disturb our settled peace.
Enter a Lord attendant. What news with you?

Lord Sir, there is a Gentleman
Lately returned from travel, now arrived
Unto the Court, who humbly craves to have
(...) about affairs of great impo^^
Which do concern^ your royal Majesty.

King. Admit him straight, we'll hear the business.
Enter the Gentleman. We understand you're late returned from travel,
From what parts came you now?

Gent. From Persia Sir.

King. What have you to deliver?

Gent. That the Persian
Is marching hither with a mighty army
To fall upon your Kingdom, from the Court
I did accompany the Camp, until
I learnt the certainty of their design,
Then in the night I left them, and with speed
Rode poast to warn you, that you might provide
Against a strong invasion.

King. But where did you
Part from the Persian Army?

Gentle. In the confines
Of Babylonia nere fair Euphrates.

King. How strong are they?

Gentle. Their Army does amount
Unto a hundred thousand foot, their horse
Equals that number bravely equipag'd
And furnished for the war.

King. Who does command
As General?

Gentle. Prince Perseus himself.

Alecto Could you not understand upon what grounds
They built their discontent and rash proceeding?

Gent. I can in form you nothing of the cause,
But so much of the effect, I can assure you,
Is it too too true.

King. This makes me not a little
To wonder at the strangeness of the thing;
Who ever heard of any Prince that was
Invaded by his foe, before he knew
What his pretense was, and the cause that moved him
To enter into war; I cannot guess
The reason why the Persi^n should receive
Distaste, and therefore am incredulous
Almost of your report.

Gentle. Sir I (...)
(So much I do prefer my King and Country
Before my life) I might be proved a liar,
Although I s^ffer'd for it, rather then
Behold the devastation of a soil
So sweet as fair Arabia; but alas
Your royal self, and we your loyal subjects
I fear too soon will have experience of
The truth of my relation, and perchance
Repent too late your incredulity,
Grounded upon too much security.
What should it ought advantage me to lie?

King. Urge it no more, we do believe what you
Have told us is a truth, and will provide
Against the enemies approaching force;
Sure it is some wrongs has caused this by the thieves,
And the mad hare brained Prince has not the patience
(It seems) for to acquainte me but by war,
And violent eruption into Arms;
It must be so, else can I not imagine
The least occasion why, well we will stand
Upon our strongest guard to keep our land.

Exeunt. Rapinus, L^cinda. Rapin. In troth sweet Lady you are much to blame
Thus to defer my pleasures, and delude
My longing hopes with trifling vain delays,
I suffer most extremely.

Lucinda. I could laugh
To hear you talk thus; are you so impatient,
You that are borne to such a course of life, --
(And so low fortune) as you cannot stay
A month or two to wait the love and pleasure
Of a Kings daughter, for the which great Princes
Have su'd, and served a year for.

Rapin. Are you then
Of the blood royal, well we'll mix our bloods
Together, so shall mine be royal too;
But wherefore did you tell me that you were
But an Egyptian Lady?

Lucinda. And in that
I did not li^, scarce use equivocation
For Madam is a title that is applied
To Queens sometimes as unto common Ladies.

Rapin. Why did you keep me in this ignorance
So long, and now at last reveal your self?

Lucinda. To awe your boldness when I saw it grow
To such a height as now; Sir keep your distance.

Rapin. High words indeed seeming to have a kind
Of reference to Majesty; but tell me
What King begat you?

Lucinda. Not to satisfy
Thy proud demand, but make thee know thy self
And the base wrong thou do me, do I answer
Unto thy question: understand I am
The mighty Souldans daughter and his heir
Sent by my Father to be married to
The Prince of Persia, when thy barbarous troop
And lawless self enforced a Rape upon me,
For which thou shall repent, unless thou do
Make speedy restitution of myself
Unspotted in my honor.

Rapin. Not such haste
To part, fair Princess, in a fit of choler;
You know not yet my humor nor I yours,
We must participate each others nature
Before we can resolve in coulder blood*

Lucind. Uncivil groom do thou think to enjoy me?
I Will rather prostitute my body to
The lust of a deformed Incubus,
Or ugly Satire, then retain one thought
Of thy lewd loathed embrace^

Rapin. That Is because
You're told they are active in the art of vaulting,
But you shall find me Madame so dexterious,
As not inferior to them in that kind;
Try my performance.

Lucinda. Thou lascivious man
Thou bestiall Goat, how dare thou tainte chaste ears
With thy infectious breath? know it is in vain
Further to urge thy lust, for I Am resolved
To run the hazard of a thousand deaths
Rather then to yield unto it.

Rapin. Foolish woman
Thy rage over comes thy wit, think thou this way
To work upon me? do thou not perceive
Thou art my prisoneer* and what now thou have
Is all my gift, thy life, thy repu^ation;
Thy wealth and jewels? do not see when I
Please to command thee to give up those things
Thou have not power to hold them fear a minu^e*
And yet art thou so inconsiderate?
Dream not, nor feed this foolish fantasy
Within your mind to think your Father can
Rescue you hence, or your betroathed Lord
The Persian Prince redeem you from my cave,
^lthough they came with grea^^ forces far
Then Xerxes or Darius; I am safer
Here in this unfrequented wilderness,
Thus barracadoed round with hills and mountains,
Then they in all their strong fortifications,
Their Forts and Castles.

Lucind. I perceive my error,
And therefore must a little temporize
To prevent outrage. -- astde.
Sir, you moved your lust,
But not your love and wooed me in a phrase
That fitter were to be applied unto,
A common whore or strumpet, then a Lady,
Much less a Princess, this I must confess
Enflamed my anger, and enforced me to
Forget my self a little.

Rapin. I confess
My error too, and crave your pardon Lady,
See how one gentle word has mollifid
My disposition, and clean turned the str^ame
Of my full bent desire to be possessed
By force of what I now resolved am
To crave by fair entreaty in the way
Of honest marriage.

Lucinda. Now your style is good,
And tastes something of civility,
Yet I desire some respi^e to give answer
Unto your suit for two considerations:
First, that I may have time to make my prayers
Unto the shrine of holy Mahomet,
To grant a dispensation of my vow
Made to the Persian Prince, to be his wife:
Next that I be not perjured to my self,
To loose my Virgin girdle, ere my age
Has numbered twenty springs to reinvest
Our naked mother earth in robes of green*

Rapin. Why did you make, pray, such a foolish vow
To stay a Maid so long?

Lucind. I did indeed.

Rapin. What wants now of the time?

Lucind. But a bare month,
That is not long you know.

Rapin. Well, I Am content,
Though my desires are apt to climb the tree
Just at this very instant, and to taste
Your dainty maiden fruit, but love is sweeter
If freely granted, then if taken by force,
Therefore I Will stay the time prefixed, and not
Beyond the same a minute, see you do not
Longer abuse my patience, if you do,
What love cannot, force shall constrain you to:
Come, will you go? --
Exit Rapinus.
Lucind. I must stay here a little.
I Will wait on you soon; heavens in what narrow straights
Wretched Lucinda have thy fates confined thee?
In what amazed labyr^nth of love
Am I enclosed, and cannot find a clue
To guide me forth, no light, no ^all^port?
I love my fellow prisoner, but ^ hate
The thief Rapinus, how I shall enjoy
The one, and handsomely avoid the other.
A woman's wit alas cannot contrive:
How soon I have forgot the Persian Prince?
How soon my self? my eye but glanced on
The beauty o^ this stranger, but his look,
His high commanding look, which darted forth
Majesticke sparks, captived my yielding heart:
He is though shadowed, that ^arre famed Amandus,
Damascus Prince, I read the characters
Of majesty deep stamped in his brow;
I Will vent my thoughts unto him, and this cave
Shall help me to his love, or to my grave.

Enter Sara her Maid. Sara what will thou counsel me to do in the thing you
wot of?


Sara I have told you my opinion already.


Lucinda But can a woman with any modesty make love to a man?


Sara Puh, why not in a case of extremity, when the woman is hot, and the man
is cold in the business?


Lucind. But if I should commit through extreme passion such a folly, should I
not be wondered at, and hated amongst women for giving an ill example to the
world?


Sara Nothing less, but on the contrary, be assured you shall reap from them
infinite love and thanks for laying them down ^uch a president of boldness,
but if you dispute pro and con, thus, and make such objections, you shall never
obtain your desires while you live, I will warrant you.


Lucinda But do thou think there is any hope of speeding in my ^uit, upon
notice given him of my love*


Sara No question, Madame, he cannot but most willingly embrace it, and bless
his fortune for so high a favor.


Lucind. Aye me Sara, I fear I am not so happy, my stars ^oretell not so
prosperous an Omen: though I have by signs and dumb shows, by sighs and
amorous glances told him my affection, yet seems he not to understand that
language, but as insensible of my pain, suffers me to languish in my torment.


Sara I would feign ask your Ladyship one question, if I might be so bold, and
thereby not incur your displeasure.


Lucind. Speak thy mind freely, thou shall give me no offense at all.


Sara Taking your word for my warrant then, I desire to know if you be in
earnest or in jest, for I cannot believe you should so soon forget the great
Prince of Persia, and dote so extremely on this stranger, whose rank and
quality you know not, but by conjecture.


Lucind. Such is the commanding power of love thou ^eest, which is able to do
more impossible matters then these; I mean sincerely;

Neither have I reason to repent the chance.


Saera No, suppose he be that poor exiled Prince of Damascus, is he to be
compared, or in your good opinion to be preferred before the puis^ant Persian,
one of the greatest Monarchs of the world?


Lucind. How foolishly thou talkest, do thou not know that comparisons are
odious, especially in love matters? counsel me better what to do, or keep thy
thoughts in thine own bosom.


Sara Madame, my help and furtherance shall not be wanting in any thing wherein
I can do you service: let your wit contrive the way according to your desire,
and let me alone to put it in execution.


Lucind. Then what if I sent thee to him with a letter stuffed full of
affection, would not that be a pretty way to cover my blushes, and yet discover
my love? sure it would, what think thou Sara?


Sara I cannot but approve your plot exceedingly Madame, for if there be then
any fault escaped, or any small breach of maiden modesty made, it shall be
imputed to the ink and paper, which is of too pale a color to blush.


Lucind. It shall be so then, get me pen, ink, and paper presently, but soft,
he comes to save me that labor, I am armed with boldness for the encounter,
assist me, Cupid, I beseech thee.


Amandus, Consolario, Colonel, Gentleman. Amand. Fair Princess, here behold
before your eyes;
Those whom your courtesy has made your slaves:
I mean my friends and me, whose thanks, yea lives
We come to tender to you, but alas,
The debt we owe is greater, and the sum
Not to be answered so, yet we beseech you
Take this in part of payment, which we offer
With zealous hearts, and no less^ strong devotion,
And though we cannot cancel your great bill,
Impute that to our want, not to our will.

Lucind. Most courteous Sir, if through my means you have
Enjoyed the benefit of any thing,
I thank my fate^ that made me an instrument
Of doing so much good: you shall oblige me
To tell me, since I cannot tell my self
What thing Lucinda did, that could produce
So strong an obligation.

Amand. You impose
Too great a task upon me, for weak words
Cannot express it full; Madame, we owe you
First for our lives, then for our liberties,
For cu^ing of our wounds with your fair hand,
And many other favors great besides,
All which we treasure up here in our hearts,
As in a trusty Cabinet.

Lucinda Sure the man
Seems of so gentle nature, that he would not
Be so unkind, as to repel the suit
Of a poor love-sicke Lady -- aside.
Will you grant me
One boon in lieu thereof, and you shall make me
A ten-fold satisfaction.

Amand. For your good
We will expose our lives unto all hazards,
For we account them yours, and not our own,
Since by your means we live, and do enjoy them:
What Is your command?

Lucinda Sir, since you do acknowledge
You owe to me your life and liberty,
Your cure, and other court^^ies besides,
I am endangered now as you were then.
It Is now my turn, and I am like to suffer
In all these things, unless your gentle nature
And pity do relieve me.

Amand. How sweet Lady
I do beseech you comes it? does the thief
Rapinus dare to offer violence
Unto your chastity, or threat your death
Unless you yield unto him? I will soon
(So much I Am obliged unto your goodness)
Find out a way to send that fiend to hell,
Although I suffer for it twenty deaths,
If this procure your fear.

Lucinda This is the least,
(Although I know not well how to avoid him)
Of what I suffer.

Amand. Let me know it then:
Your life and liberty endangered?
In need too of a cure, and not that way?
Strange mystery, unfold it I beseech you,
That if it lie in my poor power, I may
Make known how much I love and honor you.

Lucinda Sir, it is a secret, and requires to be
Spoken to you in private all alone.
Should I not be unmannerly to crave
Your friends retirement for a little space?

Consol. Madame, there needs no ceremony in
Your Ladyships commands to us your vassals.

Exeunt. Lucind. Now you can help me by an easy way
Without your hurt, for know I am your Patient,
But am ashamed to lay to you open my wound:
Imagine in what nature it is by these
My tears, my blushes, my abrupted fighes,
My broken speeches, my dejected eyes,
My strange unwonted passions: more, I am
Your prisoner too by the commanding power
Of all subduing love, now it is in you
To cure me, it is in you to give me life
And liberty at once: O be not cruel
Fair Prince, but help a poor distressed Lady,
Who craves but love, and in that ^uit your best
Construction: take it not in the worst sense,
Nor think me ought immodest, though I have
Opened my sore which was procu^^^ by
Your most majesticke carriage.

Amand. Heavens defend
So great a Princess, and so beautiful,
Of such imperial fortunes, should descend
So low in thought, to look on such a wretch
As I am, being the map of misery,
Griefs Emblem, yea the tennis ball of fortune,
Tossed by her angry Racket evermore
Beneath the line, into a thousand hazards --
For her desport, I love you better Lady
Then so, to work your downfall, and should ill
Requite your favors that way: you that may
For beauty, birth, or fortune, match with any
The greatest Prince of the terrestrial orb.
'Twere sin in me not to be pardoned,
To wrong you with my love in way of marriage,
Who can assure you nothing for a dower
But sorrow and affliction,

Lucind. Sure you cannot,
Although you would, conceal your self from me,
Whose love discerning eyes have found you out
To be admired Amandus, and surveyed
Each lineament a part, with such regard
As Painters use in limming of a piece,
You Are drawn within my heart, from head to foot.

Amand. I grant it Madam, that I was that Prince
You pleased to name, but now have nothing left me
But the bare title, but that a^ery name,
Poor echo of Damascus, would I might
Loose that and life, the shadow with the substance,
Then I were happy, but my fa^e^ alas
I fear reserve me for more misery.
If possible, then I have tasted yet:
Therefore let all avoid me as the plague,
Lest they should be infected with my grief.

Lucind. Do not suppose your pleading poverty,
Or ought you can allege, to wrong your self,
Has power to turn the stream of my affection
Another way then now it holds its course,
Or to repel my argument of love:
No, no, the plea is stronger, though you were
Poo^er then Irui (I invoke as witnes^e
Of this my vow the power that made me yours)
Yet would I rather be conjoined to you
In nuptial ba^ds, then be the w^dded wife
Of any other Prince, although he were
Richer then Craesus, and heaven knows I could
Content me better in this prison here,
(So you could love me, and I might enjoy you)
Then in the Persian Palace, if I lie,
Let Cupid shoot you with a lea^en dart,
And with disdain kill poor Lucinda's heart.

Amandus O dearest Princess, take deliberation,
And enter into thought of what you are,
Of what I am, and what the Persian is.
Then you will soon call home these wandering thoughts,
And place them where they shall be worth your love:
In me alas they cannot, for although
I had not lost my Country, though my kingdom
Had still been mine, and though I now enjoyed
My former rega^l dignities and state,
Yet should I count my self too mean by far,
To match with you the mighty Souldans heir,
And only daughter, now I scarce deserve
To wait on you in nature of your servant.
Lucinda This shall not serve your turn, these vain excuses
And wrongful reasons urged against your self,
Shall not prevail at all: the more you strive
To stop the current of my swelling passions,
The more they rage within this breast of mine,
And in the end will overflow and break
My heart if you prove cruel, and put off
My hopes with such weak shif^s and poor delays.
Come, grant me love, and seal it with a kiss
As an assurance.

Enter Rapinus listening before at the door. Rapinus. What is this I hear
Spoke by Lucinda to this caftive slave,
Come grant me love, and seal with a kiss
As an assurance? well I Will be revenged
By all the Pagan gods; ignoble strumpet
How dare thou wrong me thus, and in my Cave
To court my prisoner? was it for this thou did
Deny my suite, and still from time to time
Delude me with delay, that thou might act
Thy shame, and make me pander to thy lust?
Base Whore was this thy drift? for this abuse
I Will presently enjoy thee, if thou yield
Without constraint, I Will keep thee to my self,
But if thou strive, or make the least resistance
To cross my will, when I have satisfied
My lust at full, I Will put the over to be
Used and abused by every common soldier;
Come huswife I must teach you true obedience.
Offers to ravish her.

Lucinda. Help* help.

Amand. Base villain offer her no wrong,
But turn thee upon me, although unarmed
I dare thy utmost power.

Rapin. Then thou shall feel
The fury of my rage, have at thee slave.
Draws his sword and assaults him, Amand. defends
himself with a stool, and at last closing with him,
has him at this mercy.

Amand. Now I will dye thy sword in thy own blood,
Which thou did think to make deep drunk in mine.

Rapin. O stay thy hand for fair Lucindas sake.

Ama. That hastes thy death, and puts me in remembrance
Thou would have ravi^h'd her.

Lucinda. Sir let him die,
And ^ree ^s all from this captivity,
Never a better time then now to do it.

Amand. Then it is done, take that, and breath thy last,

killes him. Lucinda. Heroicke Prince now show thy pity on me,
And as thou have released me from this thief,
And from the violence of loathed lust,
So free me from the violence of love
By taking me unto thy wedded wife:
I will refuse no danger, nay no death
To bear thee company, live here or travel
Throughout the world, I Will Lacquey it a foot
With sweet Amandus; can you be so hard
And cruel to me? sure when Ladies woo^
Hard are the shi^tes love does constrain them too.

Amand. No more of this sweet Lady till we have
O^der'd the business that now falls upon us:
The thieves we need not fear, for I have them
Firmly at my devotion through distaste
And discontent they did receive against
Rapinus in his life, they will not stir^e
(I know) one foot in his revenge, but rather
Render me thanks for acting of his death;
Come let us go, to better our poor state
We must confirm these men yet in their hate.

Exeunt. Enter the three th^eves. 1* But my masters shall we be still ridden
thus, and undergo the but then patiently, without seeking remedy or revenge?


2 No we'll suffer it no longer, if we do we shall deserve Mydas ears y'saith.


3 And Acteons horns too for our future fortune.


1 Then we are all resolved to do our best to dispatch him, are we not?


^ All the shame of the world befall him that is a^^inst it.


3 And all the bastinadoes that do grow in the deserts light upon him* lets
devi^e a way now to work our revenge, will you study the plot?


1 Since you refer it to me, I will not be long about it, lets release the
stranger, give him arms, make him our Captain, and cut Rapinus throat; how
like you this?


2 Excellent well, it cannot choose but advantage us greatly, for the stranger
is wonderful valiant, you know we had costly experience of it, and he seems
of a generours disposition besides, that would not forget such a courtesy.


3 This will I believe, so oblige his gentle nature as whatsoever boot we take,
he will not trouble himself with it, but divide it freely among us; will not
this be excellent my hearts?


1 But who lies here all this while weltring in his own blood and we not see
him? our Captain Rapinus, it is he, come here and congratulate his death,


2 Blessed accident!


3 This befell according to our wishes, and has saved us the labor to put our
design in excution.


1 Ha Captain do you lie there in faith, remember how often you gave me the
bastinado, I could now be revenged upon your dead carcass, but I will now only
satisfy my self with laughing over thy body, ha, ha, ha.


2 To whom are we bound for this courtesy, I marvel, I cannot imagine to
whose courage to impute it unless to the strangers.


3 It Is he, it can be no other, he shall be our new Captain for the deed, do
you cons^nt to it?


1 By all means we approve it, he shall have his act presently.


2 Come let us find him out, and know how the business passed between Rapinus
and him.


1 Agreed, and offer him our service and recive his commands.

How apt a Soldiers mind is still to range,
And does desire his offic^rs to change,

2 But stay let us not leave Rapinus body lie here unburied, lend me your hand
for charities sake.


3 That Is well remembered -- exeunt with the body.


Finis Actus tertij.
Actus Quartus.
The King, Alecto. King. VVEheare ill news, Alecto, Perseus
Has passed his Army over Euphrates
And marches through our Country, all the spoil
That can be used in war his Soldiers practice,
All the hostility that can be thought off,
As burning houses, robbing Villages,
Committing Sacrilege, deflowring Maids,
Ravishing Women, murdering the Men,
And diverse other outrages besides:
Come let us march, I make you General
Of one part of my Army, the other part
I will command my self, our subjects cries
Are come already home unto our Court;
Beat Drums, sound Trumpets.

Enter a Lord attendant. Lord. Royal Sir there is
A Herald now arrivi'd unto the Court
Sent from the General of the Persian army,
Who craves he may deliver what in charge
Was given him by the Prince.

King. He shall ^e heard,
Admit him to the presence.
Enter Herald. Speak your business.

Herald The^ this it is my sovereign Lord and Prince,
Demands surrender of the ^aire Lucinda
The Egyptian Princess his betrothed love,
Upon whose person in your Kingdom here,
There was a rape committed; if she be not
Returned unspotted in her reputation,
And all her goods, her gold and precious jewels
Restored, and a full satisfaction made
Unto the utmost doit, he vows by heaven
To lay Arabia wast, until it be
Reduced unto a wildern^sse, and made
A habitation ^or the forlorn Owl,
The Bat, and other birds of dismal night,
That shun and hate th'appearance of the light.

King Tell Perseus we do not doubt his power,
But dare his utmost malice, and because
We would not have him live in ignorance,
Give him to understand that we know nothing
Of what befell the Princess, and this is
The first time that we heard it; for the wrong
He does us in invading of our land,
Without just cause, he shall be answerable:
So much inform thy master.

Exit Herald. Herald It Is my duty.

King This is strange news, Alecto is it no^?
The Souldans daughter raped, and we not know it
Till now, and yet done in our kingdom too?
How should it be? let us consider of it;
I now have found it, and it is probable,
How think you? may it not be by the thieves
That live among the deserts? so it is
Upon my life, for that way she must pass
To travel into Persia, and we know
Their strength too well: these villains in this war
Will more annoy us then the Persian army:
Heaven look upon us, for we stand in danger,
Between a forra^gne and domesticke so:
We sail between the rocks, the shelves, the shores
Of Scylla and Charibdis, yet we may
Escape those dangers, if the immortal Gods
Commit the balance to Astrea's hands,
To weigh our causes; let our fortune be
According to our right, and we agree.

Exeunt. Amandus, two of the thieves. Amand. Now fellow soldiers, since you
have committed
This place of Captain to me, and submitted
Your selves to my command, I must reduce you
Into another way, another form,
Another course of life more honorable,
And make you worthy of that glorious title
And attribute of soldier, which as yet
You but usurp and wrongfully apply
Unto your selves: I do assure you this,
You shall not have occasion to complain,
Or to repent the change.

1 Sir, you shall mould us
Into what form or fashion you please.

2 Our minds shall be as soft and tractable
To your commands, as Virgin wax unto
The Impression of the seal.

Amaand* Then I will give you documents of war,
And rudiments of martial discipline.
But first you must shake off unworthy thoughts,
And stick to virtuous actions, ^re you can
Rightly attain this knowledge, you must not
Seek by unlawful means to gather wealth,
Or to extort by violence and wrong,
What does not rightly appertain to you.
You must not rob poor passengers, nor take
Them prisoners on their way, you ^ust forget
Your outrages, your murders, rapes, and the^^s,
And put on other habits which may suit
This our profession.

1 But then how shall we
Subsist and live?

Amand. I Will tell you how you shall
More rich then ever, and yet honestly
And honorably too.
Enter Col. and Gentleman. What news my friends?

Colon. Strange unexpected news we have received,
The Persian army is at hand and ready
To enter in the deserts, and are marching
In hostile manner to the Arabian Court,
Burning and spoiling all the land before them.

Amand. But can you understand what moved the Persian
To enter into war against the King,
And to invade his Country?

Gentle. It Is because
He was informed, though falsely, that the rape
On fair Lucinda was committed by
The Kings command, and she detained at Court.

Amand. How came you Sirs by this intelligence?

Gent. We had it from a prisoner, which our men
Took of the Persians, who it seems, is one
Of the fore-riders of the camp.

Amand. Here Is work,
And brave employment for you, here you can
Get wealth and honor too* and do your King
And Country service: here is boot enough,
Win it and wear it; now courage my hearts.

Enter the third thief. 3 Sir, from the top of yonder lofty mountain,
The sentinel discovers dust to rise
From up the champain country, and does hear
Drums beating of a march, and trumpets sounding,
Which makes us doubt an army.

Amand. Let them come,
We Will stand upon our guard for to receive them,
Yet we will do things discreetly too, and not
Give battle rashly, for the Persian army
Is rich and mighty, not for us to deal with
But upon great advantages: attend
My words, we'll lie close in our ambuscadoes
Until we hear the vantguard of their army,
And battle is marched by, then on the rear
We will fall on, and fercely give the charge
Upon the narrow passage, so before
The vanguard and the battle can assist,
We shall cut of their baggage, and retire
With all our wealth into the Caves and Mountains
Safe from the strongest forces of the world;
I Will bring you on and off with honor Sirs.

All 3 Go one brave Captain with success, and we
In all thy bold attempts will second thee.

Exeunt After a flourishing charge, enter again with much wealth. Amand. Now
fellow soldiers is not this more honorable,
And profitable too? ^o beat an army,
Then to oppress poor pilgrims, and the like,
Who travel for devotions sake unto
The tomb of famed Mahomet at Maecha?
Sure you must needs confess it.

1 We extol
And magnify this change of discipline.

2 and will conform our selves to any thing
You shall command us.

3 Yea so much we love,
And honor your brave spirit and resolution,
As these your fathfull friends ^^ll not more close
Stick to your side in fortunes doubtful chance
Then we, whom you have honored with the name
Of your poor soldiers.

Amand. My kind thanks to all:
Now for this wealth which we have purchased
With glory to our selves, I will distribute
And equally divide it amongst you all:
As for my part, I will not take one denier,
But freely give it you in recompense
Of your good service.

All 3 We Will not yield to this,
All shall be yours, our lives too at your service,
And we beseech you take it.

They offer him the wealth, he refuses it. Amand. It Is a meed
Due to your valors, therefore I command you
Enjoy it freely: now I must acquaint you
Further with my intentions, which shall be
To raise your fortunes, and procure your good.
In brief, I do resolve forthwith to send
A messenger unto the Arabian King,
Your native Lord, to offer in his aid
All our assistance against the Persian Prince,
And to come over to him with proviso,
That he shall pardon, and no more remember
The trespasses you did commit against him:
Which he will willingly embrace, I know,
And more besides, bestow preferments on you,
Endeer'd the more unto us by affection
For this our service, which serves as a prologue
To usher in our welcome: condescend you
To this I do propose?

1 With willing hearts.

2 And count it a religious piece of service
To help our King and Country.

Amand. I am glad
You are so altered in your inclination
And rudeness of your nature: but where is
The fair Lucinda, and old Consolario?
Enter Lucinda and Consolario. Fair Lady, welcome, you have made this place
Poor by your absence.

Lucind. But you have enricht it
With your fair presence Sir.

Amand. I Am sorry Lady
That we must part so ^o^ne: the Prince of Persia
Is come to fetch you with a mighty army,
Who claims you as his wife, therefore in justice
And conscience too, we cannot hold you from him:
You shall have all that is your own, and more,
We Will wait upon you as becomes the state
Of such a mighty Princess, with a guard
To safe conduct you to the Persian camp.
How is your mind disposed?

Lucind. Unkind Amandus,
More cruel far then proud Narcissus was
Unto the constant Nymph that loved him so,
More salvage hearted then the boy Adonis,
That scorned the love of Venus, these were never
Half so beloved as you, yet will you leave me
To dye in your disdain, and put me over
To him I cannot love? unkind Amandus!

Amand. Sweet Lady, think I do prefer your good
Before mine own, misconstrue not my words,
For I do speak this for your great advantage,
If you conceive me rightly, but we will not
Force you to any thing against your will:
I Am sorry that you will participate
Our evil fortunes, and refuse to live
The Persian Empress, 'twas for this I did
Persuade you unto what I did.

Lucind. O let (...).
Go with you Sir, and if you cannot love me
In nature of your wife, yet I beseech you
Respect me as your handmaid, who is still ready
To wait on your command.

Amand. You do confound me
And make me blush to hear so great a Princess
To speak to me in such an humble key,
Who do confess my self your lowly vassaile;
And since you're bent so much to wrong your self
And to forget your state, my life shall stand
'Tweene you and danger; Madam you have heard
Our resolution to assist and help
T^' Arabian King against the Prince of Persia;
Will you go over with us?

Lucind. Where you go
There do I bend my journey.

Amand. Consolario
I must dispatch you to the Arabian King
About this business, wherein I Will instruct you]
Particularly more before you go.

Consol. My faith and care shall not be wanting in
The trust you shall commit unto my Charge;
How I may do you service is my study.

Amand. So then all is done but this, to crave you hand
And lead you wheresoec'r you shall command.

exeunt. Enter the Persian and the Embassadonr of Egypt. Perseus So let this
most inhospitable Land
Suffer our wrath, so let the whippe of war
Inflicted on this country by our hand
Lash them severely that have violated
The laws of Nations, and therein committed
What even the base Barbarians hate to think off;
Now let the speedy messenger of death
The king of weapons, called the sword unsheath him.
And drink his fill in blood, let every soldier
Freely enjoy his pleasure, make his pillage
And do the greatest outrage that he can;
We will no longer now suppress our fury
But let it burn unto full height, the cries
Of ravished Maids and Virgins shall no more
Enter our ears, the humble supplications
Of undone Orphants shall not move my pity,
So much I am incensed against the King.

Embassad. I would divert you from this cruelty
Great Prince if you would hear me, and allege
Some reasons too to fortibie my speech,
First, it is a beauteous country, and the world
I think not parralels it, next you do
Intend it for a conquest, will you spoil
So sweet a habitation, and lay waste
A seat will make you proud to be enthorn'd in?
If this be not sufficient to induce you
To spare the rod of vengeance, let respect
Unto your Princely same withold your hand;
What sordid blot, what foul aspersion can
More taint the candid honor of a Prince
Then tyranny upon poor seely wretches:
You know as much my Lord, and histories
Show many soul examples of such tyrants
Whose names live in reproach to these our times:
But Sir have you received the news? my mind
W as big to bring it forth, before your speech
Hindered the birth.

Perseus. News I hear none but that
The fearful King dares not fight a battle,
We must enforce him to it, or pursue him
As greedy greyhounds do the heartlesse Hares,
Till we have taken his Crown and Life away;
Now what is that you hear?

Embassa. Quite contrary
To what you last diliver'd ^or they say
He is prepared to fight, and with his army
Means speedily to seek you, all the theevee
That in your passage through the de^^^s did
So damnifie your army, have submitted
Unto their King, and serve him in this war;
His force is much augmented, and you're like
To to have a speedy trial of your fortune.

Perseus. And after that a speedy strong possession
Of all this Kingdom, I am confident
That with our breathes we shall destroy them all
Powered forth in anger, our great multitudes
Will scater them as Wolves a flock of Sheep,
Suppose his army does amount unto
Some fifty thousand men, which is the most
His strength can raise, our army does exceed it
By half the number put away our horse,
Whose gallantry is spoaken of by all
The Nations of the World, and held to be
The best for service in the universe:
Can he resist our Force? or the Arabian
Stand up against the Persian in a battle?
Speak your opinion.

Embassa. Sir you know the chance
Of war is doubtful, and plumed victory
Does oftentimes deceive great expectations,
Besides dame fortune is a fickle Lady
We know not how to trust her, but if things
Be justly carried with an equal hand,
If iugling be not used amongst the fates,
It Is evident your army must overcome,
But judge we cannot till we see the event.

Perseus. We doubt not nor despair of the success
But from this talk, I have been oftentimes
Resolved to ask you, but till now forgate
What might be gathered hence that fair Lucinda
Your Princess, in this time of her restraint
Sollicites nothing for her liberty
Nor writes a word unto us of her state,
We hear she lives at the Arabian Court.

Embassa. I heareso too, and worthily entreated
According to her bith and high degree^

Perseus. This makes me to admire, nay to suspect
The stream of her affection is diverted
Another way, and holds no constant course,
It must be so, else being so entertained
And high respected in all points of honor
Would any man conjecture, that the King
Would hold her against her will, if she desired
To come unto us, now she has forgate us,
And may be too, her honor and good name,
Then we are gross abused, fooled with a match
And must be full revenged; I have no patience,
My Lord Ambassador does your opinion
Go hand in hand with mine?

Embassa. Then I should be
A traitor to my King; dare I presume
To think the Princess should destaine her honor?
Far be it from my thoughts, Sir I must tell you
You are too rash in passing such a censure,
And your too unadvised tongue exceeded
The decent bounds prescribed him not to touch
A Princess reputation.

Perseus. Thou durst as well
Have eaten fire, as uttered these bold words,
If twere not for the laws that are observed
Between all Nations, that Ambassadors
Be well entreated, this great privilege
Has brought forth this presumption; know your self
And how far you may go, else I shall be
Though loath, a breaker of the ancient custom.

Embassa. Sir, I Am commanded not to be in place
Where I shall hear my King, or any branch
Sprung from that royal stock traduced in fame,
But to make answer roughly, not to stand
A silent auditour, or a dumb statue,
Without or sense or motion.

Perseus. I commend thee
Old man, and love thee for it, we will be
Soon reconciled, and will lay the ^^ult
Of our contention to the heat of youth
And choler of old age; now our affairs
Call us to fight a batell, all my thoughts
Must be employed in this, whereby I shall
With glory rise, if not with honor fall.

Exeunt. The King, Lueinda, Phaenicia. King. Now whilst the trumpets sound,
drums beat alarm*
The cannons roar, the armies join and charge,
(Which sometimes were the music we delighted)
Must old Arabia lay his arms aside,
And sit at home with Ladies by command
Of natures law although his life and crown,
Lie at the doubtful hazard of the day:
Heaven bless ou^ (...) we that cannot fight
Will send our prayers up to the Gods for aid,
And wake there sleeping justice with our cries:
Great Princess you are sad to see us so
And of your silken disposition seem
To have a fellow feeling of our sorrow,
Cheer up, we do bes^ech you, and dear daughter
Be joyful too, we shall have good success
My better Genius tells me.

Lucinda. Who commands
Great King your army against the enemy?

King. The valiant Prince Amandus, whom at length
We did persuade to take that charge upon him.

Lucind. Then be assured the victory is yours,
For all things prosper under his conduct.

Phaenic. Madam you do reviv^^ our dying spirits
With words of comfort, happy time that made us
Enjoy your conversation, blessed occasion
That brought the noble Prince unto our aid
Whom heavens defend from danger and return
Home safe conqueror cround with victory.

Enter a Lord with news. King. Here comes a Lord with news, what tidings
bring you?
To wether side does victory incline,
And bend her flight?

Lord. it is doubtful yet my Lord
Where she will ^ight, she hovers in the air
Uncertain where to rest her, sometimes ready
To light upon the prince his wh^^^ parilion,
Sometimes upon the Persian^; had we no^
Fought at such disadvantage as we do,
The glory of the day had not so long
Between us been disputed: never was
An army better ordered for a battle,
Then ours is by the Prince, (...)
Does wonders in the field (...) their troops,
And strong battalions, (...)
Wisely retraits with honor: hard's the fight
That is between them, and the issue stands
Yet in suspense.

King. We must attend more new^s^
Another Lord intelligence^ comes.
Enter another Lord. How speeds the battle?

Lord Sir, it was endangered
On our side when, I left it for the mighty
And strong brigadoes of the enemy:
Brake the battalion of the Duke Al^cto,
And charged quite through the body of that (...)
Where he himself commanded if he be
Alive or dead, escaped or taken priso^^^
I have no certain knowledge.

King Then our army
Is half defeated, for Alecto does
Command as great a part as Prince Amandus:
But let me not despair, until we hear

The utmost trial.
Enter a third Lord. Lord Long live mighty King.
I bring you joyful news of victory,
The Prince has won the field, redeemed the Duke
Out of the hands of death, and when the battle
In all men's judgment was snpposed lost,
He by his valor, and his wisdom both,
By none but by the mour taneers assisted,
Recovered it again, and took the prey
Out of the Persians jaws, routed their troops,
Brake their battalions, and reduced their order
Into confusion, fighting hand to hand,
He brought the Persian Prince unto his mercy.
And took him prisoner, then the Persians fled,
And we pursued them; great the slaughter is,
And infinite the riches that is taken
In costly plate and jewels, gold and silver
Was never a more braver overthrow.
Each common soldier now is like a Captain,
With scarlet hose, buffe coat, and tossing feather,
There Is no distinction in their habits seen.

King Thanks to the gods for this our victory,
Next, to their instrument Damascus Prince,
Three times a day we will smoke your sacred altars
With sweet perfumes, and come with adoration
To offer to your shrines, three times a night.
The Priest shall sprinckle over with blood of beasts
Your sacred places, and with zeal perform
The ceremony of your sacrifices.

Enter the first Lord again. Lord The Prince Amandus, and the Duke Alect^.
Are come in triumph wi^h their prisoners,
And wait your royal pleasure.

King Pray them from us
They would be pleased to enter.

Enter Amand, leading Perseus prisoner, Alecto hurt, Colonel, the Ambassador
of Egypt, the Gent. all in triumph. Amand. Unto you (...)
The Prince of Persia (...) the chance
Of war has made me master of: I freely
Give unto your possession, all the wealth
Is gotten in this Persia^ (...)
And I am glad my (...)
Occasion to me, whereby I have shown
Unto your Majesty my love and ^^^vice.

King Victorious Princ^, sen^ to us from the gods,
(Whom we may term the (...) of our Country)
Thy same reward thee fully, for we cannot,
Let the shrill trum^et of thy virtues blaze thee
Throughout the world, (...) be raised
And trophies built to speak they living praise.
Let every piece and picture (...)
Be gazed upon by (...) eyes,
And this thy conquest crowned Laurel boughs.
Prince Perseus welcome, we receive you now
I know a most unwilling guest, you shall not
Be entertain (...) your royal state,
Although our (...)
Please you salute these Ladies, one of them
I doubt not but you know.

Perseus. The (...)
salues her But who is the other (...)
As diamonds glass.
aside. salutes Phaenic^a. That lovely touch has filled
My veins with a new fire, and quite put out
The former flame within me.

also aside. Embas. Madame, I crave the honor for to kiss
Your Highness Princely hands.

Lucind. My fathers servant.
And trusty subject, se^^ i^ his affa^^s
To foreign Princes, I am glad to see you,
We shall have private time to talk at large
Of our affairs.

King My royal guests I fear
We keep you from your rests, whose wearied bodies
Would feign enjoy the benefit of sleep,
Toiled with the sweating labor of the day:
Please you to walk, we will show you to your lodgings.

Exit King, then Perseus leading Lucinda, Amand^ Phaenicia Phaenicia You grace
me Sir.

Amand. Madame, I under stand
No honor like to this, to kiss your hand.

Exeunt. Amandus at one door, Phaenicia at another, they meet. Amand. Most
fair and beauteous Princess,
My thoughts did tell me as I lay abed,
There was a wonder to be seen this morn,
A Sun whose glorious beams eclipsed Apollos
As much as he does Cinthias, she the stars.
I find they were no lyar^, for behold
I see it verified, my gazing eyes
Are come to bless, and to adore your rise,

Phaenicia. Fair Prince, it was some fal^e suggesting dream
Abused your sleep, and wronged your expectation.
You find not what was promised, though your wit
Would feign excuse the leaving of your bed
So soon for nothing: do you use to stir
So early in a morning?

Amand. Seldom Madame.
But if such Nymphs attend Auroras train,
I Will hate to be a fl^ggard, and more often
Frequent this place, the garden of delight.

Phaenic. You are not like another time to jeere me
For early rising.

Amand. Nay, fair Princess leave not
This good and wholesome exercise, the graces
Will dye for sorrow then, the mounting Lark
Will not read over his mattens, nor the Thrush
Warble forth ditties with delightful throat:
Fair Philomela shall no more be heard
To chant and charm the hearers of her songs;
And all the other winged choristers
Will hang the head, and weep in silent tears,
If fair Phaenicia grant no audience:
Hark how they do salute you, every one
Striving to paste, and to excel the other
In sweet harmonions notes to please your e^re^:
O what a consort's this! if you but mark it,
There is a certain mutual emulation
Amongst these pretty birds, whose musick's sweetest,
Has attracted most your kind attention,
Proud to be overheard by beauties Queen.

Phaen. Sir, you have learned a pretty art indeed,
To understand the languages of birds,
And tell their meanings: I have read of some
Could well interpret that way, but believe not:
You use it row in a poeticke sense,
And so I take it, I should make another
Construction of their singing that they chide me,
And say I am not modest to adventure
Alone without my Maids into the garden.
The wronged Philomela most of all
Urges her grief, and bids me take example
Of her too much credulity of man:
I was to blame to come so weakly guarded
I must confess, nor would I change a word
With any other man besides your self
Alone in such an hour, so much I trust
Your virtue noble Prince, and worthy tho^ght^.

Amandus My humblest thankee for this high priviledg^
Bright goddess that you daign me, let my lips
Pay dutious tribute to your lilly hands
I do bes^ech you

Kisses her hand. Phaenc. Sir I now leave you,
For fear I should be missed, and so f^ll ^^der
The censure of black to^nges, which take delight
To spot the reputation of a maid;
I should be loath to give the world occasion
Even of the least suspicion, yet I must
Dispense with my return a little longer
To do one friendly office in behalf
Of a distressed Princess, you may guess
The scope of my intent in these few words.

Amand. Who do you mean, the fair Lucinda Madam?
Whose angry stars made so unfortunate,
As to bestow her love on me unworthy,
Whose state is such, as that I cannot make
Reciprocal return of her affection.

Phaenic. I must impute that to your cruel nature,
(Pardon me Sir) and to no other cause,
Else what should make the Princess^ so contemned?
Is beauty wanting? no, the envious't wretch
That breathes this air, must be enforced to say,
Her portion's large that way, the curious't eye
Can see no blemish in her beanteous face.
Is youth decayed then? no, 'twere sin to think it,
For flowers and Roses spring up in her cheeks,
Half white, half red, most purely intermixed.
Is virtue banished? O me thinks my tongue
Profaned is for asking such a question
So much improbable! will you allege
She is not great enough in birth or fortune?
That will not stand in ^^w, for 'twill be proved
She is the greatest Princess of the world;
If beauty, youth, virtue, and high descent
Accompany her greatness: what is more
To be required in a princely Bride?

Amand. I grant it Madam, that she comes not short
Of what you speak her, but abounds in all
Perfections of the body and the mind,
But yet this cannot bind me to become
Disloyal to the Saint, whose temple was
Long since erected in this heart of mine,
Before I saw Lucinda, I Will adore
No other goddess in my thoughts but she,
To whom I sacrifice my heart and soul;
I know your virtue's such, as not to urge
(My reasons thus revealed) a thing unlawful:
O no, you hate to further such a suit,
Fair Princess, so unjust.

Phaenic. Would I were she
He loves with such devotion, but alas
I do despair my fortune.
aside. I have done.
Far be it from my thoughts to make a breach
Of love and loyalty between two hearts,
United in themselves; but since I have
Made this discovery, I beseech to know,
(Pardon a woman's curiosity)
The Mistress of your thoughts, I must not be
The second time denied.

Amand. You do impose
Such a command upon me, as I know not
If I shall more offend to disobey
Your will in saying nothing, or in uttering
What you will have me speak; if it displease you,
The fault is yours, not mine, for I had been
Content to smother up my woe^ in silence;
Know then, sweet Princess, that I loved as soon
As fourteen years crept on upon my age,
A beauteous picture, such as rare Apelles
Durst never presume for fear, to imitate,
Lest he should come far short, and shame himself:
I served this shadow with a z^alous heart,
Six years, but yet the heavenly substance knows not
How much I suffered for her love so long,
I dare proceed no further.

Phaenic. Come, you must
Unfold this d^rke Aenigma, I do long
To bea^e your story to the end; but if
You be so modest, let me see the picture,
And ^le disp^nc^ the trouble of your speech.

Amand. Madame it is yours, (...) does the blushing morn
Cast a most pure vermilion on her cheeks
When Phoebus does salute her, wonder not
Admired Godesse that I am so bold,
To court a beauty does deserve the style
Of more then mortal, love compelled me to
This high presumption, and confirmed me in it
By telling that his mother loved a mortal,
Juno and Pallas did the like, he swore,
Yea chaste Diana though she were so coy,
Cupid will be deposed upon the book
Would sport in private, upon Latmus top,
With fair Endimion once a shepherds boy;
Descend a little from your heavenly state,
And look upon a wretch, who lays his life
Now at your mercy; can you grant me love
And life, divine Phaenicia.

Phaenic. Noble Prince,
My tongue can now not sound the negative,
Although I feign would, for my heart commands
That instrument of speech who in this thing
Is all affirmative; I never could
Dissemble what I thought, and therefore tell you
I Am yours, if you be mine, so firm united
Unto your love as death shall not di^^love
The gordian knot is tied between us two:
But Sir we do forget our selves to stay
So long together here, suspicious eyes
Will overlooke our actions, and I fear
Alectos malice and his jealousy,
See where he passes by, we are discovered,
Come let us away, next meeting shall conclude,
If fates do say amen, loves interlude.

Exeunt. The Prince of Persia, Lucinda, the Ambassador. Perse. Madam we hear
you're fallen of from us
In your affection, and prefer Amandus
In your best thoughts before the Persian Prince,
How can you answer this, and save your honor?

Lucind. I Will lay the fault (if any be) on Love,
Chide him not me; I was obliged to
The valor of Amandus for my life
And honor, when they both endangered were
By fierce Rapinus, was not this a tie
To make me love him?

Perse. Yes but not so much
To doat upon him as I hear you do,
Your reputation I must tell you Lady
Suff^rs reproac^ and scandal, and herein
You undergo, the censure of bad tongues
Which will not cease to blaze you.

Lucind. Sir you are
A most unworthy Prince to tax my fame,
I never thought you other, though I were
Enforced to entertain your love embassage,
My heart never condescended to my journey,
For fame had told me what you were though rich
In the external fortunes of the world,
Yet poor in the internal faculties
And virtues of the mind, which do adorn
A Prince more then his greatness; I disclaim
All interest you can or may allege
In my affection, for I scorn the man
Shall ques^ion my good name.

Perse. This does confirm
Your foul disloyalty, your own tongue almost
Tells me you have been false, I do believe it,
Else would you not have broake your plighted faith,
Nor staid with poor. Amandus when you might
Come over unto me without disturbance;
Is he to be put in scale with me?
An exile banished from his native home,
A poor distr^ss' d Pilgrim? what although
He were sometimes Damascus petty Prince,
He now is but a beggar, and at best,
When most he flourished in his (...) and fortune,
Was then but worthy to attend my train,
And could you be so prodigal of love
And fav^urs on this man, as to adventure
The shipwreck of your honor and your oath,
The high displeasure of the King your Father,
And your perpetual ruir^ I am glad
The match is broaken off, and by your means,
I am not guilty of the breach of faith.
Were you endowed with both the Indies wealth
And were the daughter of great Alexander,
Were you ten times more fair then you are,
By all the gods we worship and adore,
I would not marry you to wear a Crown
Acteon should lay claim too; Perseus bed
I trow, deserves to have a Maidenhead.

Offers to go out the Ambassador stays him. Embassa. Stay, in the mighty
Souldans Name my King
I do defy thee unto mortal war
For this base wrong, and foul contagious spot
Thy leprous mouth has vomited against
The Princess reputation, look to be
Called to a strict account for this abuse.

Perse. I do not fear thy King, but fleight his force
As weak and feeble to encounter mine
He durst not look our country in the face
In angry arms, we are more apt and likely
To enter on his confines with an army.

Lucinda. And be taken prisoner, valiant Prince,
As in this Country with so small a force;
You'ave reason sure to boast your mighty power
It Is so redoubted by your wit and valor,
Experience shows it.

Perse^ Lady of lost honor
Your jeering cannot patch your broaken credit,
I will divulge you, and your Fathers Kingdom
Shall pay the wrong you did me,
so farewell. exit Perseus.
Lucind. Just heavens bear witness of mine innocence,
And clear me of this foul aspersion which
This villain casts upon me undeserved,
If I have played salse, let the greatest plagues
You can inflict fall on me, let the earth
Gape and devour me, let your thunderbolts
Light on my head, and strike me to the center,
But if I Am guitl^sse (as you know I am)
Return your plagues on him that is the author
Of those my wrongs, and let him justly suffer
The utmost of your rage, that by his fate
The world may know his scandal was but hate.

Exeunt. The King, Alecto, with attendant^. King. Nephew we understand how
intimate
And dear you are unto the Persian Prince,
How much he honors your society
Above all others, you can well inform us
What entertainment he does give his fortune,
And how a prisoner suites his lofty mind.

Alecto. At first he stormed and cursed his angry stars,
Reviled the fates, and railed against the gods,
Refu^'d to eat or drink, banished all sleep
From entering in his eyes, locked up himself
Within his private study all alone,
Comm^nding none upon his high displeasure
Should offer to disturb his meditation:
His high swollen heart, was big with angry passion
Until another far more powerful wrought
A contrary effect, and that was love,
For gazing on the Princess peerless beauty
With surfeiting delight, a sudden shaft
Sent from the curious circlet of her eye
Stroke him unto the heart, and there withal
Cupid.
The winged archer, sprung up from his stand
And took him prisoner, now (...) languisheth,
But pleasingly does take this second chance,
Submits with patience to the will and pleasure
Of fair Phaenicia Lady conqueresse,
And glories to be manacled by her
Whose prison he esteems, and does prefer
Before the Palace of the greatest Kings.

King. This thing is motion'd to us; how think you
Can I bestow her better, or ^ind out
A marriage greater or more honorable?

Ale. You cannot though you sought the spacious world
From one end to the other -- I must turn
My thoughts unto as many several shapes.
As Proteus usd --
aside. Have you proposed this thing unto the Princess?

King. Not yet but now we do intend to do it:
Go bid Phaenicia hither to repair
Unto our presence, we must speak with her.
exit attendant. How will she entertain the motion think you?
She cannot sure dislike or disapprove it,
What Is your opinion Nephew?

Alecto. I should think so,
But for one bar that lies in the way
Were that taken off al scruple were removed.

Enter Phaenicia. Phaenici. Did you command me hither to repair
Unto your presence Sir?

King. I did Phaenicia,
And thi's the business, daughter you perceive
My care and study of your future good,
And Fatherly affection: I am old
And cannot live long by the course of nature,
If I might see thee married as becomes
Thy state and fortune ere I left the world,
And settled well my Crown for ^^y possession,
I then should welcome death, come when it would,
And these gray hairs descend into my grave
Without disturbance, there is off^^ed now
A marriage, shall advance thy regal state
Above the clouds, and make thee overtop
The greatest Queens and Empresses that are.

Phaenic. Unless it be Amandus I shall be
The most unhappiest Princess of the earth -- aside.
Please you my royal Father to acquaint me,
Who is the party meant?
The Persian Prince,
He loves and serves you with a strong devotion,
Yea does even jdolize you in his heart
His saint and goddess; he has se'd unto me
My liking might procure you to his wife,
And I have granted what he did demand;
I know your virtue's such and your obedience
As not to stand against our will and pleasure,
Especially when it presents you nothing
But what is for your honor and high fortune.

Phaenic. Please you to hear me, this you do propose
Is most unlawful, and my conscience tells me
It were a sin to think off: for you know
The Prince of Persia is betroathed to
The beautiful L^cinda, and shall I
Be guilty of the breach of faith between them?
Far be it from me; I believe he is
Inconstant in his love, and apt to change
From one unto another, his large titles
Shall never win me to his wavering humor,
I rather would content me with a match
Inferior far so I might marry virtue,
In him indeed I cannot, for not only
F^me but experience manifests his vices.

King. Come, come, you are a foolish girl to make
These vain excuses to put off your good,
You ^o presume ^oo much upon our love
And tender nature, we have been ^oo ^^nd
And given you too much of your will; unless
You do conform your self to our command,
We shall be are over you a severer hand:
Get out my sight, and think upon your duty.
Exit Phaenicia. Is this not strange Alecto, that my daughter
Is so averse unto her good? you told me
Just as she entered that there was a bar
Lay in the way might chance to stop the match,
What is it prithee that we may remove it?

Alecto. She loves Amandus Sir, and he loves her,
I over heard their cour^ship in the garden,
Their amourous discourse, and protestations
Of love and service, such affection shown
In action, gesture, speech, as greater was not
Expressed between fair Hero and Leander:
Their eyes stood fixed upon each others face,
Their tongues were sometimes mute and could not utter
The abundance of their hearts, then would their sighs
Supply that silence, till they had recovered
The instrument of speech to make it move,
I never saw more passion used in love.

King. This makes me wonder much that her ambition
Bears such an humble wing, we must not suffer
This business to run on, what though we are
Bound to Amandus in a high degree,
Yet not so much his benefits oblige us
As to confer our Daughter and our Crown
Upon his merits, whose poor state is such
As he can give her nothing for a Dower:
This must nor shall not be, our full inde^vour
Shall be employed this love to break and sever.

Exeunt Perseus Alecto, Perseus musing. Alecto. Why how now noble Prince,
within a dump?
How come you so dejected in your thoughts
I do beseech you? has your love sped ill
Unto the fair Phaenicia, or some other
Ill accident befall you, that you are
So melancholy Sir?

Perseus My dearest friend,
Welcome; the mistress of my thoughts has slain me
With too much cruelty alas, for when
I marched with my army led by love,
And came before the fortress of her beauty,
To lay my siege there, how she played upon me
From all her batteries, but when I began
To make approach. then from her angry eyes
Flew balls of wilde-fire, and grenades followed,
Which scorch't and rent my heart, but last of all,
The cannon of her mouth so thundered on
My poor besieging thoughts, as I was feign
To raise my siege in haste, and get me gone,
This is the poor success of my design.

Alecto Do You know Sir what is the cause you speed so ill?

Perse. I have been thinking on it, but cannot lay
The blame on any thing but fortunes malice,
Can you inform me better?

Alecto Would I could not.
I have found out Amandus has her heart,
By what smooth guile, or Siren oratorie
He won her to himself; I am not able
To give you satisfaction, or to gu^sse it:
This ancient enemy of yours and mine,
(For who stands ill affected unto you,
Shall never affected be by me your friend)
Has now the second time deceived your match.
Wrong of all wrongs! disgrace of all disgrace!
So to be cheated of two princely brides:
Sir, you must be revenged, deeply revenged,
Or else your Princely name will be reproached
With foulest infamy that can be spoke.
Blind men and boys will sing you in the streets
In Ballads, and at length 'twill grow a proverb,
So patient as the Prince of Persia,
If you sustain those injuries which lie
So heavy on your Princely reputation.

Perseus I am even burst with rage and jealousy,
That villain, vagabond, that enegado,
Borne to be author of my sufferings,
Shall not outlive one day; I am incensed
Beyond all measure, and I cannot longer
Contain my self, I Will find that beggar out.

Alecto Stay Sir, be patient, and do things discreetly,
I Will join with you, and have a hand as deep
Or deeper as your self in your revenge,
For the great love I bear you: by the gods
I am as much touched with your wrongs, and am
As zealous in your cause, as you your self.
And now to work to bring our ends to pass,
I have a dainty powder here that was
Ordained for such a pu^pose, which will work
Effect unto ou^ wish i^ it bu^ fall
Into his cup, or light upon his hai^e,
'Twill soon di^p^tch him (...) po^der hence,
Such virtue is ther^in: we sh^^ ^^^rupt
His B^rber by rich (...) or by some other
Unthought of way yet, (...) the same
To be employed and (...) upon the Patient
This physic is ordained for (...) you this,
Or shall we yet devise some (...)?

Perseus These figs are too too common, and besides,
It does not suit the honor of a Prince
By such a way of (...)
Destruction to his foe; although Amandus
Deserve from me an ignominious death,
Yet 'cause he is a Prince, and bred in war,
I^^^ine would have him, like a soldier dye
Nobly, by sword or pistol.

Alecto He shall fall then
According to your will and in this manner
If you approve it Sir, what if you send
A challenge to him for to meet you single,
A foot or horseback, in the field to answer
These shameful wrongs he did you? I will be
Ready to rescue you when I perceive
You need my help with certain friends of mine,
Who will lie close the while, and undiscovered,
Until we see you have the worst, then forth
We Will break, and soon dispatch that traitor Princ^.

Perseus This, noble Duke, is daintily devised,
I shall be grateful ever to your love,
And show it in a large and ample manner,
Well I Will dispatch my challenge instantly.
I build upon your aid, you will not fail me
In time of my extremity.

Alecto The floods
Shall fail to pay their tribute to the sea,
Before I break with noble Perseus.

Perseus I Am confident of thee my dearest friend,
Adue, until we meet, our work to end.
Exit Perseus.
Alecto This now begins to work as I would wish;
The shallow witted Persian thinks my aims
Do bear a wing with his, and my ambition
Is bounded by his love: I fished to take
His good opinion with mine angle wit,
Not to advance his ends, but work mine own.
Alas poor Prince, he thinks I am his friend,
And on that plat-forme grounds his resolution:
He is deceived, I Am friend unto my self,
And enemy to him as to Amand^^.
I hate them both, as being both ^y rivals:
Rivals unto my love, and to my kingdom:
Neither must live, neither survive the other.
I Will let them sight till one of them be killed,
The Persian shall in vain expect relief,
Although distressed: the conqueror shall dye
By me and my associates: these removed
The way unto my Crown, lies smooth and easy;
The Princess sure will break her heart for grief.
The King I Will poison, then Alecto reign
King of Arabia, crowned by thy brain.
Exit.
Amandus solus. Amand. A furious challenge, and it speaks the man
All in a fire that sent it, but extremes
Are seldom permanent, I doubt 'twill prove
But like a sudden flash that is soon burnt out:
This is the time and place, but how comes it
The Persian is so tardy? this proud paper
Stuffed full with ostentation, made me think
He would not be the last man in the field.
What, is his courage cold, or does he now
Begin to take advised deliberation
Upon the matter, that he stays so long?
I should not think so neither, for a Prince
Cannot so much forget his reputation,
No sure, he will come, some business of import,
I do believe, detaines him; I Will attend
His leisure here with patienc^, if my thoughts
Would but descend a little from their height,
I would consider too what should beget
This fierce challenge, but he comes, I must
Prepare to entertain him.

Perseus Here before me?
This honor I could hardly spare you Sir,
You came before the hour appointed, else
I could not be prevented.

Amand. Punctually
I did observe the time, but to what purpose
Are we come hither? to discourse and talk,
And nothing ^lse? I do expect some doings,
Some wonders too by you performed upon me,
If I may credit this your salutation.
Is the ^ume vanished?

Perseus Thou shall find it burn
Asresh to fierc^ flames, it was my goodness
That raked it up in ashes, lest it should
Consume thee, and thou die in ignorance,
Before thou knew'st the occasion, now I Will tell thee.
Lucindas wrongs and mine c^ll on my sword
To do the office of revenge upon*
Thy treacherous head, thou did dissolve the knot
Was tied between us two, and alienatest
Her heart from me, thou robst her of her honor,
And strumpettedst her fame, and not contented
With this abuse, thou do proceed yet further
To do me mischief with false filed tongue,
To wrest the fair Phaenicia from my love:
These are gresse inj^ries, and such as cannot
Be undergone with patience, yet if thou Will urge thy suit no further to this Lady,
But give up all thy right in her to me:
I will forget thy former injuries,
And count thee for my friend.

Amandus Coward, villain,
Art thou my rival in Phaenicias love?
And do I suffer thee to breathe a minute
To utter these ^old words, these defamations,
These lies and slanders; know Phaenicia hates
Thy sight as a pernicious Basiliske;
Here farther, read my mind.

they draw and fight. Perseus receives a hurt. Perseus Thou see my breath
Fails, if thou art a Prince, and nobly minded,
Thou will a little intermit the fig^t.

Amand. Breath then a ^ittle longer, though I might
^ustly deny it, since we are not tied
To any such conditions in a duel:
But wherefore do you cast your sight about?
I doubt some treachery, come, I Will delay
The time no longer, there have at thee Prince.
they fight again. ^uard well thy life, it is endangered.

Perseus This may endanger thine if it hap right.
Perseus falls. I faint and dye, hell light upon Alecto,
And all the suriesrend his soul in pieces;
False perjar'd villain.

dies. Amand. I do sm^ll a plot
Laid for my life, his words betoken something.

Enter Alecto and his assoeiates. Alecto How Is this ^ the noble Prince of
Persia slain,
And his bold murderer triumphing over
His slaughtered body? come, my noble friend
Shall not dye unrevenged.

they fall all upon him, he defends himself, and kills two. Amand. If there be
any
Princely or royal blood within thy veins,
Distaine it not or shame by such a fact,
To fight at such foul disadvantage with
A wounded wearied man, yet in this state,
Though faint with loss of blood, dismiss these men,
And I will try my fortune out with thee,
And if I fall, I Will say the art noble too.

Alecto No, if thou liv'st, my fortunes then must dye:
I aim, man, for the kingdom, and to gain
The love of fair Phaenicia, thou art a bar
That hinders both, therefor must be removed:
This plot I did contrive, not with intent
To work thy end alone, but Perseus too;
Now it is finished, make an easy passage
For life to issue forth me dear associates,
There Is one gap more, a floud-gate large enough.

they all thrust at him, he falls. Amand. Most impious wretch, think thou the
gods above
Will favor thy so damnable attempt?
Think thou to escape the justice of the heavens,
And to hood-wink the gods? no, though thou have
Proceeded thus far in thy villainies:
Though thou have slain me by thy base treachery,
My mind foretells thou shall be soon cut off,
And all thy hopes destroyed.

Consolario, Colonel, Gentleman, Mountaueers. Consol. Where is my Prince?
Where is he? torment to my wounded heart?
Weltring in his own blood.

Colon. How? heavens defend,
What impious hand has done so f^ule an act?
Speak Noble Prince, speak quickly.

Amand. Worthy friends,
You're fitly come here to revenge my death,
There stands the villain, and his treacherous crew
Who did procure it.

Gent. We will sacrifice
Their lives with speed, to pacify your spirit;
But that is a poor requital for our loss:
Villains, our swords must send you hence to hell,
Go, and the furies give you entertainment.

they kill Alecto and all his friends. Consol. Dear Sir, how do you? speak
to Consolario,
Speak to your tutor, open these lovely eyes,
And look with pity on the aged face
Of him that dies for sorrow of your wounds.
Dear son, speak comfort to thy fathers heart,
(For so you bid me style you to my death)
I faint, yet let one word come from you month,
To tell me that you he^^e my g^^vous moan.
And I shall die in peace.

Amand. Dear Consolarie
Thy orie^ have waked me from a pleasing sleep,
I love thee still in death and after death.

Consol. But I Will die first, so, so my heart strings break.

Falls down dead by Amandus. Amand. Help, help, my Fathers fallen in a
^wound.

Colon He Is dead sweet Prince and passed recovery.

Amand. I Will soon be with him, for I must not loose
His loved society; have you revenged
My death, upon Alecto and the rest?

Gent. It Is done, dear Sir, see where the viliaines ly.

Amand. Thanks dearest friends, one thing before I die
I shall request you if my failing breath
Will give me leave to utter it, it is this,
Tell fair Ph^nicia my beloved Princess
The story of my death, tell how I love her,
And grieve to leave her comfortless alone.
I cannot fully speak my mind unto you,
For death stops up the passage of my speech;
Adieu dear friends, adieu, Phaenicia
I dye thy servant, sweet Phaenicia.

dies. Colon. Farewell brave Prince, we thy unworthy subjects
Can but lament thy loss, and curse the fates
For their unjust decrees; O could they not
Have spared the chief of Princes to give luster
Unto the world? could not they see his beauty
And virtue shining in their glorious Orbs?
His youth fair blooming? cruel destinies!
Come now your shoulders honor with his Coarse
Sweeter then all the perfumes of the Realm,
Some to bring Consolarios body off;
We'll see this fatal Land Arabia shall
Provide them both a royal Funeral,

Exeunt, Phaenicia, Saba her maid. Phaeni. Do I yet breath and live when he
that was
The comfort of my life lies dead and breathless?
Can I behold another Sun but that
Which shined from his maiestick countenance,
Eclipsed now by death, procured by treason:
O heavens grant freedom to my troubled spirit
To break this prison of mortality,
And so get loose with wings of swift desire
To meet my lover in the Elizian fields.
O how I languish here! hark blessed spirit
Of my departed friend (for I believe
Thou do refine this air) hark to my woes;
Do not condemn Phaeuicia that she stays
So long behind thee, for thou know her soul
Desires to take her flight into thy bosom,
Nor shall she meet a stop (I am resolved)
Amandus have a little patience yet,
And then I come, it is but a minut^ longer
Until I do contrive an easy way
For life to sally forth: my trusty maid
My faithful Saba, now assist thy Mistress
In this kind office that I shall command,
Wherein thy love shall more appear then ever:
I loath this life thou see, go fetch my Doctor
I must take his advise; thou will be secret,
I am ^ssur'd, I have so often had
Exp^rience of thy faith; will thou dispatch,
And bring him to me with all expedition?

Saba. What you command my duty wills me do
Without dispute, I Will instantly return
And bring the Doctor --
Exit Saba.
Phaeni. Do so trusty servant
And thy reward shall follow; I must work
This Doctor to my will by fair entreaties,
And if that fail, by large rewards and gifts,
I Will leave no way u^t^i'd, nor una^^empted,
Until I do prevail. --

Enter Doctor with Saba. Phaeni. My worthy Friend
And hitherto preserver of my health,
I have a business now wherein I shall
Make trial of your utmost love and trust,
In which you must not fail me.

Doctor. Gracious Princess
My life shall be employed in any service
You shall have need to use it.

Phaeni. These are words
Of ceremonious complement, you shall not
Adventure so for me, it is but a trifle
I would employ you in.

Doct. What is it, I do beseech
Your Grace to tell me, and it is done with speed.

Phaen. But I must have you swear to execute
The thing intended, and be secret too,
Else I shall think you never were my friend.

Doct. It Is some great matter that you bind me thus,
But Ladies wills must not be disobeyed,
Since it is your pleasure that I take my oath,
I here protest before the gods above
To do the utmost of my power therein.

Phae. Well then, you know my love, you know my loss*
You know the virtues of that noble Prince
Whose death exhausts tears from forth mine eyes
And drops of blood from my poor wounded heart;
I am resolved to die and now no longer
To carry such a heavy load about me
Of grief and sorrow, which does overweigh
By much the weakness of a woman's nature;
Kind friend you must be the instrument to send me
Unto the Prince Amandus, whose sweet spirit
Shall come with mine, and hover over your house,
Until the whistling air sound both our thanks:
Come do this friendly office, you are ti'd
Unto it by your oath, you must not start,
Or fall back from your former resolution.

Doctor. You do but try me, Madame, if I will
Prove such a villain, sure you cannot mean
Sincerely what you speak, or if you did,
This is a thing unlawful, there was nothing
You could command me but this only thing
That I would not perform, but pardon me
I must dispense with oath and all things el^e
To leave this deed undone.

Phaen. And perjured prove
Unto the gods, and false unto thy Mistress
O cruel man! see thou the pain I suffer
And will it not lend thy hand to ^ase my torment?
Are all my favors out of thy remembrance?
Could they not bind thee to this courtesy?
Take pity on me yet, and here is gold
Enough to purchase thee a Lordship fair,
What say thou to me?

Doct. I am doub^f^ll whether,
To grant or to deny, but yet you have not
Declared your mind at full; what must I do?

Phaen. Devise an easy way for me to die,
Not in a common ordinary road,
Which many use by cutting of a vain
Or such like, to get passage to their bliss;
I saw the Phaeni^^ burning in her flames
The other day, and was enamored off
So sweet a death, I feign would die so too
Your art can help me in the imitation.

Doct. It Is true I can compose variety
Of gummes, of drugges and spices mixed together,
And make a perfume not unlike unto
The Phaenix Funeral fire, whereby you may,
Be sweetly smothered lying in your bed,
As she is in her nest, but I would rather
You would de^^^ from this your resolvtion,
And make a trial of my love and service
I^ any other thing.

Phaen. It is more easy
To stopp the current of a swelling river,
Or to remove a mountain from his place,
Then to divert my mind from this, whereupon
It does so firmly fix, therefore kind Sir
Send me forthwith by this my maid (for now
The time fits right) this excellent receipt.

Doctor. Your will shall be obeyed, mine shall give place.
Come maiden will you go?

Exit Doctor and Maid. Phaen. Dispatch her to me
With all the have you can, in the mean time
I Will rest me on my bed, and never rise
Until I see Amandus with mine eyes
She lies down. This short, or rather this long time I have
To breath the air of woe (for life is tedious
To those that take no pleasure but in death)
Shall be employed wholly in meditation,
How sweetly I shall pass unto my friend,
And come unto him as in sacrifice,
Mine altar smoking incense and perfume.
Doctor and Maid again.

Doct. Madame, I Am come my self to do the deed,
Doubting the maid should fail in my directions.

Phaen. Most welcome, sacred priest, for that is the title
Your office now requires, because you are
To sacrifice me to Amandus shrine
A spotless Virgin; nay delay no time,
But presently about it, light the fire
Whilst I attend the sweet asending flame
Here in my bed with longing expectation
To wrap my body round, dispatch I pray.

Saba. It Is kindled, Madam, and a cloud o^^ume
Shroudes you from sight.

Ph^^. I smell a heavenly vapor
Assaulting my weak breath, now Prince I come,
Beloved Prince thy dear Phaenicia comes,
Be ready to rec^ive her, for her spirit
Ascends up in this smoaky sacrifice.

Saba She Is dead Sir, for the sweetness of the fume
Has smothered her senses.

Doct. 'Twas her pleasure
She would not be dissuaded from her purpose.
I must be gone, here is no safe abiding.

Saba. I dare not stay here neither, though her l^tter
Be a sufficient warrant for our lives;
I Will leave it on the bed, because the King
May find it if he chance to enter in.

Exeunt Doctor and Saba. Enter the King with attendance. King How sweet my
daughter sleeps and how her breath
Perfumes the chamber over like Arabs gummes,
I Will wake my darling with a fathers kiss,
She sleeps too long; ^ow's this? her lips are cold,
Her cheeks are pale, aye me, I fear she is sick,
I cannot feel her pulse, nor yet perceive
The passage of her breath; O heavens, she is dead.
A Doctor there with speed, my daughter dear,
Speak to thy aged father: O she is gone.
Doctor, Lucinda, Emb. Cobon. Gentleman. What say you master Doctor? is there
hope
To call back life again?

Doct. My gracious Sovereign,
It Is too far fled to be revok't, the art
O^ Aesculapius could do nothing in it,
Nor all the power of physic, nor the force
Of medicine can help.

King O then I am
The wretchedst man alive, why was I borne
To see this woeful hour? but what is this?
My daughters will and tes^ament (...) may be
'Twill give me satisfaction of her death:
It Is her own hand and seal, these the contents.
My royal father, please you understand,
Despair and sorrow for Amandus death,
(Whom heavens ordaind the owner of my heart)
Made me loath life, and seek this way to dye
In perfume like the Phaenix, none is guilty
Unto my death but I my self: dear Sir,
I humbly crave you would be pleased to lay
My ashes in Amandus urne with his,
That so my spirit may rest in quietness.

King Thy will shall be performed, lie there gray hayres
And aged head, think now no more to wear
A regal Crown, nor feeble hands to weild
A scepter, think of nothing but a grave:
I Am coming daughter, and I will surprise thee
Before thou art aware, beloved corpse!
Help, bring it hence unto our bed chamber,
That I may break my heart, whilst I embrace
The body 'tween my arms.

Exit King, and the body of Phaenicia. Embas. What tragic Scenes
This fatal land presents? come Madame, let us
Return to Egypt, to the King your father,
And make relation of these sad disasters
That have befaln in this our pilgrimage.

Lucind. Let it be so since things have ^alne ou^ thus,
When I come to my native Land, my thoughts
Shall shun all pleasures, banish all delights,
And live Dianas Votary I will,
Till death shut up the remnant of my days.
What course sirs will you take?

Colon. Fair Princess, we
Intend to travel back unto Damascus,
Where we first breathed, there to surrender up
Our breath again unto the Land that gave it.
The Tartars swords, we hope will cut it off.

Lucinda Nay rather go with us, and live in pleasure
At the Egyptian Court, for I Will assure you
High honors and preferments for the favors
You showed me once in my captivity,
And for his sake, whom yet in death I love,
But I shall not participate in joy.

Gent. Alas, dear Madame, we abhor delights
As much as you, since our delight is gone;
We thank your noble courtesy, but cannot
Accept it, for despair and sorrow does
Pos^esse our very souls, come, let us go
And leave this Land so much repleat with woe.

Exeunt omnes. The Epilogue.
ANovelty is happened since the Play
Was ended, and it came to pass this way,
A scrowle was found within the spicy bed
Of that rare Phaenix, fair Phaenicia dead,
Sealed up, and superscrib'd thus, to all such
Whom mine and Prince Amandus fate does tou^h
With any sorrow: these were the contents,
We thank you all for your kind audience.
Come, and be welcome still, and let your friends,
Who have not seen as yet our tragic end,
Come here and weep with you, until together,
You make up this a full pressed theater:
Then it shall please our ghosts to think the age
Pitties our wrongs presented on the Stage.
FINIS.

