The serpent of division. Which has ever been yet the chefest vndoer of any
Region or City, set forth after the Auctours old copy / by I. S. Anno. M. D.
L. IX. the. iiii. of May.



The Serpent of diui^ion.
WHylom as old Books makes mention, when the noble and famous city of Rome
was most shining in his felicity, and flouring in his glory, like as it is
remembered in the books of old antiquity / in the pryme temps of his
foundation / when the walls were raised on height by the manly and prudent
diligence of Remus and Romulus: the city stood under governance of kings /
till unto the time that Tarquine, son of Tarquine the proud, did the great
outrageous offense unto Lucres / wife of the woorthye Senator Collatine. In
punishynge of which trespace by the manlye pursuit of Collatines kindred and
full assent of all the Cenate: the name of kings ceased in the City of Rome
for evermore, and all the royal stock of the forsaide Tarquine was proscript
and put in exile. And after by the prudent advise of the Cenate: the city was
governed between Councellers / and so continued unto the time that Pompei the
proud was repaired home again from the conquest of Tire / which by force he
had made subject unto the Empire of Rome, where as with great worthiness of fame
he was received. So that for his great noblenes he was chosen one of the.iii
for to govern the city: assigned to him other two full renowned of
knighthoode / Julius Cezar, and Marcus Crassus, and thus was the name of
cou^sellers turned into the name of Dictatours, which was yt time an office
partinent to princes to govern other. And for a special cause this office and
this occupacion of a Dictatour, by assent of all the whole Cenate was committed
unto three, that if one offended, ye other twain should be mighty and strong
to correct the third. And another cause was this: while that twain were
occupied in war outward / the third should govern at home. And thus all the
while they were of one heart / of one assent / and void of variaunce among them
selves / the nobles of Rome floured in prosperity, but as soon as false
covetous brought in pride and vain ambicion, the co^tagious Serpent of division
clipsed and appalled her woorthines, co^cluding soothly as in sentence yt every
kingdom proved by division / is conveyed to his destruction. And so for the
surquedous pride on the party of Julius, and after of the said city of Rome:
the contagious covetous entermedled with envy, on the party of Pompey: made
the famous city of Rome fullye waste and wild / not only of their
inumerable treasour, but caused them also to be full baren and de solate of
their men / where to fore of worthiness, of knighthode / and of chiualry they
were incomparable. And finallye, the false division among them selves, was more
importable unto the^, and caunsed more the ruin of the City / than when they
had war with all the world / like as this little story compendiously shall
devise. And to convey briefly the process of this ma^^er: ye shall first
understand that Marcus Crassus was sent to the par^ies of the North with six
legions of Knights against the king of Parthes. And the manly man Julius Cezar
with other six legions of people was sent down, passing the great bonds of
Lombardye / dyscendynge down by high Alpies / and auayling down by the large
plage of Germany and of Almaygne, till by conquest b^ his manly ^orce and his
mortal swoorde he brought all France into subjection / and all the land of
Burgoyn, Brabant, Flaunders, and Holand. In which conquest he continued till
almost the space of his Luster was wasted out that is to say, that was the
space limited of the Romans, the which was called a Luster, which is
accounted the space of five year, and who so ever passed that space by occasion
of any conquest, and not repaired again at his time set and limited of five
year: he was foriudged anon and dempt as enemy and rebel unto the noble city
of Rome. But this famous and manly man Julius / prudentlie deming in his
opinion that time lost while ye Fortune is bla^desshing and favorable through
the contagious occasion of necligence and of sloth / is afterward full hard for
to be recovered. Wherefore of knighthod and manly prowess he did set ye
Romans statutes aside, and fully purposed in his noble and knightly heart for
to pass the bonds and the space of his Luster, and to enforce himself with
his ^^^ualrie to win the bonds (...) / and ouersayle by force the west party
of our Occean. But for all his surquedous pride he was twyse beaten of at his
arrival, by the woorthynes of the Britain king called Cassibelan. And plainly
without favor to declare and specify the truth, he might never attain to
ariue at his lust and pleasure, till this manlye king Cassibelan and Androg^nes
Duke of Cornewaile fell at debate among them selves / whereby I may conclude /
that whiles vn^tye and concord stood vndefoyled and undivided in the bonds
of Britain, the mighty conqueror Julius was unable and impotent to vanquishe
them.

By which ensample ye may evidently consider and see, that division like as is
specified to forne, is original cause in Prouincies and Regions of all
destruction. For when Julius by favor of Androgenes recovered ariuall into
Britain, shortly after Cassibelan the manlye king / proudly and kinghtlye met
with him / between whom there was a mortal war.

But like as it is especially remembered and recorded by the wrytinge of the
most worthy and graduate Clarke Eusebius, that same day when Julius and
Cassybelan me^ in the field / this foresaid Cassybelan had a famous and a
passing manly man to his brother, the which with his bloody mortal sword
never ceased to ^lea and oppress the proud Roman knights / so far forth
that they fled and eschewed his sword as the death. For as he went there was
no resistance, and this continued so long that the Romans were impotent to
resist. But oh alas when he was wearied of fight, it befell casually of fortune
which is ay contrary and perverse that he of adventure met with this manly man
Julius, and both two like as made is mention fared as Tigers and Lions,
euerich wou^ding other full mortallie, til sodeinly by dispocion of fate Julius
with an unware stroke of his dreadful sword, rose him a twain. And because
the story makes no mention what this worthy knight ^ight: I find none other
name (...) him, but that he was brother unto the nob^e Brito^ king Cassibelan.
The death of whom Britons oughtful well to complain, by whose death Julius was
made victorious / and Cassibelan brought to subieccion unto the Empire of Rome,
and constreyned by Cezar to pay for his truage three thousand pound every year.
And in the sign of this conquest and victory Julius Cezar edified in this
land for a perpetual memory to put his name in remembrance, the castle of
Dover and Cau^turburie / Rochester / and the tower of London, the castle and
the town of Cezarisbury, which now is called Salesburie. And moreover (as
says mine Auctour) he edified Cezaris Chester, that now is called Chichester,
and the castle of Exeter. And in the mean while that Cezar thus proudly had
wholly and entirelye the governance of Brutes Albion, his fellow Marcus Crassus
(of who^ tofore is made mention) was sla^ne in the East party of ye world
while he made most cruel war against the fierce people of Parthes. And for
his gredie vnstauncheable thurst of couetise / his enemies slew him in this
wise: They made melt gold and poured it into his mouth / saying to him in this
wise ( Aurum sitisti, aurum bib^*) Thou haste thursted gold all thy life / now
drink thy fill. Lo here ye may consider and see the short and the momentayne
time transitory and not abiding of all the warryours. And as the story
rehearceth also, as for lamentable kalendes of more infortune that after should
follow: Iu^ia the noble wife of Pompey, and daughter to Julius died of a
child. For which cause Pompeius pretended to find a cause to revoke Julius
again to Rome by assent of all the Senate / to the intent that he should come
in his own person to revenge in all have the death of his fellow Marcus
Crassus, as before is said so vengeablie slain in his conquest. This ^ame
Pompey having a secret dred in his conceit lest yt Julius should wax so mighty
in his conquest yt he should not be egall of power, nor able to resist him in
his repair, and dreding also in his imaginacio^ lest yt Julius would of
presu^ptuous pride usurp by tira^ny to take upon him the lordship and the
dominacion of Rome. But this manly man Cezar aduerting full prudently, and
perceiving the fradul^nt meaning of Pompey on the one side / and the compassed
sleigh^ of the Cenate of that other side full advisedly gave answer again that
that he would accomplish and perform his con^uest which he had begone / and
than mekely and humblye at their request repair home again. And in this wise
entered in the Snake of wanhope and of discord, which caused eueriche to suspect
other, and thus began to kyndle the fire of envy, enducing successiuelye war
and debate among them selves / and here upon without delay to execute their
purpose / and evidently to show the end of of their intent: Pompey and the
Cenate of one assent without respite or deliberacion, foriudged Cezar guilty,
disobedient, rebel, and traitor to Rome / and gave upon him a sentence
diffinitiue of exyle and prescriptio^ for evermore. But Julius not considering
nor having no manner evidence ^e suspicion of that malicious conspiracye, that
Pompey and the Cenate wrought against him: but all innocent and vnknowledging
of their envious malice / by good and diligent deliberacion of intent, did
send his Embassatours, not only unto his son in law Pompey, but also un to
all the woorthye court of the Cenate / and to all other of the Cityzens of the
city / requyring and praying them of equity / that for his meritorie desert
they should not be contrary against him nor for none occasion of wylfulnes to
deny unto him his customable gwe^don / the which is due of old antiquiti to be
given to Co^querours, but that they would freely an^ wylfully (uncompelled)
grant him and put him in possession of the Palm / and the Triumph which so
long by knightly labor and manlye diligence he had (for the increase and the
augmentacion of the common profit of all the Empire of Rome) traueled for. Then
for to specify and declare the honor and Triumph whylome used in Rome /
first ye shall understand that Triumphus by description / is as much to say
in English as a treble gladness, or else a singular excellency of joy, in three
manner of wise ordained for Uictours, which through their high renown and
manly prowess had brought Regions and cities by way of knightly conquest to
be subject and tributarie to the Empire of Rome. The first of the three worships
done to a Conqueror, was this: first at his repair unto the citi / all the
people of high estate and of low should with great joy and reverence in their
best and richest array, meet him on the way / and this was the first. The
second was this, that all the prisoners and they that were in captivity / should
fetred and manacled go round about enuiron his charret, some before and some
behind. And the third worship done unto him was this: that he should be clad
in a purpurate mante^l of Jupiter as God / and sit with a crown of Laurer upon
his head in a charet of gold / and about his neck a manner of a circle enuiro^
made of gold / in similitude and likeness of a Palm. And if so that his
conquest were performed and accomplished withoutes sword or sheding of blood /
than should the circle of the Palm be forged without pricks or pynnes. And
if so were that his victory was finished by the cruel fate of war, tha^ of
custom this circle or his pectoral was forged al full of sharp pricking thorns
/ to declare and specify that there is no conquest accomplished fully to the
end by mediacion of war, without that there be felt and found therein The
sharp thorns of adversity, and that either by death or else by poverty. And
this royal and victorious charet to forsaid, was drawn with.iiii. white stedes
through the most royal streets of the City to the Capitole, he having a Ceptre
in his ha^dful richly devised / and there upon in sign of victori an Egle of
gold. And to show clerelie that al worldly glory is transitory and not
abiding, and evidently to declare that in high estate is no assurance / there
was set at the back of the Conqueror, behind in the Charet, the most
unlikely person, and the most wretch that in any country might be found /
disfigured and cladde in the most ugly wise that any man could devise. And
amyd all the clamor and noise of the people / to exclude the false surquedie,
vain glory, and idle la^d, this foresaid foul and vglye wretch should of
custom and of con^uetude smite the Conqueror in the neck ever and upon the
head / and stondemele saying to him in Greek this word ((...)) which is to
say in our English tongue as (know thy self) which declares unto him yt he
nor none other should for no such worldli glory be ^urquedous ne wax proud.
And that day it was leful without punishing to every man, of high estate or of
low / to say to him that was Uictor, what that he would / whether it were of
honor or worship / of repre^e or of shame. And this was admitted for this
cause / that he should truly considre and aduert that there is no earthly
glory that fully may be assured without danger of fortune. And shortly to
declare the difference between Triumphus and Trophe^m. Triumph is a full and a
complener ouercomming of enemies by battle, and Troph is when a man puts his
enemies to flight wtoute stroke of sword. But touching this honor aforesaid
which Julius required and asked of right as for a gwerdon, which him thought
was meritory and due unto him. Anon this foresaid Pompey with full assent of
all the Cenate, denied all with one voice his request, and of one accord
answered again, and said him platlie he should not be accepted there unto no
such honor / but plainly they bad him know that he had rather deserved to be
dead, then to attain to any such worship, aledging against him that he was
both rebel and traitor to the statutes of Rome. And when Julius clearly
conceived the short answer of the Cenate and of this Pompey to fore said,
there kyndled a full great hot burning fire of envy in his heart of the freting
hate, specially, that he bare in his breast for to be revenged of Pompey. And
as Lucan rehearses in his poetical book, the denyeng of this worship to
Julius, was the chief ground and occasion of all the war that began in Rome
/ root and beginning also of all the contagious diu^sion among them selfs. But
so as Lucan likes to reherce and specify in his book aforesaid among other
causes that he put. Lie in especial writes of three which were chief
beginning and root of division among them selves / proving by reason in those
three that it must needs be that the felicity and the prosperity of Rome must
abate and draw to decline. The which three, first he says it was necessary
that such adversity should fall to Rome. Secondarelye he says it was
consue^udinarie. And thirdly he says it was voluntary. First that it was
necessary, he proves by example of nature in this wise: That like as Phoebus
the sun / when he arises in the Orient / and by successiue course ascends
into the highest point of the Middaye spear, and of his kind and natural
course must descend and has his golden tressed horns in the westre^ wawes,
and then dimmeth and darkneth our emysperie by ablence of his light: And also
eke when the same golden wayne of Titan / fro the Ariet is whirled up to the
hiest tower of his ascencion in the celestian sign of the Crabbe, and tha^ by
the mighty compelling of Natures right, he is constrained to discende down
and auale his charet: Right so sembla^lye there is no worldly worship so
brighte nor clear shyning in earth / but that it must incline and auale down
as soon as he has attained to ye hiest and the most famous point of his
asce^cion. For like as ye rage and the abou^dant flow, when it has raught his
sturdy waves to ye hiest, sode^li follows an (...) and makes him to resort
again.

In the same wise when any temporal prosperity is most flowinge in felicity /
then is a sodein ebb of adversity most to be adrade. Also in the same wise as
ye may clearly discern and considre at the eye / in trees and herbs / that
when the vege^atife virtue by the comfortable influe^ce of the sun / is after
the cold winter: In Uerre by little and little ascended into branches and bows,
and causes the^ for to bud and to blossom new: and also in herbs makes a
lusty and a fresh color newly to appear. And moreover by process of time
with her wholesome bawme aparaleth them, with manifold sondrye color of red /
white, and grene, and than anon after in discence of Apollo the sun, the same
virtue fro the crop aualeth again into ye root. Right so there is no felicity
so flouryng, nor none so apparailed with blossoms of transitory riches, but
as soon as the shi^ing Sun of her glory sheddeth his beams most clear,
full vnwarelie ere they can aduert or take heed / been robbed and reued of
their Lordship / and pio^nged a down by occasion of some adversity, brought
and induced into adversity, either by sickness or by death. And thus that the
first cause is natural and necessary and that all worldly pomp and pride
shall pass, mine Auctor Lucan has proved by reason. Than as touching the
second cause which is called customable and consuetudinarie, ye may considre
that ever of custom it falls that when the blind goddess of variau^ce dame
Fortune has enhaunced a man highest upon her whele, with a sodein sigh she
plongeth him down again. Evident example ye may take of kings and princes
yt have been tofore. And than touching the third cause of destruction of the
city / Lucan likes to call it in his poetical muses, voluntary, which is as
much to say, as a cause rooted upon wilfulnes without any ground founded upon
reason. For only of wilfulnes they were so blind: that them list not to know
them selves / but thought them selfs so assured in their felicity / that they
might not by no collateral occasion of adversity be perturbed / ne put out
thereof. And thus through false surquedraunce they were made so wilful, that
none list to obey other. And so was brought in obstinacy euerich of them
deming him self egall to other. And thus of contrarious discord among them
selfs only of voluntari they stood disseuered and divided / which was one of
the chief occa^ions of their destruction. And for this ^kyl toforne declare^ /
Lucan calls the third cause voluntary / in as much as it was falselye
founded upon will. And thus first by a cause necessary, and by the second
cause called consuetudinarie, showed tofore by example of custom / and by this
last third cause called voluntary, rooted only upon will: the Romans among
them selves stood in such^ contrauersye, that they doubted to which party they
should incline. And compendiouselye to declare how al the^e causes of division,
and how the war which of Clerks is called Bellum Civil: which is as much
to say in English as a war among the^ selves. For the clear co^pe^dious
process of which / first ye shall consider yt Julius platlye informed of the
malicious conspiracy compassed and wrought against him. Anon as he in his
repair out of Albion was passed the bonds of Almaigne, and had attained to
the high Alpies / which of ^uctours been called the cold frosty hills / and
the bonds of Lombardie, and so holding his passage by the stood of the sturdy
river called of Lucan (Rubicauis) there appeared to him an old ancient Lady,
heavy and drery in a mantel of black her face wympled tofore in full dolorous
wise, the tresses of her head for age full hoar and white. And for constraint
of her hartelye woe: even upon the time when the black dark night had
ouerspred their emispery with the bordu^e of her ugly and her cloudye cope.
This woeful Lady tofore said, began her lamentable complaynt to Julius in this
wise: Oh ye noble worthy knights, most renoumed of fame / Alas, whether
purpose ye with so mighty apparail of Mars to procede^ Or where cast ye to
fetch your sturdye standerdes, or to displaye your fearful pinons and baners?
Oh alas / against whom have ye cast finallye to execute the mortal hate that
brenneth in your heart, or against whom purpose ye in such cruel wise to prove
your might? Remember in your thought yt ye be vpholden by the Cenate of Rome,
and your self accounted as for noble and full worthy knights of the the city /
and show not your self now enemies to the Empire, by whose worthiness before
time it has been sustained and mightily supported against the assa^t of all
her ^one. And oh alas aduer^e and considre in your heart the noble and the
prudent statutes of the pol^cie of Rome / the which full plainlye does express
that it is leful unto no man for to pass the bounds of this stream, but if
he be mortal and rebel unto Rome. Now ye therefore that have so long been
friends, and so manlye mayntained the honor of the City, withdraw your foot
and haste not to fast, but let good deliberacion restrain your reins, that
hasty wilfulness lead you not to confusion / not only of your self but unto
the original ruin of the city / by the abundant sheding of blood that is
likely to ensue. And suddenly when this Lady had briefly expressed the some of
her sentence, without more she disapered. This manly man and fortunate knight
Julius in party di^maied of this vnco^the appearance, restrained his host / and
made the^ to fetch their tents endlong the strond upon the hindre parties of
the river. And in his vncou^he affray, he suddenly abrayde said in this wise: Oh
thou mighty Jupiter / under whose demaine Uulcanus forgeth the dredful soundes
of the thundre, and causes hearts to arise with the fiery leven: And oh ye Gods
and Goddesses that whilom had the governance of ou^ Aunceters in Troy, and oh
ye noble Gods Remus and Romulus, the famous founders and the might^ protectours
and patrones of the city of Rome: I as humble subject unto your deitiful lowli
beseech and requir you of equiti and right to be well willing and favorable to
promote my true quarrel and cause, and beningly of your bou^teous goodness to
favor and fortune ye high enterprise which of just title I purpose for life or
does through your favor to execut and not as enemy or rebel to Rome / but as a
true citiz^n and a proved knight cast me fullye to persevere / with condition
that like as I have manly deserved / I may be received, making a protestacio^
that not as enemy, but as full friend and subject to Rome / I will be found
steadfast and true. Wherefore ye mighty and noble Senators of Rome I require
you of right that ye nothing arect nor ascriue to my gylte that I come with
strong and mighty hand, that I enter the bonds of the emperial fraunchise.
Making a full protestacion that only with a clean conscience not entriked with
none intent of euell^ meaning / that I come to you of full purpose to be
receued as for you friend, and not as your foe. Requiring also to hold him
(what so ever he be) for full enemy to your noble city, that of will and
intent labors to make discord a^wene us twain. For so that my meritorie
gwerdon which that I have in my conquest instlie deserved be not denied me: I
am and ever will be for life or death, a true knight to the city to my lives
end. And forthwith making no delay / like a Lion not dismayed nor afraid /
first of al in his own person he passed the River, the which River like as
Lucan reme^breth / the same time at the coming of Cezar / against his
customable course was raised on heighte into a great floode, and all the white
snowes of Alpies were resolved with the beams of Phoebus / when through the
rivers in the valeis were reised so high that uneaths any man might pass. But
Julius of none uncouth adventures afraid / but like a manly man full well assured
in himself in the presence of all his woorthye knights said in this manner:
Here I leave behind, all the old confederacies made betwixt Rome and me / and
here I leave all the friendship of old antiquity / and only follow the traces of
Fortune / and of whole intent begin a ryghtfull war / for cause only that
by mediacion of peace was proffered in my side, I may not attain my title of
right. And anon without more dilacion even upon the spring of the day /
which of Clerks is called Au^ora: he unawarely with all worthy multitude of
his knights entered into the city (called of Lucan) Ar^^ie, a City partinent
to Rome, and there he took first possess^ on of the Empire / none so hardi to
resist nor to withstand the furi of his sword / and all this while ye Romans
standing in dout to which party they should incline / whether to Cezar / or to
Pompey. For of charity that they had to their wives and their children, and to
the old statutes of the city they were favorable to Pompey / and of dread that
they had of Cezars sword, they stood in ^o great ambiguicie, yt they could not
deem what was best to do. Lo how the mortal enui of twain was cause and
occasion yt that noble city which had all the world in subjection, and was
called lady and Empress of al Regions was brought into destruction. For in
these two first began the division which never after might parfitlie be
restored nor reco^siled to unity, wherbi as seems unto me^ yt al prudent
princes which have the governance in Provinces and regions should take example
what harm and damage it is, and how final a destruction it is to be divided
among the^ selfs And for to ratify by more Autentike example how much that
unity more avails then division, I will shortelye rehearce an example, the
which Ualerie putte^h / and it is this. This auctour reherceth that whilom
when the City of Rome stood likely to have b^ne divided of a debate that was
newly begone among them selves. There was a wise Philosopher among them, which
of high discressio^ con^idered the great peril that was likelye to ^al and
follow, and thought he would of wisdom void that might ensue. And in presence of
all the Cenate and Lords of the City / he made bring forth an horse which
had a long and a thick tail grown behind / and than he commanded the
mightiest cha^pion of the town to set on both his hands, and assay if he might
by force pull of the horse tail at a plu^ke. And all ^e it that he plucked to
the uttermost of his might / it would not avail. And than anon this
Philosopher made call to the presence of the Cenate / the most impotent man of
the city, a man vnweldye and crooked of age. And this Philosopher made this
old man to pluck the one hereafter an other of the horse tail, till by little
and little by process the tail was wasted clean away, and the horse naked and
bare behind. Behold said the Philosopher, that while the tail of the horse
was hole and one in it self, and eue^ich here with other (undivided) the
mightiest champion of your city might do thereto no damage. But as soon as
every here was divided and disseuered fro other, he that was lest of power
among ye all / left never till the tail was consumed and brought to naught.
By which example said the Philosopher, prudently aduert and wisely cast
tofore, that as long as ye be one in your selves / and of one heart / there is
none so strong nor so mighty that may auail by force to attempt your
worthiness. But as soon as among your selves one is divided from an other, your
enemies, though they be full impotent of power / they shall by process^ of time
pluck away the most fairest and the most shene feathers of your worthiness. And
by this example the Philosopher toforesaid reconciled the Romans again to
unity, and voided away dit uision among the^ selves. Now compendiously to
resort again to my matter like as the stori makes mention / the Romans
standing in great contrauersie among the^ selves to which party they should
draw, the Gods by many signs and pronosticacions declared unto the^ the great
mischief that was lykelye and very semblable to follow. For there appeared
unto them many uncouth images of stars / some in brenning haberions of fire,
and some with bright brondes in their hands casting flame enuiron / and some
with fiery darts and sharp hoked arowes shootinge in the air. And in
especial there appeared a large Comete of stremes ye which raught their
branches on ye four plages of the firmament. And the sun also when he shone
most bright in the meridional plage, the dai vnwarelie turned to night. And
the pale moon against the common course of her kind: sodeynlye she was
clypsed of her light. And further the dreadful karibeis of the sea Cicile was
turned into blood. All the Hounds also being in the bonds ^f Rome, left the
noy^e of their barking / and in sign of pronosticacio^ of great sorrow that was
to come, they howled and we imented that it was pity to hear / and the
supersticious fire which continually tofore was wont to burn in the chaste
temple of the Gods called Uesta, the flame of the same fire ever being bright
upon her auters. Of the which fire by old time was prophesied / that as soon as
it divided and departed at wain (as it did then) that the feasts and the
solempnities of Rome should cease. And like as the smokes of the funeral fire of
the Theban brethren departed at Thebes: right so the departing of fire upon
their aulters, was a true sign and a pronostike of division that should fall
among them, finally to declare to every region tha^ where as the fire of love
and parfite charity stand departed and divided among them selves / it is a
very e^idence that without remedy it draws to his destruction. Also an
evident token that sodein mi^chief of division should follow / the foming wawes
of the sea surmounted the height of Athlantis hills. Also all the rich images
in the Temples of Rome: which were made of gold / silver, and diverse other
sundry metalles: so as they stood in their rich and costly tabernac^es, they
were seen th^^ke time of division woefully complaining and weping / so farforthe
that the tears of their eyes distylled a down into the earth, so complaining
the desolacion of their City / only caused by occasion of their contageous
division among them selves. Birds also against the custom of their nature,
were secne fleing upon nights. And beasts also were heard speakinge, and
women brought forth monstrous children. And all these uncouth wonders befell
but a little tofore the foresaid division in the noble City of Rome / for the
dreadful time aproched full near / of the which Cibyll so long had prophesied
before, when she sent the short sum of her sentence to the Cenatours of Rome
compendiouslye in the nombre of.vi. letters. Three R. R. R. and three F. F. F.
which were fully the pronosticacion of.vi. mischiefs that should of necessity
fall unto the city of Rome, comprehended and included in the.vi. letters
specified in this wise / Regna Rome Ruent, Fero Flamme Fame, The Region of Rome
by three things shall draw to ruin: First by the sword of war among them
selves / and next by fire, and than by hunger. The which three myschiefes so
contagiouslie shall assail the city: that it shall be very vnportable unto them /
and the ground and root of all this confusion shall be among them selves
discord and division. Furthermore to declare sundry pronosticacions that fell
in their city when the Priests made sacrifice to their Gods: their fires
sodeinly quenched. In the graves and sepulchers of dead men, there were heard
woeful and lamentable noyses and ^owndes which did put the people in very
great dread And in this wise the mischief and the ruin was showed and
declared: First by diverse figures and sondrye likenesses of stars showed in
the heaven, and next by wonderful Monsters in the earth. Also the birds and
the fowls of the air come homelye and not afraid fleinge into the City / by
the which sign their Clerks that be called Augures, expounden it to their
confusion. And they by many fold mo signs than I may or can declare, the
subversion of the City full long was showed toforne, only begone by this
contageous division. But shortelye to entreat the substance of the story,
when that Julius with strong hand approached the bonds of Rome: after when he
had won the city of Arimy: and had also conquered Rauenne: and Pompey for
fear was fled toward the parties of Greece to make himself strong: They of
Rome had shortly determined in sentence that Julius not enter the City, but so
were that his whole retinue were left behind. But when they knew and saw him
so passingly mighty and strong: they began to quaken in their hearts, and
namely: when they were destitute of an head. Of which and for that, some Dukes
of Pompey drew them to the parties of Italy into a city which whylom was called
Dirachium. And ever this worthy knight Julius with his chiualry pursued after,
and all that wythstoode he slew / and the remnaunt he put manly to flight. And
day by day the power of Julius began multiplye and increase / and mauger al his
enemies of very force he entered the city. And as some auctours write / when
the Romans (for dread) were ready to receive him by their gates: he of
indignacion and disdain / made break the walls, and proudly entered as a
Conqueror, and justified the Romans as his, and wholly took on him the
governance / not only of the city / but of all the whole Empire. And maugre
the Cenate he brake the brason door of their treasure, and by violence took
and ^aught it away, and plenteouslye departed it among his knights. And in
this mean while full many kings of the East party of the world, came and
assembled before the foresaid city called Dirachium. Of intent to sustain the
party of Pompey against Julius. And as soon as there was made relacion to
Julius Cezar of this great assemble: he made no delay / but with all his power
passed by a country which of mine author is called Epirum, and so he entered
in to the costs of Thessalie / where as he found Pompey / batayled against
him with four score Cohortes and eight, departed into.iii wards. Now to
declare the nombre and the multitude of a cohort: ye shall understand that there
be two manner of Cohortes, the more, and the less. And the more by description
of Auctours, contains five hundred, and the less four hundred. There were
also on the party of Pompey, forty thousand of foot men / and in the left
wing there were beside all this, six hundred knighes on horseback. And in the
right wyng there were.v. C. among which as Unicent in his mirror historiall
makes mind there were many kings and princes / and many other woorthye
Cenatoures and knights of Rome which came in defense of Pompey. And as it is
remembered also / Caesar had.lxxx. Cohortes, divided and departed in three wards.
And with this he had xxx. M. of footmen, without passing great number of
knights on horse back. And in this mortal battle / all the party of Pompey were
^ut to flight, and there were slain on his side.xii. M. and of worthy ^eders
which be called Centurians, were slain.xxxiii. And Pompey fled out of the
field, and for refuge took a ship and passed by the bonds of A^ie through
Thyrye / and aryued in Egypt. And there anon at his aryual by the
commandment of Tholome king of Egypt, he was beheaded only for love and
favor of Julius. And fro this victory this foresaid Julius hasted to the
parties of Syrye / toward ye mighty City of A^yzaundre. And there T^olome king
of Alizaundre held a battle with Julius Cezar, both on land and on water. In
which war were slain.xxii. M. in the field / and.xii, hundred ships
dyscom^ited and drowned. And Tholome the king / as he would have fled out of
a ship (for haste) he fell in to the sea and was drowned. And as his body was
cast to land / he was known and discovered by a gile haberion, the which
haberion Julius Cezar made to be sent unto the city of Alizandre / for dread
of which they of Alizandre yielded the city unto him. Than he repaired again
into Egypt / and by occasion of the death of Tholome he gave the Septer and the
Realm and the whole governance of Egypt unto the Queen Cleopatra. And so
after the conquest of many other Prouincies, Regions / and lands, he made his
repair again the second time unto the City of Rome / and there he did take
upon him two offices, both of Consul and of Dictatour. And from thence he went
unto the conquest of Affcike and there began a new war, in especial against
all the aliaunce and the blood of Pompey, and slew all the Dukes that were
inclined to be favorable to the party of Po^pey, among which were slain three
mighty princes, Faustus / Cilla / and Postumus, and Pompeia, the daughter of
Pompey judged to be dead. And from those parties he entered with a mighty and
strong hand in to Spain / and there (so as Suetonins writes) he took upon
him power to receive the tribute, which on the party of Spain was due unto
Rome. And so as this storye makes mention / he proceeded so far^e in his
conquest, so yt he came to the pillars of Gad^s, and there he entered into the
Temple of the strong mighty champion called Hercu^es. And when he beheld in
the same Temple a rich image of gold / set up for a memory of king
Alizaundre: anon this Cezar began to sigh and complain in his self that he
never might attain in his conquest to deserve so victorious a Palm of
worthiness as in their time did Alisaunder and Hercules. And thus pensible and
heavy (he issuing out of the Temple of Hercules) fullye purposed him in his
courage, knightly to take upon him of manly courage, some new enterprises of
high prowess. And whiles that he was thus surprised in his best thought / the
next night ensuynge, he hand a wonderful vision / which was this: It seemed
unto him in his sleep / that he meddled with his own Mother: Of the which
dream he full greatly afraid / and horribly agrised / made call to his
presence, his wise Philo^ophers and Diuinours / to give a plain and a clear
interpretacion upon his dream. And they anon concluded in short sentence, yt
it was an evident sign that he should be fully put in pos^ession to have the
imperial dominacion over all the world. For these prudent Philosophers
understood nothing by the fleshly conjunction that he had with his mother / but
a knot of Aliaunce, performed up between the earth and him. Understandyng in
their exposicion / that the earth is primordinall mother of al thing /
concluding thereby that he should attain to be Lord and Emperor over all the
parties of the earth. And thus in all have after the mighty conquest of Affrike
/ he repaired the third time to Rome, and was made Emperor over all the world /
and was so farforth enhaunced on height, that the sun of his worthiness was
^unne so fa^ upon his spear, that it attained to the highest prick of his
exaltacion, so that of necessity he must descend. For as the story makes
mention / he perseuered not in his Empire fully the space of five year. And
for to rehearce compendiously the prodigies and the wonderful signs yt befell
before his death. It is remembered that the same year of Julius death, in the isle
of Capwey: there was found by Quarreours of the country a rich Tomb of stone,
and therein was found a little tablet of gold, graven with letters of Greek /
saying in this wise: When ever it shall befall that the Tomb of Capis shall be
opened, and that his bones shall be unclosed: that same year shall the noble and
worthy Conqueror Julius Cezar be murdered in the Capitole at Rome by the false
conspiracye and ymaginacion of them that he has trust^d most. Now was this
foresaid Capis a worthy man and o^ great Authority, and the first Founder
and beginner of the Country of Capwey / and named after him. And like as the
letters in Greek specified / it befell. And the second prodigye that befell
tofore the death of Cezar was this: Upon the same night tofore that he was
slain on the morrow, this noble Conqueroure Julius had a reuelacion / seeming
unto him in his sleep, that he was winged like an Eagle, and how he took
his flight so high, that he sored above the skies, and approached to ye
celestial see of Jupiter / And fell down upon the right hand of his God.
An other marvelous sign or prodigy there fell. Also his Wife named Caliphurna
a little tofore the death of her Lord Julius, had a wonderful dream or (...) /
seming unto her wha^ she was a sleep, that the most highest Pinnacle of the
imperial palace, ^odainly and unwarily fell down, ^ there upon inco^tinentli all the windows of the Chamber where she slept, wi^h out hand of any man, suddenly
brake a two their bars of iron and opened. Of which noise she being sore
afraid in her sleep / and of a feminiue dread full sore syghed in her heart
as she that could not conceyne in mind what it meant. Also as Unicent in his
hystoriall books makes mention, an hundred days before his pyteous murder in
the large Market place of Rome / where as the stature and the great image of
Cezar stood / upon an high pillar of stone / the name of Cezar graue^ with
letters of gold above his head, when the wether and the att^mper air was most
clear and still, with a sudden stroke of the fiery leven / the first letter of
his name.C. was smyten away. Declaring by this pronostical sign, that like as
this letter C in nombre betokens an hundred / and was also most craftily
wrought and graven as for the chief capital letter of his name, to show openly
that the rasing away of this letter by violence of the firye leven: that he
that was head of all the earth, within the space of a hundred days next
ensuing, should be vengeabli murdered in Rome. Also the same day of his murdre
as he went most royally in his Imperial array toward the Consistory, a poor
man named Tong^lius took him letters of all the purposed conspiracy by the
Cenate upon his death / but for he was negligent to read the letters, and to
unclose them, the ve^geable murder was execute upon him. By which example let
no man be slow nor negligent to read his letters, lest after for his
negligence it may turn him to great damage which after may not lightly be
recovered. And the chief cause and worker of this murder / was Brutus Crassus
/ associed unto him.ii. hundred and syxty of the Cenate, al having bodkins in
their sleues. And as it is in storye remembered, he had.xxiiii. deadly wounds
as he sat in the Capitole, and as says mine aucthour / he never in all his
smarte / made neither cry nor no noise / except only a lamentable and a
dolorous sigh, like a man that with sudden sorrow were afraid. So that
touching the vengeable manner of his pyteous murder I may conclude with him
that was Flower of Poets in our English tongue / and the first that ever
enlumined our language with flowers of Rethorique and Eloquence, I mean my
master Chaucer, which compendiouslie wrote the death of this mighty Emperor,
saying in this wise, as follows hereafter in these lines of meter. With
bodkins was Cezar Julius,
Murdered at Rome by Brutus Crassus
when many a regio^ he had brought lov
Lovvho may trust fortune any throvv


Thus by writing of my wise prudent master tofore said: the fro ward and the
contrarious Lady Dame Fortune, spares neither Emperor nor king to plunge him
down suddenly fro the highest prik of her unstable wheel. Alas that never man
lift to lift up his hearts eye / and prudentlye to aduerte the mutabilitie and
the sudden change of this false world. And let ye wise governors of every
land and region make a mirror in their mind of this manly man Julius, and
consider in their hearts the contagious damages, and the importable harms of
division, and let them se advisedly, and take example how the ambicous pride of
Julius, the fretinge envy of Pompeyus, and the vnstaunchable gredye couetise
of Marcus Crassus, were chief and primordial cause of their destruction,
executed and accomplished by cruel death. And not only that these aforesaid
three abominable vices were cause of their own death only, but occasion of
many a thousand other, many more the^ I ca^ tell Thus the City of Rome not only
made bare and barein of their old riches, and spoiled of their treasoure on the
tone side, but destitute and desolate by death of their knighthood on the
other side / me seems ought enough suffice to exemplify what is to begin a
war / and specially to considre the irrecuperable harms of division. And for
this skyl most especially by commandment of my master / I took upon me this
little translacion, and after my little cunning, have put it in remembrance.

Thus ends this little treatise entitled: the Serpent of division, made by
John Lydgate.
The declaracion of this tragical History in this little Book.
THis little prose declares in figure
The great damage and destruction,
That whilo^ fell, by fatal aue^ture
Unto Rome ye mighti roial town
Caused only by false Division,
Among them selves, the story tells thus,
Through Covetous, and vain Ambicion,
Of Pompey, and of Cezar Julius.
Christ him self records in Scripture,
That every Land, and every Region,
Which is divided, may no while endure,
But turn in haste to desolacion
For which ye Lords and Princes of renown,
So wise, so manly, and so virtuous,
Make a myrrour tofore in your reason,
Of Pompey and of Cezar Julius.
Harm done by death, no man may recure,
Against whose stroke is no redemption:
It is full hard in Fortune to assure,
Her whele so often turns up and down,
And for to eschew strife and discencion,
Within your selves be not contrarious,
Remembering aye in your dyscression,
Upon Pompey and Cezar Julius.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Owen Rogers dwelling in Smithfielde / by the Hospital
in little S. Bartelmewes.


