EVPHVES.

THE ANATOMY OF WIT.

Very pleasant for all Gentlemen to read, and most necessary to remember:
wherein are contained the delights that Wit follows in his youth by the
pleasantness of Love, and the happiness he reapeth in age, by the
perfectness of Wisdom.

By John Lylly Master of Art. Oxon.

Imprinted at London for Gabriell Cawood, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard.

To the right honorable my very good lord and M^ster Sir William West Knight,
Lord Delawa^e: John Lyly wissheth long life with increase of honor.
PARATIVS drawing the counterfaite of Helen (right honorable) made the attier
of hi^ head loose, who being demanded why he did so, he answered, she was
loose. Vulcan was painted curiously, yet with a polt foot. Venus cu^ningly,
yet with her Mole. Alexander having a Skar in his cheek held his finger upon
it that Appelles might not paint it, Appelles painted him with his singer
cleaving to his face, why quod Alexander I laid my finger on my Skarre because
I would not have t^^^ see it, (yea said Appelles) and I drew it there because
none else should perceive it, ^or if thy singer had been away, either thy Skarre
would have been seen, or my a^te mislyked: whereby I gather, that in all
perfect wo^kes as well the fault as the face is to be s^owen. The sairest
Leopard is set down with his spots, the swetest Rose with his prickles, the
finest Velvet with his bracke. Seeing then that in every counterfaite as well
the blemish as the beauty is colored: I hope I shall not incur the displeasure
of the wise, in that in the discourse of Euphues I have as well touched the
vanities of his love, as the virtues of his life. The Persians who above all
their Kings most honored Cyrus, caused him to be engraven as well with his hoked
nose, as his high forehead. He that loved Homer best concealed not his
^lattering, and he that praised Alexander most bewrayed his quaffing. Demonydes
must have a crooked shoe for his wry foot. Damocles a smoth glove for his
straight hand, For as every Paynter that shadoweth a man in all parts gives
every piece his just proporcion, so he that disciphereth the qualities of the
mind, ought as well to show every humor in his kind, as the other does every
part in his color. The Surgion that makes the Anatomy shows as well the
muscles in the heel, as the veins of the heart. If then the first sight of
Euphues, shall seem to light to be read of the wise, or to foolish to be
regarded of the learned, they ought not to impute it to the iniquity of the
author, but to the necessity of the history. Euphues begins with love as
allured by wit, but ends not with lust as bereft of wisdom. He wooeth women
provoked by youth, but weddeth not himself to wantonness as pricked by
pleasure. I have set down the follies of his wit without breach of modesty,
and the sparks of his wisdom without suspicion of dishonestie. And certes I
think there be mo speeches which for gravity will mislyke the foolish, then
unseemly terms which for vanity may offend the wise. Which discourse (right
Honorable) I hope you will the rather pardon for the rudenes in that it is the
first, and protect it the more willingly if it offend in that it shall be the
last. It may be that fine wits will descant upon him, that having no wit goes
about to make the Anatomy of wit: And certainly their jesting in my mind is
tolerable. For if the butcher should take upon him to cut the Anatomy of a
man, because he has skill in opening an Ox, he would prove himself a Calfe: or
if the Horselech would adventure to minister a Potion to a sick patie^t, in
that he has knowledge to give a drench to a diseased Horse, he would make
himself an Ass. The Shomaker must not go above his latchet, nor the hedger
meddle with any thing but his bill. It is unseemly for the Paynter to feather
a shaft, or the Fletcher to handle the pensill. All which things make most
against me, in that a fool has intruded himself to discourse of wit. But as
I was willing to commit the fault, so am I content to make amends. Howsoever
the case stands I look for no praise for my labor, but pardon for my good
will: it is the greatest reward that I dare ask, and the least that they can
offer. I desire no more, I deserve no less. Though the style nothing delight
the dayntie ear of the curious sifter, yet will the matter recreate the mind
of the courteous Reader. The variety of the one will abate the harshnes of the
other. Things of greatest profit, are set forth with least price. When the
Wine is neete there needs no Iuie-bush. The right Coral needs no coloring.
Where the matter it self brings credit, the man with his gloss wins small
commendation. It it therefore me thinks a greater show of a pregnant wit, then
perfect wisdom in a thing of sufficient excellency, to use superfluous
eloquence. We commonly see that a black ground does best beseme a white
counterfeit. And Venus according to the judgment of Mars, was then most
amyable, when she sat close by Vulcanus. If these things be true which
experience tries, that a naked tale does most truly set forth the naked
truth, that where the countenance is fair, there need no colors, that
paynting is meter for ragged walls the^ fine Marble, that verity then shines
most b^ight when she is in least bravery: I shall satisfy mine own mind,
though I cannot feed their humors, which greatly ^eke after those that sift
the finest meal, and bear the whitest mouths. It is a world to see how
English men desire to hear finer speech then the language will allow, to eat
finer bread then is made of Wheat, to wear finer cloth then is wrought of
Woll. But I let pass their finenesse, which can no way excuse my folly. If
your Lordship shall accept my good will which I always desired, I will patie^tly
bear the il will of the malicious, which I never deserved.

Thus committing this simple Pamphlet to your Lordships patronage, and your
Honor to the Almighties protection: ^or the preservation of the which a^ most
bounden, I will pray continually, I end.

Your Lordships servant to command: I. Lyly.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
I Was driven into a quanda^ie Gentlemen, whether I might send this my Pamphlet
to the Printer or to the peddler. I thought it to bad for the press, and to
good for the pack. But seeing my folly in writing to be as great as others, I
was willing my fortune should be as ill as any man's. We commonly see the book
that at Christmas lies bound on the Stacioners stall, at Easter to be broken
in the Haberdasshers shop, which since it is the order of proceeding, I am
content this winter to have my doings read for a toye, that in summer they may
be ready for trash. It is not strange when as the greatest wonder lasts but
nine days: That a new work should not endure but three months. Gentlemen
use books, as gentlewomen handle their slowres, who in the morning stick them
in their heads, and at night straw them at their heels. Cheries be fulsome
when they be through ripe, because they be plenty, and books be stale when
they be printed, in that they be common. In my mind Printers and Tailors are
bound chiefly to pray for Gentlemen, the one has so many fantasies to print,
the other such diverse fashions to make, that the pressing iron of the one is
never out of the sire, nor the printing press of the other any time lies
still. But a fashion is but a days wearing, and a book but an hours reading,
which seeing it is so, I am of a shomakers mind, who cares not so the shoe
hold the plucking on, and I, so my labors last the running over. He that
comes in print because he would be known, is like the fool that comes
into the market because he would be seen. I am not he that seeks praise for
his labor, but pardon for his offense, neither do I set this forth for any
devotion in print, but for duty whith I owe to my Patron. If one write never
so well, he cannot please all, and write he never so ill he shall please some.
Fine heads will pick a quarrel with me if all be not curious, and flatterers a
thank, if any thing be current. But this is my mind, let him that fyndeth
fault amend it, and him that likes it, use it. Envy braggeth but draws no
blood, the malicious have more mind to quippe, then might to cut. I submit my
self to the judgment of the wise, and I little esteem the censure of fools.
The one will be satisfied with reason, the other are to be answered with
silence. I know gentlemen will find no fault without cause, and bear with
those that deserve blame, as for others I care not for their iestes, for I
never meant to make them my Judges.

Farewell.
EVPHVES.
THere dwelt in Athens a young gentleman of great patrimony, and of so comely
a personage, that it was doubted whether he were more bound to Nature for the
liniaments of his person, or to fortune for the increase of his possessions.
But Nature impatient of comparisons, and as it were disdaining a companion, or
copartner in her working, added to this comeliness of his body such a sharp
capacity of mind, that not only she proued^ Fortune counterfaite, but was
half of that opinion that she her self was only current. This young
gallant, of more wit then wealth, and yet of more wealth then wisdom, seeing
himself inferior to none in pleasant concei^^s, thought himself superior to
al in honest conditions, insomuch yt he deemed himself so apt to all things,
that he gave himself almost to nothing, but practicing of those things
commonly which are incident to these sharp wits, fine phrases, smoth quipping,
merry taunting, using jesting without mean, and abusing mirth without measure.
As therefore the sweetest Rose has his prickel the finest velvet his brack,
the fairest ^lowre his ^^an so the sharpest wit has his wanton will, and the
holiest head his wicked way. And true it is that some men write and most men
believe, that in all perfect shapes, a blemmish brings rather a liking every
way to the eyes, then a loathing any way to the mind. Venus had her Mole in
her cheek which made her more amiable, Helen her scarre on her chinne which
Paris called Cos amoris, the Whetstone of love. Aristippus his wart, Lycurgus
his wenne: So likewise in the disposition of ye mind, eitheir virtue is
ouershaddowed with some vice^ or vice ouercast with some virtue. Alexander
valiant in war, yet given to wine. Tulli^ eloquent in his gloses, yet
vayneglorious: Solomon wise, yet to too wanton: David holy, but yet an
homicide: none more witty then Euphues, yet at the first none more wicked. The
freshest colour^ soonest fade, the teenes^ Rasor soonest tourneth his edge, the
finest cloathe is soonest eaten with Moathes, and the Cambricke sooner stained
then the course Canuas: which appeared well in this Euphues, whose wit
beeinge like wax apt to receive any impression, and having the bridle in his
own hands either to use the rain or the spur, disdayning counsel,
leauinge his country, loathinge his old acquaintance, thought either by wit
to obtain some conquest, or by shame to abide some conflicte, and leaving the
rule of reason, rashly ran unto destruction.

It has been an old said saw, and not of less truth then antiquity, that
wit is the better if it be the deerer bought: as in the sequel of this
history shall most manifestlye appear. It happened this young Impe to ariue
at Naples (a place of more pleasure then profit, and yet of more profit then
piety) the very walls and windows whereof showed it rather to be the
Tabernacle of Venus, then the Temple of Vesta.

There was all things necessary and in readiness that might either allure the
mind to lust, or entice the heart to follye, a court more meet for an
Atheyst, then for one of Athens, for Ovid then for Aristotle, for a graceless
lover then for a godly liver: more fitter for Paris then Hector, and meeter for
Flora then Diana.

Here my youth (whether for weariness he could not, or for wantonness
would not go any further) determined to make his abode: whereby it is
evidently seen that the fleetest fish swalloweth the delicatest bayte, that
the highest soaring Hawke trayneth to the lure, and that the wittiest skonce is
inuegled with the soddeyne view of alluringe vanities.

Here he wanted no companions which courted him continuallye with sundry
kinds of devises, whereby they might either soake his purse to reap
commodity, or sooth his person to win credit, for he had guestes and
companions of all sorts.

There frequented to his lodging and mancion house as well the Spider to suck
poison, of his fine wit, as the Be to gather hunny, as well the Drone, as the
Dove, the Fox as the Lamb, as well Damocles to betraye him, as Damon to be
true to him: Yet he behaved himself so warilye, that he could single out
his game wiselye, insomuche that an old Gentleman in Naples seeinge his
pregnaunt wit, his Eloquent tongue somewhat tauntinge, yet with delight, his
myrthe without measure, yet not without wit, his sayings vai^eglorious, yet
pythie, began to bewail his nurture: and to muse at his Nature, beeinge
incensed against the one as most pernicious, and enflamed with the other as
most precious: for he well knew that so rare a wit would in time either
breed an intolerable trouble, or bring an incomperable Treasure to the
common weal: at the one he greatly pitied, at the other he reioysed.

Having therefore gotten opportunity to communicate with him his mind, with
watrye eyes, as one lamentinge his w^ntonnesse, and smilinge face, as one
louinge his wittiness, encountered him on this manner.

Young gentleman, although my acquaintance be small to entreat you, and my
authority less to command you, yet my good will in giving you good counsel
should induce you to believe me, and my hoarie hairs (ambassadors of
experience) enforce you to follow me, for by how much the more I am a
stranger to you, by so much the more you are beholdinge to me, having
therefore opportunity to utter my mind, I mean to be importunate with you
to follow my meaning. As thy birth does show the express and lively Image
of gentle blood, so thy bringing up seems to me to be a great blotte to
the lineage of so noble a brute, so that I am enforced to think that either
thou dyddest want one to give thee good instructions, or that thy parents made
thee a wanton with to much cockeringe, either they were too foolish in vsinge
no discipline, or thou too froward in rejecting their doctrine, either they
willinge to have thee idle, or thou wylfull to be ill employed. Did they not
remember that which no man ought to forgette, that the tender youth of a
child is like the temperinge of new wax apt to receive any form? He that
will carry a Bull with Milo, must use to carrye him a Calfe also, he that
coueteth to have a straight tree, must not boowe him beeinge a twigge. The
Potter fashioneth his claye when it is soft, and the Sparrowe is taught to
come when he is young: As therefore the iron beeinge hot receives any
form with the stroke of the Hammer, and keeps it beeinge cold for ever, so
the tender wit of a child if with diligence it be instructed in youth, will
with industrye use those qualities in hy^ age.

They might also have taken example of the wise husbandmen, who in their
fattest and most fertile ground sow Hemp before Wheat, a grain that dries
up the superfluous moisture, and makes the soil more apt for corn: Or of
good Gardeiners who in their curious knottes mix Hisoppe with Time as ayders
the one to the growth of the other, the one beeinge dry, the other moist: or
of cunning Painters who for the white^t work cast the blackest ground, to
make the Picture more amiable. If therefore thy Father had been as wise an
husbandman, as he was a fortunate husband, or thy Mother as good a huswyfe as
she was a happy wife, if they had been both as good Gardners to keep their
knotte, as they were grafters to bring forth such fruit, or as cunninge
Painters, as they were happy parents, no doubt they had sowed Hemp before
Wheat, that is discipline before affaction, they had set Hisoppe with Time,
that is manners with wit, the one to aid the other, and to ma^e thy
dexterity more, they had cast a black ground for their white work, that
is, they had mixed threats with fair looks.

But things past are paste calling again, it is to late to shut the stable
door when the steed is stolen: The Troyans repented to late when their town
was spoiled: Yet the remembrance of thy former follies might breed in thee a
remorse of conscience, and be a remedy against further concupiscence. But now
to thy present time: The Lacedaemonians were wont to show their children
dronken men and other wicked men, that by seeinge their filth they might
shun the like fault, and avoid such vices when they were at the like
state. The Persians to make their youth abhor gluttony would paint an
Epicure sleeping with meat in his mouth, and most horribly ouerladen with
wine, that by the view of such monsterous sightes, they might eschew the
me^nes of the like excess.

The Parthians to cause their youth to loath the alluringe trains of women's
wyles and deciptfull entisementes, had most curiously carved in their houses a
young man blind, besides whom was adjoined a woman so exquisite, that in
some men's judgment Pigmalions Image was not half so excellent, having one
hand in his pocket as notinge their theft, and holdinge a knyfe in the other
hand to cut his throat: If the sight of such vglye shapes caused a
loathinge of the like sins, then my good Euphues consider their plight, and
beware of thine own peril. Thou art here in Naples a young soiourner, I an
old senior, thou a stranger, I a Citizen, thou secure doubtinge no mishappe,
I sorrowful dreadinge thy misfortune. Here may thou see that which I sighe
to see, dronken sottes wallowinge in every house, in every chamber, yea, in
every channel, here maiste thou behold that which I cannot without
blushinge behold, nor without blubbering utter, those whose bellies be their
Gods, who offer their goods as sacrifice to their guts: who sleep with
meat in their mouths, with sin in their hearts, and with shame in their
houses.

Here, yea, here Euphues, maiste thou see not the carved vi^arde of a lewd
woman, but the incarna^^ visage of a lascivious wanton, not the shaddowe of
love, but the substance of lust: My heart melts in drops of blood, to
see a harlot with the one hand rob so many cofers, and with the other to
rippe so many corses.

Thou art here amiddest the pykes between Scilla and Caribdis, ready if
thou shun Syrtes, to sincke into Semphlagades. Let the Lacedemonian, the
Persian, the Parthian, yea, the Neapolitan, cause thee rather to detest such
villainy, at the sight and view of their vanity.

Is it not far better to abhor sins by the remembrance of others
faults, then by repentance of thine own follies? Is not he accounted most
wise, whom other men's harms do make most wary? But thou will happily
say, that although there be many things in Naples to be iustlye condemned,
yet there are some things of necessity to be commended, and as thy will
does lean unto the one, so thy wit would also embrace the other.

Alas Euphues by how much the more I love the high climbinge of thy capacity,
by so much the more I fear thy fall. The fine crystal is sooner crazed then
the hard marble, the greenest Beeche burns faster then the dryest Oak, the
fairest silk is soonest soyled, and the sweetest wine tourneth to the sharpest
vinegar, the pestilence does most ryfest infect the cleerest complexion, and
the Caterpiller cleaves unto the ripest fruit, the most delicate wit is
allured with small enticement unto vice, and most subject to yeld^ unto
vanity, if therefore thou do but harken to the Sirens, thou will be
enamoured, if thou haunte their houses and places, thou shall be enchaunted:

One drop of poison infecteth the whole tun of Wine, one leaf of
Colliquintida marreth and spoyleth the whole pot of porredge, one iron Mole
defaceth the whole piece of lawne: Descend into thine own conscience, and
consider with thy self the great difference between staringe and stark
blind, wit and wisdom, love and lust. Be merrye but with modesty, be sober
but not to sulloume, be valiant but not too venterous. Let thy attire be
comely but not costly, thy diet wholesome but not excessive, use pastime as the
word imports, to pass the time in honest recreation: mistrust no man
without cause, neither be thou credulous without proof, be not light to
follow every man's opinion, nor obstinate to stand in thine own conceipte.
Serve God, love God, fear God, and God will so bless thee as either heart
can wish or thy friends desire. And so I end my counsel, beseechinge thee
to begin to follow it. This old Gentleman having finished his dyscourse,
Euphues began to shape him an answer in this sort.

FAther and friend (your age shows the one, your honesty the other) I am
neither so suspicious to mistrust your good will, nor so sottishe to mislike
your good counsel, as I am therefore to thancke you for the first, so it
stands me upon to think better on the latter: I mean not to cavil with
you as one louinge sophistrye, neither to controwle you as one having
superiority, the one would bring my talk into the suspicion of fraud, the
other convince me of folly. Whereas you argue I know not upon what
probabilyties, but sure I am upon no proof, that my bringing up should be a
blemish to my birth. I answer, and swear to that you were not therein a
little ouershot, either you gave too much credit to the report of others, or
to much liberty to your own judgment, you convince my parents of
peevishness, in making me a wanton, and me of lewdness in reiectinge
correction. But so many men so many minds, that may seem in your eye odious,
which in an others eye may be gracious. Aristippus, a Philosopher, yet who more
courtely? Diogenes, a Philosopher, yet who more carterly? Who more popular then
Plato, retayning always good company? Who more envious then Tymon, denouncing
all human s^cietie? Who so severe as the Stoyckes, which like stocks were
moved with no melody? Who so secure as the Epicures which wallowed in all kind
of licentiousness? Though all men be made of one metal, yet they be not
cast all in one moulde, there is framed of the self same clay as well the tile
to keep out water as the pot to contain lycour, the Sun does harden the
durte and melt the wax, fire makes the gold to shine and the straw to
smother, perfumes does refresh ye Dove and kill ye Betil, and the nature of the
man disposes ye consent of ye ma^ners. Now whereas you seem to love my nature
and loath my nurture, you bewray your own weakness, in thinking ye nature may
any ways be altered by education, and as you have ensa^ples to confirm your
pretense, so I have most evident and infallyble arguments to serve for my
purpose: It is natural for the vine to spread, the more you seek by art to
alter it, the more in the end you shall augment it. It is proper for the Palm
tree to mount, the heauyer you load it the higher it sprowteth. Though iron
be made soft with fire it returns to his hardness, though the Fawlcon be
reclaimed to ye fist she retyreth to her haggardnes, the whelpe of a Masti^e
will never be taught to retriue the Partridge, education can have no show,
where the excellency of nature does bear sway. The silly Mouse will by no
manner of means be tamed, the subtle. Fox may well be beaten, but never
broken from stealing his pray, if you pownde spices they smell the sweeter,
season the wood never so well the wine will taste of the caske, p^au^e and
translate the crabbe tree, where, and whenever it please you and it will
never bear sweet apple.

Infinite and innumerable were the examples I could allege and declare to
confirm the force of Nature, and confute these your vain and false forgeries,
were not the repetition of them needelesse having showed sufficient, or
bootelesse seeinge those alleged will not persuade you. And can you be so
unnatural, whom dame Nature has nourished and brought up so many years, to
repine as it were against Nature?

The similytude you rehearse of the wax, argues your waxinge and melting
brain, and your example of the ho^te and hard iron, shows in you but cold
and weak disposition. Do you not know that which all men do affirm and
know, that black will take no other color? That the stone Abeston being
once made hot will never be made cold? That fire cannot be forced
downewarde? That Nature will have course after kind? That every thing will
dispose it self according to Nature? Can the Aethiope change or alter his
skin? or the Leoparde his hew? Is it possible to gather grapes of thorns,
or ^^gges of thi^telles? or to cause any thing to strive against nature?

But why go I about to praise Nature, the which as yet was never any Impe so
wicked and barbarous, any Turk so vile and brutish, any beast so dull and
senseless, that could, or would, or durst disprayse or contemn? Does not
Cicero conclude and allow, that if we follow and obey Nature we shall never
err? Does not Aristotle allege and confirm, that Nature frames or makes
nothing in any point rude, vain, and imperfect?

Nature was had in such estimation and admiration among the Heathen people,
that she was reputed sor the only Goddess in Heaven: If Nature then have
largely and bountefully endewed me with her gifts, why deem you me so
untoward and graceless? If she have dealte hardely with me, why extol you so
much my birth? If Nature bear no sway, why use you this adulation? If Nature
work the effect, what booteth any education? If Nature be of strength or
force, what avails discipline or nurture? If of none what helps Nature? But
let these sayings pass, as known evidently and granted to be true, which
none can or may deny unless he be false, or that he be an enemy to humanity.

As touching my residence and abidinge here in Naples, my youthly and lusty
affections, my sportes and pleasures, my pastimes, my common dalyaunce, my
delyghtes, my resort and company, and companions, which daily use to visit
me, although to you they breed more sorrow and care, then solace and
comfort, because of your crabbed age: yet to me they bring more comfort and
joy, then care and griese, more bliss then bale, more happiness then heaviness:
because of my youthful gentleness. Either you would have all men old as you
are, or else you have quite forgotten yt you your self were young^ or ever knew
young days: either in your youth you were a very vicious and ungodly man, or
now being aged very supersticious and devout above measure.

Put you no difference between the young flourishinge Baye tree, and the old
withered Beeche? No kind of distinction between the waxinge and the wayninge
of the Moon? And between the risinge and the settinge of the Sun? Do you
measure the hot assaults of youth, by the cold skirmishes of age? whose
years are subject to more infirmities then our youth, we merry^ you
melancholy, we zealous in affection, you ielous in all your dooinges, you
testie without cause, we hasty for no quarrel. You careful, we careless,
we volde, you fearful, we in all points contrary unto you and ye in all
points unlike unto us.

S^eing therefore we be repugnaunt each to the other in nature, would you
have us alyke in qualyties? Would you have one potion ministered to the burni^g
Fever, and to the cold ^alseye? one plaster to an old ^ssue and a fresh
wound? one salve for all sor^s? one sauce for all meats? No no Eubulus, but I
will yield to more, then either I am bound to grant, either thou able to
prove: Suppose that which I never will believe, that Naples is a canckred
storehouse of all strife, a common stews for all strumpettes, the sink of
shame, and the very nurse of all sin: shall it therefore follow of necessity
that all y^ are woed of love, should be wedded to lust, will you conclude as it
were ex consequenti, that whosoever aryueth here shall be enticed to follye,
and beeinge enticed, of force shallbe entangled? No, no, it is ye disposition
of the thought yt alters ye nature of ye thing. The Sun shines upon the
dungehill, and is not corrupted, the Diamond lies in the fire, and is not
consumed, the Crystal touches the Toade, and is not poisoned, the bird
Fiochilus lives by the mouth of the Crocodile and is not spoiled, a perfect
wit is never bewitched with leaud^nesse, neither entised with lasciuiosnesse.

Is it not common that the Holme tree springs amidst the Beach? That the Iuie
spreads upon the hard stones? That the soft fetherbed breketh the hard
blade? If experience have not taught you this, you have lived long and learned
ly^tle, or if your moist brain have forgot it, you have learned much and
profited nothing. But it may be, that you measure my affections, by your own
fancies, and knowing your self either too simple to raise the siege of
pollycie, or too weak to resist the assault by prowess, you deem me of as
little wit as your self, or of less force, either of small capacity, or of
no courage. In my judgment Eubulus, you shall as soon catch a Hare with a Taber,
as you shall persuade youth, with your aged and ouerworn eloquence, to such
severity of life, which as yet there was never Stoy^ke so strict, nor Jesuit
so supersticious, neither Votarie so devout, but would rather allow it in words
the^ follow it in works, rather talk of it then try it. Neither were you such
a Saint in your youth, that abandoning all pleasures, all pastimes, and
delyghts, you would choose rather to sacrifice the first fruits of your life to
vain holiness, then to youthly affections. But as to the stomach quatted
with daynties, all delycates seem quesie, and as he that surfetteth with wine
uses afterward to allay with water: So these old huddles having ouercharged
their gorges with fancy, account all honest recreation mere follly, and
having taken a surfeit of delyght, seem now to savor it with despite. Seeing
therefore it is labor lost for me to persuade you, and wind vaynely wasted
for you to exhort me, here I found you and here I leave you, having neither
bought nor sold with you, but changed ware for ware, if you have taken little
pleasure in my reply, sure I am that by your counsel I have reaped less
profit. They that use to steal honny, burn hemlocke to smoke the Bees from
their hiues, and it may be, that to get some advantage of me, you have used
these smokie arguments, thincking thereby to smother me with the conceit of
strong imagination: But as ye Camelion though he have most guts, draws
least breath, or as the Elder tree though he be fullest of pith, is farthest
from strength, so though your reasons seem inwardly to your self somewhat
substantial, and your persuasions pithie in your own conceipte, yet being well
wayed without, they be shadows without substance, and weak without force.
The Bird Fa^ras, has a great voice but a small body, the thunder a great
clappe, yet but a little stone, the empty vessel gives a greater sownd, then
the full barrel. I mean not to apply it, but look into your self and you
shall certeinely find it, and thus I leave you seekinge it, but were it not
that my company stay my coming, I would surely help you to look it, but I am
called hence by my acquaintance.

Euphues having thus ended his talk departed leaving this old gentleman in a
great quandarie: who perceiving that he was more inclined to wantonness, then
to wisdom, with a deep sigh the tears trickling down his cheeks, said:
Seeing thou will not buy counsel at the first hand good cheap, thou shall
buy repentance at the second hand, at such an unreasonable rate, that thou will curse thy hard penyworth, and banne thy hard heart. And immediately he
went to his own house, heavily bewayling the young man's unhappiness.

Here ye may behold gentlemen, how lewdly wit stands in his own light,
how he deemeth no pennye good silver but his own, preferring the blossom
before the fruit, the budde before the flower, the green blade before the
ripe ear of corn, his own wit before all men's wisdoms. Neither is that
geason, seeing for the most part it is proper to all those of sharp capacity
to esteem of themselves, as most proper: if one be hard in conceiving, they
pronounce him a dowlte, if given to study, they proclayme him a duns, if merrye
a iester, if sad a Saint, if full of words, a sotte, if without speech, a
Cipher, if one argue with them boldly, then is he impudent, if coldely an
innocent, if there be reasoning of divinity, they cry, Quae supra nos nihil ad
nos, if of humanity, Sententias loquitur carnifex, heereoff comes such
great familyaritie between the rypest wits, when they shall see the
dysposition the one of the other, the Sympathia of affections and as it were
but a pair of sheeres to go between their natures, one flattereth an other
in his own folly, and lays cushions under the elbowe of his fellow, when
he sees him take a nappe with fancy, and as their wit wresteth them to
vice, so it forgeth them some feate excuse to cloak their vanity.

Too much study does intoxicate their brains, for (say they) although iron
the more it is used the brighter it is, yet silver with much wearing does wast
to nothing, though the Cammocke the more it is bowed the better it serves, yet
the bow the more it is bent and occupied, the weaker it waxes, though the
Camomill, the more it is trodden and pressed down, the more it spreads, yet
the violet the oftener it his handled and touched, the sooner it withers and
decays. Besides this, a fine wit, a sharp sense, a quick understanding,
is able to atteine to more in a moment or a very little space, then a dull and
blockish head in a month, the sith cutteth far better and smoother then the
saw, the wax yields better and sooner to the seal, then the steel to the
stamp or hammer, the smooth and plain Beeche is easier to be carved and
occupied then the knottie Box. For neither is there any thing, but y^ has his
contraries: Such is the Nature of these nouises that think to have learning
without labor, and treasure without travail, either not understanding or else
not remembering, that the finest edge is made with the blunt whetstone, and the
fairest Jewel fashioned with the hard hammer. I go not about (gentlemen) to
inueigh against wit, for then I were witless, but frankely to confess mine
own little wit. I have ever thought so supersticiously of wit, that I fear I
have committed Idolatry against wisdom, and if Nature had dealte so
beneficially with me to have given me any wit, I should have been readyer in
the defense of it to have made an Apology, then any way to turn to
Apostacy: But this I note, that for the most part they stand so on their
pantuffles, that they be secure of perils, obstinate in their own opinions,
impatient of labor, apt to conceive wrong, credulous to believe the worst,
ready to shake off their old acquaintance without cause, and to condemn
them without color: All which humors are by so much the more easier to be
purged, by how much the less they have festred the sinnewes: But return we
again to Euphues.

Euphues having soiourned by the space of two months in Naples, whether he
were moved by the courtesy of a young gentleman named Philautus, or enforced
by destenie: whether his pregnant wit, or his pleasant conceits wrought the
greater liking in the mind of Euphues I know not for certeyntie: But Euphues
showed such entyre love toward him, that he seemed to make small account of
any others, determining to enter into such an inviolable league of friendship
with him, as neither time by peecemeale should empaire, neither fancy utterly
dissolve, nor any suspicion infringe. I have red (says he) and well I believe
it, that a friend is in prosperity a pleasure, a solace in adversity, in
grief a comfort, in joy a merrye companion at all times an other I, in all
places ye express Imag^ o^ mine own person: insomuch that I cannot tell,
whether the imm^rtall Gods have bestowed any gift upon mortal men, either more
noble, or more necessary, then friendship. Is there any thing in the world to be
reputed (I will not say compared) to friendship? Can any treasure in this
transitory pilgrimage, be of more vale we then a friend? in whose bosom thou
may sleep secure without fear, whom thou may make partner of all thy
secrets without suspicion of fraud, and pertaker of all thy misfortune without
mistrust of fleeting, who will account thy bale his bane, thy mishap his
misery, the pricking of thy finger, the percing of his heart. But whether am I
carried? Have I not also learned that one should eat a bushel of salt with
him, whom he means to make his friend? that trial m^keth trust? that there
is falsehood in fellowship? and what then? Does not the sympathy of manners,
make the conjunction of minds? Is it not a by word, like will to like? Not so
common as commendable it is, to see young gentlemen choose the^ such friends
with whom they may seem being absent to be present, being a sunder to be
conversant, being dead to be alive. I will therefore have Philautus for my
pheere, and by so much the more I make my self sure to have Philautus, by how
much the more I view in him the lively Image of Euphues.

Although there be none so ignorant that does not know, neither any so
impudent that will not confess, friendship to be the jewel of human joy:
yet whosoever shall see this amity grounded upon a little affection, will
soon conjecture that it shall be dissolved upon a light occasion: as in the
sequel of Euphues and Philautus you shall see, whose hot love waxed soon
cold. For as ye best wine does make ye sharpest vinaig^r, so ye deepest love
tourneth to the deadliest hate. Who deserved the most blame in mine opinion, it
is doubtful, and so difficult, that I dare not presume to give verdit. For love
being ye cause for which so many mischiefs have been attempted, I am not yet
persuaded, whether of the^ was most to be blamed, but certainly neither of them
was blameless. I appeal to your judgment gentlemen, not that I think any
of you of ye like disposition, able to decide the question but being of deeper
discretion then I am, are more fit to debate the quarrel. Though ye discourse
of their friendship and falling out be somewhat long, yet being somewhat
strange, I hope the delightfulnes of the one, will attenuate the tediousness
of the other.

Euphues had continual access to the place of Philautus and no little
familiarity with him, and finding him at convenient leisure, in these short
terms unfolded his mind unto him.

Gentleman and friend, the trial I have had of thy manners, cutteth off diverse
terms which to an other I would have used in the like matter. And since a
long discourse argues folly, and delicate words incur the suspicion of
flattery, I am determined to use neither of them, knowing either of them to
breed offense. Waying with my self the force of friendship by the effects, I
studied ever since my first coming to Naples to enter league with such a one,
as might direct my steps being a stranger, and resemble my manners being a
scholar, the which two qualities as I find in you able to satisfy my desire,
so I hope I shall find a heart in you willing to accomplish my request. Which
if I may obtein, assure your self ye Damon to his Pythias, Pylades to his
Orestes, Titus to his Gysippus, Theseus to his Pyrothus, Scipio to his Laelius,
was never ^ou^d more faithful then Euphues will be to his Philautus.

Philautus by how much the less he looked for this discourse, by so much the
more he liked it, for he saw all qualities both of body and mind in Euphues,
unto whom he replied as follows.

Friend Euphues (for so your talk warranteth me to term you) I dare neither
use a long process, neither loving speech, least unwittingly I should cause
you to convince me of those things, which you have already condemned. And
verily I am bold to presume upon your courtesy, since you your self have used
so little curiosity, persuading my self, that my short answer will work as
great an effect in you, as your few words did in me. And seeing we resemble (as
you say) each other in qualities, it cannot be that the one should differ from
ye other in courtesy, seeing the sincere affection of the mind, cannot be
expressed by the mouth, and that no art can unfold ye entire love of the
heart, I am earnestly to beseech you not to measure the firmness of my faith,
by the fewnes of my words, but rather think that the ouerflowing waves of
good will leave no passage for many words. Trial shall prove trust, here is
my hand, my heart, my lands and my life at thy commandment: Thou may well
perceive that I did believe thee, that so soon I did love thee, and I hope
thou will the rather love me, in that I did believe thee.

After many embracings and protestations one to an other, they walked to
dinner, where they wanted neither meat, neither Music, neither any other
pastime, and having banqueted, to digest their sweet confections, they daunced
all ye afternoon, they used not only one board, but one bed, one book (if
so be it they thought not one to many.) Their friendship augmented every day,
insomuch yt the one could not refrain ye company of ye other one minute, all
things went in common between them, which all men accounted commendable.
Philautus being a town borne child, both for his own continuance, and the
great countenance which his Father had while he lived, crepte into credit
with Don Ferardo one of the chief governors of the city, who although he had
a courtly crewe of gentlewomen soiourning in his palace, yet his daughter
heir to his whole reuenews, stained the beauty of them all, whose modest
bashfulnesse caused the other to look wanne for envy, whose lillye cheeks
dyed with a Uermillion read made the rest to blushe at her beauty. For as the
finest Rubie, stayneth the color of the rest that be in place, or as the
Sun dimmeth the Moon, that she cannot be discerned, so this gallant gyrle
more fair then fortunate, and yet more fortunate then faithful, eclipsed the
beauty of them all, and changed their colors. Unto her had Philautus
access, who wanne her by right of love, and should have worn her by right of
law, had not Euphues by strange destenie broken the bonds of marriage, and
forbidden the banes of Matrimony.

It happened yt Don Ferardo had occasion to go to Venice about certain his own
affairs, leaving his daughter the only steward of his houshoulde, who spared
not to feast Philautus her friend, with all kinds of delights and delicates,
reserving only her honesty as the chief stay of her honor. Her father being
gone she sent for her friend to supper, who came not as he was accustomed
solitarily alone, but accompanied with his friend Euphues. The Gentlewoman
whether it were for nycenesse or for niggardnesse of courtesy, gave him such a
cold welcome that he repented that he was come.

Euphues though he knew himself worthy every way to have a good
countenance, yet could he not perceive her willinge any way to lend him a
friendly look. At the last supper being ready to come in, Philautus said
unto her: Gentlewoman I was the bolder to bring my shadow with me, (meaning
Euphues) knowing that he should be the better welcome for my sake, unto whom
the gentilwoman replied: Sir as I never when I saw you thought that you came
without your shadow, so now I cannot a little marvel to see you so ouershot
in bringing a new shadow with you. Euphues though he perceived her coy nippe,
seemed not to care for it, but taking her by ye hand said.

Fair Lady seeing the shade does often shilde your beauty from the parching
Sun, I hope you will the better esteem of the shadow, and by so much the
less it ought to be offenciue, by how much the less it is able to offend
you, and by so much the more you ought to like it, by how much the more you use
to lie in it.

Well gentleman answered Lucilla in arguing of the shadow, we forgo the
substance: pleases it you therefore to sit down to supper. And so they all
sat down, but Euphues fed of one dish which ever stood before him, the
beauty of Lucilla.

Here Euphues at the first sight was so kyndled with desire, that almost he
was like to burn to coals. Supper being ended, the order was in Naples that
the gentlewomen would desire to hear some discourse, either concerning love or
learning: And although Philautus was requested, yet he posted it over to
Euphues, whom he knew most fit for that purpose: Euphues being thus tied to
the stake by their importunate entreaty, began as follows.

He that worst may is always enforced to hold the candell, the weakest must
still to the wall, where none will, the Devil himself must bear the cross:
But were it not gentlewomen that your list stands for law, I would borrow so
much leave as to resign mine office to one of you, whose experience in love
has made you learned, and whose learning has made you so lovely: for me to
entreat of the one being a nouise, or to discourse of the other being a
trewant, I may well make you weary but never the wyser, and give you occasion
rather to laugh at my rashness, then to like my reasons. Yet I care the less
to excuse my boldness to you, who were the cause of my blyndenesse. And since
I am at mine own choice either to talk of love or of learning, I had rather
for this time be deemed an unthrift in rejecting profit, then a Stoicke in
renouncing pleasure.

It has been a question often disputed, but never determined, whether the
qualities of the mind, or the composition of the man, cause women most to
like, or whether beauty or wit move men most to love. Certes by how much the
more the mind is to be preferred before the body, by so much the more the
graces of the one are to be preferred before the gifts of the other, which if
it be so, that the contemplation of the inward quality ought to be respected
more, then the view of the outward beauty, then doubtless women either do or
should love those best whose virtue is best, not measuring the deformed man
with the reformed mind. The foul Toade has a fair stoane in his head, the
fine goulde is found in the filthy earth, the sweet kernel lies in the hard
shell. Virtue is harbored in the heart of him that most men esteem misshapen,
contrariwise if we respect more the outward shape, then the inward habit, good
God into how many mischiefs do we fall? into what blyndenesse are we led?
Do we not commonly see that in painted pottes is hidden the deadlyest poison?
that in the greenest grass is the greatest Serpent? in the cleerest water the
vglyest Toade? Does not experience teach us that in the most curious Sepu^chre
are enclosed rotten bones? That the Cypress tree bears a fair leaf but no
fruit? That the Estridge carries fair feathers, but rank flesh? How
frantic are those lovers which are carried away with the gaye glistering of
the fine face? the beauty whereof is parched with the Summers blase, and
chipped with the winters blast, which is of so short continuance that it fades
before one perceive it florishe, of so small profit that it poysoneth those
that possess it, of so little value with the wise, that they account it a
delicate bayte with a deadly hook, a sweet Panther with a devouring paunch, a
sower poison in a silver pot. Here I cold enter into discourse of such fine
dames as being in love with their own looks, make such course account of
their passionate lovers: for commonly if they be adorned with beauty, they be
so straight laced, and made so high in the insteppe, that they disdain them
most that most desire them. It is a world to see the doting of their lovers,
and their dealing with them, the revealing of whose subtle trains would cause
me to shead tears, and you gentlewomen to shut your modest ears. Pardon me
gentlewomen if I unfold every wyle, and show every wrinckle of women's
disposition. Two things do they cause their servants to vow unto them,
secrecy, and sovereignty, ye one to conceal their entising sleights, by the
other to assure themselves of their only service. Again, but ho there, if I
should have waded any further and sownded the depth of their deceit, I should
either have procured your displeasure, or incurred ye suspicion of frawd,
either armed you to practice the like subteltie, or accused my self of perjury.
But I mean not to offend your chaste mynds, with the rehearsal of their unchaste
manners, whose ears I perceive to glowe, and hearts to be grieved at that
which I have already uttered, not that amongst you there be any such, but that
in your sex there should be any such. Let not ge^tlewome^ therefore make to much
of their painted sheathe, let them not be so curyous in their own conceit,
or so currishe to their loyal lovers. When the black crows foot shall
appear in their eye, or the black Ox tread on their foot, when their
beauty shall be like the blasted Rose, their wealth wasted, their bodies
worn, their faces wrinckled, their fyngers crooked, who will like of them in
their age, who loved none in their youth? If you will be cherished when you be
old, be courteous while you be young, if you look for comfort in your hoary
hairs, be not coye when you have your golden locks, if you would be embraced
in the wayning of your bravery, be not squeymish in the waxing of your beauty,
if you desire to be kept like the Roses when they have lost their color,
smell sweet as the Rose does in the bud, if you would be tasted for old wine,
be in the mouth a pleasant Grape, so shall you be cherished for your courtesy,
comforted for your honesty, embraced for your amity, so shall you be
preserved with the sweet Rose, and droncke with the pleasant wine. Thus far
I am bold gentlewomen, to counsel those that be coye that they weaue not the
web of their own woe, nor spin the thread of their own thraldom by their
own ouerthwartnesse. And seeing we are even in the bowels of love, it shall
not be amiss to examine whether man or woman be sonest allured, whether be
most constant the male or the female. And in this point I mean not to be mine
own caruer, least I should seem either to pick a thank with men or a
quarrel with women. If therefore it might stand with your pleasure (Mistres
Lucilla) to give your censure I would take the contrary, for sure I am though
your judgment be sound, yet affection will shadow it.

Lucilla seeing his pretense thought to take advantage of his large profer,
unto whom she said. Gentleman in mine opinion Women are to be won with
every wind, in whose sex there is neither force to withstand the assaults of
love, neither constancy to remain faithful. And because your discourse has
hitherto bredde delight, I am loath to hinder you in the sequel of your
devises. Euphues perceiving himself to be taken napping, answered as follows.

Mistres Lucilla, if you speak as you think, these gentlewomen present have
little cause to thank you, if you cause me to commend women, my tale will be
accounted a mere tri^le, and your words ye plain truth: Yet knowing promise to
be debt, I will pay it with performance. And I would ye gentlemen here present
were as ready to credit my proof, as ye gentlewomen are willing to hear their
own praises, or I as able to overcome, as Mistres Lucilla would be content to
be ouerthrown, how so ever the matter shall fall out, I am of the surer side,
for if my reasons be weak, then is our sex strong, if forcyble, then your
judgment feeble, if I find truth on my side, I hope I shall for my wages win
the good will of women, if I want proof, then gentlewomen of necessity you
must yield to men. But to the matter.

Touching the yelding to love, albeit their hearts seem tender, yet they
harden them like the stone of Sicilia, the which the more it is beaten, the
harder it is, for being framed as it were of the perfection of men, they be
free from all such cogitations as may any way provoke them to uncleanness,
insomuch as they abhor the light love of youth which is grounded upon lust,
and dissolved upon every light occasion. When they see the folly of men turn
to fury, their delight to doting, their affection to frenzy, when they see
them as it were pyne in pleasure, and to wax pale through their own
peevishness, their suits, their service, their letters, their labors, their
loves, their lives, seem to them so odious, that they harden their hearts
against such concupiscence, to the end they might convert them from rashness
to reason, from such lewd disposition, to honest discretion: hereoff it
comes that men accuse women of cruelty, because they themselves want
civility, they account them full of wyles in not yelding to their wickedness,
faythlesse for resisting their fylthinesse. But I had almost forgot my self,
you shall pardon me Mistress Lucilla for this time, if this abruptly, I
finish my discourse, it is neither for want of good will, or lack of proof,
but that I feel in my self such alteration, that I can scarcely utter one
word, ah Eupheus, Euphues.

The gentlewomen were struck into such a quandarie with this sudden change,
that they all changed color. But Euphues taking Philautus by the hand and
giving the gentlewomen thanckes for their patience and his repast, badde them
all farewell, and went immediately to his chamber. But Lucilla who now began to
fry in the flames of love, all the company being departed to their lodgings,
entered into these terms and contrarieties.

Ah wretched wench Lucilla how art thou perplexed? what a doubtful fight do
thou feel betwixt faith and fancy? hope and fear? conscience and
concupiscence? O my Euphues, little do thou know the sudden sorrow that I
sustain for thy sweet sake. Whose wit has bewitched me, whose rare
qualyties have deprived me of mine old qualytie, whose courteous behavior
without curiosity, whose comely feature without fault, whose fyled speech
without fraud, has wrapped me in this misfortune. And can thou Lucilla be
so light of love in forsaking Phil^utus to fly to Euphues? can thou prefer a
stranger before thy countryman? A starter before thy companion? Why Euphues
does perhaps desire my love, but Philautus has deserved it. Why Euphues
feature is worthy as good as I, But Philautus his faith is worthy a better. I
but the latter love is most fervent. I but the first ought to be most
faithful. I but Euphues has greater perfection. I but Philautus has deeper
affection.

Ah fond wench, doste thou think Euphues will deem thee constant to him,
when thou have been unconstant to his friend? Weenest thou that he will have
no mistrust of thy faithfulness, when he has had trial of thy fycklenesse?
Will he have no doubt of thine honor, when thou thy self call thine
honesty in question? Yes, yes, Lucilla, well does he know that the glass
once crased will with the least clappe be cracked, that the cloth which
staineth with Milk, will soon loose his color with vinegar, that the Eagles
wynge will wast the fether as well of the Phoenix, as of the Pheasant, that she
that has been faythlesse to one, will never be faithful to any. But can
Euphues^ convince me of fleetinge, seeing for his sake I break my fideli^i^^
Can he condemn me of disloyalty, when he is the only cause of my dislyking?
May he justly condemn me of trecherye, who has this testimony as trial of
my good will? Does not he remember that the broken boane once set together,
is stronger then ever it was? That the greatest blotte is taken off with the
Pommice? That though the Spyder poison the Fly, she cannot infect the Be?
That although I have been light to Philautus, yet I may be lovely to Euphues?
It is not my desire, but his deserts that moves my mind to this choice,
neither the want of the like good will in Philautus, but the lack of the like
good qualities that remoueth my fancy from the one to the other.

For as the Be that gathers Honny out of the weed, when she espyeth the
fair flower flies to the sweetest: or as the kind spanyell though he hunt
after Birds, yet forsakes them to retryue the Partridge: or as we commonly
feed on beef hungerly at the first, yet seeing the Quayle more dayntie,
change our diet: So I, although I loved Philautus for his good properties, yet
seeing Euphues to excel him, I ought by Nature to like him better: By so much
the more therefore my change is to be excused, by how much the more my choice
is excellent: and by so much the less I am to be condemned, by how much the
more Euphues is to be commended. Is not the Dyamonde of more valewe then the
Rubie, because he is of more virtue? Is not the Emeraulde preferred before the
Saphyre for his wonderful property? Is not Euphues more praise worthy then
Philautus being more witty? But fie Lucilla, why doste thou flatter thy self
in thine own follye? can thou feign Euphues thy friend, whom by thine own
words thou have made thy foe? Dyddest not thou accuse women of inconstancy?
dyddest not thou account them easy to be wonne^ dyddest not thou condemn them
of weakness? what sounder argument can he have against thee, then thine own
answer? what better proof, then thine own speech? what greater trial, then
thine own talk? If thou haste belyed women, he will judge thee unkind, if
thou have revealed the troth, he must needs think thee unconstant, if he
perceive thee to be won with a Nut, be will imagine that thou will be lost
with an Apple: If he find thee wanton before thou be woed, he will guess thou will be wavering when thou art wedded.

But suppose that Euphues love thee, that Philautus leave thee, will thy father
thinckest thou give thee liberty to live after thine own lust? will he
esteem him worthy to enherite his possessions, whom he accompteth unworthy to
enjoy thy person? Is it like that he will match thee in marryage with a
stranger, with a Grecian, with a mean man? I but what knows my father
whether he be wealthy, whether his revenues be able to counteruaile my fathers
lands, whether his birth be noble, yea, or no? can any one make doubt of his
gentle blood, that sees his gentle conditions? Can his honor be called into
question, whose honesty is so great? is he to be thought thriftelesse, who in
all qualyties of ye mind is peerless? No, no, ye tree is known by his
fruit, the gold by his touch, the son by the fire. And as the soft wax
receives what soever print be in the seal, and shows no other impression,
so the tender babe being sealed with his fathers gifts represents his Image
most lively. But were I once certain of Euphues good w^ll, I would not so
supersticiously account of my fathers ill will. Albeit I can no way quench the
coal^s of desire with forgetfulness, yet will I rake them up in the ashes of
modesty, seeing I dare not discover my love for maide^ly shamefastnes. I will
dissemble it til time I have opportunity. And I hope so to behave my self as
Euphues shall think me his own, and ^hilautus persuade himself I am none but
his. But I would to God Euphues would repair hither, that the sight of him
might mittigate some part of my martyrdom.

She having thus discoursed with her self her own miseryes, cast her self on
the bed: and there l^tte her lie, and return we to Euphues, who was so
ca^ght in the ginne of folly, that he neither could comfort himself nor
durst ask counsel of his friend, suspecting that which in deed was true, that
Philautus was cor^iuall with him, and coo^^emate with Lucilla. Amiddest
therefore these his extremityes between hope and fear, he uttered these or
the like speeches.

What is he Euphues that knowing thy wit, and seeing thy folly: but will
rather punish thy lewdenesse, then pity thy heauiuesse? Was there ever any so
fickle so soon to be allured? any ever so faithless to deceive his friend?
ever any so foolish to bathe himself in his own misfortune? To true it is
that as the Sea Crabbe swimmeth always against the stream, so wit always
strives against wisdom: And as the Be is oftentimes hurt with her own
honny, so is wit not seldom plagued with his own conceipte.

O ye gods have ye ordained for every maladye a medicine, for every sore a
salve, for every pain a plaster, leuing only love remediless? Did ye deem
no man so mad to be entangled with desire, or thought ye them worthy to be
tormented that were so misledde? have ye dealte more favorable with brute
beasts then with reasonable creatures.

The filthy Sow when she is sick, eats the Sea Crabbe and is immediately
recured: the Torteyse having tasted the Uiper, sucketh Origanum and is quickly
revived: the Bear ready to pine, lycketh up the Ants and is recovered: the
Dog having surfetted to procure his vomitte eats grass, and finds
remedy: the Heart being pierced with the darte, runs out of hand to the
herb Dictanum, and is healed. And can men by no herb, by no art, by no way
procure a remedy for the impatient disease of love? Ah well I perceive that
love is not unlike the Fig tree, whose fruit is sweet, whose root is more
bitter then the claw of a Bitter, or like the apple in Persia, whose blossom
sauoreth like Honny, whose budde is more sower then gall.

But O impiety. O broad blasphemy against the heavens. Will thou be so
impudent Euphues, to accuse the gods of iniquity? No fond fool, no. Neither
is it forbidden us by the gods to love, by whose divine providence we are
permitted to live, neither do we want remedies to recure our maladyes, but
reason to use the means. But why go I about to hinder the course of love,
with the discourse of law? have thou not read Eupheus, that he that loppeth
the Uine causes it to spread fairer? that he that stops the stream
forces it to swell higher? that he that casts water on the fire in the
Smithes forge, makes it to flame fiercer? Even so he that seeks by counsel
to moderate his ouerlashinge affections, increases his own misfortune. Ah my
Lucilla, would thou were either less fair or I more fortunate, either I wiser
or thou milder, either would I were out of this mad mood, either I would we
were both of one mind. But how should she be persuaded of my loyalty, that
yet had never one simple proof of my love? will she not rather imagine me to
be entangled with her beauty, then with her virtue. That my fancy being so
lewdly chayned at ye first, will be as lightly changed at the last, yt there is
nothing which is permane^t yt is violent? yes, yes, she must needs conjecture
so, although it be nothing so, for by how much ye more my affection comes on
ye sudden, by so much the less will she think it certain. The rattling
thunderbolte has but his clappe, the lyghteninge but his flash, and as they
both come in a moment, so do they both end in a minute.

I but Euphues, has she not heard also that the dry touch wood is kindled
with lyme, that the greatest mushrompe grows in one night? yt the fire
quickly burns the flax? that love easilye enters into the sharp wit
without resistaunce, and is harbored there without repentance?

If therefore the Gods have endewed her with as much bounty as beauty. If she
have no less wit then she has comeliness, certes she will neither conceive
sinisterly of my sudden suit, neither be coye to receive me into her service,
neither suspecte me of lyghtnesse, in yielding so lightly, neither reject me
disdaynefully, for loving so hastily. Shall I not then hazard my life to
obtain my love? and deceive Philautus to receive Lucilla? Yes Euphues, where
love bears sway, friendship can have no show: As Philautus brought me for
his shadow the last supper, so will I use him for my shadow til I have gained
his Saint. And can thou wretch be false to him that is faithful to thee?
Shall his courtesy be cause of thy cruelty? Will thou violate the league of
faith, to enherite the land of folly? Shall affection be of more force then
friendship, love then law, lust then loyalty? Know thou not that he that
loses his honesty has nothing else to loose?

Tush the case is light where reason takes place, to love and to live well, is
not granted to Jupiter. Who so is blinded with the caul of beauty, decerneth
no color of honesty. Did not G^ges cut Candaules a coat by his own
measure? Did not Paris though he were a welcome guest to Menelaus serve his
host a slippery prancke? If Philautus had loved ^ucilla, he would never have
suffered Euphues to have seen her. Is it not the pray that entiseth the
thief to ryfle? Is it not the pleasant bayte, that causes ye fleetest fish
to bite? Is it not a bye word amongst us, that gold makes an honest man an
ill man? Did Philautus account Euphues to simple to decypher beauty, or
supersticious not to desire it? Did he deem him a saint in rejecting fancy,
or a sotte in not discerning?

Thought he him a Stoycke that he would not be moved, or a stock that he
could not?

Well, well, seeing the wound that bleedeth inward is most dangerous, that
the fire kept close burns most furious, that the Oouen dammed up baketh
soonest, that sores having no vent fester inwardly, it is high time to unfold
my secret love, to my secret friend. Let Philautus behave himself never so
craftily, he shall know that it must be a wily Mouse that shall breed in the
Cats ear, and because I resemble him in wit, I mean a little to dissemble
with him in wyles. But O my Lucilla, if thy heart, he made of that stone which
may be mollyfied only with blood, would I had sipped of that river in Caria
which tourneth those that drink of it to stones^ If thine ears be anointed
with the Oil of Syria that bereaueth hearing, would mine eyes had been rubbed
with the sirrop of the Ceder tree which takes away sight.

Euphues having thus talked with himself, Philautus entered the chamber, and
finding him so worn and wasted with continual mourning, neither ioycing in his
meat, nor rejoicing in his friend, with watery eyes uttered this speech.

Friend and fellow, as I am not ignorant of thy present weakness, so I am
not privy of the cause, and although I suspect many things^ yet can I assure
my self of no one thing. Therefore my good Euphues, for these doubts and
dompes of mine, either remove the cause or reveal it. Thou have hitherto found
me a cheerful companion in thy mirth, and now shall thou find me as careful
with thee in thy moan. If altogether thou may not be cured, yet may thou
be comforted. If there be any thing that either by my friends may be procured,
or by my life attained, that may either heal thee in part, or help thee in
all, I protest to thee by the name of a friend, that it shall rather be gotten
with the loss of my body, then lost by getting a kingdom. Thou have tried m^,
therefore trust me, thou have ^^ul^ed me in many things, therefore try me in
this one thing. I never ye^ failed, and now I will not fainte. Be bold to
speak and blush not: thy sore is not so angry but I can salve it, thy wou^d
not so deep but I can ^earch it, thy grief not so great but I can ease it. If
it be ripe it s^albe lawn^ed, if it be broken it shall be tainted be it never so
desperate it shall be cured. Rise therefore Euphues, and take heart at grass,
younger you shall never be, pluck up thy stomach, if love it self have stoung
thee it shall not stiffle thee. Though thou be enamoured of some lady thou shall
not be enchau^ted. They yt begin to pine of a consu^ptio^, without delay preserve
themselves with cullisses, he yt feels his stomach en^lamed with heat, cool^th it
eft soones with co^serues: delays breed dangers, nothing so perilous as
procrastinatio^. Euphues hearing this comfort and friendly counsel,
disse^bled his sorrowing heart, with a smiling face, aunswering him forthwith
as follows.

True it is Philautus that he which touches ye nettle tenderly, is soonest
sloung, yt the Fly which plaieth with ye fire is singed in the flame, that he
y^ dallieth with women is drawn to his woe. And as y^ Adamant draws the
heavy iron, the harp yt fleet Dolphin, so beauty allureth the chaste mind to
love, and the wisest wit to lust: The example whereof I would it were no less
profitable the^ ye experience to me is like to be perilous. The vine wattered
with wine is soon withered, ye blossom in ye fattest ground is quickly
blasted, the Goat yt fatter she is the less fertile she is: yea, man the more
witty he is ye less happy he is. So it is Philautus (for why should I
conceal it from thee, of who^ I am to take counsel) yt since my last and
first being with thee at ye house of Ferardo, I have felt such a furious battle
in mine own body, as if it be not speadely repressed by policy, it will carry
my mind (ye grau^d captain in this fight) into endless captivity. Ah Liuia,
Liuia, thy courtly grace without coins, thy blazing beauty without blemish, thy
courteous demeanor without curiosity, thy sweet speech sauoured with wit, thy
comely mirth tempered with modesty, thy chaste looks yet lovely, thy sharp taunts
yet pleasant, have given me such a check, yt sure I am at the next view of thy
virtues, I shall take thee mate: And taking it not of a pawn, but of a prince,
ye loss is to be accounted the less. And though they be commonly in a great
choler that receive the mate, yet would I willingly take every minute x. mates,
to enjoy Liuia for my loving mate. Doubtless if ever she her self have been
scorched with the flames of desire, she will be ready to quench the coals with
courtesy in an other, if ever she^ have been attached of love, she will rescue
him yt is drenched in desire, if ever she have been taken with the ^e^^^^r of
fancy, she will help his ague, who by a quotidia^ fit is converted into
frenzy: Neither can there be under so delicate a hew lodged deceit, neither
in so beautiful a mould a malicious mind. True it is that the disposition of
the mind, follows the composition of ye body: how the^ can she be in mind
any way imperfect, who in body is perfect every way ^ I know my success will be
good, but I know not how to have acce^se to my goddess, neither do I want
courage to discover my love to my friend, but some color to cloak my coming
to ye house of Ferardo, for if they be in Naples as ieolous as they be in the
other parts of Italy, then it behooves me to walk circu^spectly, and to forge
some cause for mine often coming. If therefore Philautus, you can fet but this
fether to mine arrow, you shall see me shoot so near, yt thou will account me
for a cunning Archer^ And verily if I had not loved thee well, I would have
swalowed mine own sorrow in silence, knowing yt in love nothing is so
dangerous, as to perticipate ye means thereof to an other, and ye two may keep
counsel if one be away. I am therefore enforced perforce to challenge that
courtesy at thy hands, which erst thou did promise with thy heart, the
perfourmaunce whereof shall bind me to Philautus, and prove thee faithful to
Euphues.

Philautus thincking all to be gold that glistered, and all to be gospel
that Euphues uttered, answered his forged gloase with this friendly cloase.

In that thou have made me privy to thy purpose, I will not conceal my
practice, in that thou crauest my aid, assure thy self I will be the finger
next the thumb, insomuch as thou shall never repent thee of the one or the
other. Concerning Liuia though she be fair, yet is she not so amiable as my
Lucilla, whose servant I have been the term of three years, but least
comparisons should seem odious, chiefly where both the parties be without
comparison, I will omit that, and seeing that we had both rather be talking
with them, then tatling of them, we will immediately go to them. And truly
Euphues I am not a little glad, that I shall have thee, not only a comfort
in my life, but also a companion in my love: As thou have been wise in thy
choice, so I hope thou shall be fortunate in thy chance. Liuia is a wench of
more wit then beauty, Lucilla of more beauty then wit, both of more
honestye then honor, and yet both of such honor, as in all Naples there is
not one in birthe, to be compared with any of them both. How much therefore
have we to rejoice in our choice? Touching our access be thou secure, I
will flappe Ferardo in the mouth with some conceyte, and fill his old head so
full of new fables that thou shall rather be earnestly entreated to repair
to his house, then evil entreated to leave it. As old men are very suspicious
to mistruste every thing, so are they very credulous to believe any thing,
the blind man does eat many a Fly, yea, but said Euphues take heed my
Philautus, that thou thy self swallow not a gudgen, which word Philautus did
not mark, until he had almost digested it. But said Euphues, let us go
devoutly to the shrine of our Saints there to offer our devotion, to the which
Euphues consented willingly, smiling to himself to see how he had brought
Philautus into a fools Paradise.

Here you may see gentlemen the falsehood in fellowship, the fraud in
friendship, the painted sheth with the leaden dagger, ye fair words that make
fools feign, but I will not trouble you with superfluous addition unto whom I
fear me I have been tedious, with the bare discourse of this rude history.

Philautus and Euphues repaired to the house of Ferardo, where they found
Mistres Lucilla and Liuia accompanied with other gentlewomen neither being
idle, nor well employed, but playing at cards. But when Lucilla beheld Euphues
she could scarcely contain her self from embracing him, had not womanly
shamefastness, and Philautus his presence stayed her wisdom.

Euphues on the other side was fallen into such a trance, that he had not the
power either to succor himself, or salute the gentlewomen. At the last
Lucilla began as one that best might be bold, on this manner.

Gentlemen although your long absence gave me occasion to think that you
disliked your late entertainment, yet your coming at the last has cut off my
former suspicion: And by so much the more you are welcome by how much the more
you were wished for. But you gentleman (taking Euphues by the hand) were the
rather wished for, for that your discourse being left imperfect, caused us all
to long (as women are wont for things that like them) to have an end thereoff.
Unto whom Philautus replied as follows.

Mistres Lucilla though your courtesy made us nothing to doubt of our
welcome, yet modestye caused us to pinch courtesy who should first come, as
for my friend I think he was never wished for here so earnestly of any as
of himself, whether it might be to renew his talk or to recant his
sayings, I cannot tell. But whilst he was yet speakinge Ferardo entered,
whom they all duetifully welcomed home, who rounding Philautus in the care,
desired him to accompany him immediately without farther pausinge, protesting it
should be as well for his preferment as for his own profit. Philautus
consentinge, Ferardo said to his daughter.

Lucilla the urgent affairs I have in hand, will scarce suffer me to tarrye
with you one hour, yet my return I hope will be so short, that my absence
shall not breed thy sorrow: In the mean season I commit all things into thy
custody wishing thee to use thy accustomable courtesy. And seeinge I must take
Philautus with me, I will be so bold to crave you gentleman (his friend) to
supplye his room desiring you to take this hastye warninge for a hartye
welcome and so to spend this time of mine absence in honest mirth. And thus I
leave you.

Philautus knew well the cause of this sudden departure, which was to redeem
certain lands that were morgaged in his Fathers time to the use of Ferardo
who on that condition had before time promised him his daughter in marriage.
But return we to Euphues.

Euphues was supprised with such increadible joy at this strange event, that
he had almost sounded, for seeing his coryuall to be departed, and Ferardo to
give him so friendly entertainment, doubted not in time to get the good will of
Lucilla: Whom findinge in place convenient without company, with a bold
courage and comely gesture, he began to a^^ay her in this sort.

Gentlewoman, my acquaintance being so little, I am afraid my cred^te will
be less, for that they commonly are soonest believed, that are b^st bel^ued,
and they liked best, whom we have known longest, nevertheless the noble
mind suspecteth no guile without cause, neither condemns any wight without
proof, having therefore notise of your heroycall heart, I am the better
persuaded of my good hap. So it is Lucilla, that coming to Naples but to fetch
fire, as the by word is, not to make my place of abode, I have found such
flames that I can neither quench them with the water of free will, neither
cool them with wisdom. For as the Hoppe the poale being never so hye
grows to the end, or as the dry Beeche kindled at the root, never leaves
until it come to the top, or as one drop of poison disperseth it self
into every vain, so affection having caught hold of my heart, and the
sparkles of love kindled my liver, will sodeinely, though secretlye flame up
into my head, and spread it self into every sinewe. It is your beauty
(pardon my abrupte boldness) Lady that has taken every part of me
prisoner, and brought me to this deep distress, but seeinge women when one
praises them for their deserts, deem that he flattereth them to obtain his
desire, I am here present to yield my self to such trial, as your courtesy
in this behalf shall require: Yet will you commonly object this to such as
serve you and sterue to win your good will, that hot love is soon cold, that
the Bauin though it bourne bright, is but a blaze, that scaldinge water if it
stand a while tourneth almost to yse, that pepper though it be hot in the
mouth is cold in the mawe, that the faith of men though it frye in their
words, it freeseth in their works: Which things ( Lucilla) albeit they be
sufficient to reprove the lightness of some one, yet can it not convince every
one of lewdenes, neither ought the constancy of all, to be brought in question
through the subtlety of a few. For although the worm enters almost into
every wood, yet he eats not the Ceder tree: Though the stone Cylindrus at
every thunder clappe, roll from the hill, yet the pure s^eeke stone mounteth
at the noise, though the rust fret the hardest steel, yet does it not eat
into the Emeraulde, though Polypus change his hew, yet ye Salamander keeps
his color, though Proteus transform himself into every shape, yet Pygmalion
retains his old form, though Aeneas were to fickle to Dido, yet Troylus was
to faithful to Craessida, though others seem counterfaite in their deeds,
yet Lucilla persuade your self that Euphues will be always curraunt in his
dealinges. But as the true gold is tried by the touch, the pure flinte by the
stroke of the iron, so the loyal heart of the faithful lover, is known by
the trial of his Lady: of the which trial ( Lucilla) if you shall account
Euphues worthy, assure your self, he will be as ready to offer himself a
sacrifice for your sweet sake, as your self shall be willinge to employe him
in your service. Neither does he desire to be trusted any way, until he
shall be tried every way, neither does he crave credit at the first, but a
good countenance til time his desire shall be made manifest by his deserts.
Thus not blinded by light affection, but dazeled with your rare perfection, and
boldened by your exceeding courtesy, I have unfolded mine entire love,
desiring you having so good leisure, to give so friendly an answer, as I may
receive comfort, and you commendacion.

Lucilla although she were contented to hear this desired discourse, yet did
she seem to be somewhat displeased: And truly I know not whether it be
peculyar to that sex to dissemble with those, whom they most desire, or
whether by craft they have learned outwardely to loath that, which inwardely
they most love: yet wisely did she cast this in her head, that if she should
yield at the first assault he would think her a light huswife, if she should
reject him s^ornefully a very haggard, minding therefore that h^ should
neither take hold of her promise, neither unkindness of her preciseness,
she fed him indifferently, with hope and despair, reason and affection, life
and death. Yet in the end arguing wittilly upon certain questions, they fell
to such agreement as poor Philautus would not have agreed unto if he had
been present, yet always keepinge the body undefiled. And thus she replied.

GEntleman as you may suspecte me of Idelnesse in giving ear to your talk, so
may you convince me of lyghtenesse in answering such toys, certes as you have
made mine ears glowe at the rehearsal of your love, so have you galled my
heart with the remembrance of your folly. Though you came to Naples as a
stranger, yet were you welcome to my fathers house as a friend. And can you
then so much transgress ye bounds of honor (I will not say of honesty) as to
solicit a suit more sharp to me then death? I have hitherto God bethancked,
lived without suspicion of lewdenesse, and shall I now incur the danger of
sensual liberty? What hope can you have to obtain my love, seeing yet I
could never afford you a good look? Do you therefore think me easily
entised to the bent of your bow, because I was easily entreated to lysten to
your late discourse? Or seeing me (as finely you gloss) to excel all other in
beauty, did you deem that I would exceed all other in beastlynesse? But yet I
am not angry ^upheus but in an agony, for who is she that will not fret or
fume with one that loves her, if this love to delude me be not dissembled.
It is that which causes me most to fear, not that my beauty is unknown to my
self but that commonly we poor wenches are deluded through light belief, and
ye men are naturally inclined craftily to lead your life. When the Fox
preaches the Geese perish. The Crocodile shrowdeth greatest treason under
most pitiful tears: in a kissing mouth there lies a gallyng mind. You have
made so large proffer of your service, and so fair promises of fidelytie, that
were I not over charie of mine honesty, you would inueigle me to shake hands
with chastity. But certes I will either lead a Uirgins life in earth (though
I lead Apes in hell) or else follow thee rather then thy gifts: yet am I
neither so precise to refuse thy proffer, neither so peevish to disdain thy
good will: So excellent always are ye gifts which are made acceptable by the
virtue of the giver. I did at the first entrance discern thy love but yet
dissemble it. Thy wanton glaunces, thy scalding sighs, thy loving signs,
caused me to blush for shame, and to look wanne for fear, least they should
be perceived of any. These subtle shifts, these painted practices (if I were
to be won) would soon weane me from the teate of Vesta, to the toys of
V^nus. Besides this thy comely grace, thy rare quallyties, thy exquisite
perfection, were able to move a mind half mortified to transgress the bonds
of maydenly modesty. But God shield Lucilla, that thou should be so
careless of thine honor as to commit the state thereoff to a stranger. Learn
thou by me Euphues to despise things that be amiable, to forgo delightful
practices, believe me it is piety to abstain from pleasure.

Thou art not the first that has solicited this suit, but the first that
goes about to seduce me, neither discernest thou more then other, but dare
more then any, neither have thou more art to discover thy meaning, but more
heart to open thy mind: But thou preferrest me before thy lands, thy
lyuings, thy life: thou offerest thy self a Sacrifice for my security, thou
proferest me the whole and only soue^^igntie of thy service: Truly I were
very cruel and hard hearted if I should not love thee: hard hearted albeit I
am not, but truly love thee I cannot, whom I doubt to be my lover.

Moreover I have not been used to the court of Cupide, wherein there be more
slights then there be Hares in Athon, then Bees in Hybla, then stars in Heaven.
Besides this, the common people here in Naples are not only both very
suspicious of other men's matters and manners, but also very jealous over other
men's children and maidens: either therefore dissemble thy fancy, or desist
from thy folly.

But why should thou desist from the one seeinge thou can cunningly
dissemble the other. My father is now gone to Venice, and as I am uncertain
of his return, so am I not privy to the cause of his travail: But yet is he
so from hence that he seethe me in his absence. Know thou not Euphues that
kings have long arms and rulers large reches? neither let this comfort thee,
that at his departure he deputed thee in Philautus place. Although my face
cause him to mistrust my loyalty, yet my faith enforces him to give me this
liberty, though he be suspicious of my fair hew, yet is he s^cure of my ^irme
honesty. But alas Euphues, what truth can there be found in a trauayler? what
stay in a stranger? whose words and bodies both watch but ^or a wind, whose
feet are ever fleeting, whose faith plighted on the shore, is turned to
perjury when they hoiste sail. Who more traiterous to Phillis then Demophoon?
yet he a trauailer. Who more perjured to Dido then Aeneas? and he a stranger,
both these Queens, both they Caytiffes. Who more false to Ar^ad^e then
^heseus? yet he a sayler. Who more fickle to Medea then Jason? yet he a
starter, both these daughters to great Princes, both they unfaithful of
promises. Is it then lykely that ^uphues will be faithful to Lucilla being
in Naples but a soiourner? I have not yet forgotten the inuectiue (I can no
otherwise term it) which thou made against beauty, saying it was a
deceiptfull bayte with a deadly hook, and a sweet poison in a painted pot.
Can thou then be so unwise to swallow the bayte which will breed thy bane?
To swill the drink that will expire thy date? To desire the wight that will
work thy death? But it may be that with ye Scorpion thou can feed on the
earth, or with the Quail and Roebucke, be fat with poison, or with beauty
live in all bravery. I fear me thou have the stone Contineus about thee,
which is named of the contrary, that though thou pretend faith in thy
words, thou deuisest fraud in thy heart, yt though thou seem to prefer love,
thou art inflamed with lust. And what for that? Though thou have eaten the
seed^s of Rockatte, which breed incontinencie, yet have I chewed the leaf
Cresse which mayteineth modesty. Though thou bear in thy bos^me the herb
Araxa most noisome to virginity, yet have I ye stone yt grows in the mount
Tmolus, the vpholder of chastity. You may gentleman account me for a cold
Prophet thus hastily to divine of your disposition, pardon me Euphues if in
love I cast beyond the Moon, which brings us women to endless moan.
Although I my self were never burnt, whereby I should dread the fire, yet the
scorching of others in the flames of fancy, warns me to beware: Though I as
yet never tried any faithles, whereby I should be fearful, yet have I read of
many that have been perjured, which causes me to be careful: though I am able
to convince none by proof, yet am I enforced to suspect one upon
probabilyties. Alas we silly souls which have neither wit to decypher the
wyles of men, nor wisdom to dissemble our affection, neither craft to train
in young lovers, neither courage to withstand their encounters, neither
discretion to discern their dubling, neither hard hearts to rei^ct their
complaynts, we I say are soon enticed, being by nature simple, and easily
entangled, beeinge apt to receive the impression of love. But alas it is both
common and lamentable, to behold simplicity intrapped by subtilytie, and
those that have most might, to be infected with most malice. The Spider
weaueth a fine web to hang the Fly, the Wolf wears a fair face to devour
the Lamb, the Merlin strikes at the Partridge, the Eagle often snappeth at
the Fly, men are always laying baytes for women, which are the weaker
vessels: but as yet I could never hear man by such snares to intrappe man:
For true it is that men themseleus have by use observed, that it must be a hard
winter, when one Wolf eats an other. I have read yt the Bull being tied to
ye Fig tree loses his strength, that the whole heard of Dear stand at the
gaze, if they smell a sweet apple, that the Dolphin by the sound of Music is
brought to ye shore. And then no marvel it is that if the fierce Bull be
tamed with the Fig tree, if that women being as weak as sheep, be overcome
with a Fig, if the wild Dear be caughte with an apple, that the tame
Damzell is won with a blossom, if the fleet Dolphin be allured with
harmony, that women be entangled with the melody of men's speech, fair
promises and solemn protestations. But follye it were for me to mark their
mischiefs, since I am neither able, neither they willing to amend their
manners, it becomes me rather to show what our sex should do, then to open
what yours does. And seeing I cannot by reason restrain your importunate suit,
I will by rigor done on my self, cause you to refrain the means. I would to
God Ferardo were in this point like to Lysander, which would not suffer his
daughters to wear gorgeous apparel, saying it would rather make them common
then comely. I would it were in Naples a law which was a custom in Egypt,
that women should always go barefoote, to the intent they might keep
themselves always at home, that they should be ever like to ye Snaile, which
has ever his house on his head. I mean so to mortify my self that in stead
of silks I will wear sackecloth, for Owches and Bracelettes, Leere and
Caddys, for the Lute, use the Distaffe, for the Pen, the Needle, for lovers
Sonettes, David's Psalms. But yet I am not so senceles altogether to reject
your service: which if I were certainly assured to proceed of a simple mind,
it should not receive so simple a reward. And what greater trial can I have of
thy simplicity and truth, the^ thine own request which desires a trial. I,
but in the coldest flinte there is hot fire, the Be that has ho^^y in her
mouth, has a sting in her tail, the tree that bears the sweetest fruit,
has a sower sap, yea the words of men, though they seem smoothe as oil,
yet their hearts are as crooked as the stalk of Iuie. I would not Euphues
that thou should condemn me of rigor, in that I seek to assuage thy
follye by reason, but take this by the way that although as yet I am disposed
to like of none, yet whenever I shall love any I will not forget thee, in the
mean season account me thy friend, for thy foe I will never be.

Euphues was brought into a great quandarie and as it were a cold shiuering,
to hear this new kind of kindness, such sweet meat, such sower sauce,
such fair words, such faint promises, such hot love, such cold desire,
such certain hope, such sudden change, and stood like one that had looked
on Medusaes head, and so had been turned into a stone.

Lucilla seeing him in this pitiful plight and fearing he would take stand if
the lure were not cast out, took him by the hand and wringing him softely with
a smiling countenance began thus to comfort him.

Me thinks Euphues chaungeing so your couloure upon the sudden, you will
soon change your coppie, is your mind on your meat? a penny for your thought.

Mistress (quod he) if you would buy all my thoughts at that price, I should
never be wearye of thinking. but seeinge it is too dear, read it, and take it
for nothing.

It seems to me (said she) yt you are in some brown study, what colors you
might best wear for your Lady.

In deed Lucilla you level shrewdly at my thought, by the aim of your own
imagination, for you have given unto me a true loves knotte wrought of
chaungeable silk, and you deem me that I am deuisinge how I might have my
colors chaungeable also, that they might agree: But let this with such
toys and devises pass, if it please you to command me any service, I am
here ready to attend your leisure. No service Euphues, but that you keep
silence until I have uttered my mind: and secrecy when I have unfolded my
meaning.

If I should offend in the one I were to bold, if in the other too beastly.

Well then Euphues (said she) so it is that for the hope that I conceive of
thy loyalty and the happy success that is like to ensue of this our love, I
am content to yield thee the place in my heart which thou desire and
deseruest above all other: which consent in me if it may any ways breed thy
contentation, sure I am that it will every way work my comfort. But as either
thou tenderest mine honor or thine own safety, use such secrecy in this
matter that my father have no incklyng heereoff, before I have framed his mind
fit for our purpose. And though women have small force to overcome men by
reason, yet have they good Fortune to undermine them by pollycie. The soft
drops of rain pearce the hard Marble, many strokes overthrow the tallest
Oak, a silly woman in time may make such a breach into a man's heart as her
tears may enter without resistaunce, then doubt not but I will so undermine
mine old father, as quickly I will enjoy my new friend. Tush Philautus was
liked for fashion sake, but never loved for fancy sake, and this I vow by ye
faith of a Uirgin and by the love I bear thee (for greater bands to confirm
my vow I have not) that my father shall sooner martyr me in the fire then
marry me to Philautus. No no Euphues thou only have won me by love, and
shall only wear me by law, I force not Philautus his fury, so I may have
Euphues his friendship, neither will I prefer his possessions before thy
person, neither esteem better of his lands then of thy love. Ferardo shall
sooner disherite me of my patrimony, then dishonor me in breaking my promise
it is not his great manors, but thy good manners, that shall make my marriage.
In token of which my sincere affection, I give thee my hand in pawn and my
heart for ever to be thy Lucilla.

Unto whom Euphues answered on this manner.

If my tongue were able to utter the joys that my heart has conceived, I
fear me though I be well beloved, yet I should hardlye be believed. Ah my
Lucilla how much am I bound to thee, which preferrest mine unworthiness
before thy Fathers wrath, my happiness before thine own misfortune, my love
before thine own life? how might I excel thee in courtesy, whom no mortal
creature can exceed in constancy? I find it now for a settled truth, which
erst I accounted for a vain talk, that the Purple dye will never stain,
that the pure Cyuet will never loose his savor, that the green Laurel will
never change his color, that beauty can never be blotted with
discourtesie: As touching secrecy in this behalf, assure thy self, that I
will not so much as tell it to my self. Command Euphues to run, to ride, to
undertake any exploite be it never so dangerous, to hazard himself in any
enterprise, be it never so desperate: As they were thus pleasauntly conferring
the one with the other, Liuia (whom Euphues made his stale) entered into the
parlor, unto whom Lucilla spoke in these terms.

Do thou not laugh Liuia to see my ghostly father keep me here so long at
shrift? Truly (answered Liuia) me thinckes that you smile at some pleasant
shift, either he is slow in enquiring of your faults, or you slack in
aunswering of his questions, and thus being supper time they al sat down,
Lucilla well pleased, no man better content then Euphues, who after his repast
having no apportunitie to confer with his lover, had small lust to continue
with the gentlewoman any longer, seeinge therefore he could frame no means
to work his delight, he coined an excuse to hasten his departure, promisinge
the next morninge to trouble them again as a guest more bold then welcome,
although in deed he thought himself to be the better welcome in saying that
he would come.

But as Ferardo went in post, so he returned in haste, having concluded
with Philautus, that the marriage should immediately be consummated which
wrought such a content in Philautus yt he was almost in an ecstasy through the
extremity of his passions: such is the fullness and force of pleasure, that
there is nothing so dangerous as the fruityon, yet knowinge that delays
bring dangers, although he nothing doubted of Lucilla, whom he loved,
yet feared he the fickleness of old men, which is always to be mistrusted.
He urged therefore Ferardo to break with his daughter who beeinge willinge to
have the match made, was content incontiuently to procure the means: findinge
therefore his daughter at leisure, and having knowledge of her former love,
spoke to her as follows.

Dear daughter, as thou have long time lived a maiden, so now thou must
learn to be a Mother, and as I have been careful to bring thee up a
virgin, so am I now desirous to make thee a wife. Neither ought I in this
matter to use any persuasions, for ye maidens commonly now a days are no
sooner borne, but they begin to bride it: neither to offer any great portions
for that thou know thou shall inherit all my possessions. Mine only care
has been heterto to match thee with such an one, as should be of good wealth
able to maynteine thee, of great worship able to compare with thee in birth, of
honest conditions to deserve thy love, and an Italian borne to enjoy my
lands. At the last I have found one aunswerable to my desire, a gentleman of
great revenues, of a noble progeuie, of honest behavior, of comely personage,
borne and brought up in Naples, Philautus (thy friend as I guess) thy husband
Lucilla, if thou like it, neither can thou dislike him, who wants nothing
that should cause thy liking, neither has any thing that should breed thy
loathing. And surely I rejoice the more, that thou shall be linked to him in
marriage, whom thou have loved as I hear beeinge a maiden, neither can there
any iarres kindle between them, where the minds be so united, neither any
ielowsie arise, where love has so long been settled. Therefore Lucilla to the
end the desire of either of you may now be accomplished, to the delight of you
both, I am here come to finishe the contract by giuinge hands, which you have
already begun between your selves by joining of hearts, that as God does
witness the one in your consciences, so the world may testi^ie the other by
your conuersations, and therefore Lucilla make such answer to my request, as
may like me and satis^ie thy friend.

Lucilla abashed with this sodeine speech of her father, yet boldened by the
love of her friend, with a comely bashfulnesse answered him in this manner.

Reverend Sir, the sweetness that I have found in the undefiled estate of
virginity, causes me to loath the sower sauce which is mixed with matrimony,
and ye quiet life which I have tried being a maiden, makes me to shun the
cares yt are always incide^t to a mother, neither am I so wedded to the world
that I should be moved with great possessions, neither so bewitched with
wantonness, that I should be entised with any man's proportion, neither if I
were so dysposed would I be so proud to desire one of noble progeny, or so
precise to choose one only in mine own country, for that commonly these
things happen always to the contrary. Do we not see the noble to match
with the base, the rich with the poor, the Italian oftentimes with the
Portingale? As love knows no laws, so it regards no conditions, as the
lover makes no pawse where he likes, so he makes no conscience of these
idle ceremonies. In that Philautus is the man that threateneth such kindness
at my hands, and such courtesy at yours, that he should account me his
wife before he woe me, certeinely he is like for me to make his reckoninge
twice, because he reconeth without his hostess. And in this Philautus would
either show himself of great wisdom to persuade, or me of great lightness
to be allured: although the loadstone draw iron, yet it cannot move gold,
though the Iette gather up the light straw, yet can it not take up the pure
steel. Although Philautus think himself of virtue sufficient to win his
lover, yet shall he not obtain Lucilla. I cannot but smile to hear, that a
marriage should be solemnized, where never was any mention of assuringe, and
that the woeing should be a day after the weddinge. Certes if when I looked
merilye on Philautus, he deemed it in the way of marriage, or if seeinge me
dispose to ieste, he took me in good earnest, then sure he might gather
some presumption of my love, but no promise: But me thincks it is good reason,
that I ^houlde be at mine own brydeall, and not given in the Church, before I
know the Bridegroom. Therefore dear Father in mine opinion as there can be no
bargain, where both be not agreede, neither any Indentures sealed, where the
one will not consent, so can there be no contract where both be not content, no
banes asked lawfully where one of the parties forbids the^, no marriage made
where no match was meant: But I will hereafter frame my self to be coy, seeing
I am claimed for a wife because I have been courteous, and give my self to
melancholy, seeing I am accounted won in that I have been merry: And if every
gentleman be made of the metal that Philautus is, then I fear I shall be
challenged of as many as I have used to company with, and be a common wife to
all those that have commonly resorted hither.

My duty therefore ever reserved, I here on my knees forswear Philautus for
my husband, although I accept him for my friend, and seeing I shall hardly
be induced ever to match with any, I beseech you if by your Fatherly love, I
shall be compelled, that I may match with such a one, as both I may love, and
you may like.

Ferardo being a grave and wise Gentleman, although he were thoroughly angry,
yet he dissembled his fury, to the end he might by craft discover her fancy,
and whispering Philautus in the ear (who stood as though he had a Flea in his
ear) desired him to keep silence, until he had undermined her by subtlety,
which Philautus having granted, Ferardo began to sift his daughter with this
device.

Lucilla thy color shows thee to be in a great choler, and thy hot words
bewray thy heavy wrath, but be patient, seeinge all my talk was only to
try thee, I am neither so unnatural to wreaste thee against thine own will,
neither so malytious to wedde thee to any, against thine own likinge: for
well I know what iarres, what jealousy, what s^riefe, what storms ensue,
where the match is made rather by the compulsion of the parents, then by
consent of the parties, neither do I like thee the less, in that thou lykest
Philautus so little, neither can Philautus love thee the worse, in that thou
love thy self so well, wishinge rather to stand to thy chance, then to the
choice of any other. But this gryueth me most, that thou art almost vowed to
the vain order of the vestall virgins, despisinge, or at the least not
desiring the sacred bands of Juno her bed. If thy Mother had been of that
mind when she was a maiden, thou had not now been borne to be of this
mind to be a virginne: Way with thy self what slender profile they bring to
the common wealth, what slight pleasure to themselves, what great grief to
their parents which joy most in their ofspringe and desire, most to enjoy
the noble and blessed name of a graundfather.

Thou know that the tallest Ash is cut down for fuel, because it bears
no good fruit, that the Cow that gyues no milk is brought to the slaughter,
that the Drone that gathers no honny is contemned, that the woman that makes
her self barren by not marryinge, is accounted among the Grecian Ladies worse
then a carryon, as Homere reports. Therefore Lucilla if thou have any care to
be a comfort to mye hoarye hairs, or a commodity^ to thy common weal, frame
thy self to that honorable estate of matrimonye, which was sanctified in
Paradise, allowed of the Patriarchs, hallowed of the old Prophets, and
commended of all persons. If thou like any, be not ashamed to tell it me,
which only am to exhort thee, yea, and as much as in me lies to command
thee, to love one: If he be base thy blood will make him noble, if beggerlye
thy goods shall make him wealthy, if a stranger thy freedom may enfraunchise
him: if he be young he is the more fitter to be thy pheare, if he be old
the lyker to thine aged Father. For I had rather thou should lead a life to
thine own lykeinge in earth, then to thy great torments lead Apes in Hell.
Be bold therefore to make me partner of thy desire, which will be partaker of
thy disease, yea, and a furtherer of thy delights, as far as either my
friends, or my lands, or my life will stretch.

Lucilla perceiuinge the drifte of the old Fox her Father, wayed with her
self what was best to be done, at the last not wayinge her Fathers ill will,
but encouraged by love, shaped him an answer which pleased Ferardo but ^
little, and pinched Philautus on the parsons side on this manner.

Dear Father Ferardo, although I see the bayte you lay to catch me, yet I
am content to swallowe the hook, neither are you more desirous to take me
nappinge, then I willinge to confess my meaning. So it is that love has as
well inueigled me as others, which make it as strange as I. Neither do I love
him so meanly that I should be ashamed of his name, neither is his personage
so mean that I should love him shamefullye: It is Euphues that lately arrived
here at Naples, that has battered the bulwark of my breast, and shall
shortly enter as conqueror into my bosom: What his wealth is I neither know
it nor way it^ what his wit is all Naples does know it, and wonder at it,
neither have I been curious to enquire of his progenitors, for that I know so
noble a mind could take no Original but from a noble man, for as no bird can
look again the Sun, but those that be bredde of the Eagle, neither any
Hawke soar so hie as the brood of the Hobbie, so no wight can have such
excellent qualities except he descend of a noble race, neither be of so high
capacity, unless he issue of a high progeny. And I hope Philautus will not
be my foe, seeinge I have chosen his dear friend, neither you Father be
displeased in that Philautus is displaced. You need not muse that I should so
sodeinely be entangled, love gives no reason of choice, neither will it suffer
any repulse. Mirha was enamoured of her natural Father, Biblis of her
brother, Phaedra of her son in law: If nature can no way resist the fury of
affection, how should it be stayed by wisdom?

Ferardo interrupting her in the middle of her discourse, although he were
moved with inward grudge, yet he wisely repressed his anger, knowing that
sharp words would but sharpen her froward will, and thus answered her briefly.

Lucilla, as I am not presently to grant my good will, so mean I not to
reprehende thy choice, yet wisdom wylleth me to pawse, until I have called
what may happen to my remembrance, and warns thee to be circumspecte,
least thy rash conceyte bring a sharp repentance. As for you Philautus I
would not have you despair seeinge a woman does oftentimes change her
desire. Unto whom Philautus in few words made answer.

Certeinely Ferardo I take the less grief in that I see her so greedy after
Euphues, and by so much the more I am content to leave my suit, by how much the
more she seems to disdain my service, but as for hope because I would not
by any means taste one dram thereoff, I will abjure all places of her abode
and loath her company, whose countenance I have so much loved, as for Euphues,
and there staying his speech, he flange out of the doors and repairing to his
lodginge uttered these words.

Ah most dissembling wretch Euphues, O counterfayte companion, could thou
under the show of a steadfast friend cloak the malice of a mortal foe?
under the color of simplicity, shroud the Image of deceit? Is thy Liuia
turned to my Lucilla, thy love to my lover, thy devotion to my Saint? Is this
the courtesy of Athens, the cauillyng of scholars, the craft of Grecians?
Could thou not remember Philautus that Greece is never without some wily
Ulysses, never void of some Synon, never to seek of some deceitful shifter?
Is it not commonly said of Grecians that craft comes to them by kind, that
they learn to deceive in their cradell? Why then did his pretended courtesy
bewitch thee with such credulytie? shall my good will be the cause of his ill
will? because I was content to be his friend, thought he me meet to be made
his fool? I see now that as the fish Scolopidus in the flood Araris at the
waxinge of the Moon is as white as the driven snow, and at the wayning as
black as the burnt coal, so Euphues, which at the first increasing of our
familyaritie, was very zealous, is now at the last cast become most
faythlesse. But why rather exclaim I not against Lucilla, whose wanton looks
caused Euphues to vyolate his plyghted faith? Ah wretched wenche can thou b^
so light of love, as to change with every wind? so unconstant as to preserre
a new lover before thine old friend? Ah well I wotte that a new broom
sweepeth clean, and a new garment makes thee leave off the old though it be
fitter, and new wine causes thee to forsake the old though it be better,
much like to the men in the Island Scyrum, which pull up the old tree when
they se the young begin to spring, and not unlike unto the widow of Lesbos,
which changed all her old gold for new glass, have I served thee three
years faithfully, and am I served so unkindly? shall the fruit of my desire
be turned to disdain? But unless Euphues had inueigled thee thou had yet
been constant, yea but if Euphues had not seen thee willing to be won, he
would never have woed thee, but had not Euphues enticed thee with fair words,
thou would never have loved him, but had thou not given him fair
looks, he would never have lyked thee: I, but Euphues gave the onset, I, but
Lucilla gave the occasion, I, but Euphues first brake his mind, I, but Lncilla
first bewrayed her meaning. Tush why go I about to excuse any of them, seeing I
have just cause to accuse them both? Neither ought I to dispute which of them
has proffered me the greatest villanye, since that either of them has
committed perjury. Yet although they have found me dull in perceiving their
falsehood, they shall not find me slack in reue^ging their folly. As for
Lucilla seeing I mean altogether to forgette her, I mean also to forgive her,
least in seeking means to be revenged, mine old desire be renewed. Philautus
having thus discoursed with himself, began to write to Euphues as follows.

Although hitherto Euphues I have shrined thee in my heart for a trusty
friend, I will shun thee heeraf^er as a trothles foe, and although I cannot
see in thee less wit then I was w^nt, yet do I find less honesty, I
perceive at the last (although being deceived it be to late) that Musk
although it be sweet in the smell, is sower in the smacke, that the leaf of
the Cedar tree though it be fair to be seen, yet the siroppe depriueth sight,
that friendship though it be plighted by shaking the hand, yet it is shaken
off by fraud of the heart. But thou have not much to boaste off, ^or as thou
have won a fickle Lady, so have thou lost a faithful friend. How can thou
be secure of her constancy when thou have had such trial of her lyghtenesse?

How can thou assure thy self that she will be faithful to thee, which
has been faithless to me? Ah Euphues, let not my credulytie be an occasion
hereafter for thee to practice the like cruelty. Remember this that yet there
has never been any faithles to his friend, that has not also been fruitelesse
to his God. But I way this treachery the less, in that it comes from a
Grecian in whom is no trothe. Though I be to weak to wrestle for a revenge,
yet God who permits no guyle to be guyltlesse, will shortly requite this
injury, though Philautus have no pollycie to undermine thee, yet thine own
practices will be sufficient to overthrow thee.

Could thou Euphues for the love of a fruitelesse pleasure, vyolate the
league of faithful friendeshippe? Did thou way more the entising looks
of a lewd wenche, then the entyre love of a loyal friend? If thou did
determine with thy self at the first to be false, why did thou swear to
be true? If to be true, why art thou false? If thou wast minded both
falselye and forgedlye to deceive me, why did thou flatter and dissemble
with me at the first? If to love me, why do thou flinche at the last? If
the sacred bands of amity did d^lyght thee, why didd^st thou break them? if
dislyke thee, why did thou praise them? Do thou not know that a perfect
fri^nde should be like the Glazeworme, which shines m^st bright in the dark?
or like the pure Franck^nc^ns^ which smells most sweet when it is in the
(...)? or at the least not unlike to the Damask Rose which is sweeter in the
still then on the stalk? But thou Euphues, do rather resemble the Swallow
which in the Summer creeps under the eues of every house, and in the Winter
leaves nothing but durte behind her, or the humble Be which having sucked
honny out of the fair flower does leave it and loath it, or the Spider which
in the finest web does hang the fairest Fly. Do thou think Euphues that
thy craft in betraying me, shall any whit cool my courage in revenging thy
villainy? or that a Gentleman of Naples will put up such an injury at the hands
of a Scholar? And if I do, it is not for want of strength to maynteyne my
just quarrel, but of will which thinks scorn to get so vain a conquest.
I know that Menelaus for his ten years war endured ten years woe, that
after all his strife he wan but a Strumpet, that for all his trauails he
reduced (I cannot say reclaymed) but a straggeler: which was as much in my
judgment, as to strive for a broken glass which is good for nothing. I wish
thee rather Menelaus care, then my self his conquest, that thou being deluded
by Lucilla may rather know what it is to be deceived, then I having
conquered thee should prove what it were to bring back a dissembler. Seeing
therefore there can no greater revenge light upon thee, then that as thou
have reaped where an other has sown, so an other may thresh yt which thou
have reaped: I will pray that thou may be measured unto with the like measure
that thou have meaten unto others: that as thou have thought it no conscience
to betray me, so others may deem it no dishonestie to deceive thee, that as
Lucilla made it a light matter to forswear her old friend Philautus, so she
may make it a mock to forsake her new pheere Euphues. Which if it come to
pass as it is like by my compass, then shall thou see the troubles, and feel
the torments which thou have already thrown into the hearts and eyes of others.
Thus hoping shortly to see thee as hopeless, as my self is hapless, I wish
my wish were as effectually ended as it is heartely looked for. And so I leave
thee.

Thine once Philautus.

Philautus dispatching a messenger with this letter speedely to Euphues, went
into the fields to walk there either to digeste his choler or chew upon his
melancholy. But Euphues having read the contents was well content, setting his
talk at naught and aunswering his taunts in these gibing terms.

I Remember Philautus how valyauntly Ajax boasted in the feats of arms, yet
Ulysses bare away the armor, and it may be that though thou crake of thine own
courage, thou may easily lose the conquest. Do thou think Euphues such a
dastarde that he is not able to withstand thy courage, or such a dullarde that
he cannot descry thy craft. Alas good soul. It fares with thee as with the
Hen, which when ye Puttocke has caught her Chicken begins to cackle: and
thou having lost thy lover beginnest to prattle. Tush Philautus, I am in this
point of Euripides his mind, who thinks it lawful for the desire of a
kingdom to transgress the bounds of honesty, and for the love of a Lady to
violate and break the bands of amity. The friendship between man and man
as it is common so is it of course, between man and woman as it is seldom so
is it sincere, the one proceeds of the similitude of manners, ye other of the
sinceritio, of the heart: if thou had learned the first point of hauking
thou would have learned to have held frst, or the first noat of Deskant thou
would have kept thy sol. fa. to thy self.

But thou can blame me no more of folly in leaving thee to love Lucilla, then
thou may reprove him of foolishness that having a Sparrowe in his hand
lets her go to catch the Phesaunt, or him of unskillfulness that seeing the
Heron, leaves to leauell his shoot at the Stockedoue, or that woman of
coyness that having a dead Rose in her bosom, throws it away to gather the
fresh Uiolette. Love knows no laws: Did not Jupiter transform himself into
the shape of Amphitrio to embrace Al^maena? Into the form of a Swan to enjoy
Laeda? Into a Bull to beguyle ^o? Into a shower of gold to win Danae? Did
not Neptune change himself into a Heyfer, a Ram, a Floude, a Dolphin,
only for the love of those he lusted after? Did not Apollo convert himself
into a Shepherd, into a Bird, into a Lion, for the desire he had to heal his
disease? If the Gods thought no scorn to become beasts, to obtain their
best beloved, shall Euphues be so nyce in changing his coppie to gain his
Lady? No, no, he that cannot dissemble in love, is not worthy to live. I am of
this mind, that both might and malice, deceit and treachery, all perjury,
any impiety may lawfully be committed in love, which is lawless. In that
thou arguest Lucilla of lyghtnesse, thy will hangs in the light of thy wit:
Do thou not know that the weak stomach if it be cloyed with one diet does
soon surfe^? That the clownes Garlike cannot ease the cour^iers disease so
well as the pure Treacle? that far fette and dear bought is good for Ladies?
That Euphues being a more dayntie morsel then Philautus, ought better to be
accepted? Tush Philautus set thy heart at rest, for thy hap wills thee to
give over all hope both of my friendship, and her love, as ^or revenge thou
art not so able to lend a blow as I toward it, neither more venterous to
challenge the combatte, then I valiant to answer the quarrel. As Lucilla was
caught by frawde so shall she be kept by force, and as thou wast too simple to
espy my craft, so I think thou will be too weak to withstand my c^urage,
but if thy revenge stand only upon thy wish, thou shall never live to see my
woe, or to have thy will, and so farewell.

Euphues

This letter being dispatched, Euphues sent it and Philautus read it, who
disdayning those proud terms, disdayned also to answer them, being ready to
ride with Ferardo.

Euphues having for a space absented himself from the house of Ferardo,
because he was at home, longed sore to see Lucilla which now opportunity
offered unto him, Ferardo being gone again to Venice with Philautus, but in
his absence one Curio a gentleman of Naples of little wealth and less wit
haunted Lucilla her company, and so enchaunted her, yt Euphues was also cast
off with Philautus which thing being unknown to Euphues, caused him ye sooner
to make his repair to the presence of his Lady, whom he finding in her muses
began pleasauntly to salute in this manner.

Mistress Lucilla, although my long ab^ence might breed your just anger, (for
ye lovers desire nothing so much as often meeting) yet I hope my presence will
dissolve your choler (^or ye lovers are soon pleas^d when of their wishes they
be fully possessed.) My absence is the rather to be excused in yt your father
has been always at home, whose frowns seemed to threaten my ill fortune, and
my presence at this present the better to be accepted in that I have made
such speedye repair to your presence.

Unto whom Lucilla answered with this glyeke.

Truly Euphues you have miste the cushion, for I was neither angry with your
long absence, neither am I well pleased at your presence, the one gave me
rather a good hope hereafter never to see you, the other gives me a greater
occasion to abhor you.

Euphues being nipped on the head, with a pale countenance, as though his
soul had forsaken his body replied as follows.

If this sudden change Lucilla, proceed of any desert of mine, I am here not
only to answer the fact, but also to make amends for my fault: if of any new
motion or mind to forsake your new friend, I am rather to lament your
inconstancy then revenge it, but I hope that such hot love cannot be so soon
cold, neither such sure faith, be rewarded with so sodeyne forgetfulness.

Lucilla not ashamed to confess her folly, answered him with this f^umpe.

Sir whether your deserts or my desire have wrought this change, it will boot
you little to know, neither do I crave amends, neither fear revenge, as for
fervent love, you know there is no fire so hot but it is quenched with
water, neither affection so strong but is weakened with reason, let^e this
suffice thee that thou know I care not for thee.

In deed (said Euphues) to know the cause of your alteration would boot me
little seeing the effect takes such force. I have heard that women either
love entirely or hate deadly, and seeing you have put me out of doubt of the
one, I must needs persuade my self of the other. This change will cause
Philautus to laugh me to scorn, and double thy lightness in ^^^ning so often.
Such was the hope that I conceived of thy constancy, yt I spared not i^ al
places to blaze thy loialtie, but now my rash conceit will prove me a liar,
and thee a light huswife.

Nay (said Lucilla) now shall not thou laugh Philautus to scorn, seeing you
have both druncke of one cup, in misery Euphues it is a great comfort to have
a companion. I doubt not, but that you will both conspire against me to work
some mischief, although I nothing fear your malice, whosoever accompteth you
a liar for praising me, may also deem you a letcher for being enamoured of me,
and whosoever judges me light in forsaking of you, may think thee as lewd
in loving of me, for thou that thoughtest it lawful to deceive thy friend,
must take no scorn to be deceived of thy foe.

Then I perceive Lucilla (said he) that I was made thy stale, and Philautus thy
laughinge stock, whose friendship (I must confess in deed) I have refused to
obtain thy favor, and since an other has won that we both have lost, I am
content for my part neither ought I to be grieved seeing thou art fickle.

Certes Euphues (said Lucilla) you spend your wind in wast for your welcome is
but small, and your chere is like to be less, fancy gives no reason of his
change neither will be co^trolled for any choice, this is therefore to warn
you, yt from henceforth you neither solicit this suite neither offer any way
your service, I have chosen one (I must needs confess) neither to be compared
to Philautus in wealth, nor to thee in wit, neither in birth to the worst of
you both, I thinck God gave it me for a just plague, for renouncing Philautus,
and choosing thee, and since I am an ensample to all women of lightness, I
am like also to be a myrrour to them all of unhappiness, which ill luck I
must take by so much the more patiently, by how much the more I acknowledge my
self to have deserved it worthily. Well Lucilla (answered Euphues) this case
breeds my sorrow the more, in that it is so sodeine, and by so much the more
I lament it, by how much the less I looked for it. In that my welcome is so
cold and my cheer so simple, it nothing touches me, seeinge your furye is so
hot, and my misfortune so great that I am neither wyllinge to receive it,
nor you to bestow it, if tract of time, or want of trial had caused this
Metamorphosis my grief had been more tolerable, and your fleetinge more
excusable, but coming in a moment undeserved, unlooked for, vnthoughte off, it
increases my sorrow and thy shame.

Euphues (quoth she) you make a long harvest for a little corn, and angle
for the fish that is already caught. Curio, yea, Curio, is he that has my
love at his pleasure, and shall also have my life at his commandment, and
although you deem him unworthy to enjoy that which erst you accounted no
wight worthy to embrace, yet seeinge I esteem him more worth then any, he is
to be reputed as chief. The Wolf chooses him for her make, that has or does
endure most travail for her sake. Venus was content to take the black Smith
with his powlt foot. Cornelia here in Naples disdained not to love a rude
Miller. As for changing, did not Helen ye pearl of Greece thy countriwoman
first take Menelaus, then Theseus, and last of all Paris? if brute beasts give
us ensamples that those are most to be lyked, of whom we are best beloved, or
if the Princess of beautye Venus, and her heirs Helen, and Cornelia, show
that our affection stands on our free will: then am I rather to be excused
then accused. Therefore good Euphues be as merrye as you may be, for time
may so turn that once again you may be.

Nay Lucilla (said he) my harvest shall cease, seeing others have reaped my
corn, as for anglinge for the fish that is already caught, that were but
mere folly. But in my mind if you be a fish you are either an Ele which as
soon as one has hold of her tail, will slip out of his hand, or else a
Mynnowe which will be nibbling at every bait but never biting: But what fish
soever you be you have made both me and Philautus to swallow a Gudgen. If
Curio be the person, I would neither wish thee a greater plague, nor him a
deadlyer poison. I for my part think him worthy of thee, and thou unworthy of
him, for although he be in body deformed, in mind foolish, an innocent
borne, a beggar by misfortune, yet does he deserve a better then thy self,
whose corrupt manners have staynde thy heavenly hew, whose light behavior
has dimmed the lights of thy beauty, whose unconstant mind has betrayed
the innocence of so many a Gentleman. And in that you bring in the example of
a beast to confirm your folly, you show therein your beastly disposition,
which is ready to follow such beastliness. But Venus played false: and what
for that? seeinge her lightness serves for an example, I would wish thou
might try her punishment for a reward, that being openly taken in an iron
net all the world might judge whether thou be fish or flesh, and certes in my
mind no angle will hold thee, it must be a net. Cornelia loved a Miller, and
thou a miser, can her folly excuse thy fault? Helen of Greece my countriewoman
borne, but thine by profession, changed and rechaunged at her pleasure I
grant. Shall the lewdenesse of others animate thee in thy lightness? why
then do thou not haunt the stews because Lais frequented them? why do
thou not love a Bull seeing Pasiphae loved one? why art thou not enamoured of
thy father knowing yt Mirha was so incensed? these are set down that we viewing
their incontinencie, should fly ye like impudency, not follow the like
excess, neither can they excuse thee of any inconstancy. Merry I will be as
I may, but if I may hereafter as thou meanest, I will not, and therefore
farewell Lucilla, the most inconstant that ever was nursed in Naples, farewell
Naples the most cursed town in all Italy, and women all farewell.

Euphues having thus given her his last farewell, yet being solitary began a
fresh to recount his sorrow on this manner.

Ah Euphues into what a quandarie art thou brought? in what sodeine misfortune
art thou wrapped? it is like to fare with thee as with the Eagle, which dies
neither for age, nor with sickness, but with famine, for although thy
stomach hunger yet thy heart will not suffer thee to eat. And why should
thou torment thy self for one in whom is neither faith nor feruencie? O the
counterfaite love of women. Oh inconstant sex. I have lost Philautus, I have
lost Lucilla, I have lost that which I shall hardlye find again, a faithful
friend. A foolish Euphues why did thou leave Athens the nourse of
wisdom, to inhabit Naples the nourisher of wantonness? Had it not been
better for thee to have eaten salt with the Philosophers in Greece, then sugar
with the courtiers of Italy? But behold the course of youth which always
inclyneth to pleasure, I forsook mine old companions to search for new
friends, I rejected the grave and fatherly counsel of Eubulus, to follow the
brainesicke humor of mine own will. I addicted my self wholly to the service
of women to spend my life in the lappes of Ladies, my lands in maintenance of
bravery, my wit in the vanities of idle Sonnets. I had thought that women
had been as we men, that is true, faithful, zealous, constant, but I perceive
they be rather woe unto men, by their falsehood, gelousie, inconstancy. I was
half persuaded that they were made of the perfection of men, and would be
comforters, but now I see they have tasted of the infection of the Serpent, and
will be corasiues. The Physician says it is dangerous to minister Physic
unto the patient that has a cold stomach and a hot liver, least in giving
warmth to the one he inflame the other, so verily it is hard to deal with a
woman whose words seem fervent, whose heart is congealed into hard ice,
least trusting their outward talk, he be betrayed with their inward
treachery. I will to Athens there to toss my books, no more in Naples to live
with fair looks. I will so frame my self as al youth hereafter shall rather
rejoice to se mine amendme^t then be animated to follow my former life.
Philosophy, Physic, Divinity, shall be my study. O ye hidden secrets of
Nature, the express image of moral virtues, the equal ballaunce of Justice,
the medicines to heal all diseases, how they begin to delyght me. The
Axiomaes of Aristotle, the Maxinis of Justinian, the Aphorisms of Galen, have
sodaynelye made such a breach into my mind that I seem only to desire them
which did only erst detest them. I^, wit be employed in the honest study of
learning what thing so precious as wit? if in the idle trade of love what
thing more pestilent then wit? The proof of late has been verefied in me,
whom nature has endued with a little wit, which I have abused with an
obstinate will, most true it is that the thing ye better it is the greater is
the abuse, and that there is nothing but through the malice of man may be
abused.

Does not ye fire (an element so necessary that without it man cannot live) as
well burn ye house as burn in the house if it be abused? Does not Treacle as
well poison as help if it be taken out of time? Does not wine if it be
immoderately taken kill the stomach, inflame the liver, murder the droncken?
Does not Physic destroy if it be not well tempred? Does not law accuse if it
be not ryghtly interpreted? Does not divinity condemn if it be not faithfully
construed? Is not poison taken out of the Honnysuckle by the Spider, venime out
of the Rose by the Canker, dunge out of the Maple tree by the Scorpion? Even so
the greatest wickedness is drawn out of the greatest wit, if it be abused by
will, or entangled with the world, or inueig-with women.

But seeinge I see mine own impiety, I will endeavor my self to amend all
that is paste, and to be a myrrour of godlynes hereafter. The Rose though a
little it be eaten with the Canker yet being distilled yields sweet water,
the iron though fretted with the ruste yet being burnte in the fire shyneth
brighter, and wit although it has been eaten with the canker of his own
conceit, and fretted with the rust of vain love, yet beeinge purified in the
still of wisdom, and tried in the fire of zeal, will shine bright and smell
sweet in the nosethrilles of all young nouises.

As therefore I gave a farewell to Lucilla, a farewell to Naples, a farewell to
women, so now do I give a farewell to the world, meaning rather to macerate
my self with melancholye then pine in follye, rather choosinge to dye in my
study amiddest my books, then to court it in Italy, in the company of Ladies.

It happened immediately Ferardo to return home, who hearing this strange
event was not a little amazed, and was now more ready to exhort Lucilla from
the love of Curio, then before to the lykinge of Philautus. Therefore in all
haste, with watry^ eyes, and a woeful heart, began on this manner to reason
with his daughter.

Lucilla (daughter I am ashamed to call thee, seeing thou have neither care of
thy fathers tender affection, nor of thine own credit) what sprite has
enchaunted thy spirit that every minute thou alterest thy mind? I had thought
that my hoary hairs should have found comfort by thy golden locks, and my
rotten age great ease by thy ripe years. But alas I see in thee neither wit
to order thy doings neither will to frame thy self to discretion, neither the
nature of a child, neither the nurture of a maiden, neither (I cannot without
tears speak it) any regard of thine honor, neither any care of thine
honesty.

I am now enforced to remember thy mothers death, who I think was a
Prophetess in her life, for oftentimes she woul^e say that thou had more
beauty then was convenient for one that should be honest, and more
c^ckering then was meet for one that should be a Matrone.

Would I had never lived to be so old or thou to be so obstinate, either
would I had dyed in my youth in the court, or thou in thy cradle, I would
to God that either I^ had never been borne, or thou never bredde. Is this the
comfort that the parent reapeth for all his care? Is obstinacy paid for
obedience, stubbernnesse rendered for duty, malicious desperateness, for
filial fear? I perceive now that the wi^e Paynter saw more then ye foolish
parent can, who painted love going downward, saying it might well descend, but
ascend it could never. Danaus whom they report to be the father of fifty
children, had among them all but one that disobeyed him in a thing most
dishonest, but I that am father to one more then I would be although one be
all, have that one most disobedient to me in a request lawful and reasonable.
If Danaus seeing but one of his daughters without awe became himself without
mercy, what shall Ferardo do in this case who has one and all most
unnatural to him in a most just cause? Shall Curio enjoy ye fruit of my
travails, possess the benefit of my labors, enherit the patrimony of mine
ancestors, who has neither wisdom to increase the^, nor wit to keep the^?
will thou Lucilla bestow thy self on such an one as has neither comlines in
his body, nor knowledge in his mind, nor credit in his country. Oh I would
thou had either been ever faithful to Philautus, or never faithless to
Euphues, or would thou would be more fickle to Curio. As thy beauty has
made thee blaze of Italy, so will thy lyghtnes make thee the bye word of ye
world. O Lucilla, Lucilla, would thou were less fair or more fortunate,
either of less honor or greater honesty? either better minded, or soon
buried. Shall thine old father live to see thee match with a young fool?
shall my kind heart be rewarded with such unkind hate? Ah Lucilla thou
know not the care of a father, nor the duty of a child, and as far art
thou from piety, as I from cruelty.

Nature will not permit me to disherit my daughter, and yet it will suffer
thee to dishonor thy father. Affection causes me to wish thy life, and shall
it entice thee to procure my death? It is mine only comfort to see thee
florishe in thy youth, and is it thine, to see me fade in mine age? to
conclude, I desire to live to see thee prosper, and thou to see me perish. But
why cast I the effect of this unnaturalness in thy teeth, seeing I my self
was the cause? I made thee a wanton and thou have made me a fool, I brought
thee up like a cockney, and thou have handled me like a cockescombe (I speak
it to mine own shame) I made more of thee then became a Father, and thou less
of me then beseemed a child. And shall my loving care be cause of thy wicked
cruelty? yea, yea, I am not the first that has been too careful, nor the
last that shall be handled so unkindly, it is common to see Fathers too
fond, and children to froward. Well Lucilla the tears which thou see
trickle down my ^heekes and the drops of blood (which thou can not see)
that fall from my heart, enforce me to make an end of my talk, and if thou
have any duty of a child, or care of a friend, or courtesy of a stranger,
or feelinge of a Christian, or humanity of a reasonable creature, then release
thy Father of gryefe, and acquit thy self of ungratefulness, otherwise thou
shalt but hasten my death, and increase thine own defame, which if thou do
the gain is mine, and the loss thine, and both infinite.

Lucilla either so bewitched that she could not relente or so wicked that
she would not yield to her Fathers request answered him on this manner.

Dear Father as you would have me to show the duty of a child, so ought
you to show the care of a parent, and as the one stands in obedience so the
other is grounded upon reason. You would have me as I owe duty to you to
leave Curio, and I desire you as, you owe me any love, that you suffer me to
enjoy him. If you accuse me of unnaturalness in that I yield not to your
request, I am also to condemn you of unkindness, in that you grant not my
petition. You obiecte I know not what to Curio, but it is the eye of the
master that fatteth the horse, and the love of the woman, that makes the man.
To give reason for fancy were to weighe the fire, and measure the wind. If
therefore my delight be the ca^se of your death, I think my sorrow would
be an occasion of your solace. And if you be angrye because I am pleased,
certes I deem you would be content if I were deceased: which if it be so that
my pleasure breed your pain, and mine annoy your joy, I may well say that
you are an unkind Father, and I an unfortunate child. But good Father either
content your self with my choice, or let me stand to the maine chance,
otherwise the grief will be mine, and the fault yours and both intolerable.

Ferardo seeinge his daughter, to have neither regard of her own honor nor
his request^ conceived such an inward gryefe, that in short space he dyed,
leaving Lucilla the only heir of his lands, and Curio to possess them, but
what end came of her, seeing it is nothing incident to the history of Euphues,
it were superfluous to insert it, and so incredible that all women would rather
wonder at it thou believe it, which event being so strange, I had rather leave
them in a muse what it should be, then in a maze in telling what it was.

Philautus having intelligence of Euphues his success, and the falshoode of
Lucilla, although he began to rejoice at the miserye of his fellow, yet
seeinge her fickleness could not but lamente her follye, and pity his
friends misfortune. Thinckinge that the lightness of Lucilla enticed Euphues
to so great liking.

Euphues and Phila^tus having conference between themselves, castinge
discourtesie in the teeth each of the other, but chiefly noting disloyalty in
the demeanor of Lucilla, after much talk renewed their old friendship both
abandoning Lucilla as most abominable. Philautus was earnest to have Euphues
^arrie in Naples, and Euphues desirous to have Philautus to Athens, but the one
was so addicted to the court, the other so wedded to the university, that each
refused ye offer of the other, yet this they agreed between themselves that
though their bodies were by distaunce of place severed, yet the conjunction of
their minds should neither be separated, by the length of time, nor
alienated by change of soil. I for my part said Euphues to confirm this
league give thee my hand and my heart, and so likewise did Philautus, and so
shaking hands they bid each other farewell.

Euphues to the intent he might bridell the ouerlashing affections of
Philautus, conuayed into his study, a certain pamphlet which he termed a
coolinge card for Philautus, yet generallye to be applied to all lovers which
I have inserted as follows.

A cooling Card for Philautus and all fond lovers.
MUsing with my self being idle how I might be well unployed (friend
Philautus) I could find nothing either more fit to continue our
friendship, or of greater force to dissolve our follye, then to write a
remedy for that which many judge past cure, for love ( Philautus) with yt which
I have been so tormented, that I have lost my time, thou so troubled that thou
have forgot reason, both so mangled with repulse, inueigled by deceit, and
almost murdered by dysdain, that I can neither remember our miseries without
grief, nor redress our mishaps without groans. How wantonly, yea, and how
willingly have we abused our golden time, and misspent our gotten treasure? How
curious were we to please our Lady, how careless to displease our Lord? How
devout in serving our Goddess, how desperate, in forgetting our God? Ah my
Philautus if the wasting of our money might not dehort us, yet the wounding of
our minds should deter us, if reason might nothing persuade us to wisdom,
yet shame should provoke us to wit. If Lucilla read this trifle, she will
straight proclaim Euphues for a traitor, and seeing me turn my tippet will
either shut me out for a Wrangler, or cast me off for a Wiredrawer: either
convince me of malice in bewraying their sleightes, or condemn me of
mischief in arming young men against fleetinge minions. And what then? Though
Curio be as hot as a toast, yet Euphues is as cold as a clock, though he be
a Cock of the game, yet Euphues is content to be crauen and cry creek,
though Curio be old huddle and twange, ipse, he, yet Euphues had rather
shrink in the weeting, then wast in the wearing. I know Curio to be steel to
the back, standerd bearer in Venus camp, sworn to the crewe, true to the
crown, knight marshall to Cupid, and heir apparaunt to his kingdom. But by
that time that he has eaten but one bushel of salt with Lucilla, he shall
taste ten quarters of sorrow in his love, then shall he find for every
pynte of honnye a gallon of gall, for every dram of pleasure, an ounce of
pain, for every inche of mirth, an ell of moan. And yet Philautus if there be
any man in despair to obtain his purpose, or so obstinate in his opinion that
having lost his fredome by solly, would also lose his life for love, let him
repair hither, and he shall reap such profit, as will either quench his
flames or assuage his furye, either cause him to renounce his Lady as most
pernicious, or redeem his liberty as most precious. Come therefore to me all
ye lovers that have been deceived by fancy, the glass of pestilence, or
deluded by women the gate to perdition, be as earnest to seek a medicine, as
you were eager to run into a mischief, ye earth brings forth as well Endyue
to delyght the people, as H^mlocke to endaunger the patient, as well the Rose
to distill as the Nettle to sting, as well the Be to give honny, as the Spider
to yield poison.

If my lewd life Gentlemen have given you offense, let my good counsel
make amends, if by my folly any be allu^ed to lust, let them by my repentance
be drawn to continency. Achilles spear could as well heal as hurt, the
Scorpion though he sting, yet he stints ye pain, though ye herb Nerius
poison ye Sheep, yet is a remedy to man against poison, though I have
infected some by example, yet I hope I shall comfort many by repentance.
Whatsoever I speak to men, the same also I speak to women, I mean not to
run with the Hare and hold with the Hounde, to carrye fire in the one hand
and water in the other, neither to flatter men as altogether faultlesse,
neither to fall out with women as altogether guyltie, for as I am not minded
to pick a thancke with the one, so am I not determined to pick a quarrel
with the other, if women be not perverse they shall reap profit, by remedy
of pleasure. If Phillis were now to take counsel, she would not be so
foolish to hang her self, neither Dido so fond to dye for Aeneas, neither
Pasiphae so monstrous to love a Bull, nor Phedra so unnatural to be enamoured
of her son.

This is therefore to admonish all young Impes and nouises in love, not to blow
the coals of fancy with desire, but to quench them with disdain. When love
tickleth thee decline it lest it sti^fle thee, rather fast then surfette,
rather starve then strive to exceed. Though the beginning of love bring
delyght, the end brings destruction. For as the first draught of wine does
comfort the stomach, the second inflame the liver, the third fume into the
head, so the first sippe of love is pleasant, the second perilous, the
third pestilent. If thou perceive thy self to be entised with their wanton
glaunces, or allured with their wicked guyles, either enchau^ted with their
beauty or enamoured with their bravery, enter with thy self into this
meditation. What shall I gain if I obtain my purpose? nay rather what shall I
loose in winning my pleasure? If my Lady yield to be my lover is it not lykely
she will be an others lemman? and if she be a modest matrone my labor is
lost. This therefore remains that either I must pine in cares, or perish with
curses.

If she be chaste then is she coy, if light then is she impudent, if a grave
Matrone, who can woe her? if a lewd minion, who would wedde her? if one of
the Uestall Uirgins, they have vowed virginity, if one of Venus court they
have vowed dishonestie. If I love one that is fair, it will kindle gelousie,
if one that is foul it will convert me into frenzy. If fertile to bear
children my care is increased, if barren my curse is augmented. If honest I
shall fear her death, if immodest, I shall be weary of her life.

To what end then shall I live in love, seeing always it is a life more to be
feared then death? for all my time wasted in sighs, and worn in sobbes, for
all my treasure spente on Jewels, and spilte in iolly^^e, what recompense
shall I reap besides repentance? What other reward shall I have then
reproach? What other solace then endless shame? But happily thou will say if I
refuse their courtesy I shall be accounted a Mecocke, a Milkesoppe, taunted and
retaunted, with check and checkemate, flowted and reflowted with intolerable
glee.

Alas fond fool art thou so pinned to their sleeves that thou regardest
more their babble then thine own bliss, more their fru^pes then thine own
welfare? Will thou resemble the kind Spaniell, which the more he is beaten the
fonder he is, or the foolish Eiesse, which will never away? Do thou not know
that women deem none valiant, unless he be too venturous? That they
account one a bastard, if he be not desperate, a pinche penny, if he be not
prodigal, if silente a sotte, if full of words a fool? Peruersly do they
always thinck of their lovers, and talk of them scornfully, judging all to be
clownes, which be no courtiers, and all to be pinglers, that be not coursers.

Seeing therefore the very blossom of love is sower, the budde cannot be
sweet. In time prevent danger, least vntimelye thou run into a thousand
perrills. Search the wound while it is green, to late comes the salve when
the sore fes^ereth, and the medicine brings dubble care, when the maladye is
past cure.

Beware of delays. What less then the grain of Mustarde seed, in time
almost what thing is greater then the stalk thereoff? The slender twigge
grows to a stately tree, and that which with the hand might easily have been
pulled up, will hardly with the are be hewn down. The least spark, if it
be not quenched will burst into a flame, the least Moth in time rateth the
thickest clothe, and I have read that in a short space, there was a Town in
Spain vndermi^ed with C^nuyes, in Theslal^^, with Mowles, with Fregges in
France, in Africa with Flies. If these silly Worms in tracte of time
overthrow so statelye Towns, how much more will love, which creeps secretly
into the mind, (as the rust does into the iron and is not perceived) consume
the body, yea and consound the soul. Defer not from hour to day, from day to
month, from month to year, and always remain in misery.

He that to day is not willing, will to morrow be more wilful. But alas it
is no less common then lamentable to behold the tottering estate of lovers,
who think by delays to preuente dangers, with oil to quench fire, with
smoke to clear the eye sight. They slatter themselves with a faynting
farewell, deferring ever until to morrow, when as their morrow does always
encrese their sorrow. Let neither their amyable countenances, neither their
painted protestacions, neither their deceitful premises, allure thee to
dela^es. Think this with thy self, that the sweet songs of Calipso, were
subtle snares to entice Ulysses, that the Crabbe then catches the Oyster,
when the Sun shines, that Hiena, when she speaks like a man deuiseth most
mischief, ye women when they be most pleasant, pretend most treachery.

Follow Alexander which hearing the commendation and singular comeliness of
the wife of Darius, so courageously withstood the assaults of fancy, that he
would not so much as take a view of her beauty: Imitate Cyrus, a king endued
with such continency, yt he loathed to look on the heavenly hew of Panthea,
and when Araspus told him that she excelled all mortal wightes in amiable
show, by so much the more (said Cyrus) I ought to abstain from her sight,
for if I follow thy counsel in going to her, it may be, I shall desire to
continue with her, and by my light affection, neglect my serious affairs.
Learn of Romulus to refrain from wine, be it never so delicate, of Agesilaus
to despise costly apparel, be it never so curious, of Diogenes to detest women
be they never so comely. He that touches pitche shall be defiled, the sore
eye infecteth the sound, the society with women breeds security in the
soul, and makes all the senses senseless. Moreover take this counsel, as
an article of thy Creed, which I mean to sollow as the chief argument of my
faith, that idleness is the only nourse and nourisher of sensual appetite, the
sole maintenance of youthful affection, the first shaft that Cupide shoots
into the hot liver of a heedlesse lover. I would to God I were not able to
find this for a truth, by mine own trial, and I would the example of others
idleness had caused me rather to avoid ye fault, then experience of mine own
folly. How dissolute have I been in striving against good counsel, how
resolute in standing in mine own conceit? how forward to wickedness, how
froward to wisdom, how wanton with too much cockeringe, how waywarde in
hearing correction? Neither was I much unlike these Abbate lubbers in my life
(though far unlike them in belief) which labored till they were cold, eat
til they sweat, and lay in bed till their boanes aked. Hereof comes it
gentlemen, that love creeps into the mind by privy craft, and keeps his
hold by maine courage.

The man being idle the mind is apt to all uncleanness, the mind being
void of exercise the man is void of honesty. Does not the rust fret the
hardest iron if it be not used? Does not the Moath eat the finest garment, if
it be not worn? Does not Moss grow on the smothest stone if it be not
stirred? Does not impiety infect the wisest wit, if it be given to idleness?
Is not the standinge water sooner frosen then the running stream? Is not he
that sits more subject to sleep then he that walks? Does not common
experience make this common unto us, that the fattest ground brings forth
nothing but weeds if it be not well tilled? That the sharpest wit enclineth
only to wickedness, if be not exercised? Is it not true which Seneca
reports, that as to much bendinge breaks the bow, so to much remission
spoyleth the mind? Besides this immoderate sleep, immodest play, insatiable
swilling of wine, does so weaken the senses, and bewitch the soul, that before
we feel the motion of love, we are resolved into lust. Eschew idleness my
Philautus, so shall thou easily vnbende the bow and quench the brandes of
Cupide. Love gives place to labor, labor and thou shall never love. Cupide
is a cr^ftie child following those a^^an ynche that study pleasure, and
flyinge those swyftlye that take pains. Bend thy mind to the law whereby
thou may have understanding of old and ancient customs, defend thy
clientes, enriche thy cofers, and carry credit in thy Country. If law seem
loathsome unto thee, search the secrets of physic, whereby thou may know
the hidden natures of herbs, whereby thou maiste gather profit to thy purse,
and pleasure to thy mind. What can be more exquisite in human affairs then
for every fever be it never so hot, for every palsy be it never so cold, for
every infection be it never so strange, to give a remedy? The old verse
stands as yet in his old virtue: That Galen gives goods, Justinian honors.
If thou be so nice that thou can no way brook the practice of Physic, or
so unwise that thou will not beat thy brains about the institutes of the
law, confer all thy study all thy time, all thy treasure to the attayning of
the sacred and sincere knowledge of divinity, by this may thou bridle thine
incontinencie, rain thine affections, res^rayne thy lust. Here shall thou
behold as it were in a glass, that all the glory of man is as the grass,
that all things under heaven are but vain, that our life is but a shadow, a
warfare, a pilgrimage, a vapor, a bubble, a blast, of such shortness that
David says it is but a spanne long, of such sharpness, that Job notes it
replenished with all miseries, of such uncertainty, that we are no sooner
borne, but we are subject to death, the one foot no sooner on the ground,
but the other ready to slip into the grave. Here shall thou find ease for
thy burden of sin, comfort for the conscience pined with vanity, mercy for
thine offenses by the martyrdom of thy sweet Savior. By this thou shall be
able to instruct those that be weak, to confute those that be obstinate, to
confound those that be erroneous, to confirm the faithful, to comfort the
desperate, to cut off the presumptious, to save thine own soul by thy sure
faith, and edify the hearts of many by thy sound doctrine. If this seem to
straight a diet for thy straininge disease, or to holy a profession, for so
hollow a person, then employ thy self to martial feats, to iusts, to turnayes,
yea, to al torments rather then to loiter in love, and spend thy life in ye
laps of Ladies: what more monstrous can there be, then to see a young man
abuse those gifts to his own shame which God has given him for his own
preferment. What greater in^amye, then to confer the sharp wit to ye making
of lewd Sonnets, to the idolatrous worshipping of their Ladies, to the vain
delights of fancy, to all kind of vice as it were against kind and course of
nature. Is it not folly to show wit to women which are neither able nor
willinge to receive fruit thereoff. Do thou not know that the tree
Siluacenda bears no fruit in Pharo? That the Persian trees in Rhodes do
only wax green, but never bring forth apple.

That Amonius, and Nardus will only grow in India. Balsamum only in Syria,
that in Rhodes no Eagle will build her neast, no Owl live in Crete, no wit
spring in the will of women? Mortif^e therefore thy affections, and force not
Nature against Nature to strive in vain. Go into the country look to thy
grounds, yoke thine Oxen, follow thy Plough, graft thy trees, behold thy
Cattle, and devise with thy self how the increase of them may increase thy
profit. In Autumn pull thine apples, in Summer ply thy harvest, in the
Spring trim thy gardens, in the Winter, thy woods, and thus beginning to
delight to be a good husband^ thou shall begin to detest to be in love with an
idle huswife, when profit shall begin to fill thy purse with gold, then
pleasure shall have no force to defile thy mind with love. For honest
recreation after thy toil, use hunting or haukeing, either rowse the Dear, or
vnperch the Phesaunt, so shall thou root out the remembrance of thy former
love, and repent thee of thy foolish lust. And although thy sweet heart bind
thee by oath always to hold a candle at her shrine, and to offer thy deuotyon
to thine own destruction, yet go, run, fly, into the country, neither
water thou thy plants, in that thou departest from thy Pigges nigh, neither
stand in a mammering whether it be best to depart or not, but by how much the
more thou art unwilling to go, by so much the more hasten thy steps, neither
feign for thy self any sleeuelesse excuse whereby thou may tarry. Neither
let rain nor thunder, neither lyghtening nor tempest, stay thy journey and
reckon not with thy self how many miles thou have gone, that shows
wearinesse^ but how many thou have to go, that proves manlynesse. But foolysh
and frantic lovers, will deem my precepts hard, and esteem my persuasions
haggarde: I must of force confess, that it is a corasiue to the stomach of a
lover, but a comfort to a godly liver, to run through a thousand pykes, to
escape ten thousand perils. Sour potions bring sound health, sharp
purgations make short diseases, and the medicine ye more bitter it is, ye more
better it is in working. To heal the body we try Physic, search cunninge,
prove sorcery^ venture through fire and water, leaving nothing unsought, that
may be gotten ^or money, be it never so much, or procured by any means, be
they never so unlawful. How much more ought we to hazard all things, for
the sauegarde of mind, and quiet of conscience? And certes easier will the
remedy be when the reason is espied, do you not know the Nature of women
which is grounded only upon extremities?

Do they think any man to delyght in them, unless he doat on them? Any to be
zealous, except they be gelous? Any to be feruente in case he be not furious?
If he be cleanly, then term they him proud, if mean in apparel, a slouen, if
talle, a long is, if short a dwarf, if bold, blunte, if shamefaste, a
cowarde. Insomuch, as they have neither mean in their frumpes, nor measure in
their follye. But at the first the Ox weildeth not the yoke nor the Colte
the snaffle, nor the lover good counsel, yet time causes the one to bend his
neck, the other to open his mouth, and should enforce the thir^e to yield
his right to reason. Lay before thine eyes the slights and deceits of thy
Lady, her snatching in jest, and keeping in earnest, her perjury, her
impiety, the countenance she shows to thee of course, the love she bears
to others of zeal, her open malice, her dissembled mischief.

O I would in repeating their vices thou could be as eloquent, as in
remembering them thou ought to be penitent: be she never so comely call her
counterfaite, be she never so straight think her crooked. And wreste all
parts of her body to the worste be she never so worthy. If she be well
set, then call her a Bosse, if slender, a Hasill twigge, if Nutbrowne, as
black as a coal, if well colored, a painted wall, if she be pleasant, then
is she a wanton, if sullemne, a clown, if honest, then is she coye, if
impudent, a harlotte.

Search every vain and sinew of their disposition, if she have no sight in
deskante, desire her to chaunte it, if no cunning to dance request her to
trippe it, if no skill in Music, profer her the Lute, if an ill gate, then
walk with her, if rude in speech, talk with her, if she be gagge toothed,
tell her some merry ieste to make her laughe, if pinke eyed, some doleful
Historye, to cause her weep, in the one her grinning will show her deformed,
in the other her whininge, like a Pigge half roasted.

It is a world to see how commonly we are blinded, with the collusions of
women and more entised by their ornaments being artificial, then their
proportion being natural. I loathe almost to think on their ointments, and
Apoticarie drugges, the sleeking of their faces, and all their slibber sawces,
which bring quasinesss to the stomach, and disquyet, to the mind.

Take from them, their periwiggs, their payntings, their Jewels, their rowles,
their boulsterings, and thou shall soon perceive that a woman is the least
part of her self. When they be once robbed of their robes, then will they
appear so odious, so ugly, so monstrous, yt thou will rather think the^
Serpents then Saints, and so like Hags, yt thou will fear rather to be
enchanted then enamoured. Look in their closets, and there shall thou find an
Apoticaries shop of sweet confections, a Surgions box os sundry salues, a
Pedlars pack of new fangles. Besides all this their shadows, their spots,
their lawnes, their leesekyes, their ruffes, their rings: Show the^ rather
Cardinals curtisans, then modest Matrones, and more carnally affected, then
moved in conscience. If every one of these things severally be not of force to
move thee, yet all of them jointly should mortefie thee.

Moreover to make thee ye more stronger, to strive against these Syrenes, and
more subtle to deceive these tame Serpents, my counsel is that thou have
more strings to thy bow then one, it is safe riding at two ancres, a fire
divided in twain burns slower, a fountain running into many rivers, is of
less force, the mind enamoured on two women, is less affected with desire,
and less infected with despair, one love expels an other, and the
remembrance of the latter quenches the concupiscence of the first.

Yet if thou be so weak being bewitched with their wiles that thou have
neither will to eschew, nor wit to avoid their company, if thou be either so
wicked yt thou will not, or so wedded that thou can not abstain from their
glaunces, yet at the least dissemble thy grief: If thou be as hot as the
mount Aetna, feign thy self as col^e as ye hill Caucasus, carry two faces in one
hood, cover thy ^laming fancy with fained ashes, show thy self sound when
thou art rotten, let thy hew be merrye, when thy heart is melancholy, bear a
pleasant countenance, with a pyned conscience, a painted sheathe wi^h a
leaden dagger: Thus dissembling thy grief, thou may recure t^y disease. Love
crepeth in by stealth and by stealth ^lydeth away.

If she break promise with thee in the night, or absent her self in the
day, seem thou careless and then will she be careful, if thou languish,
then will she be lavish of her honor, yea and of the other strange beast her
honesty. Stand thou on thy pan^ussles, and she will veil bonnet? lie thou
aloof, and she will ceaze on the lure, if thou pass by her door and be called
back, either seem deaf and not to hear, or desperate, and not to care. Fly
the places, the parl^urs, the portalles, wherein thou have been conuersaunt
with thy Lady, yea Philautus shun the street where Lucilla does dwell? least
the sight of her window, renew the sum of thy sorrow.

Yet although I would have thee precise, in keeping these precepts, yet would
I have thee to avoid sollytarinesse, that breeds melancholy, melancholy,
madness, madness mischief and utter desolation: have ever some faithful
pheere, with whom thou may communicate thy cou^cells, some Pilades to
encourage Orestes, some Damon to release Pithias, some Scipio to recure
Laelius. Phillis in wandringe the woods hanged her self: A^^archus forsakinge
company, spoiled himself with his own bookin: Biarus a Roman, more wise
the^ fortunate, being alone destroyed himself with a potsherd. Beware
solitarines. But although I would have thee use company for thy recreation,
yet would I have thee always to leave the company of those yt accompany thy
Lady, yea, if she have any jewel of thine in her custody, rather loofe it, then
go for it, least in s^^king to recover a trifle, thou renew thine old
trouble. Be not curious to curlle thy hair, nor careful to be neat in thine
apparel be not prodigal of thy gold, nor precise in thy goinge, be not like
the Englishman which prefers every strange fashion, before the use of his
country, be thou dissolute, least thy Lady think thee foolish in framing
thy self to every fashion for her sake. Believe not their oaths and solemn
protestations, their exorcismes and coniurations, their tears which they have
at commandment, their alluring looks, their treading on the toe, their
unsavory toys.

Let every one loath his Lady, and be ashamed to be her servant. It is
riches and ease that nourishes affection, it is play, wine, and wantonness,
that feeds a lover as fat as a fool, refrain from all such meats as shall
provoke thine appetite to lust, and all such means, as may allure thy mind to
folly. Take clear water for strong wine, brown bread for fine manchet, beef
and brewys, for Quails and Partridge, for ease, labor, for pleasure, pain,
for sur^etting, hunger, for sleep, watching, for the fellowshippe of Ladies,
the company of Philosophers. If thou say to me, Physician heal thy self, I
answer, that I am meetly well purged of that disease, and yet was I never
more willing to cure my self then to comfort my friend. And seeing the cause
that made in me so cold a devotion, should make in thee also as frosen a
desire, I hope thou will be as ready to provide a salve as thou wast hasty in
seeking a sore. And yet Philautus I would not that all women should take
pepper in the nose, in that I have disclosed the legerdemaines of a few, for
well I know none will winch except she be gawlded, neither any be offended
unless she be guilty. Therefore I earnestly desire thee, that thou show
this cooling card to none, except thou show also this my defense to them all.
For although I way nothing the ill will of light huswiues, yet would I be
loath to loose the good will of honest matrones. Thus being ready to go to
Athens and ready there to entertain thee, whensouer thou shalt repair
thither. I bid thee farewell, and fly women.

Thine ever Euphues.
To the grave Matrones and honest Maidens of Italy.
GEntlewomen because I would neither be mistaken of purpose, neither
misconstrued of malice, least either the simple should suspect me of folly, or
the subtle condemn me of blasphemye against the noble sex of women, I
thought good that this my faith should be set down to find favor with the
one, and confute the cauils of the other. Believe me gentlewomen, although I
have been bold to inuay again many, yet am I not so brutish to envy them all,
though I seem not so gamesome as Aristippus to play with Lais, yet am I not so
dogged as Diogenes to abhor all Ladies, neither would I you should think me
so foolish (although of late I have been very fantastical) that for the light
behavior of a few, I should call in question the demeanor of all. I know
that as there has been an unchaste Helen in Greece, so there has been also a
chaste Penelope, as there has been a prodigious Pasiphae, so there has been a
godly Theocrita, though many have desired to be beloved as Jupiter loved
Al^maena, yet some have wished to be embraced as Phrigius embraced Pieria, as
there has reigned a wicked, Iesabel, so has there ruled a devout Debora,
though many have been as fickle as Lucilla, yet has there many been as
faithful as Lucretia. Whatsoever therefore I have spoken of the spleen against
ye slights and subtilties of women, I hope there is none will mislike it if she
be honest, neither care I if any do if she be an harlot. The sour crab has
the show of an apple as well as the sweet pyppin, the black Raven the shape of
a bird as well as the white Swanne, ye lewd wight the name of a woman as well
as the honest Matrone. There is great difference between ye standing puddle,
and the running stream, yet both water, great ods between the Adamant and the
Pommice, yet both stones, a great-distinction to be put between Vitrem and the
Crystal, yet both glass, great contrariety between Lais and Lucretia, yet
both women. Seeing therefore one may love the clear Conduit water, though he
loath the muddie ditch, and wear the precious Diamonde, though he despise the
ragged brick, I think one may also with safe conscience reverence the modest
sex of honest maidens, though he forswear the lewd sort of unchaste minions.
Ulysses though he detested Calipso with her sugered voice, yet he embraced
Penelope with her rude distaffe. Though Euphues abhor ye beauty of Lucilla,
yet will he not abstain from ye company of a grave maiden. Though ye tears of
the Heart be salt, yet the tears of ye Bore be sweet, though ye tears of some
women be counterfaite to deceive, yet ye tears of many be curra^t to try their
love. I for my part will honor those always yt be honest, and worship the^ in
my life who^ I shall know to be worthy in their living, neither can I promise
such precisenes yt I shall never be caught again with ye bayte of beauty, for
although the falsehood of Lucilla have caused me to forfake my wonted dotage,
yet the faith of some Lady may cause me once again ^o fall into mine old
disease. For as the fire stone in Liguria though it be quenched with milk,
yet again it is kindled with water, or as the roots of Anchusa, though it be
hardened with water, yet it is again made soft with Oil, so the heart of
Euphues enflamed erst with love, although it be cooled with the deceit^s of
Lucilla, yet will it again flame with the loyalty of some honest Lady, and
though it be hardened with the water of wiliness, yet will it be mollified
with the Oil of wisdom. I presume therefore so much upon the discretion of
you gentlewomen that you will not thinck the worse of me, in yt I have thought
so ill of some women, or love me the worse in that I loath some so much. For
this is my faith that some one Rose will be blasted in ye bud, some other never
fall from the stalk, that the Oak will soon be eaten with the worm, the
Walnut tree never, that some women will easily be entised to folly, some other
never allured to vanity. You ought therefore no more to be agrieued with that
which I have said, then the mint Master to see the coyner hanged, or the true
subject the false traitor araigned, or the honest man the thief condemned.
And so farewell.

You have ^earde (Gentlemen) how soon the hot desire of Euphues was turned
into a cold devotion, not that fancy caused him to change, but that the
fickleness of Lucilla enforced him to alter his mind. Having therefore
determined with himself, never again to be entangled with such fond
delights, according to the appointment made with Philautus, he immediately
repaired to Athens, there to follow his own private study: And calling to
mind his former losenes, and how in his youth, he had misspent his time, he
thought to give a Caveat to all parents, how they might bring their children up
in virtue, and a commandment to al youth, how they should frame themselves to
their fathers instructions: in the which is plainly to be seen, what wit can,
and will do, if it be well employed, which discourse following, although it
bring less pleasure to your youthful minds the^ his first course, yet will
it bring more profit, in the one being contained the race of a lover, in the
other^ the reasons of a Philosopher.

Euphues and his Ephaebus.
IT is commonly said, yet do I think it a common lie, that Experience is the
Mistress of fools, for in my opinion they be most fools that want it.
Neither am I one of ye least that have tried this true, neither he only that
heretofore deemed it to be false. I was hereof a studente of great wealth, of
some wit of no small acquayntance, yet have I learned that by Experience, that I
should hardly have seen by learning. I have thoroughly sifted the disposition
of youth, wherein I have found more branne then meal, more dowe then leaven,
more rage then reason. He that has been burned knows the force of the fire,
he that has been stoung, remembers the smarte of the Scorpion, he that has
endured the brunts of fancy, knows best how to eschew ye broils of
affection. Let therefore my counsel be of such authority as it may command
you to be sober, your conversation of such integrity, as it may encourage me
to go forward in that which I have taken in hand: the whole effect shall be
to set down a young man so absolute as that nothing may be added to his
further perfection. And although Plato has been so curious in his common weal,
Aristotle so precise in his happy man, Tullie so pure in his orator, that we
may well wish to see them, but never have any hope to enjoy them, yet shall my
young Impe be such an one as shall be perfect every way and yet common, if
dilygence and industry be employed to the attayning of such perfection. But I
would not have young men slow to follow my precepts, or idle to defer the
time like Saint George, who is ever on horse back yet never rides.

If my counsel shall seem rigorous to fathers to instruct their children, or
heavy for youth to follow their parents will: Let them both remember that the
Estrich disgesteth hard iron to preserve his health, that the soldier lies
in his harness to atchieue conquest, that the sick patient swalloweth bitter
pills to be eased of his grief, that youth should endure sharp storms to
find relief.

I my self had been happy if I had been unfortunate, wealthy if left
meanly, better learned if I had been better lived, we have an old (Proverb)
youth will have his course. Ah gentlemen it is a course which we ought to make
a course account off, replenished with more miseries the^ old age, with more
sins then common cutthroats, with more calamities the^ ye date of Priamus: we
are no sooner out of the shell but we resemble the Cocyx which destroys it
self through self will, or the Pelican which pearceth a wound in her own
breast: we are either lead with a vain glory of our proper personage, or
with self love of our sharp capacity, either entangled with beauty, or
seduced by idle pastimes, either witcht with vicious company of others, or
inueigled with our own conceits, of all these things I may the bolder speak,
having tried it true to mine own trouble.

To the entente therefore that all young gentlemen might shun my former
losenesse I have set it down, and that all might follow my future life, I
mean here to show what fathers should do, what children should follow,
desiring them both not reiecte it because it proceeds from one which has
been lewd, no more then if they would neglect the gold because it lies in
the durtye earth or the pure wine for that it comes out of an homely press,
or the precious stone Aetites which is ^ounde in the filthy neastes of the
Eagle, or the precious gemme Draconites that is ever taken out of the head of
the poisoned Dragon. But to my purpose.

That the child should be true borne, no bastard.
FIrst touching their procreation, it shall seem necessa^ie to entreat off,
who so ever he be yt desires to be the Sire of an happy son, or the father
of a fortunate child, let him abstain from those women which be either base
o^ birth, or bare of honesty, for if ye mother be noted of incontinencie, or
the father of vice, the child will either during life, be infected with the
like crime, or the trecheries of his parents as ignomye to him will be cast in
his teeth: For we commonly call those ^nhappy children, which have sprung from
dishonest parents. It is therefore a great treasure to the father and
tranquillity to the mind of the child, to have that liberty, which both
nature, law, and reason has set down.

The guyltie conscience of a father that has trodden awry, causes him to
think^ and suspect that his father also went not right, whereby his own
behavior is as it were a witness, of his own baseness. Even as those that
come of a noble progeny boast of their gentrye. Heerevppon it came that
Diophantus, Themistocles his son would often and that openly say in a great
multitude, that what soever he should seem to request of the Athenians, he
should be sure also to obtain, for ^ayth he, what soever I will that will my
mother, and what my mother says my father sootheth, and what my father
desires that the Athenians will grant most willingly. The bold courage of
the Lacedaemonians is to be praised, which set a fine on the head of
Archidamius their king, for yt he had married a woman of a small personage,
saying he minded to begette Queens, not Kings to succeed him. Let us not
omit that which our Ancestors were won^ precisely to keep that men should
either be sober, or drink little wine, that would have sober and discrete
children, for that the fact of the father would be figured in the infant.
Diogenes therefore seeing a young man either overcome with drink or bereued
of his wits, cried with a loud voice, youth, youth, thou had a dronken
Father. And thus much for procreation, now how the life should be led I
will show briefly.

How the life of a young man should be lead.
THere are three things which cause perfection in man, Nature, Reason, Use.
Reason I call discipline, Use exercise, if any one of these branches want,
cert^i^^ly the tree of virtue must needs wither. For (...) without discipline
is of small force, and discipline without Nature more feeble, if exercise or
study be void of any of these, it avails nothing. For as in tilling of the
ground and husbandry, there is first chosen a fertile soil, then a cunning
sower, then good seed, even so must we compare Nature to the fatee earth,
the expert husbandman to the Schoolemaister, the faculties and sciences to the
pure seeds. If this order had not been in our predecessors, Pithagoras,
Socrates, Plato, and whosoever was renowned in Greece for the glory of
wisdom: they had never been eternished for wise men, neither cannonished as it
were for Saints among those that study sciences. It is therefore a most
evident sign of Gods singular favor toward him that is endued with all
these qualities, without the least of the which man is most miserable. But if
there be any one that deemeth wit not necessary to the obtayninge of wisdom,
after he has gotten the way to virtue by industrye and exercise, he is
an^heriticke, in my opinion touching the true faith of learning, for if Nature
playe^ not her part, in vain is labor, and as I said before if study be
not employed, in vain is Nature^ Sloth tourneth the ^edge of wit, Study
sharpen^th the mind, a thing be it never ^o easy is hard to the (idle) a
thing be it never so hard, is easy to the wit well employed. And most
plainly we may see in many things the efficacy of industry and labor.

The little drops of rain pearceth hard Marble, iron with often handlinge is
worn to nothing. Besides this, industry shows her self in other things,
the fertile soil if it be never tilled does wax barren, and that which is
most noble by nature is made most vile by negligence. What tree if it be not
topped bears any fruit? What vine if it be not proyned, brings forth
grapes? is not the strength of the body turned to weakness through too
much (...) were not Milo his arms brawnefallen, for want of wrastlinge?
moreover by labor the fierce Unicorne is tamed, the wyldest Fawlcon is
reclaymed, the greatest bulwark is sacked. It was well answered of that man
of Thessalie, who beeinge demanded who among the Thessalians were reputed
most vile, those said he that live at quiet and ease, never gyuing themselves
to marciall affairs: but what should one use many words in a thing already
proved. It is custom, use and exercise, that bring a young man to virtue,
and virtue to his perfection. Lycurgus the lawegiuer of the Sparthans did
nourish two whelps, both of one sire and one damme: But after a sundry manner,
for the one he framed to hunte, and the other to lie always in ye chymneys
end at the porredge pot, afterward calling the Lacedaemonians into one
assemblye, he said, to the attayninge of virtue ye Lacedaemonians, education,
industry, and exercise, is the most noblest means, the truth of the which I
will make manifest unto you by trial, then brynginge forth the whelps and
settinge down there a pot, and a hare, the one ran at the hare, the other
to the porredge pot, the Lacedaemonians, scarce understanding this mystery,
he said both these be of one sire and one damme, but you see how education
alters nature.

Of the education of youth.
IT is most necessary and most natural in mine opinion, that the mother of
the child be also the nurse, both for the entire love she bears to the
babe, and the great desire she has to have it well nourished: for is there any
one more meet to bring up the infant, then she that bore it? or will any be so
careful for it, as she that bredde it? for as the throbbes and throws in
chyldbirth wrought her pain, so the smilinge countenance of the infant
increases her pleasure, the hired nurse is not unlike to ye hired saruaunt
which not for good will but for gain, not for love of the man but the desire
of the money, accomplisheth his days work. Moreover Nature in this point
enforces the mother to nurse her own child, which has given unto every
beast milk to succor her own, and me thincketh Nature to be a most
provident foreseer and prouider for the same, which has given unto a woman two
pappes, that if she should conceive two, she might have wherewith also to
nourishe twain, and that by sucking of the mothers breasts, there might be a
greater love both of the mother toward the child, and the child toward
the mother, which is very likely to come to pass, for we see commonly those
that eat and drink and live together, to be more zealous one to the other,
then those that meet seldom, is not the name of a mother most sweet? If it
be, why is half that title bestowed on a woman which never felt the pains
in conceyuing, neither can conceive the like pleasure in nursinge as the mother
does? Is the earth called the mother of all things only because it brings
forth? No, but because it nourishes those things that spring out of it,
whatsoever is bredde in the sea, is fed in the sea, no plant, no tree, no
herb comes out of the ground that is not moystened and as it were nursed of
the moisture and milk of the earth, the Lioness nurseth her whelps, the
Raven, cherishes her birds, the Uiper her brood, and shall a woman cast away
her babe?

I account it cast away which in the swathe clowtes is cast aside, and
little care can that Mother have, which can suffer such cruelty: and can it
be termed with any other title then cruelty, the infant yet lookinge read
of the mother, the mother yet breathing through the torments of her travail,
the child crying for help which is said to move wild beasts, even in the
self said momente it is borne, or the next minute, to deliver a strange
nurse, which perhaps is neither wholesome in body, neither honest in manners,
which esteems more thy argent although a trifle, then thy tender infant thy
greatest treasure? Is it not necessary and requisite that the babe be nursed
with that true accustomed juice and cherished with his wonted heat, and not fed
with cou^terfaite diet? Wheat thrown into a strange ground tourneth to a
contrary grain, ye Uyne translated into an other soil changes his kind. A
slip pulled fro the stalk withers, the young child as it were slipped
from the pappes of his mother either changes his nature or alters his
disposition. It is pretely said of Horace a new vessel will long time savor
of that lyquor that is first powered into it, and the infant will ever smell of
the Nurses manners having tasted of her milk. Therefore let the mother as
often as she shall behold those two fountaynes of milk, as it were of their
own accord flowing and swelling with lycour, remember that she is admonished
of nature, yea commanded of duty, to cherishe her own child, with her own
teates, otherwise when the babe shall now begin to tattle and call her
Mamma, with what force can she hear it of his mouth unto whom she has
denied Mamma? It is not milk only that increases ye strength or augmenteth
the body, but the natural heat and agreement of the mothers body with the
childs, it craves ye same accustomed moisture that before it received in the
bowels, by the which the tender parts were bound and knit together, by the
which it increased and was succored in the body.

Certes I am of that mind that the wit and disposition is altered and
changed by the milk, as the moisture and sap of the earth, does change the
nature of that tree or plant that it nourishes. Wherefore the common bye word
of the common people seems to be grounded upon good experience which is:
This fellow has sucked mischief even from the teate of his nursse. The
Grecians when they saw any one sluttishly fed, they would say even as
nurses: whereby they noted the great dislykinge they had of their fulsome
feeding. The Etimologie of mother among the Grecians, may aptly be applied to
those mothers which unnaturally deal with their children, they call it meter a
meterine, that is mother of not making much off, or of not nourishing, hereof
it comes that the son does not with deep desire love his mother, neither
with duty obey her, ^is natural af^ection being as it were divided and
distraught into twain, a mother and a nurse: heereoff it proceeds that the
mother bears but a cold kindness toward her child, when she shall see
the nature of her nurse in the nurture of her child. The chiefest way to
learning is, if there be a mutual love and fervent desire between the teacher
and him that is taught, then verily the greatest furtheraunce to education is
if the mother nourish the child and the child suck the mother, that there be
as it were a relacion and reciprecall order of affection. Yet if the mother
either for the evil habit of the body, or the weakness of her p^ppes,
cannot though she would nurse her infant, then let her provide such a one
as shall be of a good complexion, of an honest condition, careful to tender
the child, loving to see well to it, willing to take pains, dillygent in
tending and providing all things necessary, and as like both in the
lyniaments of the body and disposition of the mind to ye mother as may be.
Let her forslow no occasion that may bring the child to quietness and
cleanelynesse, for as the parts of a child as soon as it is borne are framed
and fashioned of the midwife, yt in all points it may be straight and comely,
so the manners of the child at the first are to be looked unto that nothing
discommend the mind, that no crooked behavior or indecent demeanor be
found in the man.

Young and tender age is easily framed to manners, and hardelye are those
things mollyfied which are hard. For as the steel is imprinted in the soft
wax, (...) learning is engraven in the mind of an young impe. ^^^to that
divine Philosopher admonished all nurses and weaners of youth, that they should
not be to busy to tell them fond fables or filthy tales, least at their
entrance into the world they should be contaminated with unseemly
behavior, unto the which Phocides the Poet does pithely allude, saying. Whilst
that the child is young let him be instructed in virtue, and lyterature.

Moreover they are to be trained up in the language of their country, to
pronounce aptly and distinctly without stammering every word and syllable of
their native speech, and to be kept from barbarous talk as the ship from
rocks: least beeinge affected with their barbarism they be infected also
with their unclean conversation.

It is an old Proverb that if one dwell the next door to a creple he will
learn to hault, if one be conversant with an hypocrite, he wll soon endeavor
to dissemble. When this young infant shall grow in years and be of that
rypenesse that he can conceive learning, insomuch that he is to be committed
to the tuition of some tutour, all dillygence is to be had to search such a
one as shall neither be unlearned, neither ill lived, neither a light person.

A gentleman that has honest and discreet servants disposes them to the
increase of his segnioryes, one he appoynteth steward of his courts, an other
ouerseer of his lands, one his factoure in far countries for his
merchaundize, an other puruayour for his cates at home.

But if among all his servants he shall espy one either filthye in his ^alke
or foolish in his behavior, either without wit or void of honesty either
an unthrift or a witta^l, him he settes not as a suruayour and ouerseer of
his manors, but a superuisour of his childrens conditions and manners, to him
he commits the guydinge and tuition of his sons, which is by his proper
Nature, a slave, a knave by condition, a beast in behavior. And sooner will
they bestow an hundredth crowns to have a horse well broken, then a child well
taught, wherein I cannot but marvel to see them so careful to increase their
possessions, when they be so careless to have them wise that should inherit
them.

A good and discreet scholemayster should be such an one as Phaenix was, the
instructor of Achilles, whom Pelleus (as Homer reports) appointed to that
end that he should be unto Achilles not only a teacher of learning but an
example of good lyuinge. But that is most principally to be looked for, and
most dilygently to be foreseen, that such tutours be sought out for ye
education of a young child, whose life has never been stained with
dishonestie, whose good name has never been called unto question, whose
manners has been irreprehensible before the world. As husbandmen hedge in
their trees, so should good scholemaysters with good manners hedge in the wit
and disposition of ye scholar: whereby the blossoms of learning may ye sooner
encrese to a bud. Many parents are in this to be misliked which having neither
trial of his honesty nor experience of his learning to whom they commit
the child to be taught, without any deep or due consideration, put them to
one either ignorant or obstinate, the which if they themselves shall do of
ignorance the folly cannot be e^cused, if of obstinacy their lewdenesse is
to be abhorred.

Some fathers are ou^rc^me with the flattery of those fools, which profess
outwardly great knowledge, and show a certain kind of dissembling sincerity
in their life, others at the entreating of their familyar friends are content
to commit their sons to one without ^yther substance of honesty or shadow
of learning. By which their vndis^r^te dealing, they are like these ^icke men
which reject the expert and cunning Physician, and at the request of their
^^iendes admit the heedelesse practiser which dau^gereth the patient, and
brings the body to his bane: Or not vn^yke unto those which at the instaunt
and importunate suite of their acquaintance refuse a cunninge Pylot, and
choose an vns^ilfull Mariner, which hazardeth the ship and themselves in
the calmest sea. Good God can there be any that has the name of a Father
which will est^eme more the fancy of his friend then the nurture of his
son? It was not in vain that Crates would often say, that if it were lawful
even in the market place, he would cry out: Whether run you Fathers, which
have all your carke and ca^e to multiplye your wealth, nothing regardinge your
children unto whom you must leave all. In this they resemble him which is very
curious about the shoe, and has no care of the foot. Besides this there be
many fathers so inflamed with the love of wealth, that they be as it were
incensed with hate against their children which Aristippus, seeinge in an old
miser, did partly note it, this old miser askinge of Aristippus what he would
take to teach and bring up his son, he answered a thousand groates, a
thousand groates, God shield answered this old huddle, I have two servants
of that price. Unto whom he made answer, thou shall have two servants and
one son, and whether will thou sell? Is it not absurd to have so great a
care of the right hand of the child to cut his meat, that if he handle his
knife in the lea^t hand we rebuke him severely and to be secure of his nurture
in discipline and learning? But what do happen unto those parents, that
bring up their children like wantons?

When their sons shall grow to man's estate, disdayninge now to be
corrected, stoborne to obey, gyuing themselves to vain pleasures and
unseemly pastimes, then with the foolish trowans they begin to wax wise
and to repent them of their former follye, when their sons shall insumate
themselves in the company of flatterers, (a kind of men more perrillous to
youth then any kind of beasts.) When they shall haunt harlottes, frequent
tauerns, be curious in their attire, costly in their diet, careless in their
behauiou^, when they shall either be common d^cers with gamesters, either
wanton dallyers with Ladies, either spend all their thrift on wine, or all
their wealth on women, then the Father curses his own securitie^ and
lamenteth to late his childs mysfortune, then the one accuses his Sire, as it
were of malice that he would not bring him up in learning, and himself
of mischief that he gave not his mind to good letters. If these youths had
been trained up in the company of any Philosopher, they would never have been
so disolute in their life, or so resolute in their own conceits.

It is good nurture that leads to virtue, and discreet demeanor that
playneth the pathe to felicity. If one have either the gi^tes of Fortune, as
great riches, or of nature, as seemly personage, he is to be despised in
respect of learning. To be a noble man it is most excellent, but that is our
ancestors, as Ulysses said to Ajax, as for our nobility, our stock, our
kindred, and whatsoever we our selves have not done, I ^earcely account ours.
Richesse are precious, but Fortune rules the roast, which oftentimes takes
away all from them that have much, and gives them more that had nothing,
glory is a thing worthy to be followed, but as it is gotten with great
travail, so is it lost in a small time. Beauty is such a thing as we
commonly prefer before all things, yet it fades before we perceive it to
florishe, health is that which all men desire, yet ever subject to any disease,
strength is to be wyshed for, yet is it either abated with an ague, or taken
away with age: whosoever therefore boaste^h of force, is to too beastly, se^ing
he is in that quality, not to be compared with beasts, as the Lion, ye
Bull, the E^ephant. It is ver^ue, yea, virtue, gentlemen, yt makes gentlemen,
yt makes ye poor rich, ye base borne noble, the subject a sovereign, the
deformed beautiful, the sick whole, the weak strong, the most miserable most
happy. There are two principal and peculier gifts in the nature of man,
knowledge, and reason, the one commands, the other obeys: these things
neither the whirlinge wheel of Fortune can change, neither the deceitefull
cauillinge of worldlinges separate, neither sickness abate, neither age
abolish. It is only knowledge which worn with years waxes young, and when
all things are cut away with the cycle of time, knowledge florisheth so
high that time cannot reach it, war takes all things with it even as the
whirlepoole, yet must it leave learning behind it, wherefore it was wiselye
answered in my opinion of Stilpo the Philosopher, for when Demetrius, won
the City and made it even to the ground leauinge nothing standing, he
demanded of Stilpo whether he had lost any thing of his in this great
spoil: unto whom he answered no verilye, for war gets no spoil of
virtue. Unto ye like sense may the answer of Socrates be applied, when Gorgias
asked him whether he deemed the Persian king happy or not, I know not said he
how much virtue or discipline he has, for happiness does not consist in ye
gifts of fortune, but in grace of virtue. But as there is nothing more
convenient the^ enstruction for youth, so would I have them nurtered in such a
place as is renowned for learning, void of corrupt manners, undefiled with
vice, that seeinge no vain delights they may the more easilye absteyne from
lycensious desires, they that study to please the multitude are sure to
displease the wise, they that seem to flatter rude people with their rude
pretenses, level at great honor, having no aim at honesty, when I was
here a student in Athens, it was thought a great commendation for a young
scholar to make an Oration extempore, but certeinely in my judgment it is
utterly to be condemned, for whatsoever is done rashlye, is done also rawely,
he that takes upon him to speak without premedytation, knows, neither how
to begin, nor where to end, but fallinge into a vain of bablinge, utters
those things which with modestye he should have concealed, and forgets
those things that before he had conceived. An Oration either penned, either
premeditated, keeps it self with in the bounds of Decorum, I have read that
Pericles beeinge at sundry times called of the people to plead, would always
answer that he was not ready: even after the same manner Demosthenes being
sent for to declaime amyddest the multitude, staide and said I am not yet
provided.

And in his inuectiue against Mydas, he seems to praise the profitablenesse
of premeditation, I confess says he, ye Athenians, that I have studied and
considered deeply with my self what to speak, for I were a sot if without
due consideration had of those things that are to be spoken, I should have
talked unadvisedly. But I speak this not to this end to condemn the exercise
of the wit, but that I would not have any young scholar openly to exercise
it, but when he shall grow both in age and eloquence, in so much as he shall
through great use and good memory be able aptly to conceive and redely to
utter any thing the^ this saying extempore brings an admiration and delight
to the auditorye, and singular praise and commendacion to the Orator. For as he
that has long time b^n fettered with chains being released halteth through
the force of his former yrons, so he that has been used to a stricke kind of
pleading, when he shall talk extempore will savor of his former penning. But
if any shall use it as it were a precept for youth to tattle extempore, he will in
time bring them to an immoderate kind of humility. A certain painter brought
to Appelles the counterfaite of a face in a table saying: lo Appelles I drew
this eue^ now whereunto he replied. If thou had ben silent I would have judged
this picture to have been framed of ye sudden I marvel yt in this time thou
could not paynt many more of these. But return we again, as I would have
tragical and stately style shunned, so would I have that abject and base
phrase eschued, for this swellyng kind of talk has little modesty, the
other nothing moves.

Besides this to have the oration all one in every part, neither adorned with
fine figures, neither sprinkled with choice phrases, brings teadiousnesse to
the hearers, and argues the speaker of little learning and less eloquence. He
should more over talk of many matters, not always harp upon one string, he
that always sings one note without d^skant breeds no delyght, he that
always plays one part brings lothsomenesse to the ear. It is variety
that moves the mind of all men, and one thing said twice (as we say
commonly) deserves a trudge. Homer would say that it loathed him to repeat
any thing again though it were never so pleasant or profitable. Though the
Rose be sweet yet being tied with the Uiolet the smell is more fragraunte,
though meat nurrish, yet having good savor it p^ouoketh the appetite. The
fairest nosegay is made of many flowers, the finest picture of sundry colors
ye wholesomest medicine of diverse herbs: wherefore it behooves youth with all
industry to search not only the hard questions of the Philosophers, but also
the fine cases of the Lawiers, not only the quirks and quillyties of the
Logicians, but also to have a sight in the numbers of the Arithmetricians, the
Tyrangles and Circles of the Geometricians, the Spheere and Globe of the
Astrologians, the notes and crochets of the Musicians, ye odd conceits of the
Poets, the simples of the Phisicions, and in all things, to the end that when
they shall be willed to talk of any of them, they may be ignorant in nothing.
He yt has a gardein plot does as well sow the pothearb as the Margerom, as well
the Leeke as the Lyllye, as well the wholesome Isoppe, as the fair Carnation,
the which he does to the intent he may have wholesome herbs as well to
nurrish his inward parts as sweet flowers to please his outward desire,
as well fruitful plants to refresh his senses, as fair shows to please his
sight. Even so whosoever that has a sharp and capable wit, let him as well
give his mind to sacred knowledge of divinity, as to the profounde study of
Philosophye, that by his wit he may not only reap pleasure but profit, not
only contentacion in mind, but quietness in conscience. I will proceed in
the Education.

I would have them first of all to follow Philosophy, as most ancient, yea
most excellent, for as it is pleasant to pass through many fair Cities, but
most pleasant to dwell in the fairest, even so to read many Historyes and
arts pleasant but as it were to lodge with Philosophy most profitable.

It was pretely said of Bion the Philosopher. Even as when the woers could not
have the company of Penelope they run to her handemaydes: so they that
cannot attain to the knowledge of Philosophy, apply their minds to things
most vile and contemptible. Wherefore we must prefer Philosophy, as the only
Princess of all Scyences, and other arts as waiting Maids. For the curinge
and keepinge in temper of the body, man by his industrye has found two
things, Physic and Exercise, the one cures sickness, the other preserves
the body in temper, but there is nothing that may heal diseases, or cure the
wounds of the mind but only Philosophy. By this shall we learn what is
honest what dishonest, what is right what is wrong, and that I may in one
word say what may be said, what is to be known what is to be avoided, what to
be embraced, how we ought to obey our parents, reverence our Elders, enterteyne
strangers, honor the Magistrates, love our friends, live with our wives, use
^ur servant, how we should worship God, be dutiful to our fathers, stand in
awe of our superiors, obey laws, give place to officers, how we may choose
friends, nurture our children, and that which is most noble how we should
neither be too proud in prosperity, neither pensive in adversity, neythr
like beasts overcome with anger. And here I cannot but lament Athens, which
having ben always ye nurse of Philosophers, does now nurrish only ye name of
Philosophy. For to speak plainly of ye disorder of Athens, who does not see
it, and sorrow at it? such playing at dice, such quaffing of drink, such
dalyaunce with women, such daunsing, that in my opinion there is no quaffer in
Flaunders so given to typplynge, no courtier in Italy so given to ryotte, no
creature in the world so misled as a student in Athens. Such a con^usion of
degrees, that the Scholar knows not his ^uetie to the Bachelor, nor the
Bachelor to the Master, nor the Master to the Doctor. Such corruption of
manners, cont^mpt of Magistrates, such open sins, such privy villanye, such
quarrelling in the st^eetes, such subtle practices in chambers, as makes my
heart to melt with sorrow to think of it, and should cause your minds
gentlemen to penitent to remember it.

Moreover who does know a scholar by his habit? Is there any hatte of so
unseemly a fashion, any dublette of so long a waste, any hose so short, any
attire either so costly, or so courtly, either so strange in making or so
monstrous in wearing, that is not worn of a scholar? have they not now in
steed of black cloth black velvet, in steed of course sackecloth fine
silk? Be they not more like courtiers the^ scholars, more like stageplayers
then students, more like ruffians of Naples then disputers in Athens? I would
to God they did not imitate all other nations in the vice of ye mind as they
do in the attire of their body, for certeynelye as there is no nation whose
fashion in apparel they do not use, so is there no wickedness publyshed in
any place, yt they do not practice. I think that in Sodom and Gomora, there
was never more filthiness, never more pride in Rome, more poisoning in Italy,
more lyinge in Crete, more privy spoiling in Spain, more Idolatry in Egypt,
then is at this day in Athens, never such sects among the Heathens, such
schisms amongst the Turks, such mis belief among ye Infidells, as is now
among Scholars. Be there not many in Athens which think there is no God? no
redemption? no resurrection?

What shame is this gentlemen that a place so renowned for good learning,
should be so shamed for ill lyuinge? that where grace does abound, sin
should so superabound? yt where ye greatest profession of knowledge is, there
should also be ye least practicing of honesty. I have read of many
Uniuersities, as of Padua, in Italy, Paris in France, Wittenberge in Germany,
in England of Oxford and Cambridge, which if they were half so ill as Athens
they were to to bad, and as I have heard as they be, they be stark naught.

But I can speak the less against them, for that I was never in them, yet can
I not choose but be agrieued, that by report I am enforced rather to accuse them
of vanity then excuse them any way. Ah gentlemen what is to be looked for, nay
what is not to be feared, when the temple of Vesta where virgins should live is
like the stews, freight with strompets when ye Alter where nothing but
sanctity and holiness should be used, is polluted with uncleanness, when
the Uniuersities, of christendom which should be the eyes, the lights, the
leaven, the salt, the seasoning of the wo^ld, are dimmed with blind
concupisence, put out with pride and have lost their savor with impiety?

Is it not become a bye word amongst the common people, that they had rather
send their children to the carte, then to the Uniuersiti^, being induced so to
say, for the abuse that reigns in the Uniuersities, who sending their sons
to attain knowledge, find them little better learned, but a great deal worse
lived then when they went, and not only unthrifts of their money, but also
banckeroutes of good manners: was not this the cause that caused a simple woman
in Greece to exclaim against Athens, saying.

The Master and the Scholar, the ^uter and the Pupil be both agreede, for
the one cares not how little pain he takes for his money, the other how
little learning. I perceive that in Athens there be no chaungelinges: When of
old it was said to a Lacedemonian that all ye Grecians knew honesty, but not
one practiced it. When Panathaenea were celebrated at Athens, an old man going
to take a place was mockingly rejected, at the last coming among the
Lacedaemonians all the youth gave him place, which ye Athenians liked well off,
then one of the Sparthans cried out: Uerily ye Athenians know what should be
done, but they never do it.

When one of the Lacedaemonians had been for a certain time in Athens seeing
nothing but dancing, dicinge, banquetinge, surfeytinge, and licencious
behavior, retourninge home he was asked how all things stood in Athens, to
whom he answered, all things are honest there, meaning that the Athenians
accounted all things good, and nothing bad. How such abuses should or might
be redressed in all Uniuersities, especially in Athens, if I were of authority
to command, it should be seen, or of credit to persuade those that have the
dealinges with them, it should soon be shown.

And until I see better reformation in Athens, my young Ephaebus, shall not
be nurtured in Athens. I have spoken all this that you gentlemen might see how
ye Philo in Athens practice nothing less then Philosophy, what scholar is he
that is so zealous at his book as Chrisippus, who, had not his maid Melissa
thrust meat into his mouth had perished with famine beeinge, always
studying? Who so watchful as Aristotle, who going to bed would have a ball
of brass in his hand, that if he should be taken in a slomber, it might
fall and awake him? No, no, the times are changed as Ovid says, and we are
changed in the times, let us endeavor every one to amend one, and we shall
all soon be amended, let us give no occasion of reproach, and we shall more
easily bear the burden of false reports, and as we see by learning what we
should do, so let us do as we learn, then shall Athens florishe, then
shall the students be had in great reputation, then shall learning have his
hyre, and every good scholar his hope. But return we once again to Philo.
There is amongst men a trifolde kind of life, Active which is about civil
function and administration of the common weal. Speculatiue, which is in
continual meditation and study. The third a life led, most commonly a
lewd life, an idle and vain life, the life that the Epicures account their
whole felicity, a voluptuous lyse replenished with all kind of vanity, if
this Active life be without Philosophy it is an idle life, or at the least a
life evil employed which is worse: if the contemplative life be separated from
the Active it is most unprofitable. I would therefore have my youth, so to
bestow his study, as he may both be exercised in the common weal, to
common profit, and well employed privately for his own perfection, so as by
his study the rule he shall bear may be directed, and by his government
his study may be increased, in this manner did Pericles deal in civil
affairs, after this sort did Architas Tarentine, Dion the Syracusian, the
Thebane Epiminides govern their cities: For ye exercise of the body it is
necessary also somewhat be added, that is that the child should be at such
times, permitted to recreate himself, when his mind is overcome with study,
least dullinge himself with ouermuche industry he become unfit afterward to
conceive readyly, besides this it will cause an apt composition and that
natural strength yt it before retained. A good composition of the body lays
a good foundation of old age, for as in the fair Summer we prepare all
things necessary for the cold Winter, so good manners in youth and lawful
exercises be as it were victuals and nourishmentes for age, yet are their
labors and pastimes so to be tempered that they weaken not their bodies more
by play, then otherwise they should have done by study^, and so to be used
that they addict not themselves more to the exercise of the limbs then the
following of learning, the greatest enemies to discipline as Plato recompteth,
are labors and sleep. It is also requisite that he be expert in marciall
affairs, in shooting, in darting, that he hawke and hunt, for his honest
pastime and recreation, and if after these pastimes he shall seem secure,
nothing regardinge his books, I would not have him, scourged with stripes, but
threatened with words, not dulled with blows, like servant the which the more
they are beaten the better they bear it, and the less they care for it, for
children of good disposition are either incited by praise to go forward, or
shamed by dispraise to commit the like offense: those of obstinate and blockish
behavior, are neither with words to be persuaded, neither with stripes to be
corrected. They must now be tau^ted with sharp rebukes, straight ways
admonished with fair words, now threatened a payment, by and by promised a
reward, and dealt withal as nurses do with the babes, whom after they have
made to cry, they profer the teate, but dilligent heed must be taken yt he be
not praised above measure, least standing to much in his own conceit, he
become also obstinate in his own opinions. I have known many fathers whose
great love toward their sons has been the cause in time that they loved
them not, for when they see a sharp wit in their son to conceive for the
desire they have that he should out run his fellows, they laden him with
continual exercise, which is the only cause that he sincketh under his
burden, and gives over in the plain field. Plants are nurrished with little
rain, yet drowned with much, even so the mind with indifferent labor wareth
more perfect, with much study it is made fruitelesse. We must consider that
all our life is divided into remission and st^dye.

As there is watchinge, so is there sleep, as there is war, so is there
peace, as there is Winter, so is there Summer, as there be many working days,
so is there also many holidays, and if I may speak all in one word, ease is
the sauce of labor, which is plainly to be seen not only in living things,
but also in things without life: We vnbende the bow that we may the better
bend him, we unloose the harp that we may the sooner tune him, the body is
kept in health as well with fasting as eating, the mind healed with ease as well
as with labor, those parents are in mind to be mislyked which commit the
whole care of their child to the custody of a hirelyng, neither askinge
neither knowing how their children profit in lerning. For if the father were
desirous to examine his son in that which he has learned, the master would
be more careful what he did teach. But seeinge the father careless what they
learn, he is also secure what he teaches, that notable saying of ye
Horsekeeper may here be applied which said, nothing did so fat the horse
as the eye of the King. Moreover I would have the memory of children
continually to be exercised, which is the greatest furtheraunce to learning
that can be.

For this cause they feigned in their old fables memory to be the mother of
perfection. Children are to be chastised if they shall use any filthy or
unseemly talk, for as Democrates says, the word is the shadow of the work:
they must be courteous in their behavior, lowely in their speech, not
disdayning their cock mates or refrayning their company: they must not live
wantonly, neither speak impudently, neither angry without cause, neither
quarrellous without choler. A young man being perverse in nature, and proud
in words and manners, gave Socrates a spurn, who being moved by his fellows
to give him an other: If said Socrates an ^sse had kicked me, would you also
have me to kick him again, the greatest wisdom in Socrates in compressing
his anger is worthy great commendacion. Architas Tarentine retourning from
war and finding his ground ouergrowen with weeds and turned up with
Mowles, ^ent for his Farmour unto whom he said: If I were not angrye I
would make thee repent thy ill husbandry. Plato having a servant whose bliss
was in fillyng of his belly, seeinge him on a time idle and dishonest in
behavior, said out of my sight, for I am incensed with anger.

Although these ensamples be hard to imitate, yet should every man do his
endeavor to repress that hot and heady humor which he is by nature subject
unto. To be silent and discreet in company, though many think it a thing
of no great wayghte or importance, yet is it most requisite for a young man
and most necessary for my Ephaebus. It never has been hurtefull to any to
hold his peace, to speak, damage to many, what so is kept in silence is
hushed, but whatsoever is babbled out cannot again be recalled. We may see the
cunning and curious work of Nature, which has barred and hedged nothing in so
stronglye, as the tongue, with two rows of teeth, therewith two lyppes,
besides she has placed it far from the heart, that it should not utter
that which the heart had conceived, this also should cause us to be silente,
seeinge those that use much talk though they speak truly are never believed.
Wine therefore is to be refrayned which is termed to be the glass of the
mind, and it is an old Pr^uerbe: Whatsoever is in the heart of the sober man,
is in the mouth of the drunckarde. Bias holding his tongue at a feast, was
termed there of a tatler to be a fool, who said, is there any wise man that
can hold his tongue amidst the wine? unto whom Bias answered, there is no
fool that can.

A certain gentleman here in Athens, invited the Kings Legates to a costly
and sumptuous ^east, where also he assembled many Philosophers, and talking of
diverse matters both of the common weal and learning, only Zeno said nothing.
Then the ambassadors said, what shall we show of thee O Zeno to the king.
Nothing answered he, but that there is an old man in Athens that amiddest
the pottes could hold his peace. Anacharsis suppinge with Solon, was found a
sleep, having his right hand before his mouth, his left upon his priuities,
whereby was noted that the tongue should be rayned with the strongest bridle.
Zeno because he would not be enforced to reveal any thing against his will
by torments, bitte of his tongue and spit it in the face of the Tyrant.

Now when children shall by wisdom and use refrain from over much tatlyng,
let them also be admonished that when they shall speak, they speak nothing
but truth, to lie is a vice most detestable, not to be suffered in a slave,
much less in a son. But the greatest thing is yet behind, whether that
those are to be admitted as cockemates with children which love them entirely,
or whether they be to be banished from them.

When as I see many fathers more cruel to their children then careful of
them, which think it not necessary to have those about them, that most
tender them, then I am half as it were in a doubt to give counsel. But when
I call to my remembrance Socrate^, Plato, Xenophon, Eschines, Saebetes, and
all those that so much commend the love of men, which have also brought up
many to great rule, reason and piety, then I am encouraged to imitate those
whose excellency does war^ant my precepts to be perfect. If any shall love the
child ^or his comely countenance, him would I have to be banished as a most
dangerous and in^ectious beast, if he shall love him for his fathers sake, or
for his own good qualyties, him would I have to be with him always as
superuisour of his manners: such has it been in times past the love of one
Athenian to the other, and of one Lacedemonian to the other.

But having said almost sufficient for the education of a child, I will
speak two words, how he should be trained when he grows in years. I can not
but mislyke the nature of diners parents which appoynte overseers and tutours
for their children in their tender age, and suffer them when they come to be
young men, to have the bridle in their own hand, knowing not that age
requires rather a hard snaffle then a pleasant bit, and is sooner allured to
wickedness then childehood. Who knows not the escapes of children, as they
are small so they are soon amended? either with threats they are to be
remedied or with fair promises to be rewarded. But the sins and faults of
young men are almost or altogether ^ntollerable, which give themselves to be
delycate in their diet, prodigal in their expense, using dicing, dancing,
drunkenness, deflowring of virg^ns, abusing wives, committing adulteries, and
accounting all things hon^st that are most detestable. H^ere therefore must be
used a due regard that their lust may be repressed, their riot abated, their
courage cooled, for hard it is to see a young man to be mais^er of himself
which yeldeth himself as it were a bond slave, to fond and ouerlashinge
affections. Wise parents ought to take good heed, especially at this time, yt
they frame their sons to modesty, either by threats or by rewards, either by
fair promises or severe practices, either shewinge the miseries o^ those that
have been overcome with wildenesse, or the happiness of the^ that have
contained themselves within the bands of reason: these two are as it were the
ensigns of virtue, the hope of honor, the fear of punishment. But chiefly
parents must cause their youths to abandon the society of those which are
noted of evil living and lewd behavior, which Pithagoras seemed somewhat
obscurely to note in these his sayings.

First, that one should abstain from the taste of those things that have
black tails. That is, we must not use the company of those whose corrupt
manners do as it were make their life black. Not to go above the ballaunce,
that is, to reverence Justice, neither for fear or flattery to lean to any
one parcially, not to lie in idleness, that is, that sloth should be
abhorred: That we should not shake every man by the hand: That is, we should
not contract friendship with all: Not to wear a strait ringe: That is that
we should lead our life so as we need not to fetter it with ^heynes: Not to
bring fire to a slaughter: That is, we must not provoke any that is furious
with words: Not to eat our hearts: That is, that we should not vex our
selves with thoughts, consume our bodies with sighs, with sobbes, or with
care to pine our carcasses: To abstain from beans, that is, not to meddle in
civil affairs or business of the common weal, for in the old times the
election of magistrates was made by the pullinge of beans: Not to put our
meat in Scapio. That is we should not speak of manners or virtue, to those
whose minds are infected with vice. Not to retire when we are come to the
end of our race. That is, when we are at the point of death, we should
not be oppressed with grief, but willingly yield to nature. But I will
return to my former precepts, that is, that young men should be kept from
the company of those that are wicked, especially from the si^ht of the
flatterer. For I say now as I have oftentimes before sayde^, that there is no
kind of beast so noisome as the flatterer, nothing that will sooner consume
both the son and the Father and all honest friends. When the Father
exhorts the son to sobrietye, the flatterer provoke him to wine, when the
Father weaneth them to continency, the flatterer allureth them to lust, when
the Father admonishes them to thrifte, the flatterer haleth them to
prodigallitye, when the Father encourages them to labor, the flatterer lays
a cusshion under his eldbowe to sleep, biddinge them to eat, drink, and be
merry, for that the life of man is soon gone, and but as a short shadow, and
seeinge that we have but a while to live, who would live like a servant?
they say that now their Fathers be ol^e and doat through age like Saturnus.

Hereof if comes ye young men giving not only attentive ear but ready coin
to flatterers fall into such mys^ortune, hereof it proceeds that they haunt
the stews, marry before they be wise, and dye before they thrive. These be the
beas^s which live by ye trenchers of young gentlemen, and consume the
treasures of their revenues, these be they that soothe young youths in their
own sayings, that uphold them in all their dooinges with a yea, or nay,
these be they that are at every beck, at every nod, ^reemen by fortune, slaves
by free will. Wherefore if there be any fathers that would have his children
nurtured and brought up in honestye, let him expel these Panthers, which have
a sweet smell but a deuouringe mind: yet would I not have parents
altogether precise, or to seu^re in correction, but let them with mildness
^orgyue light offenses, and remember that they themselves have been young, as
the Physician by minglinge bitter poisons with sweet liquor, brings health
to the body, so the Father with sharp rebukes seasoned with loving looks,
causes a redress and amendment in his child. But if the Father be thoroughly
angry upon good occasion, let him not continue his rage, for I had rather he
should be soon angry then hard to be pleased, for when the son shall
percei^e that the Father has conceived rather a hate then a heat against
him, he becomes desperate, neither regarding his fathers ire, neither his
own duty. Some light faults let them dissemble as though they knew them
not, and seeing them let them not seem to see them, and hearing them let them
not seem to hear. We can easily forget the offenses of our friends be they
never so great, and shall we not forgive the escapes of our children be they
never so small? We bear of^entimes with our servant and shall we not
sometimes with our sons: the fairest Iennet is ruled as well with the wand as
with the spur, the wildest child is as soon corrected with a word as with a
weapon. If thy son be so stubborn obstinately to rebel against thee, or so
wilful to persevere in his wickedness yt neither for fear of punishment, neither
for hope of reward, he is any way to be reclaimed, then seek out some marriage
fit for his degree which is ye surest bond of youth, and the stro^gest chain to
fetter affections yt can be found. Yet let his wife be such a one as is neither
much more noble in birth, or far more richer in goods, but according to the
wise saying: choose one every way, as near as may be equal in both: for they
that do desire great dowries do rather marrye themselves to the wealth, then
to their wife. But to return to the matter, it is most requisite, that
Fathers both by their discreet counsel, and also their honest conversation,
be an ensample of imitation to their children, that he seeinge in their
parents as it were in a glass the per^ection of manners, they may be
encouraged by their upright living, to practice the like piety: for if a
Father rebuke his child of swearinge, and he himself a blasphemor, does he
not see, that in detecting his sons vice, he also notes his own. If the
father counsel the son to refrain wine, as most unwholesome, and drink
himself immoderately, does he not as well reprove his own folly, as rebuke
his sons? Age always ought to be a myrror for youth, for where old age is
impudent there certainly youth must needs be shameless, where the aged have
no respect of their honorable and graye hairs, there the young gallauntes
have little regard of their honest behavior, and in one word to conclude al,
where age is past gravity, there youth is past grace. The sum of all wherewith
I would have my Ephaebus endued, and how I would have him instructed, shall
briefly appear in this following. First, that he be of honest parents, nursed
of his mother, brought up in such a place as is incorrupt both for ye air and
manners, with such a person as is undefiled of great zeal, of profounde
knowledge, of absolute perfection, that be instructed in Philosophy, whereby
he may atteyne learning, and have in all sciences a sm^ake, whereby he may
readi^y dispute of any thing. That his body be kept in his pure strength by
honest exercise, his wit and memory, by diligent study.

That he abandon all allurements of vice, and continually enclyne to virtue,
which if it shall as it may come to pass, then do I hope that if ever Platoes
common weal shall flourish, that my Ephaebus, shall be a Citizen, that if
Aristotle si^ed any happy man it will be my child, if Tullye confess any
to be an absolute Orator, it will be my young youth. I am here therefore
gentlemen to exhort you, that with all industry you apply your minds to the
study of Philosophye, that as you profess your selves students, so you may
be students, that as you disdain not the name of a scholar, so you will not
be found void of the duty of scholars, let not your minds be carried away
with vayn delyghts, as with trauayling into far and strange countries, where
you shall see more wickedness, then learn virtue and wit. Neither with
costlye attire of the new cut, the Dutch hatte, the French hose, the Spanish
rapier, the Italian hilte, and I know not what. Cast not your eyes on the
beauty of women, least ye cast away your hearts with folly, let not that
fond love, wherewith youth fatteth himsel^e as fat as a fool, infect you,
for as a sinew being cut though it be healed there will always remain a
scar^e, or as fine lynnen stained with black incke, though it be washed never
so often, will have an iron mowle, so ye mind once mangled or maimed with
love, though it be never so well cured with reason, or cooled by wisdom, yet
there will appear a scar by ye which one may guess the mind has been
pierced, and a blemish whereby one may judge the heart has been stained.

Refrain from dyeing which was the only cause that Pyr^us was stricken to the
heart, and from dancing which was the means y^ lost John Baptists head. I am
not he that will disallow honest recreation although I detest the abuses, I
speak ^oldely unto you because I my self know you: what Athens has been,
what Athens is, what Athens shall be I can guess. Let not every June and Alehouse
in Athens be as it were your chamber, frequent not those ordinary tables where
either for the desire of delycate cates, or the meetinge of youthefull
companions, ye both spend your money vaynely and your time idly. Imitate him
in life whom ye honor ^or his learning, Aristotle, who was never seen in the
company of those that idelly bestowed their time.

There is nothing more swifter then time, nothing more sweeter, we have not as
Seneca says little time to live, but we leese much, neither have we a short
life by Nature, but we make it shorter by naughtines, our life is long if we
know how to use it. Follow Appelles that cunning and wise Painter, which would
let no day pass over his head without a line, without some labor. It was
pretely said of Hesiodas, let us endeavor by reason to excel beasts,
seeinge beasts by nature excel men, although strickely taken it be not so,
for that man is endewed with a soul, yet taken touching their perfection of
senses in their kind it is most certain. Does not the Lion for strength, the
Turtle for love, the Ante for labor excel man? Does not the Eagle see
cleerer, the Uulter smell better, the Mowle hear lyghtlyer? let us therefore
endeavor to excel in virtue seeing in qualyties of the body we are inferior
to beasts. And h^ere I am most earnestly to exhort you to modesty in your
behavior, to duty to your elders, to dilygence in your studyes. I was of
late in Italy, where mine ears gloed, and my heart was gauled to hear the
abuses that reygn^ in Athens: I can not tell whether those things sprange by
the lewd^ and lying lyppes of the ignorant, which are always enemies to
learning, or by the reports of such as saw them, and sorrowed at them. It was
openly reported of an old man in Naples that there was more lyghtnes in
Athens, then in all Italy, more wanton youths of scholars, then in all Europe
besides, more Papists, more Atheists, more sects, more schisms, then in all
the Monarchies of the world, which things although I think they be not true,
yet can I not but lament that they should be deemed to be true, and I fear
me they be not altogether false, there can no great smoke arise but there must
be some fire, no great report without great suspicion. Frame therefore your
lives to such integretie, your studies to the attayning of such perfection,
that neither the might of the strong, neither the mallyce of the weak,
neither the swifte reports of the ignoraunte be able to spotte you with
dishonestie or note you of ungodliness. The greatest harm that you can do
unto the envious, is to do well, the greatest corasiue that you can give unto
the ignorant, is to prosper in knowledge, the greatest comfort that you can
bestow on your parents is to live well, and learn well, the greatest
commodity that you can yield unto your country, is with wisdom to bestow
that talente, that by grace was given you.

And here I cannot choose but give you that counsel, that an old man in
Naples gave me most wiselye, although I had then neither grace to follow
it, neither will to give ^are to it, desiringe you not to reiecte it because I
did once despise it, It is this as I can remember word ^or word.

Desce^de into your own cons^yences, consider with your selves the great
dif^erence between staringe and stark blind, wit and wisdom, love and
lust, be merrye but with modesty, be sober but not too sullen, be valyaunte
but not too venterous, let your attire be comely but not too costly, your
diet wholesome, but not excessive, use pastime as the word imports, to pass
the time in honest recreation. Mistrust no man without cause, neither be ye
credulous without proof, be not light to follow every man's opinion, neither
obstinate to stand in your own conceits, serve God, fear God, love God, and
God will bless you, as either your hearts can wish, or your friends desire.
This was his grave and godly advise whose council I would have you all to
follow, frequent lectures, use disputations openly, neclecte not your private
studyes, let not degrees be given for love, but for learning, not for money but
for knowledge, and because you shall be the better encouraged to follow my
counsel, I will be as it were an example my self, desiring you all to
imitate me.

Euphues having ended his discourse, and finished those precepts which he
thought necessary for the instructing of youth, gave his mind to the
continual study of Philosophy, insomuch as he became publyque Reader in the
University, with such commendacion as never any before him, in the which he
continued for the space of ten years, only searching out the secrets of
Nature and the hidden mysteries of Philosophy, and having collected into three
volumes his lectures, thought for the profit of young scholars to set them
forth in print, which if he had done, I would also in this his Notomie have
inserted, but he alteringe his determination, fell into this discourse with
himself.

Why Euphues art thou so addi^ted to the s^udye of the Heathen? that thou have
forgotten thy God in Heaven? shall thy wit be rather employed to the attaining
of humayne wisdom then divine knowledge? Is Aristotle more dear to thee with
his books? then Christ with his blood? What comfort can thou find in
Philosophy for thy guilty conscience, what hope of the resurrection, what
glad tidinges of the Gospel? Consider with thy self that thou art a
gentlemen, yea, and a Gentile, and if thou neglect thy calling thou art worse
then a Jew. Most miserable is the estate of those gentlemen which think it a
blemishe to their ancestors, and a blot to their own gentry to read or
practice divinity. They think it now sufficient for their felicity to ride
well upon a great horse, to hawke, to hunt, to have a smacke in Philosophye,
neither thincking of the beginning of wisdom, neither the end which is
Christ: only they account divinity most contemptible, which is and ought to
be most notable. Without this there is no Lawyer be he never so eloquent, no
Physician be he never so excellent, no Philosopher be he never so learned, no
King no Keyser, be he never so royal in birth, so politic in peace, so expert
in war, so valiant in prowess, but he is to be detested, and abhorred.
Farewell therefore the fine and filed prases of Cicero, the pleasant Eligues
of Ovid, the depth and profound knowledge of Aristotle. Farewell Rhetoric,
farewell Philosophy, farewell all learning which is not spronge from the
bowels of the holy Bible.

In this learning shall we find milk for the weak, and marrowe for the
strong, in this shall we see how the ignorant may be instructed, the
obstinate confuted, the penitent comforted, the wicked punished, ye godly
preserved. Oh I would gentlemen would ^emetimes sequester themselves from their
own delights, and employ their wits in searching these heavenly and divine
mysteries. It is common, yea, and lamentable to see that if a young youth,
have the gifts of Nature, as a sharp wit or of Fortune, as sufficient
wealth to maintain them gallauntly, he employeth the one in the vain
inventions of love, the other in ye vile bravery of pride, the one in the
passions of his mind and praises of his Lady, the other in furnishinge of his
body and furtheringe of his lust, hereof it comes that such vain ditties,
such idle sonnets, such inticinge songs, are set forth to the gaze of the
world and grief of the godly. I my self know none so ill as my self, who
in times past have been so superstitiously addicted, that I thought no heaven
to the Paradise of love, no Angel to be compared to my Lady, but as
repentance has caused me to leave and loath such vain delights, so
wisdom has opened unto me the perfect gate to eternal life.

Besides this, I my self have thought that in divinity there could be no
eloquence, which I might imitate, no pleasant invention which I might
follow, no delicate phrase, that might delyght me, but now I see that in the
sacred knowledge of Gods will, the only eloquence, the true and perfect
phrase, the testimony of salvation does abide, and seeing without this, all
learning is ignorance, all wisdom more folly, and wit plain bluntness,
all Justice iniquytie, all eloquence barbarism, all beauty deformytye. I will
spend all the remainder of my life, in studying the old testament, wherein is
prefigured the coming of my savior, and the new testament, wherein my Christ
does suffer for my sins, and is crucified for my redemption, whose bitter
agonies should cast every good Christian into a shieueringe ague, to remember
his anguishe, whose sweatinge of water and blood should cause every devout and
zealous Catholic, to shed tears of repentance in remembrance of his
torments.

Euphues, having discoursed this with himself, did immediately abandon all
light company, all the dysputations in schools, all Philosophy, and gave
himself to the touchstone of holiness in divinity, accomptinge all other
things as most vile and contemptible.

Euphues to the Gentlemen scholars in Athens.
THe Mercha^t that trauaileth for gain, the husbandman yt toyleth for encrese,
the Lawyer that pleads for gold, the crafts man that seeks to live by his
labor, all these after they have fatted themselves with sufficient, either
take their ease or less pain the^ they were accustomed. Hippomanes ceased to
run when he had gotten the goal, Hercules to labor, when he had obtained
the victory, Mercury to pipe when he had cast Argus in a slumber. Every
action has his end, and then we leave to sweat when we have found the
sweet. The Ant though she toil in Summer, yet in Winter she leaves to
travail. The Be though she delight to suck the fair flower, yet is she at
last cloyed with honny. The Spider that weaueth the finest threede cease at
the last, when she has finished her web. But in the action and study of the
mind (gentlemen) it is far otherwise, for he that tastes the sweet of
learning endures all the sower of labor. He that seeks ye depth of
knowledge is as it were in a Laborinth, in which the farther he goes, the
farther he is from the end: or like the bird in the limebush which the more she
strives to get out, ye faster she sticks in. And certainly it may be said of
learning, as it was famed of Nectar ye drinck of the Gods the which the more it
was dronck, the more it would ouerflow the br^mme of the cup, neither is it
far unlike the stone that grows in the river of Caria, the which the more
it is cut, the more it increases. And it fares with him y^ follows it as
with him that has the dropsy, who the more he drincketh the more he
thirsts. Therefore in my mind the student is at less ease then the Ox that
draws, or the Ass that carries his burden, who neither at the board when
others eat is void of labor, neither in his bed when others sleep is
without meditation. But as in manuary crafts though they be all good, yet
that is accounted most noble, that is most necessary, so in the actions and
studies of the mind although they be all worthy, yet that deserves greatest
praise which brings greatest profit. And so we commonly do make best account
of that which does us most good. We esteem better of the Physician that
ministers the potion, then of the Apoticarie that sells the drugges.

How much more ought we with all diligence, study, and industry, spend our
short pilgrimage in the seeking out of our salvation. Uaine is Philosophye,
vain is Physic, vain is Law, vain is all Learning without the taste of
divine knowledge. I was determined to write notes of Philosophy, which had been
to feed you fat with follye, yet that I might seem neither idle, neither you
evil employed, I have here set down a brief discourse which of late I have
had with an heretic which kept me from idleness, and may if you read it
deter you from heresy. It was with an Atheyst, a man in opinion monstrous,
yet tractable to be persuaded. By this shall you see the absurd dotage of him
that thincketh there is no God, or an insufficient God, yet here shall you
find the sum of faith, which iustifyeth only in Christ, the weakness of
the law, the strength of the Gospel, and the knowledge of Gods will. Here
shall ye find hope if ye be in despair, comfort if ye be distressed, if ye
thirst drink, meat if ye hunger, if ye fear Moses who says, without you
fulfill the law you shall perish. Behold Christ which says, I have ouercommen
the law. And that in these desperate days wherein so many sects are sown,
and in the wayning of the world, wherein so many false Christ's are come, you
might have a certeyntie of your salvation, I mean to set down the
towchestone whereunto every one ought to trust, and by the which every one
should try himself, which if you follow, I doubt not but that as you have
proved learned Philosophers, you will also proceed excellent divines, which
God grant.

EVPHVES AND ATHEOS.
ATheos. I am glad Euphues that I have found thee at leisure, partly that we
might be merry, and partly that I might be persuaded in a thing that much
troubles my conscience. It is concerning God. There be many that are of this
mind, that there is a God whom they term the creator of all things, a God
whom they call the son the redeemer of the world, a God whom they name the
holy Ghost, the worker of all things, the comforter, the spirit, and yet are
they of this opinion also, that they be but one God, coequall in power,
coeternal, incomprehensible, and yet a Trinity in person. I for my part
although I am not so credulous to believe their curious opinions, yet am I
desirous to hear the reasons that should drive them into such fond and
frenticke imaginations. For as I know nothing to be so absurd which some of
the Philosophers have not defended, so think I nothing so erroneous which some
of our Catholics have not maynteyned. If there were, as diverse dream, a God
that would revenge the oppression of the widows and fatherless, that would
reward the zeal of the merciful, pity the poor and pa^don the penitent,
then would the people either stand in greater awe, or owe more love toward
their God.

I remember Tullye disputinge of the nature of Gods, brings Dionisius as a
scoffer of such vain and devised Deities, who seeinge Aesculapius with a long
bearde of gold, and Apollo his father beardelesse, played the Barbar and
shaued if from him, saying, it was not decent that the son should have a
bearde and the father none. Seeing also Jupiter with an ornament of gold took
it from him jesting thus, In Summer this array is too heavy, in Winter too
cold, here I leave one of woollen, both warmer for the cold and lyghter for
the heat. He coming also into ye Temple where certain of the gods with golden
gifts stretched out their hands, took them all away saying, Who will be so
mad as to refuse things so gentlye off^red.

Do thou not see Euphues what small account he made of their gods, sor at ye
last sailing into his country with a prosperous wind, he laughing said, lo
see you not my Masters, how well the Gods reward our Sacrilege. I could
rehearse infinite opinions of excellent men who in this point hold on my
side, but especially Protago^as. And in my judgment if there be any God, it
is the world wherein we live, that is the only God, what can we behold more
noble then the world, more fair, more beautiful, more glorious? what more
maiesticall to the sight, or more constant in substance? But this by the way
Euphues, I have greter and more forcible arguments to confirm my opinion, and
to confute the errors of those that imagine that there is a God. But first I
would gladly hear thee shape an answer to that which I have said, for well
I know that thou art not only one of those which believe that there is a god,
but of them also^ which are so precise in honoring him, that they be scarce
wise in helping themselves.

Euphues. If my hope ( Atheos) were not better to convert thee, then my hap
was here to confer with thee, my heart would break for grief, which
begins freshly to bleed for sorrow, thou have stricken me into such a
shiuering and cold terror at the rehearsing of this thy monstrous opinion,
that I look every minute when the ground should open to swallowe thee up,
and that God which thou know not should with thunder from Heaven strike
thee to Hell. Was there ever Barbarian so senseless, ever miscreaunt so
bar^arous, that did not acknowledge a lyuinge and everlasting Jehovah? I cannot
but tremble at the remembra^nce of his majesty, and do thou make it a
mockery?

O iniquity of times, O corruption of manners, O blasphemy against the
heavens. The Heathen man says, yea that Tullye whom thou thy self
alleadgest, that there is no nation so barbarous, no kind of people so savage
in whom rests not this persuasion that there is a God, and even they that in
other parts of their life seem very little to differ from brute beasts, do
continually keep a certain seed of Relygion, so throughlye has this common
principle possessed all men's minds, and so fast it sticks in all men's
bowels.

Yea Idolatrye it self is sufficient proof of this persuasion for we see how
willyngly man abaseth himself to honor other creatures, to do homage to
stocks, to go on pilgrimage to images, if therefore man rather then he would
have no God do worship a stone, how much more art thou duller then a stone
which go against the opinion of all men.

Plato a Philosopher would often say, there is one whom we may call God
omnipotent, glorious, immortal, unto whose similytude we that creep here on
the earth have our souls framed. What can be said more of a Heathen, yea,
what more of a Christian? Aristotle when he could not find out by the
secrecy of Nature the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, cried out
with a loud voice, O thing of things have mercy upon me.

Cleanthes alleged four causes, which might induce man to acknowledge a God,
the first by the foreseeing of things to come, the second by the infinite
commodities which we daily reap, as by the temperature of the air, the
fatness of the earth, the fruitefulnesse of trees, plants and herbs, the
abundance of all things that may either serve for the necessity of many, or
the superfluity of a few, the third by the terror that the mind of man is
stricken into, by lyghtenings, thunderings, tempests, hayles, snow,
earthquakes, pestilence, by the strange and terrible fightes which cause us to
tremble, as the rayning of bl^ud, the fiery impressions in the Elemente, the
ouerflowinge of ^loudes in the earth, the prodigious shapes and unnatural
forms of men, of beasts, of birds, of fishes, of all creatures, the
appearing of blasing Commettes, which ever prognosticate some strange
mutation, the sight of two Suns which happened in the Consulshippe of
Tudit^nus and Aquilius, with these things mortal men being afrighted are
enforced to acknowledge an immortal and omnipotent God. The fourth by ye
equality of moving in the heaven, the course of the Sun, the order of the
stars, the beautifulness of the Element, the sight whereof might
sufficiently induce us to believe they proceed not by chance, by nature, or
destiny, but by the eternal and divine purpose of some omnipotent Deity.
Heereoff it came that when the Philosophers could give no reason by nature,
they would say there is one above nature, an other would call him the first
mouer, an other the ayder of nature, and so forth.

But why go I about in a thing so manifest to use proofs so manifold. If
thou deny the truth who can prove it, if thou deny that black is black, who
can by reason reprove thee, when thou opposest thy self against reason, thou
know that manifest truths are not to be proved but believed, and that he
that denies the principles of any Art is not to be confuted by arguments,
but to be left to his own folly. But I have a better opinion of thee, and
therefore I mean not to trifle with Philosophy but to try this by the
touchstone of the Scriptures. We read in the second of Exodus, that when
Moses desired of God to know what he should name him to the children of
Israel, he answered, thou shalt say, I am that I am. Again, he that is
has sent me unto you. The Lord even your God, he is God in the heaven above
and in the earth beneath, I am ye first, and the last I am. I am the Lord, and
there is none other besides me. Again, I am the Lord and there is none other.
I have created the light and made darkness, making peace and framing evil.
If thou desire to understand what God is, thou shall hear, he is even a
consuming fire, the Lord of revenge, the God of judgment, the living God, the
searcher of the reins, he that made all things of nothing, Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and yet without beginning, the end and yet everlasting, one at
whose breath the mountains shall shake, whose seat is the lofty Cherubins,
whose footestoole is the earth invisible, yet seeinge all things, a gelous
God, a loving God, myraculous in all points, in no part monstrous. Besides
this, thou shall well understand that he is such a God as will punish him
whosoever he be ye blasphemeth his name, for holy is the Lord. It is written,
bring out the blasphemer without ye tents and let al those that heard him lay
their hands upon his head, and let all the people stone him. He that
blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall dye the death. Such a gelous God, that
whosoever commits Idolatrye with strange Gods he will strike with terrible
plagues? Turn not to Idols neither make Gods with hands, I am the Lord your
God: Thou shalt make no Image which the Lord thy God abhors. Thou shall
have no new GOD, neither worship any strange Idol. For all the Gods of the
Gentiles are Devils.

My sons keep your selves from Images, the worshippinge of Idols is the
cause of all evil, the beginning and the end. Cursed be that man that
engraueth any Images, it is an abhominatio^ before the Lord. They shall be
confounded that worship graven Images, or glory in Idols. I will not give my
glory to an other, nor my praises to graven Images. If all these testimonies
of the Scriptures cannot make thee to acknowledge a lyuinge GOD, harken what
they say of such as be altogether incredulous. Every unbeliever shall dye in
his incredulity. Woe be to those that be loose in heart, they believe there
is no God, and therefore they shall not be protected of him. The wrath of the
Lord shall kindle against an vnbleeuinge nation. If ye believe not ye shall
not endure. He that believes not shall be damned. He that believes not is
judged already. The portion of the unbelievers shall be in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstome which is the second death. If thou feel in
thy self Atheos any spark of grace pray unto the Lord and he will cause
it to flame, if thou have no feelinge of faith, yet pray and the Lord will
give abundance, for as he is a terrible God, whose voice is like the
rushinge of many waters, so is he a merciful God whose words are as soft as
Oil. Though he breath fire out of his nostrils against sinners, yet is he
mild to those that ask forgiveness. But if thou be obstinate that seeinge
thou wylt not see, and knowing thou wylt not acknowledge, then shall thy heart
be hardened with Pharao, and grace shall be taken away from thee with Saul.
Thus says the Lord, who so believes not shall perish, heaven and earth
shall pass, but the word of the Lord shall endure for ever.

Submyt thy self before the throne of his Majesty, and his mercy shall save
thee. Honor the Lord and it shalll be well with thee. Besides him fear no
strange God. Honor the Lord with all thy soul. Offer unto God the sacrifice
of praise. Be not like the hipocrites which honor God with their lips, but be
far from him with their hearts, neither like ye fool which says his in
heart, there is no God. But if thou wylt still persevere in thine obstinacy thine
end shall be worse then thy beginning, ye Lord, yea, thy savior shall come to be
thy Judge when thou shall behold him come in glory with millions of Angels and
Archangels, when thou shall see him appear in thundringes and lyghtninges and
flashinges of fire, when ^he mountains shall melt, and the heavens be wrapped
up like a scrowle, when all the earth shall tremble, with what face will thou
behold his glory that deniest his Godhead? how can thou abide his presence
that beleeuest not his essence? what hope can thou have to be saved which
did never acknowledge aany to be thy Savior? Then shall it be said to
thee and to all those of thy s^cte (unless ye r^pent) depart all ye workers
of iniquity, there shall be weepinge and gnashing of teeth. When you shall see
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye
to be thrust out: You shall conceive heat and bring forth wood, your own
consciences shall consume you like fire. Here do thou see Atheos the
threatninges against unbelievers, and the punishment prepared for miscreantes.
What better or sounder proof can thou have that there is a GOD then thine
own conscience, which is unto thee a thousand witnesses? Consider with thy
self that thy soul is immortal, made to the Image of the almighty God: be
not curious to enquire of God, but careful to believe, neither be thou
desperate if thou see thy sins abound, but faithful to obtain mercy, for
the Lord will save thee because it is his pleasure, search therefore the
Scriptures for they testify of him.

Atheos. Truly Euphues you have said somewhat, but you go about contrary to
the customs of schools, which me thinckes you should dilygentlye observe
beeinge a professed Philosopher, for when I demand by what reason men are
induced to acknowledge a God, you confirm it by course of Scripture, as who
should say there were not a relatyon between GOD and the Scripture, because
as the old Fathers define, without Scripture there were no GOD, no Scripture
without a GOD. Whosoever therefore denies a Godhead, denies also the
scriptures which testify of him. This is in my opinion absurdum per absurdius
to prove one absurdity by an other. If thou can as substantiallye by reason
prove thy authority of Scriptures to be true, as thou have proved by
Scriptures there is a God, then will I willyngly with thee both believe the
Scriptures, and worship thy God. I have heard that Antiochus commanded all
the copies of the Testament to be burnt, from whence therefore have we these
new books, I think thou will not say by revelation, therefore go forward.

Euphues. I have read of the milk of a Tygresse that the more salt there is
thrown into it the fresher it is, and it may be that thou have either eaten of
that milk, or that thou art the Whelpe of that Monster, for the more reasons
that are beat into thy head, the more unreasonable thou seem to be, the
greater my authorities are, the lesser is thy belief. As touching the
authority of Scriptures although there be many arguments which do prove yea
and enforce the wicked to confess that the Scriptures came from God, yet by
none other mean then by the secret testimony of the holy Ghost our hearts
are truly persuaded that it is God which speaks in the law, in the
Prophets, in the Gospel, the orderly disposition of the wisdom of God, the
doctrine savoring nothing of earthlynesse, the godly agreement of all parts
among themselves, and specially the baseness of contemptible words uttering
the high misteryes of the heavenly kingedome, are second helps to establish
the Scriptures.

Moreover the antiquity of the Scripture, whereas the books of other
Relygions are later then the books of Moses, which yet does not himself
invent a new God, but sets forth to the Israelites the God of their
fathers. Whereas Moses does not bide the shame of Leuy his father, nor the
mourninge of Aaron his brother, and of Marie his sister, nor does aduannce his
own children: The same are arguments that in his book is nothing feigned by
man. Also the miracles that happened as well at the publyshing of the law as
in all the rest of time are infallyble proofs that the Scriptures proceeded
from the mouth of God. Also whereas Moses speaking in the person of Jacob,
assigns government to the Tribe of Judah, and where he tells before of the
calling of the Gentiles, whereof the one came to pass four hundredth years
after, the other almost two thousand years, these are arguments that it is
GOD himself that speaks in the books of Moses.

Whereas Esaias tells before of the captivity of the Jews and their restoryng
by Cyrus (which was borne an hundredth years after the death of Esaias) and
whereas Ier^my before the people were led away apointeth their exile to continue
threescore and ten years. Whereas Jeremy and Ezechiel beeinge far distaunt
in places the one from the other do agree in all their sayings. Where Daniel
tells of things to come six hundredth years after. These are most certain
proves to establish the authority of the books of the Prophets, the
simplycitie of the speech of the first three Euaungelysts, conteyninge
heavenly mysteries, the praise of John thundering from on high with weyghty
sentences, the heavenly majesty shininge in the writings of Peter and Paul,
the sudden calling of Matthew from the receipte of custom, the calling of
Peter and John from their fisher boats to the preaching of the Gospel, the
conversion and calling of Paul being an enemy to the Apostleshippe are signs
of the holy Ghost speaking in them. The consent of so many ages, of so sundry
nations, and of so diverse minds, in embracing the Scriptures, and the rare
godliness of some, ought to establish the authority thereoff amongst us.
Also the blood of so many Martyrs which for the confession thereoff have
suffered death with a constant and sober zeal, are undoubted testimonies of
the truth and authority of the Scriptures.

The miracles that Moses recounteth are suffient to persuade us that God, yea,
the God of hoastes, set down the Scriptures. For this that he was carried
in a cloud up into the mountain: that there even until the fortith day he
continued without the company of men. That in the very publyshinge of the
law his face did shine as it were besette with Sun beams, that lyghteninges
flashed round about, that thunder and noyses were each where heard in the
air, that a Trompette sownded being not sownded with any mouth of man.

That the entry of the Tabernacle by a cloud set between was kept from the
sight of the people, that his authority was so miraculously revenged with the
horrible destruction of Chorah, Dathan, and Abiron, and all that wicked
faction, that the rock stricken with a rod did by and by power forth a
river, that at his prayer, it rayned Manna from Heaven. Did not God herein
commend him from Heaven as an undoubted Prophet?

Now as touching the tyranny of Antiochus, which commanded all the books
to be burned, herein GODS singular providence is seen, which has always
kept his word both from the mighty that they could never extinguishe the
same, and from the malicious that they could never diminish it. There were
diverse copyes which god of his great goodness kept from the bloody proclamation
of Antiochus, and by and by followed the translating of them into Greek, that
they might be publyshed unto the whole world. The Hebrew tongue lay not only
vnesteemed but almost unknown, and surely had it not been Gods will to have his
religion provided for, it had altogether perished. Thou see Atheos how the
Scriptures come from the mouth of God, and are written by the finger of the
Holy Ghost, in ye consciences of all the faithful. But if thou be so curious
to ask other questions, or so quarrellous to strive against the truth, I must
answer thee, as an old father answered a young fool which needs would know
what God did before he made Heaven, to whom he said, hell, for such curious
inquisitors of gods secrets, whose wisdom is not to be comprehended, for who
is he that can measure the wind or way the fire, or attain unto the
unsearchable judgments of the Lord.

Besides this, where the Holy Ghost has ceased to set down, there ought we
to cease to enquire, seeing we have ye sufficiency of our salvation contained
in holy Scripture. It were an absurdity in schools, if one being urged with
a place in Aristotle could find none other shifte to avoid a blancke then in
doubting whether Aristotle spoke such words or no. Shall it then be tolerable
to deny the Scriptures having no other color to avoid an inconvenience, but
by doubting whether they proceed from the holy Ghost? But that such doubts
arise among many in our age, the reason is, their little faith, not the
insufficient proof of the cause.

Thou may as well demand how I prove white to be white, or black, black,
and why it should be called white rather then green. Such gross questions
are to be answered with slender reasons, and such idle heads would be scoffed
with adle aunsweres. He that has no motion of God in his mind, no feelinge of
the spirit, no taste of heavenly things, no remorce in conscience, no spark
of zeal, is rather to be confounded by torments, then reasons, for it is an
euydent and infallible sign that the holy Ghost has not sealed his
conscience, whereby he might cry Abba Father, I could allege Scripture to
prove that the godly should refrain from the company of the wicked, which
although thou wylt not believe, yet will it condemn thee. Saint Paul says, I
desire you brethren that you abstain from the company of those that walk
inordinatelye. Again my son i^ sinners shall flatter thee give no ear unto
them, fly from the evil, and evils shall fly from thee.

And surely were it not to confute thy detestable heresy, and bring thee if
it might be to some taste of the holy Ghost, I would abandon all place of thy
abode, for I think the ground accursed whereon thou stand: Thine opinions
are so monstrous that I cannot tell whether thou will cast a doubt also
whether thou have a soul or no, which if thou do, I mean not to wast wind
in proving that which thine infidellitie will not permit thee to believe, for
if thou have as yet felt no taste of the spirit working in thee, then sure I am
that to prove the immortallitie of the soul were bootelesse, if thou have a
secret feelinge, then it were needless. And God grant thee that glowinge and
sting in conscience that thy soul may witness to thy self that there is a
living God, and thy heart shed drops of blood as a token of repentance, in that
thou have denied that God, and so I commit thee to God, and that which I cannot
do with any persuasion I will not leave to attempt with my prayer. Atheos. Nay
stay a while good Euphues and leave not him perplexed with fear, whom thou may
make perfect by faith. For now I am brought into such a double and doubtful
distress that I know not how to turn me, if I believe not the Scriptures,
then shall I be damned for unbelief, if I believe them then I shall be
confounded for my wicked life. I know the whole course of the Bible which if I
should believe then must I also believe that I am an abject. For thus says
Heli to his sons, if man sin again man, God can forgive it, if against God
who shall entreat for him? ^e that sins is of the Dyuell, the reward of
sin is death, thou shalt not suffer the wicked to live: take all the Princes
of the people and hang them up against the Sun on Iybbets, that my anger
may be turned from Israel, these sayings of holy Scripture cause me to
tremble and shake in every sinnewe. Again this says the holy Bible now shall
the scowrge fall upon thee for thou have sinned, behold I set a curse before
you to day if you shall not harken to the commandments of the Lord, all
they that have forsaken the Lord shall be confounded,

Furthermore, where threats are poured out against sinners, my heart bleedeth
in my bellye to remember them, I will come unto you in judgment says the
Lord, and I will be a swifte and a severe witness, offenders, adulterers, and
those that have committed perjury and retained the duty of the hirelinges,
oppressed the widows, misused the stranger, and those that have not feared me
the Lord of hoasts. Out of his mouth shall come a two edged swoorde. Behold I
come quickly, and bring my reward with me, which is to yield every one
according to his deserts. Great is the day of the Lord and terrible, and who
is he that may abide him? What shall I then do when the Lord shall arise to
judge, and when he shall demand what shall I answer? Besides this, the names
yt in holy scripture are attributed to God bring a terror to my guilty
conscience. He is said to be a terrible God, a God of revenge, whose voice is
like the thu^der, whose breath makes all the corners of the earth to shake and
tremble. These things Euphues testify unto my conscience that if there be a
God, he is the God of the righteous, and one that will confound the wicked.
Whether therefore shall I go, or how may I avoid the day of vengeance to come?
if I go to heaven that is his seat, if into the earth that is his footstool,
if into the depth he is there also: Who can shrowde himself from the face of ye
Lord, or where can one hide him that the Lord cannot find him? his words are
like fire and the people like dry wood and shall be consumed. Euphues. Although
I cannot but rejoice to hear thee acknowledge a God, yet must I needs lament
to see thee so much distrust him. The Devil that roaring Lion seeing his pray
to be taken out of his jaws, alleges al Scripture yt may condemn the
sinner, leaving al out that should comfort ye sorrowful. Much like unto ye
deceitful Physician which recounteth all things that may endomage his patient,
never telling any thing yt may recure him. Let not thy conscience be agrieued,
but with a patie^t heart renounce all thy former iniquities and thou shall
receive eternal life. Assure thy self that as God is a Lord so he is a
father, as Christ is a Judge, so he is a Savior, as there is a law, so there
is a Gospel. Though God have leaden hands which when they strike pay home,
yet has he leaden feet which are as slow to overtake a sinner. Hear therefore
the great comfort flowing in every leaf and line of the Scripture if thou be
patient. I my self am even he which does blotte out thy transgressions and
that for mine own sake, and I will not be mindful of thy sins. Behold the
Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy, that
it cannot hear. If your sins were as Crimosin they shall be made whiter then
Snow, and though they were as red as Scarlet they shall be made like white
Woll. If we confess our offenses he is faithful and just so that he will
forgive us our sins. God has not appointed us unto wrath but unto
salvation, by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, the earth is filled with
the mercy of the Lord. It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven
that any one of the little ones should perish. God is rich in mercy. I will
not the death of a sinner says the Lord God, return and live. The son of
man came not to destroy but to save. God has mercy on all, because he can
do all. God is merciful, long sufferinge and of much mercy. If the wicked
man shall repent of his wickedness which he has committed, and keep my
commandments, doing Justice and judgment he shall live the life, and
shall not dye. If I shall say unto the sinner thou shall dye the death, yet if
he repent and do Justice he shall not dye. Call to thy mind the great
goodness of God in creating thee, his singular love in giving his son for
thee. So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son that
whosoeur believed in him might not perish but have everlasting life. God has
not sent his son to judge the world, but that the world might be saved by
him. Can the Mother (says the Prophet) forget the child of her womb, and
though she be so unnatural, yet will I not be unmindful of thee. There
shall be more joy in heaven for ye repentance of one sinner the^ for nintie and
nine just persons. I came not says Christ to call ye righteous but sinners to
repentance. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ
the righteous, he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins
only but for the sins of the whole world. I write unto you little children
because your sins be forgiven for his names sake. Does not Christ say that
whatsoever we shall ask the Father in his name we shall obtain? Does not
God say this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him? I have
read of Themistocles which having offended Philip ye king of Macedonia, and
could no way apease his anger, meeting his young son Alexander took him in
his arms, and met Philip in the face: Philip seeing ye smilyng countenance of
the child, was well pleased with Themistocles. Even so if through thy
manifold sins and heinous offenses thou provoke the heavy displeasure of
thy God insomuch as thou shall tremble for horror, take his only begotten and
well-beloved son Jesus in thine arms, and then he neither can nor will be
angry with thee. If thou have denied thy God, yet if thou go out with Peter
and weep bitterly, God will not deny thee. Though with the prodigal son
thou wallow in thine own wilfulness, yet if thou return again sorrowful
thou shall be received. If thou be a grievous offender, yet if thou come unto
Christ with the woman in Luke and wash his feet with thy tears thou shall
obtain remission.

Consider with thy self the great love of Christ and the bitter torments that
he endured for thy sake, which was enforced through the horror of death to cry
with a loud voice. Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabathani, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, and with a groaning spirit to say, my soul is heavy even unto
the death, tarry here and watch, and again, father if it be possible let
this cup pass from me. Remember how he was crowned with thorns, crucified
with thieves, scourged and hanged for thy salvation, how he swette water and
blood, for thy remission, how he endured even the torments of the damned
spirits for thy redemption, how he overcame death yt thou should not dye,
how he conquered the Devil yt thou migh^est not be damned. When thou shall
record what he has done to purchase thy freedom, how can thou dread
bondage? When thou shall behold the agonyes and anguish of mind that he
suffered for thy sake, how can thou doubt of the release of thy soul? When
thy Savior shall be thy Judge, why should thou tremble to hear of
judgment? When thou have a continual Mediator with God the father, how can
thou distrust of his favor.

Turn therefore unto Christ with a willing heart and a waylyng mind for thy
offenses, who has promised yt at what time soever a sinner repents him of
his sins he shall be forgiven, who ^alleth al those that are heavy laden,
that they might be refreshed, who is the door to them that knock, the way to
them that seek, the truth, the rock, the corner stone, the fullness of time,
it is he yt can and will pour oil into thy wounds. Who absolved Marie
Magdalene from her sins but Christ? Who forgave the thief his robbery and
manslaughter but Christ? Who made Matthew the Publycane and tollgatherer, an
Apostle and Preacher but Christ? Who is that good shepehearde that fetches
home the straye sheep so lovingly upon his shoulders but Christ? Who received
home the lost son, was it not Christ? Who made of Saul a persecuter, Paul an
Apostle, was it not Christ? I pass over diverse other histories both of the
old and new Testament which do abundantly declare what great com^orte the
faithful penitent sinners have always had in hearing the comfortable promises
of Gods mercy. Can thou then Atheos distrust thy Christ who rejoices at thy
repentance? Assure thy self that through his passion and bloudshedding, death
has lost his sting, the Diuill his victory, and that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against thee. Let not therefore the blood of Christ be shed in
vain by thine obstinate and hard heart. Let this persuasion rest in thee
that thou shall receive absolution freely, and then shall thou feel thy soul
even as it were to hunger and thirst after righteousness.

Atheos. Well Euphues seeing the Holy Ghost has made thee ye mean to make me
a man (for before ye taste of the gospel I was worse then a beast) I hope ye
same spirit will also lyghten my conscience with his word, and confirm it to
the end in constancy, yt I may not only confess my Christ faithfully, but
also preach him freely, that I may not only be a Minister of his word but also
a Martyr for it, it be his pleasure. O Euphues how much am I bound to ye
goodne^^ almighty god, which has made me of an infidel a believer, of a
castaway a Christian, of an heathenly Pagan an heavenly Protestant. O how
comfortable is the feelyng and taste of grace, how joyful are the glad tidings
of the Gospel, ye faithful promises of salvation, ye free redemption of ye
soul. I will endeavor by all means to confute those damnable, I know not by
what names to term them, but blasphemers I am sure, which if they be no more
certainly they can be no less. I see now ye ods betwixt light and darkness,
faith and frowardnes, Christ and Belial, be thou Euphues a witness of my faith
seeing thou have ben the instrument of my belief, and I will pray that I show
it in my life. As for thee I account my self so much in thy debt as I shall
never be able with the loss of my life to render thee thy due, but god which
rewards ye zeal of al men will I hope bless thee, and I will pray for thee.
Eu. O Atheos little is ye debt thou owe me, but great is ye comfort that I
have received by thee. Give the praise to God, whose goodness has made thee a
member of the mystical body of Christ, and not only a brother with his
son, but also a coheriter with thy Savior. There is no heart so hard, no
heathen so obstinate, no miscreaunt or Infidel so impious that by grace is not
made as supple as oil, as tractable as a sheep, as faithful as any. The
Adamant though it be so hard that nothing can bruise it, yet if the warm
blood of a Goat be poured upon it, it bursteth: even so although the heart of
the Atheist and unbeliever be so hard that neither reward nor revenge can
mollyfie it, so stout that no persuasion can break it, yet if the grace of God
purchased by the blood of Christ, do but once towch it, it renteth in
sunder, and is enforced to acknowledge an omnipotent and everlasting Iehoua.
Let us therefore both ( Atheos I will not now call thee, but Theophilus) fly
unto that Christ which has through his mercy, not our merits, purchased for us
the enheritaunce of everlasting life.

Certain Letters writ by Euphues to his friends.
Euphues to Philautus.
IF the course of youth had any respect to the staff of age, or the living man
any regard to the dying moulde, we would with greater ^are when we were young,
shun those things which should griue us when we be old, and with more
severity direct the sequel of our life, for the fear of present death? But
such is either ye unhappiness of man's condition, or the untowardness of his
crol^ed nature, or the wilfulness of his mind, or the blindness of his
heart, that in youth he surfiteth with delights preventing age, or if he live,
continues in dotage ^orgetting death. It is a world to see how in our
flourishing time when we best may, we be worst willing to thrive. And how in
fadinge of our days, when we most should, we have least desire to remember
our end. Thou will muse Phila^tus, to here Euphues to preach, who of late had
more mind to serve his Lady then to worship his Lord. Ah Philantus thou
art now a Courtier in Italy, I a scholar in Athens, and as hard it is for thee
to follow good counsel as for me to enforce thee, seeing in thee there is
little will to amend, and in me less authority to command, yet will I
exhort thee as a friend, I would I might compel thee as a Father. But I have
heard that it is peculier to an Italian to stand in his own conceit, and to
a courtier never to be controlde, which causes me to fear yt in thee which I
lament in others. That is, that either thou seem to wise in thine own opinion
thinking scorn to be taught, or to wild in thine attempts in rejecting
admonishme^t. The one proceeds of self love and so thy name imports, the
other of mere folly, and yt thy nature shows thou look: I should crave
pardon for speaking so boldly, no Philautus: I mean not to flatter thee, for
then should I incur the suspicion of ^rawde, neither am I determined to fall
out with thee, for the^ might ye wise convince me of folly. But thou art in great
credit in the court, and what then? shall thy credit with the Emperor abate
my courage to my God? or thy hauty looks quench my kindled love, or the
gallant show aslake my good will? has ye courtier any prerogative above the
clown, why he should not be reprehended, does his high calling not only
give him a commision to sin but remission also if he offend, does his
pre-eminence in the court warrant him to oppress the poor by might and
acquit him of punishment? No Philantus. By how much the more thou excellest
others in honors, by so much the more thou ought to exceed them in
honesty, and the higher thy calling is, the better ought thy conscience to
be, and as far it beseems a gentleman to be from pride, as he is from
poverty, and as near to gentleness in condition, as he is in blood: but I
will descend with thee to perticulers. It is reported here for a troth, that
Philautus, has given over himself to all deliciousness, desiringe rather to
be dandled in the laps of Ladies, then busied in the study of good letters:
And I would this were all, which is to much, or the rest a lie, which is to
monstrous. It is now in every man's mouth, that thou, yea, thou, Philautus,
art so void of courtesy, that thou have almost forgotten common sense and
humanity, having neither care of religion (a thing to common in a courtier)
neither regard of honesty or any virtuous behavior. Oh Philautus, do thou
live as thou should never dye, and laugh as thou should never mourn, art
thou so simple that thou doste not know from whence thou came, or so sinful
that thou carest not whether thou go, what is in thee yt should make thee
so secure, or what can there be in any yt may cause him to glory. Milo, that
great wrastler began to weep when he saw his arms brawnefallen and weak,
saying, strength, strength, is but vanity, Helen, in her new glass viewing
her old face, with a smyling countenance cried. Beauty where is thy blaze?
Craesus with all his wealth, Aristotle with all his wit, all men with all their
wisdom have and shall perish and turn to dust. But thou delightest to have
the new fashion, the Spanish felt, the French ruff, thy crewe of ru^sians,
all thine attire misshapen to make thee a monster, and all thy time misspent to
show thee unhappy, what should I go about to decipher thy life, seeinge the
beginning shows the end to be naught. Art not thou one of those Philautus
which sekest to win credit with thy superiors by flatterye, and wring out
wealth from thy inferiors by force, and undermine thy equals by frawde: do
thou not make ye court not only a cover to defend thy self from wrong, but a
color also to commit injury? Art not thou one of those yt having gotten on
their sleeue the cognisaunce of a courtier have shaken from thy skirtes the
regard of courtesy, I cannot but lament (I would I might remedy the great
abuses that reign in the eyes of the Emperor, I fear me the Poet say to
truly. Exeat aula qui vult esse pius virtus, and summa potestas non coeunt. Is
not piety turned all to policy faith to foresight, rigor to Justice, does
not he best thrive, ye worst deserves, and he rule all the country, yt has no
conscience? Does not ye Emperors court grow to this insolent blindness, that
all y^ see not their folly, they account fools, and all that speak against
it, precise? laughing at ye simplicity of ye one, and threatening ye boldenes
of the other. Philautus, if thou would with due consideration way how far a
courtiers life is from a sound belief, thou would either frame thy self to
a new trade or else amend thine old manors, yea, thou would with C^ates leave
all thy possessions taking thy books and trudge to Athens, and with Anaxagoras
despise wealth to attain wisdom, if thou had as great respect to dye well
as thou have care to live wantonly, thou would with Socrates seek how thou
might yield to death, rather then with Aristippus search how to prolonge
thy life. Do thou not know that where the tree falls there it lies? and
every ones deaths day is his domes day? that the whole course of life is but
a meditation of death, a pilgrimage, a warfare? Have thou not read or do thou
not regards what is written, that we shall all be cyted before the Tribunal
seat of God to render a straight account of our stewardshyp? if then the
reward be to be measured by thy merits, what boot can thou look for, but
eternal pain, which here lyuest in continual pleasure? So should thou
live as thou may dye, and then shall thou dye to live. Were thou as strong as
Sampson, as wise as Solomon, as holy as David, as faithful as Abraham, as
zealous as Moses, as good as any that ever lived, yet shall thou dye as they
have done, but not rise again to life with them, unless thou live as they
did. But thou will say that no man ought to judge thy conscience but thy self,
seeinge thou know it better then any. O Philautus, if thou search thy self
and see not sin, then is thy case almost curelesse. The patient, if
Physicians are to be credited, and common e^perie^ce esteemed, is ye nearest
death when he thinks himself past his disease, and the less grief he
feels ye greater fits he endures, y^ wou^d that is not searched because it a
little smarteth, is fullest of dead flesh, and the sooner it skinneth the sorer
it festereth. It is said that Thunder bruseth the tree, but breaks not the
bark, and pearceth the blade, and never hurts the scabberd: Even so does
sin, wound the heart, but never hurt the eyes, and infect the soul,
though outwardely it nothing afflict the body. Descend therefore into thine
own conscience, confess thy sins, reform thy manners, contemn the world,
embrace Christ, leave the court, follow thy study, prefer holiness before
honor, honesty before promotion, relygion and uprightness of life, before
the ouerlashinge desires of the flesh. Resemble the Be which out of the dryest
and bitterest Time sucketh moist and sweet Honny, and if thou can out of the
court a place of more pomp then piety, suck out the true juice of
perfection, but if thou see in thy self a will rather to go forward in thy
losenesse then any mean to go backewarde, if the glystering faces of fair
Ladies or the glittering show of lusty gallaunts, or courtly fare, or any
delycate thing seem to entice thee to farther lewdenesse, come from the court
to Athens, and so in shunning the causes of evil thou shall soon escape the
effect of thy misfortune, the more those things please thee, the more thou
displeasest God, and the greater pride thou take in sin, the greater pain
thou heapest to thy soul. Examine thine own conscience and see whether thou
have done as is required, if thou have, thancke the Lord and pray for
increase of grace, if not, desire God to give thee a willing mind to att^yne
faith, and constancy to continue to the end.

Euphues to Ferardo.
I Salute thee, in the Lord, etc. Although I was not so witty to follow thy
grave advice when I first knew thee, yet do I not lack grace to give thee
thanks since I tried thee. And if I were as able to persuade thee to patience,
as thou were desirous to exhort me to piety, or as wise to comfort thee in
thine age, as thou willing to instruct me in my youth: thou should now
with less grief endure thy late loss, and with little care lead thy aged
life, thou weepest for the death of thy daughter, and I laugh at the folly of
the father, for greater vanity is there in the mind of the mourner, then
bitterness in the death of the deceased, but she was amyable, but yet sinful,
but she was young and might have lived, but she was mortal and must have dyed.
I but her youth made thee often merry, I but thine age should once make thee
wise, I but her green years were unfit for death, I but thy hoary hairs
should despise life. Know thou not Ferardo, that life is the gift of God,
death the due of nature, as we receive the one for a benefitte, so must we
abide the other of necessity. Wisemen have found that by learning which old
men should know by experience, that in life there is nothing sweet, in death
nothing sour. The Philosophers accounted it ye chiefest felycitie never to be
borne, the second soon to die. And what has death in it so hard that we
should take it so heavily? is it strange to see ye cut off, which by nature
is made to be cut, or that melten, which is fit to be melted? or that burnt
which is apt to be burnt, or man to pass that is borne to perish? But thou
grauntest that she should have dyed, and yet art thou grieved yt she is dead. Is
the death y^ better if the life be longer? no truly. For as neither he that
sings most, or prays longest, or rules ye stern oftenest, but he that
does it best deserves greatest praise, so he, not yt has most years but many
virtues, nor he that has grayest hairs but greatest goodness, lives longest.
The chief beauty of life consists not in the numbering of many days, but in
the using of virtuous doings. Amongst plants those be best esteemed yt in
shortest time bring forth much fruit. Be not the fairest flowers gathered when
they be freshest? the youngest beasts killed for sacrifice because they be
finest? The measure of life is not length but honesty, neither do we enter
into life to the end we should set down ye day of our death, but therefore do
we live, yt we may obey him that made us, and be willing to dye when he shall
call us. But I will ask thee this question, whether thou wayle the loss of thy
daughter for thine own sake or hirs, if for thine own sake, because thou
did hope in thine age to recover comfort, then is thy love to her but for thy
commodity, and therein thou art but an unkind father, if for hirs, then do
thou mistrust her salvation, and therein thou show thy unconstant faith.
Thou should not weep that she has run fast, but that thou have gone so
slow, neither ought it to grieve thee that she is gone to her home with a few
years, but that thou art to go with many. But why go I about to use a long
process to a little purpose? The budde is blasted as soon as the blown Rose,
ye wind shakes off the blossom as well as ye fruit. Death spares neither
ye golden locks nor the hoary head. I mean not to make a treatise in the
praise of death but to note the necessity, neither to write what joys they
receive that dye, but to show what pains they endure ye live. And thou which
art even in the wane of thy life, whom nature has nourished so long, that now
she begins to nod, may well know what griefs, what labors, what pains,
are in age, and yet would thou be either young to endure many, or elder to
bide more. But thou think it honorable to go to ye grave with a gray head,
but I deem it more glorious to be burted with an honest name. Age sayste thou
is the blessing of God, yet the messenger of death. Descend therefore into
thine own conscience consider the goodness that comes by the end, and the
badnesse which was by ye beginning, take ye death of thy daughter patiently,
and look for thine own speedely, so shall thou perform both the office of
an honest^ man, and the honor of an aged father, and so farewell.

Euphues to Philautus. Touching the death of Lucilla.
I Have received thy letters, and thou have deceived mine expectation, for thou
seem to take more thought for the loss of an harlot, then the life of an
honest woman. Thou writest that she was shameful in her trade and shameless
in her end. I believe thee, it is no marvel that she which living practiced
sin, should dying be void of shame, neither could there be any great hope
of repentance at the hour of death where there was no regard of honesty in
time of life. She was stricken sodaynely beeinge troubled with no sickness:
It may be, for it is commonly seen, that a sinful life is rewarded with a
soddayne death, and a sweet beginning with a sour end. Thou addest moreover
yt she being in great credit with the states, died in great beggerie in the
streets, certes it is an old saying that who so lives in the court shall
dye in the straw, she hoped there by delyghtes to gain money, and by her
deserts purchased misery, they that seek to clyme by privy sin shall fall
with open shame, and they that covet to swim in vice, shall sink in vanity
to their own perilles. Thou say that for beauty she was the Helen of
Greece, and I durst swear that for beastlines she might be the Monster of
Italy. In my mind greater is the shame to be accounted an harlot, then the
praise to be esteemed amiable. But where thou art in the court, there is more
regard of beauty then honesty, and more are they lamented that dye viciously
then they loved that live virtuously: for thou give as it were a sigh, with
all thy companions in the court^ seem by thee to sound also, that Lucilla
being one of so great perfection in all parts of the body and so little
piety in the soul, should be as it were snatched out of the jaws of so many
young gentlemen. Well Philautus, thou take not so much care for the loss of
her as I grief for thy lewdness, neither can thou sorrow more to see her
dye sodeinely, then I to hear thee live shamefullye. If thou mean to keep
me as a friend shake off those vain toys and dalyaunces with women, believe
me Philautus I speak it with salt tears trickling down my cheeks, the life
thou live in court is no less abhorred then the wicked death of Lucilla
de^ested, and more art thou scorned for thy folly, then she hated for her
filthiness.

The evil end of Lucilla should move thee to begin a good life, I have often
warned thee to shun thy wonted trade? and if thou love me as thou profestest
in thy letters, then leave all thy vices and show it in thy life. If thou
mean not to amend thy manners I desire thee to write no more to me, for I will
neither answer thee nor read them. The Iennet is broken as soon with a wa^d as
with the spur, a gen^^eman as well allured with a word as with a sword. Thou
concludest in the end that Liuia is sick, truly I am sorry for she is a madyen
of no less comeliness then modesty, and hard it is to judge whether she
deserves more praise for her beauty with ye amorous or admiration for her
honesty of virtues, if you love me embrace her, for she is able both to satisfy
thine eye for choice, and instruct thy heart with learning. Comme^d me unto
her, and as I praise her to thee, so will I pray for her to God yt either she
may have pa^ience to endure her trouble or deliverance to escape her peril. Thou
desire me to send thee ye Sermons which were preached of late in Athens. I
have fulfilled thy request, but I fear me thou will use them as S. George does
his horse, who is ever on his back but never rides, but if thou were as
willing to read them, as I was to send them, or as ready to follow them, as
desirous to have them, it shall not repent thee of thy labor, nor me of my
cost. And thus farewell.

Euphues to Botonio, to take his exile patiently.
IF I were as wise to give thee counsel, as I am willing to do thee good, or
as able to set thee at liberty, as desirous to have thee free, thou should
neither want good advice to guide thee, nor sufficient help to restore thee.
Thou take it heauylye that thou should be accused without color, and
exiled without cause: and I think thee happy ^o be so well rydde of the
court and to be so void of crime. Thou say banishment is bitter to the
free borne, and I deem it the better if thou be without blame. There be
many meats which are sour in the mouth and sharp in the mawe, but if thou
mingle them with sweet sawces, they yield both a pleasant taste and wholesome
nourishment: Diverse colors offend the eyes, yet having green among them
whet the sight. I speak this to this en^e, that though thy exile seem
grievous to thee, yet guiding thy self with the rules of Philosophye it shall
be more tolerable, he that is cold does not cover himself with care, but
with clothes, he that is washed in ye rain dries himself by the fire not by
his fancy, and thou which art bannished ought not with tears to bewail
thy hap, but with wisdom to heal thy hurt.

Nature has given no man a country no more then she has a house, or lands, or
livings. Socrates would neither call himself an Athenian neither a Grecian but
a Citize^ of ye world. Plato would never account him banished yt had the Sun,
Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, that he had before, where he felt the Winters
blast and the Summers blaze, where y^ same Sun and the same Moon shined,
whereby he noted that every place was a country to a wise man, and all parts
a pallaice to a quiet mind.

But thou art driven out of Naples, that is nothing All the Athenians dwell not
in Colliton, nor every Corinthian in Graecia, nor all the Lacedaemonians in
Pitania. How can any part of the world be distant far from the other, when
as the Mathematicians set down that the earth is but a point being compared
to ye heavens. Learn of the Be as well to gather Honny of the weed as the
flower, and out of far countries to live, as well as in thine own.

He is to be laughed at which thincketh the Moon better at Athens then at
Corinth, or the Honnye of the Be sweeter that is gathered in Hybla then that
which is made in Mantua? when it was cast in Diogenes teeth that the
Synoponetes had banished him Pontus, yea, said he, I them of Diogenes. I may
say to thee as Straconicus said to his guest, who demanded what fault was
punished with exile, and he aunsweringe falshoode, why then said Straconicus
d^st not thou practice deceit to the end thou may avoid the myschiefes
that follow in thy country.

And surely if conscience be the cause thou art banished tho court, I account
thee wise in being so precise yt by the using of virtue thou may be exiled
the place of vice. Better it is for thee to live with honesty in ye country
then with honor in the court, and greater will thy praise be by flying vanity,
then thy pleasure in followinge trains. Choose that place for thy palaice
which is most quiet, custom will make it thy country, and an honest life will
cause it a pleasant living. Philip falling in the dust, and seeing the figure
of his shape perfect in show. Good God said he, we desire ye whole earth and
see how little serves? Zeno hearing that this only bark wherein all his
wealth was shipped to have perished, cried out thou have done well Fortune to
thrust me into my gown again to embrace Philosophy: thou have therefore in my
mind great cause to rejoice, that God by punishment has compelled thee to
strick^nesse of life which by liberty might have been grown to lewdness. When
thou have not one place assigned thee wherein to live, but one forbidden thee
which thou must leave, then thou being denied but one, that excepted thou
may choose any. Moreover this dispute with thy self, I bear no office
whereby I should either for fear please the noble, or for gain oppress the
needy. I am no Arbiter in doubtful cases, whereby I should either peruerte
Justice or incur displeasure. I am free from the injuries of the strong and
malice of the weak. I am out of the broiles of the sedytious, and have
escaped the threats of the ambitious. But as he that having a fair
Orcharde, seeing one tree blasted, recompteth the discommodity of that and
passes over in silence the fruytfulnesse of the other. So he yt is banished
does always lament ye loss of his house and the shame of his exile not
rejoicing at the liberty, quietness and pleasure yt he enjoys by ye sweet
punishment. The kings of Persia were deemed happy that they kept their Winter
in Babylon, in Media their Summer, and their Spring in Susis: and certeynly the
Exile may in this be as happy as any king in Persia, for he may at his leisure,
being at his own pleasure, lead his Winter in Athens, his Summer in Naples,
his Spring at Argos. But if he have any business in hand, he may study
without trouble, sleep without care, and wake at his will without controlment.
Aristotle must dine when it pleases Philip, Diogenes when it lysteth Diogenes,
the courtier suppeth when the king is satisfied, but Botonio may now eat when
Botonio is an hungered.

But thou say that banishment is shameful. No truly, no more then poverty
to the content, or graye hairs to the aged. It is the cause that makes thee
shame. If thou were banished upon choler greater is thy credit in sustayninge
wrong then thy enuyes in committinge injury, and less shame is it to thee to
be oppressed by might, then theirs that wrought it for mallyce. But thou
fear thou shall not thrive in a strange nation, certeynly thou art more
afraid then hurt, the Pine tree grows as soon in Pharo as in Ida, the
Nightingale sings as sweetly in the deserts as in the woods of Crete, the
wiseman lives as well in a far country as in his own home. It is not the
nature of the place but the disposition of the person that makes the life
pleasant. Seeing therefore Botonio, that all the Sea is apt for any fish
that it is a had ground where no flower will grow, that to a wise man all
lands are as fertile as his own enherytaunce. I desire thee to temper the
sharpness of thy banishment with the sweetness of the cause, and to measure
the clearenesse of thine own conscience with the spite of thy enemies
quarrel, so shall thou revenge their mallyce with patience and endure thy
banishment with pleasure.

Euphues to a young gentleman in Athens named Alcius, who leaving his study
followed all lyghtnes and lived both shamefully and sinfully to the grief of
his friends and discredit of the University.
IF I should talk in words of those things which I have to confer with thee
in writings, certes thou would blush for shame, and I weep for sorrow,
neither could my tongue utter that with patience which my hand can scarce write
with modesty, neither could thy ears hear that without glowing which thine
eyes can hardly view without grief. Ah Alcius I can not tell whether I should
most lament in thee thy want of learning, or thy wanton lyuinge, in the one
thou art inferior to all men, in the other superior to all beasts. Insomuch
as who sees thy dull wit and marketh thy froward will may well say that he
never saw smacke of learning in thy doings, nor spark of relygion in thy life.
Thou only vauntest of thy gentry, truly thou wast made a gentleman before
thou knew what honesty meant, and no more have thou to bost of thy stock
the^ he who being left rich by his father, dies a beggar by his folly.
Nobilytie began in thy ancestors and ends in thee, and the Generositie that
they gained by virtue, thou have blotted with vice. If thou claim gentry by
petegree, practice gentleness by thine honesty, that as thou challengest to
be noble in blood thou may also prove noble by knowledge, otherwise shall
thou hang like a blast among the fair blossoms and like a stayne in a piece of
white lawne.

The Rose that is eaten with the Canker is not gathered because it grows on
that stalk that the sweet does, neither was Helen made a Star because she
came of that Egg with Castor, nor thou a gentleman in yt thy ancestors were
of nobilytie. It is not the descent of birth, but the consent of conditions
that makes gentlemen, neither great manors but good manners that express the
true Image of dignity. There is copper coin of the stamp that gold is, yet
is it not current, there comes poison of the fish as well as good oil yet is
it not wholesome, and of man may proceed an evil child and yet no gentleman.
For as the Wine that runs on the lees, is not therefore to be accounted
neat because it was drawn of the same piece. Or as the water that springs
from the fountains head and flows into the filthye channel is not to be
called clear because it came of the same stream: so neither is he that
discendeth of noble parentage if he desist from noble deeds to be esteemed a
gentleman in that he issued from the loins of a noble sire, for that he
obscureth the parents he came off, and discrediteth his own estate. There is
no gentleman in Athens but soroweth to see thy behavior so far to disagree
from thy birth, for this say they all (which is the chiefest note of a
gentleman) that thou should as well desire honesty in thy life as honor by
thy lynage, that thy nature should not swerue from thy name, that as thou by
duty would be regarded for thy progeny, so thou would endeavor by
deserts to be reverenced for thy piety.

The pure Coral is chosen as well by his virtue as his color, a king is
known better by his courage then his crown, a right gentleman is sooner
seen by the trial of his virtue then blasing of his arms. But I let pass
thy birthe, wishing thee rather with Ulysses to show it in works, then with
Ajax to boast of it with words, thy stock shall not be the less but thy
modesty the greater. Thou live in Athens as the Waspe does among Bees, rather
to sting the^ to gather Honny, and thou dealest with most of thy acquaintance
as the Dog does in the maunger, who neither suffers the Horse to eat hay,
nor will himself, for thou being idle, wilt not permit any (as far as in
thee lies) to be well employed. Thou art an heir to fair living, that is
nothing, if thou be disherited of learning, for better were it to thee to
enherit righteousness then riches, and far more seemly were it for thee to
have thy studdye full of books, then thy purse full of money, to get goods
is the benefit of Fortune, to keep them the gift of Wisdom. As therefore
thou art to possess them by thy fathers will, so art thou to increase them by
thine own wit. But alas, why desire thou to have the revenues of thy
parent and nothing regardest to have his virtues? seek thou by succession to
enjoy thy patrimony, and by vice to obscure his piety? will thou have the
title of his honor and no touch of his honesty? Ah Alcius remember yt thou
art borne not to live after thin^ own lust, but to learn to dye, whereby
thou may live after thy death. I have often heard thy father say and that
with a deep sighe the tears tricklinge down his graye hairs that thy mother
never longed more to have thee borne when she was in travail, then he to have
thee dead to rydde him of trouble. And not seldom has thy mother wished, that
either her womb had been thy grave or ye ground hirs. Yea, al thy friends with
open mouth desire either that God will send thee grace to amend thy life, or
grief to hasten thy death. Thou will demand of me in what thou do offend:
and I ask thee in what thou do not sin. Thou swearest thou art not
co^etous, but I say thou art prodigal, and as much sins he that lauisheth
without mean, as he that hoordeth without measure. But can thou excuse thy
self of vice in y^ thou art not covetous? certainly no more then the murderer
would therefore be guiltless because he is no coyner.

But why go I about to debate reason with thee when thou have no regard of
honesty? though I leave here to persuade thee, yet will I not cease to pray
for thee. In the mean season I desire thee, yea, and in Gods name command
thee that if neither the care of thy parents whom thou Souldest comfort, nor
the counsel of thy friends which thou should credit, nor the rigor of the
law which thou ought to ^eare, nor the authority of the Magistrate which
thou should reverence, can allure thee to grace. Yet the law of thy Savior
who has redeemed thee, and the punishment of the almighty who continually
threatens thee, draw thee to ame^dement, otherwise as thou live now in
sin, so shall thou di^ with shame and remain with Satan, from whom he that
made thee, keep thee.

Liuia from the Emperors court, to Euphues at Athens.
IF sickness had not put me to silence and the weakness of my body hindered
the willingness of my mind, thou should have had a more speedy answer,
and I no cause of excuse. I know it expedient to return an answer, but not
necessary to write it in posse, for that in things of gr^ate importance we
commonly look before we leap, and where the heart droupeth through
faintness, the hand is enforced to shake through feebleness. Thou say
thou understand how men live in the cour^e, and of me thou desire to
know the estate of women, certes to dissemble with thee were to deceive my
self and to cloak the vanities in court were to clogge mine own conscience
with vices. The Empress keeps her estate royal and her maidens will not
leese an ynch of their honor, she endeavors to set down good laws and
they to break them, she warns them of excess and they study to ex^eede,
she says that decent^ attire is good though it be not costly, and they swear
unless it be dear it is not comely. She is here accounted a slut that
comes not in her silks, and she that has not every fashion, has no man's
favor. They that be most wanton are reputed most wise, and they that be the
idlest livers are deemed the finest lovers. There is great quarelling for
beauty, but no question of honesty: to conclude, both women and men have
fallen here, in court to such agreement that they never ^arre about matters of
religion, because they never mean to reason of them. I have wished oftentimes
rather in the country to spinne, then in the court to dawnce, and truly a
distaffe does better become a maiden then a Lute, and sitter it is with the
nedle to practice how to live, then with the pen to learn how to love.

The Empress gives ensample of virtue, and the Ladies have no leisure to
follow her. I have nothing else to write. Here is no good news, as for badde:
I have told sufficient, yet this I must add that some there be which for
their virtue deserve praise, but they are only commended for their beauty,
for this think courtiers, that to be honest is a certain kind of country
modesty, but to be amiable the courtly cur^esie.

I mean shortly to sue to the Empress to be dysmissed of the court, which if
I obtain I shall thinck^ it a good reward for my service to be so well rydde
from such severity, for believe me there is scarce one in court that either
fears GOD, or means good. I thancke thee for the book thou dyddest send
me, and as occasion shall serve. I will requyte thee. Philautus begins a
little to lysten to connsayle, I wish him well and thee too, of whom to hear
so much good it does me not a little good. Pray for me as I do for thee,
and if oppor^unitie be offered write to me.

Farewell.
Euphues to his friend Liuia.
Dear Liuia, I am as glad to hear of thy welfare as sorrowful to
understand thy news, and it does me as much good that thou art recovered, as
harm to think of those which are not to be recured. Thou have satisfied my
request and answered my expectation. For I longed to know the manners of
women, and looked to have them wanton. I like thee well that thou will not
conceal their vanities, but I love thee the better that thou do not follow
them, to reprove sin is the sign of true honor, to renounce it the part of
honesty. All good men will account thee wise for thy truth, and happy for
thy trial, for they say, to abstain from pleasure is the chiefest piety,
and I think in court to refrain from vice is no little virtue. Strange it
is that the sound oye viewinge the sore should not be dimmed, that they that
handle pitch should not be defiled, that they that continue in court should not
be infected. And yet it is no great marvel for by experience we see yt the
Adamant cannot draw iron if ye Diamond (...) it ^or vice allure ye courtier if
virtue be retained. Thou prays^st the Empress for instituting good laws, and
grieuest to see them violated by the Ladies. I am sorry to think it should be
so, and I sigh in that it cannot be otherwise. Where there is no heed taken of a
commandment, there is small hope to be looked for of amendment. Where duty
can have no show, honesty can bear no sway. They that cannot be enforced to
obedience by authority, will never be won by favor, for being without
fear, they commonly are void of grace: and as far be they careless from
honor as they be from awe, and as ready to despise the good counsel of their
Peers, as to contemn the good laws of their Prince. But the breaking of
laws does not accuse the Empress of vice, neither shall her making of them
excuse the ladies of vanities. The Empress is no more to be suspected of
erring then the Carpenter that builds the house be accused because thieves
have broken it, or the Mintmaister condemmed for his coin because the traitor
has clipped it. Certainly God will both reward the godly zeal of thy Prince,
and revenge the godless doings of the people.

Moreover thou say that in the court all be sluttes that swim not in
silks, and that the idlest livers are accounted the brauest lovers, I cannot
tell whether I should rather laugh at their folly or lament their frenzy,
neither do I know whether the finne be greater in apparel which moves to
pride, or in affection which entiseth to peevishness, the one causes the^ to
forget themselves, ye other to forgo their senses, each do deceive their soul,
they yt thinck one cannot be cloanly without pride, will quickly judge none to
be honest without pleasure, which is as hard to confess as to say no mean to
be without excess, thou wishest to be in the country with thy distaffe rather
then to continue in the court with thy delights. I cannot blame thee, for Greece
is as much to be commended for learning, as the court for bravery, and here
may thou live with as good report for thine honesty, as they wy^h renown
for their beauty. It is better to spinne with Penelope all night then to sing
with Helen all day. Huswifery in the country is as much praised as honor in
the court. We think it as great mirth to sing Psalms, as you melody to chaunt
Sonnets, and we account them as wise that keep their own lands with credit,
as you those that get others lyuings by craft. Therefore if thou will follow
my advise and prosecute thine own determination thou shall come out of a warm
Sun into Gods blessing. Thou addest (I fear me also thou errest) that in the
court there be some of great virtue, wisdom and sobriety, if it be so I
like it, and in that thou say it is so, I believe it. It may be, and no
doubt it is in the court as in all rivers some Fish some Frogs and as in all
gardens some flowers some weeds, and as in all trees some blossoms some
blasts. Nylus breeds the precious stone and the poisoned Serpent. The court
may as well nourish virtuous Matrones as the lewd Minion. Yet this makes me
muse yt they should rather be commended for their beauty then for their
virtue, which is an infallible argument that the delyghts of the flesh are
preferred before ye holiness of the spirit. Thou say thou will sue to leave
thy service and I will pray for thy go^d success, when thou art come into the
country I would have thee first learn to forget all those things which thou
have seen in the court. I would Philautus were of thy mind to forsake his
youthful course but I am glad thou writest that he begins to amend his
conditions he runs far that never retourneth, and he sins deadly that
never repents. I would have him end as Lucilla began without vice, and not
begin as she ended without honesty. I love the man well, but I cannot brook
his manners. Yet I conceive a good hope that in his age he will be wise, for
that in his youth I perceiu^d him witty. He has promised to come to Athens,
which if he do, I will so handle the matter that either he shall abjure the
court for ever or absent himself for a year. If I bring the one to pass be
shall forgo^ his old course, if the other forget his ill conditions. He that
in court will thrive to reap wealth, and live warte to get worship, must
gain by good conscience, and clyme by wisdom, otherwise his thrift is but
theft where there is no regard of gathering, and his honor but ambition, where
there is no rare but of promotion. Philautus is too simple to understand the
wyles in court, and too young to undermine any by craft. Yet has he showen
himself as far from honesty as he is from age, and as full of craft as he
is of courage. If it were for thy preferment and his amendment, I wish you were
both married, but if he should continue his folly whereb^ thou ^^ouldest fall
from thy duty I rather wish you both buried. Salute him in my name and hasten
his journey, but forgette not thine own. I have occasion to go to Naples,
that I may with more speed arrive in England, where I have heard of a woman
that in all quallyties e^c^lleth any man. which if it be so I shall think my
labor as well bestowed as Saba did hirs, when she trauayled to see Solomon.
At my goinge if thou be in Naples I will visit thee and at my return I will
tell t^ee my judgment. If Philautus come this Winter, he shall in this my
pilgrimage be a partner, a pleasant companion is a bayte in a journey. We shall
there as I hear see a court both brauer in show and better in substance,
more gallaunt courtiers, more godly cons^iues, as fair Ladies and fairer
conditions. But I will not vaunt before the victory, nor swear it is so
until I see it be so. Farewell unto whom^ above all I wish well.

I Have finished the first part of Euphues whom now I left ready to cross
the Seas to England, if the wind send him a short cut you shall in the
second part hear what news he brings and I hope to have him reteurnued
within one Summer. In the mean season I will stay for him in the country and as
soon as he arriueth you shall know of his coming.

FINIS.

