A treatice co^teining certain meditatio^s of true and perfect consolation,
declared in two tables, ye first, is the consideration of ye eueles, which
happen to us, ye second of the good which we receive, set forth for ye
consolation and comfort of all those yt are lade^ and do labor to be eased.

Written in the French tung, and translated in to English by Robert Filles.

TO THE RIGHT ^norable and my singular good ^de, the Lord Roberte ^ley,
Master of the Queens ^sties Horse, Knight of the most no^dre of the Garter,
and one of the ^nes Majesty's privy Council, Robert Filles wishes increace of
Honor long to indute.
IN reading over diverse books in the time of the late persecution, there came
one little treatise too my hands written in the French tunge wherein (above
the rest) I took most pleasure and found cheifest comfort in that miserable
time, and being not fully satisfied with the often readyng thereof: I took in
hand for to translate it into the English tunge, for mine own use only,
thinking thereby to imprint it the more lively in my mind, beig not determined
to have published it abroad until a certain friend by chance found it among
other of my books, wylled me, and as it were urged me not to keep back so
excellent a tresure from the people of God. At last (being overcome) I
condescen^ed to set it forth in print, devising with my self to choose a
patron whose honorable name and renoume might be an occasion somewhat to stop
the mouth of the sicophant and privy biter, I could not devise one more
meeter, and to whom this wurk more aptlier does agree nor whose estate is
more liuelyer paited for the: then is in this little volume, wherefore taking
courage of your accustomable beneuolent kindenes toward me, I have per fourmed
my device, desiring your honor to accept my meaning and to be are with my
rudenes.

^he apostle. In the 15. to the Ro^nes, declaring the chief con^ion To. 15.
of a christian, says. My br^n. What so ever things are ^ten aforetime are
written for learning, that by patience and ^solatio^ in ye scripture we might
^ne hope. In which words he ^clareth, that we ought to seek ^r comfortes
In the holy scriptu^s. But we must take heed, for ye ^riptures do often use a
double fy^re or manner of speaking, shew^g unto me as it were a double ^irrour
to look in, of things te^pered (...) mi^gled to gether (that is to say) ^f
good and evil, as the wise man ^ith, in the day of euel: remember ^he good,
and in the prosperous dai^s remember adversity. The holy ^host knowing the
affection of man (...) be without measure, and to esty^ate things according to
his own ^pinion, assaieth with all possible means too withdraw man from his
vain estimation and affeccion of erthly things so that the affection being
taken away, all things will be indifferent. But such an alteration and chan^ge
can not come but by the wurd o^f God, and of good right we ought too seek no
other consolation or rule to guide us but the scripture, which in the day of
adversity brings us to consider the prosperitye which either is present or
to come, and likewise in the day of prosperity does call us back to consider
adversity. Also the spirit of God speaking it by the mouth of wise Solomon,
gives us too understand that the joy of man is compassed with sorrow, and also
sadness, sorrow and displeasure, be always joined and linked together with some
mirth and pleasure, that hardly can man declare ye end of one or the beginning
of the other, in such marvelous wise is anger, sorrow and ^es, aptly joined and
linked with (...) bewtiful color of joy and ple^, and not only linked or joined:
(...) rather mingled or confounded (...) one into the other, so that it is
^possible to find in this mortal ^e, any little spark of the one: but is
mengled with the other, the ^ery Hethen know this. For a ^reeke Poet said that
the pleasure ^f this world was not the true ple^re: but was sorrow clothed in
plesures garments, and shows in ^is manner. He said that when the ^essel yt
Pandora brought on earth was opened, whereby all the mischeefes and human
misery went forth and then pleasure went forth also, and going a broad in the
world: he began by all means to draw men unto him, who began to follow him in
such sort that none went any more into heaven. Wherefore Jupiter thought to
take pleasure from the earth and to bring him again into heaven, and thereupon
sent the nine Muses for hi^, whoo with their melody drew him again into heaven
causing hi^ yet before, to leave his apparel behind him on earth, because into
heaven enters no corrupt deckinges. Sorrow in this mean time wandering abroad
in the world, found this apparel, and thinking that if he clothed him self
therein, he should not so be chaced and driven from every man, and not being
known: he put it on his back, and so ever after he has gone about the world
clothed in pleasures apparel, deceiving men continually. Meaning by this yt all
things yt men take for pleasure bring them sorrow, and the pleasures of this
world, too be none other but sorrows clothed and covered with a very small
delight, whereby men (...) desceaued eudeuour them (...) to seek them and find
in ye ^ore sorrow then delight. And ^s the holy Ghost says, that (...)
accompanied with sorrow, he ^eth according to our rude vn^nding. The eye of our
minds ^e soon be daseled with the being of some sudaine joy, yet in ^tinent
it shall perceive that his ^ine joy is accompanied with ^we, even as is the
shadow folo^g the body, and how contrary ^er these things seem to be, (...)
nevertheless they be ever knyt ^ether, but this can not be per^ued but with a
christian eye, light ^d by faith and which is excersi^d to contemplate this
divine sun ^ning in the holy scriptures, the ^ly ghost teaches us this
coniu^c (...) in a number of places in the ^ripture, but if this coniu^ccion be
^eruelous, let us not muse at it, For the woorker is marvelous. For if in one
person he knew how to join the diuinitye and humanity: wherefore can he not
as well join in us, sorrow and joy, heuines and gladness, sweetness and bitterness?
Has he not by a supernatural coupling united, death and life, hell and heaven,
and in general all other things, which be directly contrary after our
judgments? This is the incomprehensible divine wisdom of God, which makes
unequal things equal, in such manner as our dull understanding can never
comprehend such a marvelous discord, according. The holy Ghost is the only
scoolemaister to teach ^s this lesson in the holy scriptures.

The kingly Prophet David, declares these things notably, saying. Alas Lord,
how great are the tribulations which thou have thewed me? and being converted
have ^ened me, and also says. Thou (...) taken me out of the depth (...)
earth. Consider these words ^e emport on the one side ex^ despair and fearful
trouble: ^n the other side singular mer^d consolation. And what shall ^eak of
King Czechias? which ^er he was overwhelmed with ^nesse and death, looking
for de^ vengeance) crying out unto (...), and said, Alas Lord answer ^me.
And sude^ly cried what shall ^y to him? or what answer shall (...) made for me?
It is he that has ^ought this euel upon me. Thus be ^g opressed with sorrow and
greef ^nfessed that no man could deli^r him, and said. I will yet have ^y
recourse unto God, and in thus ^ying: he declares a certain firm ^d sure trust
and hope, yet suden^ he says. Alas, Lord answer for ^e, and again as one
being cast of and discomfiited coplaineth moorningly, I know well yt none other
but he ca^ deliver me, but what the^? it is he him self yt pursues me, he has
pronounced my death, what shall I say unto him to cause him too revoke the
sentence? what shall he say unto me? He is my counterparty, and my judge. Here
we may se these two passions, directly contrary in one soul. Now considering
these two contrary operations within a man and the tormoiling between hope and
despair, which be^ so out ragious, sudaine and vnmesarable so that there is
no man, but it makes him amassed when he comes to consider it as it is. Saint
Paul to the Romans, after that he had enclosed all under sin and dampnation,
as one being rauyshed beside or above him self, cried out, saying

O pro^found greatness of the wisdom, riches and knowledge of God. ^ow
inco^prehensible are his judgments To. 11*
and his ways past finding ^ut? And so concludes, that all ^hinges be of God,
by God and in God. It appears that S. Paul felt ^underful things in himself.
For ^udenly from the depth of Hell, and ^he knowledge of sin, he erecteth ^im
self up above the heavens, and ^andreth, in his spirit contempla^ing the high
and marvelous diui^itye of God after an unspeakable manner. Now here may we
learn ^ot too be careful for our selves or to have respect to our own misery
^or infermitye, but ask of God our good father and he will not fail us but
with speed will exalt us into ye most blessed and happy fruition of his
deuinity. But we cannot rightlye desire the mercy and goodness of God, except we
hate our own sinful wicked life: and we can not hate our sin and wickedness:
except we have ye true knowledge and feeling thereof. And we cannot know it
nor feel it: with out his contrary, which is the great mercy and infinite
goodness of God. But so long as our soul does dwell and abide captive and
detained we in this miserable body of finne as a wanderer in the desert or as a
pilgrim or wayfaring man: there shall be alwaise relikes of sin remaining wtin
us. The spiritual Philistines and amalechites do war continually against us
until we come to ye land of promission during which time: it will be needful
for us to know our own misery and evils, always aspiring too the mercy and
goodness of God. And by this means this contradiction aforesaid shall be to us
both more tolerable and easy to be borne, which as we have said ceasseth not
too strive in a christian (...). And that man which fee^t this within him self
is but (...) souldioure, and rather a ^n, in name: then in conuer^ and good
life. O Lord God ^uely is this contradiction a^id proved and found hear ^g us
in this commonwealth of ^and? For in what quietness and ^quillity have we lived
sense the (...) of our most noble Queen? (...) what security have we lulled
^elues a sleep, and looking as it (...) for Mountains of gold? for ^ing God
and his word, or at (...) making no great account of ^n, and all sudenlye, in
the mid^ of our secure life: we are stri^ with Hunger, Pestilence, and ^oord.
The like plagues for sin (...) often to be seen in the scriptu^. For in the
time of king David ^ong the Jews commonwealth ^n they had overcome their
enemies brought home ye ark of God and were become welthy and ri^che then they
grew into securitye, and all sudenly the Plague of God fell upon them, and
there dyed in Israel seventy thousand men, and God would have destroyed all
Jerusale^ likewise, had he not in the midst of his fury remembered mercy. I
pray you, what has wealth and securitye brought us unto here in England? Has
it not brought contempt of the Ministers and word of God? Nay has it not
brought contempt and disobedience both of the Magistrate and the laws?

Where ever was there so much* crying out against sin? so many exhortacions?
so many good books set forth? and all for the suppression of wickedness and
sin: but never the better but rather the worse. Altogether (afew exceptid),
from the hiest to the lowest, have as it were ^ent them selves and determined
^o bring to pouertye and in to con^empt the Ministers of the word of God. What
means is daily inue^^ed to catch and rake from the^, by im ^ropriations,
leasses, first fruits and tenthes with many other simo^icall means, to
impoueryshe them and discourage other which would enter therintto? But those
that labor and be so diligent too dispute and reason their case (prete^^ing
to bring the ministry too the same rule and estate that Christ and his
Apostles were) will in the end say as the Jews said of Christ and his
Apostles, away with these fellows they are not wurthy to live among us, shall
these beggarly raskalles teach us our duetye? this will be the end of your
pretense. O Lord in what reverence had the Jews their Ministers? How were
they provided for? Likewise in the primitive Christian church how were they
adourned with reverence and liuinges as is yet too be seen? yea the very
Heathen and Infidelles had their ministers in estimation and provided for the^,
and shall we now that proffes so much christianity seek by all means to over
throw and bring to nothing our ministers? the Minister being contemned: his
preaching shall be little esteemed. This is the way to overthrow the wurd of God,
and bring us too brutalitie, for where preaching ceasseth the people perish,
as says Salomo^. But some will object and say, that riches corrupts the
Ministers and hinders their vocation and that they become covetous and more
careful then any other, and that a poor estate is best for them. I answer
that my meaning is not to enriche any greedy or covetous Minister, but wish
that when any such springs up ^n welthe whereby his vocation is neglected:
that some good ordinaun^is were provided in that behalf for to suppress and
keep back the greedy desire of such. And my desire is that those Parishes
where reasonable liuinges and stipendes were appointed by good men, in time
past for a Minister: might be reduced and brought again to the right use, and
that Minister or Pastor, which would not continue and be resident among his
flock: should be deprived and have no living there. Hospitality is incident to
preching, and the Pastor must as well feed their belies as their souls, or else
he shall do but little good among a number. But such as intend to bring the
Ministry to slavery, by thrusting themselves into their liuinges: I trust our
merciful and loving God, will prevent them and cut them of, from their wicked
purposes and take mercy of his people. But now me think I hear the enemies of
true religion the Papists say, these plagues are come upon us for your new
lerning. I answer, in the time of Papistry, yea when popery was most hiest had
ye no plagnes? Read Polichronicon and ye shall find that these be but trifels,
in respect of those pestilencis, yea some that felt within this lx. year. And
I pray you had ye no War in those days? Read sense Cxx. years and see what
slaughter, what civil discordes with hunger and penurye happened, ^ea when ye
sang mass most highest and when your holy Fathers pardones were most holiest,
that men buried them with the^ in their graves, but what shall I say now to the
City of London? The plague has long been there among them, I believe verily
and dare affirm, that God is as dilygently served, and his wurd as sincerely
preached and obeyed as ever was in this realm, (of a good number there) But as
the holy Ghost says. Judgment begins at the house of GOD. God does use
most commonly to begin with his own house, but after that he scoureth his
enmies, and as our savior Christ said, by those upon whom the tower of
Silo fell. Suppose ye (says he) that those were greater sinners then the other?
I say nay, but except ye repent ye shall like wise perish. So may I say.
Suppose ye that London has more grievously offended then other Towns and
Cities in England? I say nay, but except ye repent and that with speed, ye shall
not escape Gods heavy hand, his sword hangs even over your heddes ready to
strike, therefore let us with David prevent Gods wrath with hearty prayer and
every man enter into his own conscience and say. It is I (Lord) that have
caused thy heavy wrath and displeasure. And leave our old Adamishe excuses and
vain shifts. Let us call back again, our selves to true fasting and prayer
with hearty repentance, but I fear me popish fasting hat almost ouerthrown
the true fast, and supersticious latten praying has blemished the right use of
prayer, so that there remains but only the names of fasting and prayer (to a
number) but the effect is unknown. God bring it again to the right use, and
give us hearts diligently to learn, and faithfully to practice it, so that we
may turn to the Lord with all our hearts, that he may have mercy upon us and
turn away those grievous plagues that we have (through our secure and
disobedient life) most justly provoked to fall upon us. Heer^ have I
according to my small hability and knowledge declared the mind of Thauthour,
and rendered ye very wurdes of his text in as plain english as I could express,
such homely stuff as it is, I beseech your honor and all other yt fear^ God
to accept it. And if ought be amiss either through my neglige^c^ or the
printars rechelesnes to bear with us, or at the least to let us understand it,
that if it be possible it may be amended, and I shall heartily pray for your
honors prosperous estate long to continue that as ye have Godly begone not
only to profess and follow: but also to defend and maintain the true
professors and folowers of Christ's religion, so ye may co^tinew to the end.
Amen.

Now least by my not sufficient extolling and declaring your noble and
excellent virtues (which God has endued you with) I should rather seem to
darken or shadow them, then condignly to set them forth: I leave to the Godly
reader to call to mind and consider in them selves, more then I can express
in wurdes, desiring GOD that as he has hither to fortified you with singular
gifts of his holy spirit: yt he will likewise arm you with the invincible
constancy unto the end. For I am not ignorant how God has tried and excercised
you with many hard and sharp batt^iles of afflictions the which your honor I
know well does not forget, but rather looks for toabide a more sharper
assault then any that is past, if God lay it upon you. Now having learned by
long ^perience how necessary it is that ^od stretche forth his hand to help ^s,
it shall be most needful to call upon him to grant us the gift of ^er
seueraunce and constancy, and ^or my part, I will call upon the ^orde Jesus our
King, to whom GOD the Father has given all ^owre in heaven and earth, and in
those hand has put all the spiri^uall treasures. That it may please ^im to
preserve and maintain you, long time among us to the advancement of his
kingdom and continue your honor in having the victory and triumphing over
Satan and his band to his glory.

Amen.
A table of the Chapiters of the first part of this book.
The first Chapter of the first consideration which is the inward euel. Fo.
1. The second Chapter of the second consideration which is the evil to come
or before us. Fo. 4. The third Chapter or third consideration which is the
euel passed or behind us. fo. 8. The fourth of the fourth consideration which
is the euel or misery under us. fo. 11. The fifth Chapter of the fifth
consideration which is the euel or misery on our left hand. fo. 14. The sixth
Chapter of the sixth consideration of the evil or misery on the right hand.
fo. 18. The seventh Chapter of the seventh consideration, which is the euel
or misery above us. fo. 23.
The table of ye second part.
The first Chapter of the first co^^eration which is the good with ^ us. fo.
27. The second Chapter of the se^ond consideration, the which is ^he good to
come or before us. fo. 33. The third Chapter of the third ^onsideration which
is the good ^assed or after us. fo. 38. The fourth Chapter of ye fourth
consideration of the good under us. folio. 42. The fifth Chapter of the fifth
con^ideration of the good on the left ^and. fo. 46. The sixth Chapter of the
sixth considerations of the good on the right hand. fo. 50. The seventh Chapter
of the seventh consideration of ye good which is above us. fo. 54.
Finis.
To the king of worlds immortal invisible, to God only be honor and glory
eternally. Amen.


The.i. Chapter of the first considerat on which is the inwatd evil
IT is a thing certains and most true, (whether man gives credit thereto or
not) that there cannot be in a man a greter torment or unquietness more
miserable then the euilles with in himself, which be so many and so great,
above that he does either feel or perceive. For if he did taste or feel them:
he should feel Hell. For in a certain manner, a man has Hell within himself.
The question is, how or by what means, the Prophet says all men are liars?
and again. The living man is but vanity. Now to be a liar and vain: is to be
void of the truth, and of the perfyt substance. And to be without truth and
perfection: is to be without God and to be lost. And what is that but to be in
Hell and dampened? And for this cause God doothe chastise us benignly and meekly,
discovering unto us the least evils, and charge us but with the lightest,
knowing that if he brought a man to the full knoweledge of his sin and evil:
he should perish in a moment, and to sum he permits and gives to feel it.
Of whom it is said. He leads to hell, and brings out again. Wherefore these
which call corporal tribulation a certain advertisement of the inward evil,
say well. And the apostle to the Hebrews calls them Fatherly corrections of
God, seeing he chastises all the children that he receineth and doothe this to
thend, yt by his loving corrections of light evils: he puts back the great
and he^y euilles that we never feel them, as it is said. Folly sticks in the
heart of the Child, but the rod of correction drives it away. The Parents
truly loving their Children be more grieved with them if they be thieves or of
a wicked life: then if they were woun^ed or hurt in body. Yea they do rather
beat them and punish them the^ ^elues, that they should not become ^icked.
What lets the^ yt the depth of euel and misery is not felt? That is ^s I
have said, by ye disposition of God. That man should not fall, in seeing and
feeling his secret euels. For God shadoweth them, willing that ^hey should be
looked upon by Faith, when he opens them by sum senci^le evil, and therefore
in the day of ^uils or tribulation, be mindeful of the prosperouse or good
days. And ^eme^ber what a benifite it is, not to ^eele all the euilles and
sins. Be mindful of this benefit: and th^n shall be less tormented, with
the present sensible evil. Also ye contrary. In the day of prosperity: remember
the affliction and miserye, that is to say.

When thou feel in thee ye weight of euilles and sin: reknowledge the good
that is done to thee, and be think thee of the depth and weight of the euels,
and then thou shall raste less of the sencible evil. It appears then yt there
is daily more insencibility of evil in man in this life, then feeling of sorrow,
not that the hole heap of euilles is not daily present: but that ye opinion
and affection of them is not daily or continually, and this is by the
bountifulnes of God, which hides the euilles. Now we see by this, how cruel
they be against them selves, to whom it is given to contemplate the weight of
their sin and euilles, and how little they do esteem all yt they may suffer
in this life, yt they might not feel their own hell. So should it be to each
of us if he felt or if he gave firm credit to his inward euelles: he would
gladly desire with a good will su^ outward evils or grief he should so vex
him self in them, and would never be so sad: as when he felt not sum outward
euel, as we have know en that holy men have done, and also as we read of David
in his sixth. ^salme.

And therefore the first comfort or ^editatio^ is to say to him self. O man
^hon feelist not yet thine own euilles and sin. Rejoice therefore and give
thanks to God that thou art not constreigned to feel thy sin and euilles, and
by this means a small euel shallbe made lite in comparison of a greater, and
whereas some do say, I have merited much more grievously to be punished, yea
eue^ hell, This is easly said but intolerable to feel, and how soever this
evils be hidden, nevertheless it brings forth perfect fruit, these fruits be
far incertitude with a tre^bling conscience by the which the faith is
assaulted as, when a man knows not or douteth if God be merciful to hi^.
This infirmity would be considered as it apperteineth with aspiritual eye, and
would cause ye evil corporal to be more lighter and easier, if ye co^pariso^
be made as it is required Beside these things: all the tragedy^ of the
Ecclesiastes appertains to the inward euilles. There it makes mention of
vanities so often, and affliction of ye spirit. For how many cou^celles do we
take in hand, that be made void and of none effect? Of how many desires be we
void of and abused? How many things se we? how many things here we that we
would not, and the things that only happen after our own desire, happen as
it were against our desire, though it so come that they be desirable or
profitable to us? Moreover the hier that any is lifted up in his degree: so much
more be all things greater, yea so much the more is such a one necessarily
tossed with much more great and greater tempests, waves and storms then
other which travail in the same thing, so that the Psalmist says very well in
ye. 103. Psalm. There are things creeping both small and great, beasts
without number, in this sea of the world, that is to say, be infinite means of
temptation. And Job also in the. 7. Chapter calls the life of man a
temptation. Now these things be not presently felt to be evil: but because
that the long usage and the continuance has caused that we make no count of
them, and the things which happen very seldom does more stur us up, so
that this is true, that we do scantly feel the thousand part of our own
euelles. And finally that the euilles be mesured, felt, and not felt, not
after the measure of the fact, but by opinion and affection.

The second Chapter of the second consideration which is ye evil to come or
before us.
THe present euel what so ever it be, emporteth and helps much if we adres
our eyes toward the things to come, the which be in such manner so great,
and of so great number that of this only evil comes this great and one of
the principallest affections, which is called fear, and after the diffinition
of su^ which say, that fear is an infection of the evil to come, as also ye
Apostle says. 11. Chapter to the Romans. lift not thy self up by pride, but
fear. This evil is somuche the greater: as webe, less certain what, and how
much it shall be. So that this prouer be, which is commonly used in some places
may be here spoken, yt there is no age past scabbes, the which is not
wtstanding a desease of young boys, yea little Children, so that there is no man
(what so ever he be) that can be assured to be exempt from the euilles of
others, what soever they be. But all that one suffers: an other may suffer ye
same also. To this apperteineth all the histories and tragedies of all worlds
and all the complaints of this world. And to this appertains also that some
do ob^rue more then. 3. C. names of mala ^es, by the which the humain body
^ay be tormented. Now if there be (...) many maladies, how many think ^e that
there be of other infortune ^f goods, friends, and finally of the spirit
only, which is the principal, and subject to all euelles, and the one^y
retract of sorrow and misery? Now ^he force and feeling of these euilles ^roweth
so much the more: as the ^ate is honorable which engenders ^t all hours, to
fear poverty, sickness, ignomini and all other adversities, which may come
sudainlye in an hour, as all things hang, as it were by a thread, like as it
were the knife of Denis the tiraunt which he hung over the head of his host.
And what soever happens not of these things, may be esteemed as clearly
gotten and a great comfort to the evil which is present. So that we ought
to say with Jeremy. This com meth by the great mercy of God, that we be not
utterly consumed. For which soever of these, is not come upon us: is for that
the hand of the Lord, has kept it from us, the which enuironeth us on every
side, and defe^deth us so strongly, that Satan and his euilles complain, that
they be so let and prevented as it is showed in Job, whereby we se how much
we are bound to love ye Lord as often as none of these come upon us, and also
for that the celestial Father is so well affectioned toward us admonishing us,
by this only present euel: to consider how many euels be near adjoining to us,
which might take us if he did not let them, as if he should say to us. Satan
with his confusion of euelles does search thee, desiring to fan thee, but I
have blind fold the sea, and have said to it. Thy roaring waves, shall not
pass nor ouerflowe but hitherto, and shall be broken and consumed, as it is
said in Job the. 38. Chap. But when none ^f these things come to us, as when
^od wills so to be, yet at ye least he (...) at is called the greatest of all
terri^e things (that is death) fails not (...) come, and no thing more
incer^aine, then the hour of death. And ^ruly this euel is so great: that we
se ^any men, that had rather live with ^ll these aforesaid euilles and misery
^s, then ones to die and end all this misery. And the scripture also brings ^s
to this only (yt is fear) saying.

Be mindeful of the end, and thou shall ^ot sin. Let us well remember our selves
how many Meditations have been made, how many means has been invented, how
many books composed, how many remedies serched for to return man from his
sin to render the world contemptible, to moderate the passions and euelles
and to comfort the afflicted, nevertheless of necessity death once must come.
Theris no man, which desires not rather to suffer (if it might be) all these
evils and mo sorrows and miseryes, to avoid death. The saints feared death.
Jesus Christ him self, had it in such horror that his soul was heavy, yea
so heavy that drops of blood, dropped from his most holy body, insomuche
that our good and merciful God shows that there is no evil in the which is
more need to comfort the feeble and weak then in this evil, as is to be seen
hereafter. As now all these things, be common too all men, as be also the
benifites of health, commen in the same euilles to them. Moreover the christians
have a new and needful cause to have in horror and too fear the euel to come,
the which nevertheless does surmount all the euelles before said, which is
that saint Paul deseribeth in the. 10. Chapter of the. 1. to the Corinthians,
saying. He that stands: let him take heed that he fall not. The way is
helding and the path slippery, our enemy is so puissaunt, yea armed with our
own proper force and strength, that is to say, with our own flesh and with
all our wicked affections, garnished with a number of worldly armures, having
the voluptnous delites and plesures on the righthand: and many wicked wills
and desires on the left hand, beside wicked carnal concupiscence with the
which he is garnished, and he having such boldness to noy, to deceive, and
destroy us in a thousand sacions and ways. We live so that we be not assured
of our good purposes nor ententes, not the minute of an hour. Saint Ciprian
recites many like things in his book of mortality, and she with that we must
think upon death, as that that comes sudenly to dispatche these euelles. Now
this comes customably to those that consider diligently in their minds,
these infinite dangers of hell, having their hearts firm and constant. We se
that often times, they desire to be losed out of this prison of the body,
despising life and death, that is to say, all these aforesaid euilles, to the
end to be delivered from this burden of sin, in the which they be in, as
we have said in the first speculation, and into which they may fall into,
where of we will hereafter speak. And so these two reasons be most true, not
only to desire the death: but also to despise all the evils, and more strongly
to bear easily one only euel. If the Lord does so graciously move any man: as
it is verily a gift of God to be moved with these things, for he that is a
right Christian, does not only desire to be sick: but also to die, seeing him
self, and feeling to be in sin, when he is in health, and also seeing him self
at every hour ready too fall into greater and a greater number of euilles and
sins, and to do without ceassing things contrary to the will of his
celestial Father, ^hiche is so loving. Saint Paul be* ^g moved, with such a
burning de^re, after he had complained, that he ^ould not finishe the good that
he ^ould do, but to do the evil he would ^ot: makes an exclamation, saying.
(...) miserable that I am, who shall de^iuer me from this body of death?
Thanks and praise to God by Jesus Christ, he that prefers this euel of
sin and miserable life, before the evil of death: loves not greatly God his
father, seeing that God has ordained the death to this end, to make us an end
of this evil and misery of sin, and that death should be a minister of life
and right^eousnesse as shall be seen hereafter.

The third Chapter or third consideration which is the euel passed* or
behind us.
IN this evil shines mo^ste excellently, and above the others, the great
bountifulnes and mercy of God our father, mighty to comfort us in all our
anguithes and sorrows. For there is not one of us all, that shall feel the
hand of God more presently upon him: then when he calls to memory the years
of his life past. Saint Augustine says, if the choice were given to a man, to
die or to return again, to his first life, he would rather choose the death,
seeing so many euilles and so great dangers, that he has passed, and with how
great difficulty, and pain. The which sentence is true if it be well
considered. For as we may se here, how often times that man without his own
endeavor, without any care, yea with out and against his own desire, has done
and suffered many things of which if he had taken council before they were
done, or that he did take council, that after the wurk being finished, he was
constrained and abashed in him self, and to say. Too what purpose are these
things happened to me? or how are they come to pass, contrary to my intent
and thought? or that I have purposed far other wise. So that this proverb is
true. Man purposes and God disposes. That is to say, he does it otherwise,
and clean contrary to that man has purposed. So that if we had but only this
to behold: we can not deny but our operations, our life and our acts to be
governed by the counsel and bountiful puissaunce of God, and not by our own
prudence. Here we may see how often times God has been with us, when we saw him
not, nor felt him, and how veritable it is that Saint Peter has said. That the
merciful God has care for us all. Wherefore if we had another books nor
preaching, yet our own lives carried and led through so many euelles and
dangers: would show us sufficiently the divine bountifulnes of God is very
near us, as though he had borne and kept us, in his bosom without our
deliberation and without any feeling of us in any things, as says Moises in
Deuteronominu^. 32 Chap. The Lord has mai^teined and defended him, as the
apple of an eye. He has led him over all, and borne him upon his shoulders.
And from thence comes these exhortations which be contained in the Psalms.
I have remembered the days past. I have meditatid all thy works, and I have
thought upon the works of thy hands. I do remember all the meruailes which
have been from the beginning. I have been mindful of thy judgments and
have been comforted.

Now these things and all other like tend to this end, that we may know this,
that God has been even then present with us, when we thought not of him, and
specially when it seemed he was absent from us, for he that has received us
into his protection without us, yea in so many necessities, yea in small
things, and yet while it seemed that he had forsaken and left us, nevertheless
he has not thrown us of, as it is said in Esaias. I have forsaken thee for a
little time, but I will gather thee again in my great mercy. And let us ioyn
this to it. Who is it that has had care for us, in so many nights while we
have slept? Who has cared for us so often and so many times, as we have felt
our selves grieved, when we wandered about in our own folies, and have done
numbers of things, in the which we have not had respect to our selves? or
since what time have we had care, or taking charge of our selves? When the
auaritius man is in care and study, to gather great heaps of money, he does
diligently and earnestly study and care to seek and heap up together. Also
seeing, how all our care, will we or nil we, retorneth to God only, and that
we be scarsly at any time left to our own councelles. And yet God does this
only to instruct us and to learn us to reknowledge his great bountifulnes,
and that sometime we may understand how great difference there is between his
care and ours. By this means it happens that sumtime he permits that we
be assailed with some light evil, making as though he cared not for us, but
truly there is neither day night nor hour, but he cares for us, not
withstanding yet he lets and stops, that all the euelles which be near
us, come not all at once, to tempt us and prove us as his dear and well-beloved
Children, to learn us to commit all our care to him, and to call to
remembrance, our life past, and considre how much our care and study is
unprofitable and impuissaunt. What do we profit, or what may we profit our
selves in all ^ur life? Behold we can not heal a ^ittle hurt on our leg or
finger, no ^ot in a good space.

Wherefore do we torment our sel^es then, in such great anxiety and ^orow at
the prick of one evil or ^aunger? And wherefore do we not ^ommit to our
good God, the care of ^s, seeing he has chastesed us by ^o many miseryes and
euilles, and ^ath preserved us without our dilygence, yea and also our life? We
can well witness the same, to know these things, is to know the works of
God, and to meditate therein is to be co^^orted, but those that be ignorant ^n
those things: fall into this incon^enie^ce of whom it spoken in the. 27.
Psalm, saying. Because they have ^ot understand nor known the wurkes of God,
nor the wurkes of his hands: thou shall destroy them, and not build them up.
For those which do not commit unto God their care: ^ea in small points, be
very unkind for all the care that God has had, for them in all their life.

The fourth. Chapter. of the fourth consideration which is the euel or misery
under us.
Hitherto we have seen no other thing in all the euilles and miseries which
we suffer: but the goodness of God is so favorable and so great, that among so
many euelles with the which we be environed in this world, and be wholly
emprisoned in the same, yea they be scarcely permitted to assail us very
seldom, so that what soever euel or misery it be, which does presently
assail us: yet nevertheless it is an advertisement of a certain great gain or
great goodness yt God will honor us with all, when he does not suffer that we
be oppressed with the multitude of euels, in the which we be in. For what a
benefit is it of God, that when one is tempted with a number of miseries and
troubles, and yet is scant touched with one? Yea it is meruail, that he is not
hurt of all, yea and a grace that he is not stricken and overcome utterly.

The first euel that is under us is death, the second is hell. For if we
consider the horrible death of others, by the which the wicked be punished:
we shall see easily what a gain and benefit it is not to suffer that we have
well merited and deserved. For how many be there which be strangled on the
gallows? drowned in the water? or which have their heddes cut of, which
parauenture have committed less offenses then we? So that the Son of God
himself does propose and paint forth their death and ignominy, before our
eyes, as in a glass, in the which we may behold that we have justly
deserved. for he says in the.13. of Saint Lake after that they had spoken to
him of certain Galileaus, whose blood Pylat mengled with ye sacrifices. Think
you (says he) that those Galileans were greater sinners then the other,
because they suffered these things? I say not so, but I say to you, that if ye
repent not: ye shall all like wise perish. As also he spoke of the.18. men
upon whom the toure of Silo fell, and slew the^. Think ye (says he) that
these same were more culpable then all the inhabiters of Iherusalem? I say not
so, but if ye repent not I tell you, that ye shall all pearish. For let us not
think that lighter euelles and plagues be dew to us, when we do commit sins
greater and more abominable? or at the least the like sins. And the truth
of God shall not be untrue, and his justice shall not be vnrightwise because of
us, yt which has disposed to render to every one according to his wurks, if
we do not prevent our selves, or at the least it ^e do not endeavor our
selves paci^ntly to suffer small and light evil and troubles. Yea how many
thousands be there in hell, and in eternal damnation, which parauenture had not
the thousand part of our sins?

How many yung wenches, and yung boys, and those which we call innocents?
How many Munkes Friars, Hermittes, Priests, married folks, which seemed to
serve God all their lives long, and parauenture be damned, for less offenses
then we have done? Let us not dissemble herein. There is but one justice of
God, for all offenses and sins. He hates and condemns egally sin, in
whom soever he findetk it. Do we not see here, the inestimable bountifulnes
of God and great mercy, the which has not damned us, so greatly, so many, and
so often times, as we have deserved? I pray you what great thing is it, that
we may suffer in all our life, in respect of the eternal pain which they
suffer and namely have not deserved, but for lighter offenses, and yet yt not
withstanding, we be free and preserved from so many euelles and miseries, the
which God seems not to see? Now when we do lightly pass over the benefits
of God, or that we do not wurthely esteem them: it is a villain ingratitude
and an insencible hardness of heart, and incredulity.

Moreover here must we bring in How many Infidelles? How many Jews, Gentiles,
Painims, and how many of their infantes to whom if the things had been given,
that be given to us: they had not been in hell but in heaven, and had less
offended if it be lawful so to say? Jesus Christ himself sets before our
eyes this mirror in Saint Matthew, saying. Woe be to thee Bethsaida, woe be to
thee Corazim, for if you bertnes, which have been done in you, had been done in
Tire and Sidon: they had repented long agone, in sack and ashes. Nevertheless
I say to you, that in the day of judgment it shall be ca^ier for them then for
you. Woe be ^o thee, O Capernaum, which art ^ifted up to the heaven, but thou
shall be thrust down into hell, for if the virtues which have been done in
thee, had been done in Sodom: parauenture they had remained to this day.

Nevertheless I say to you, that they shall be entreated, more easily in the day
of judgment then thou. We see then what thanks and loving praises, we owe to
our good God, in what soever misery or euel yt may come to us in this life, for
scarsely there comes not one drop of the euilles that we have meritid, the
which Job, compares to the sand of the sea.

The fist Chapter of the fifth consideration which is the evil or misery on
our left hand.
Here let us set before our eyes, the great number of the wicked adversaries,
and consider first in them how many euelles, miseries, and shreud turns they
would have done unto us, and yet have not, neither to our bodies, goods,
renoum, nor our souls, the which they would have done but that the
permission of God would not suffer them. And the greater that one has his
estate spread forth, and set in hy degree: somuche the more is he subject to
escarmisshes, conspirations, deceiptes, detractions, and temptations of
ennemies, so that in all things we may know and perceive, the present hand of
God, and his favorable kindness toward us. Is it then meruail, if we be then
sumtime stricken and scourged with one of these euelles? Also let us consider
their evil purpose and ententes, and lament and pity them, for they be
commonly given ^p, and subject to all euelles, even as ^e be, as is to be seen
here before, not withstanding they be in this case much more miserable then
we, that is to weete, without the society and brotherly fellowship of the
Church, as well corporal as spiritual. And these euelles that we do suffer,
is nothing in comparison of that they be in. In sin, infidelity, under the
wrath of God, under the power of the devil, bond slaves, accursed, full of
iniquity and sin, so that if all ye world should curse them, it could not be
said, to be more execrable and horrible, which if we consider well all these
things as apperteineth: we shall see by and by, how great is the benignity of
God, we sufferi^g a certain little incommodity or euel of our bodies, being in
faith in ye kingdom of Jesus Christ, under ye most blessed yoke of God, yt
which incommodity we can not scacely perceive, so great is the abundaunts of
the true good things. But the christian and faithful heart, ought to be moved
and grieved with the missery of others, esteeming their anguishes to be his
own. For as Saint Paul, in the.2. to the Phillippians, commaundith us to do
likewise saying. Let none of you look upon the things that be his own, but
of others. Let there be such affection in you as was in Jesus Christ, which
although he were in the form of God: nevertheless has taken the shape of a
servant. etc. That is to say, with most humble affection, he has clothed
him self, with our shape, none other wise behauing him self in our euels, then
as they had been his own proper, so forsaking and forgetting him self, and his
glory, that he was formed wholly to be a perfect man, seized and taken with our
euelles. The faithful saints, being taken with this affection and stirred up
with this consideration: have accustomably prayed, namely for the euelles of
their enemies, and to do all things after ^hexample of our Lord Jesus
Christ, forgetting all injuries done to them, and all their wro^ges, caring
for them as though they should deliver their enemies from greef and troubles,
wherewith they be without comparison, more tormented and grieved the^ with
their own proper bodyly euelles, as Saint. Peter writes of Lot in ^is.2.
Epistle, 2. Chapter, saying. Lot, being among them which day and night vexed
his rightesus soul by their wicked and abominable wurkes. We see then what a
lake of deep euelles appears here, and what occasion there is here, of
pity and compassion, and also to forget ^our own small euelles, and trouble, if
the charity of God be in us, and how ^tle God permits us too suffer in
respect of that the wicked suffer. What is the cause, that we be so sl^drely
touched and moved with these: thoughts? Because that the eye of our heart is
not pure enough, wherewith we should see how great the misery and ignomini of
man is, being wrap ped under sin, that is to say, separated and alienatid from
God, and possessed with the deuel. For what man is he, that has his heart so
hardened, that does not conceive a certain horror in beholding the hideous
figures of these which sit and ly at the church doors and other open places
having the face scabbed and eaten half of, their noses quite eaten of, the
eyes tornout, and other members most horribly consumed of filthy rottennes, so
that it is an horror to the body and mind, to hear them speak, and to the
eye, to be hold such a fearful and grievous spectakle? Now what does God
declare by these pitiful monsters, ^utto open the eyes of our understanding to
thend yt we may se how much more horrible the figure of the soul of the
sinner, she with his filthy rottennes, and his stinking corruption, yea
although he live in delights and pleasure, clothed bravely in s^^k and purple,
covered with chains of gold, among roses, baulmes and sweet smelles as the
Son of Paradise? But what soever he be, being a sinner of this world: he is
compared to one of these rotten ones. Verily these infinite euelles as well in
multitude as in greatness, being despised in others: makes that our own evil
being but small, to seem to us most great, and that there is almost none
other sin but our own.

But yet it comes to pass that they be in much worse condition then we,
namely in corporal euelles. For what things (I pray you) may be to them
pleasant and delectable, allthough they have, and obtain all that they will,
their conscience not being in tranquillity and rest? Is there an euel more
terrible then the tumult of a conscience full of remorse and sorrow? For Esaias
says, in the 57. Chapter. The wicked be as a raging sea ye which can not
rest throwing out his foam and sand with terrible noise, there is no peace to
the sinners, says the Lord God. We may see in them that which is spoken in
the.28. Chap. of Deuteronomium.

The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart, vnseing eyes, and a soul consumed
with sorrow, and thy life shall be hanging before thee. Thou shall fear day and
night, and shall not trust to thine own life. Thou shall say in the morning,
who shall bring me the evening? and in the evening who shall give me the
morning? and that because of the fear of thy heart, for the which thou shall
be astonished because of the things that thou seeist before thine eyes. Breefly
if any might se the the euilles and sorrows of the wicked, with such affection
as appertains, be it of friends or enemies not only he should forget his
own: but it should seem to him that he felt nothing. But with this he should
be moved with an ardent desire with Moses, and Saint Paul, destring if it
were possible to die for them, and to be scraped out of the book of life, and
to be alienated from Christ, as it is said in the.9. to the Romans. To the
end that they might be delivered. For Jesus Christ burning with such a
desire, is dead for us, and is descended into hell, leaving us an example to
the end that we should be careful for the euelles of others, and of their
passionnes, forgetting our own and desiring to unburden them.

The sixth Chapter of the sixth consideration of the euel or misery on the right
hand.
Our friends be on our right hand. In whom Saint Peter declares, that our
euelles and sorrows be molified, in the first of. S. Peter, the fifth Chapter,
where he says. Resist the deuell, being strong in faith, knowing that the
same afflictions are accomplished in your brethern that be in the world. Also
the Church prays in their prayer, ordinarely that we being provoked by the
example of the saints might follow the virtue of their passions, this is that
they sing. How many torments have the saints suffered to the death, that they
might come assuredly to the glorious crown of martyrdom? By these canticles
the church wills us otherwise to understand then to celebrate the feasts and
memories of saints, or to build them temples, aulters or Images.

But after their example we should be incyted and moved to suffer the like
euelles and torments that they have suffered. This was used su^times until the
superstition of man had perverted and turned all these things to Idolatry. For
if we honor them with temples, aulters and Images: we may rightly be called
superstitious, as now in these days, we see many which deck there Images and
aulters and celebrate their feasts and frequent their temples. And I pray you
why do they these things, but because they will not suffer the persecution
which the saints by their example and memory, have showed to be suffered? But
in doing these things what desire they otherwise, but the contrary of that
they should desire? that is to be made unlike to them, to whom they celebrate
the feast, for ^e apostle to the Hebrews in the.12. Chapter, treatith very well
this passage of consolation among other saying. Ye have not yet resisted to
bludsheding, repugning against sin, and have forgotten the consolation which
spekith unto you, as unto children, saying. My son despise not the chastening
of the Lord, neither faint when thou art corrected of him, for whom the Lord
loves: he chastsneth, and scourges every child yt he receives. If ye
suffer correction: God offrith him self to you as to his children. For what
child is it whom the Father corrects not? for if ye be without chastisement
of the which all are partakers: then are ye bastardes and not sons.
Moreover. We have had to chastise us, our carnal Fathers, and have sufferid
the^, shall not we rather suffer our heavenly Father, that we may live? But
this correction for the present, seems not to be joyous, but rather sorrowful,
but afterward it brings a quiet fruit of righteousness to those that be
exercised therein. These be the wurdes of the Apostle. Who will not be astonished
at these wurdes of the Apostle? whereby he declares openly that those which
be not corrected and chastised of God: be not the children of God. But to be
more strongly comforted in this text, let us consider that those which be
chastysed by the hand of God, be his well-beloved and dear children, and that
they be garnished and armed with the communion of all the faithful saints and
that it is not they alone that do suffer. And truly this meditation, shall
moderate our pains and torment in our correction. But here let us not trouble
our selves, in that one does suffer things less grievous and the other more
hard, for temptation is given to every man by measure, and not above his
strength, as it is said in the.79. Psalm. Thou have fed us with the bread of
tears, and have given us to drink, of tears by measure. Saint Paul says
also.

God is faithful which permits not, that ye be temptid and afflicted above
your strength: but shall deliver you in your temptations, that ye may suffer
and bear it, and in that ye one does feel or taste most greef, there has
he most fruit and help of God, in such wise, that it should see me rather to
be an inequality of passions, then otherwise.

For Saint John Baptist (which was miserably beheaded by Herod) may it not
make us all astonished, that such a great and excellent personage as has not
been one among those that are borne of women so great, the singular friend of
ye spouse christ, forerunner of the Son of God, greter then all the
Prophettes, nevertheless was not put to death, by public sentence: nor is not
accused of malice or envy, as was Jesus Christ nor yet because of the people,
but for the love of a dauncer, the daughter of an adulteress and in prison,
this shameful death of this holy person and his life taken away so vilainly
^ud of so wicked a manner, being in ^he hands of such a most poisoned ^
abominable adulterer, this ought at the least for to mitigate our euelles and
all our afflictions. But where was God then, which might have seen all these
things? Or where was the Lord Jesus now, which hearing these things, and
has fained to dissemble or not to hear them?

This holy prophet and wurthy man is perished as though it had been unknown to
God, to man and to all other creatures. What suffer we wherein we may rejoice
(or more aptly too speak) wherein we be not confounded, if we make comparison
of our suffringes with his death? Well now where shall we become if we w^l
nothing suffer, seeing so great and excellellent personages have suffered and
despised the death so valiantly, the which they have not deserved, and their
bodies to be set for the as a mocking stock to their enemies after their
death, as it is said by Jeremy. Behold these that are not condemned to drink
of the cup, do drink thereof, and shall than continue Innocent? Thou shall not
continue Innocent, except you drink thereof We read of a certain Hermit that
complained (which had been sick almost all his life) felt him self well one
year to gether: he was greatly troublid and sorrowful in his mind, and
complained that GOD had utterly forgotten him, and had refused to give him his
grace. Somuche is necessary unto health the correction of the Lord to all
Christians. Now we may see, that it which we suffer is less then nothing, if
we consider the Prisons, Manacles, Irons, Fire, wild beasts and other
infinite number of torments, that the Saints have sufferid. Or else if we
will way the temptations of those that suffer presently with us in this life, so
many persecutions and (...) grievous temptations of the deuel (...) their
conscience, for there be ma^y of those yt suffer inwardly, things ^ore grievous
and more sharp then do ^e, as well in sprit as in body. Some ^oo use to say
here thus. I may la^ent, for my passions and afflictions ^ay not be compared
to those of the ^aintes: because I am a sinner, and ^ot wurthy to be compared
to them. They have sufferid for innocence: and ^ for my sins. And therefore
it is ^o meruail though they sufferid joyfully all these things. Verily this
is a wurd of great folly. For if thou suffer for thy sins thou ought to
rejoice, for as much as thy sins are purgid. The saints them selves were
they not sinners? But thou fea rest least thou be like Herod, or the euel
thief on the cross, no, thou art not, if thou be patient. For what difference
was there between the two thieves, or what did judge the one to be good, and
the other evil: but patience through faith? But thou art a s^^ner, well the
thief was a sinner, but patience has brought him this glory, that he is
righteous and holy, also thou do the like, for thou may not suffer, but
either for thy sins or for righteousness. Both these passions (...) sanctify
and render a man blessed, if a man do embrase them, wherefore now restith no
excuse. Moreover so soon as thou have confessed unfeignedly, that thou
suffer justly for thy sins, and of good right: thou art then just and
holy, even as the good thief was made just and holy. For the confession of sin
proceading from faith, justifies and sanctifies, and in this manner as soon
as thou have made this confession, then thou sufferist no more for thy sins:
but for innocence, for the righteous suffers not but innocently. Now thou art
made righteous by the confession of thy suffringes and passion: and through the
confession of thy sins, and therefore thy suffering is justly and ^f good
right compared to the suffering of the saints, as thy faith may ^e justly and
of good right, compared ^o the faith of the saints, for all had ^ne confession
of sins, all had one ^aith, all had one passion or suffering ^f euelles, all
the saints communicate together trewly in all and by all and over all.

The seventh Chapter of the seventh consideration which is the euel or misery
above us.
FInally we must lift up ou^ hearts on hy, and ascend up to ye mountain of
mirre to the spouse. This mountain is the Son of God Jesus Christ crucified
head of all the faithful saints, Prince of all those that suffer, of whom many
have written notable things, and altogether has written all that ought to be
written, and the memory of the same is recommended to the church, where it is
said. Set me for a sign in thy heart, and as a butte or mark upon thine arm.
The blood of the lamb sprinklid upon the enter of the houses, stayed the aungel
from striking. And likewise the spouse is praised, because her hears be as
the purple of the king, that is to say, her meditation is read by the
remembrance of Jesus Christ. This is the wood that Moises cast by
commandment into the waters of marah, that is to say. Into the bitter
passions, and were made sweet. There is nothing but this passion, that can make
sweet, yt is to say death, as says the espouse. His lips be as ye distilling
lilly, drawing out sovereign mirrhe, ye which proporcion of lillies and
tippes, signify the act of mystical things. For as ye lilly is white and the
lips red, that is ye wurdes of the Lord Jesus be most white and most pure
in ye which is no bitterness, nor bloody slaughter, but sweetness and
plesauntnes from whom distilleth sovereign mirrhe: these lips most pure, and
most sweet have power to put away the great bitterness of death, and to
convert it into sweetness, purity, whitenes and sweet savor, as the excellent
mirrhe puts away all stinckingnes of sin, that is to say. When we hear
that Jesus Christ the son of God, has cleansed and sanctified by his most
holy suffringes, all persecutions and passions, yea the very death, he has
blessed the curse, he has glorified ye shame and ignomini, and enriched the
poverty, so that death is constrained to be the gate of life, the curse is
constrained to be cause of blessing, and the ignomini mother of glory. Now how
can we be so ingrate and unthankful, that we do not earnestly desire, yea and
love all these passions and afflictions, dipped and sanctified by the most
pure flesh and most holy blood of the Son of God, the which be made to us
most helthful blessings. For if by the touching of his most pure flesh, he
has sanctified all the waters to be holy and needful to baptism: yea all
creatures, how much more has he sanctified by baptism of ye spirit, or of
blood, all death, all passions, all injuries, all outragies, all maledictions,
all ignomini, and that by the blessed touching of his flesh, and blood which
is most precious? as he says in the. 12. of Saint Luke, of this baptism
namely the passion. I shall be baptized with a certain baptism, and how am I
pained until it be ended? Here we see with what ardent desire he desired to
sanctify the passions, and also does, and has made them sweet and amiable to
us, for he knew well, that we would be astonished at the afflictions and did well
foresee, that we would be afraid of death and abhor it, also willing to make
an end of this our euilles as a most meek and prouide^t pastor, and as a most
faithful physician, he hasted him self, and prolonged not the death, that he
might make ye afflictions and passions, yea the very death good to us, by his
holy suffering, so that we may esteem the death to a Christian as the brazen
serpent of Moises, which had the figure of a serpent over all, and in all
points and yet was nothing less then living, he was without venim, without
moving, without biting, so likewise it seems to the eyes of the foolish that
the faithful die, but truly they be in peace, we be like the^ yt die and the
appearance of our death is none other but as others be. Nevertheless the
truth is otherwise, for to us death is dead, also all our afflictions and
passions be like to their afflictions, but it is only by appare^ce. For verily
our passions be the beginninges of impassibilitie, as the death is the
beginning of life. And this is it that the Lord Jesus says, in the. 8 of
Saint John. If any keep my word he shall never taste of death. How shall he
not see death? Because that in dying he begins to live, and so the life
that he be holds: causes that he doothe not see death. The night is here
made bright as the day for as much as the brightness of the life beginning, is
clearer then the death departing. These things be most certain to all those
which believe in Jesus Christ, but not to the unfaithful. Now if they do
kiss, if they love and embrase the apparel, the vessels, the cups, and
finally those things which Jesus Christ has touched, or that he used, so
they honor the^, as great relics, with great deuocio^, because they say that
he has sanctified the^, by the touching thereof. But wherefore do we not the
embrace, kiss, and love rather the the pains, the shames, rebukes, the
opprobries, the euilles of the world, and the very death, the which were not
only sanctified, by his holy touching: but also be blessed and dipped in his
most precious blood, and embrasing them with a most ardent zeal and great
charity, eue^ to the very death.

Behold in these things we have much more reward, health and goodness, then in
relics. For truly by these things, we do optain victory over death, hell,
and all our sins, and not by relics. O good God, if we might look into the
heart of ye Son of God, and se perfectly when he was strained on the cross,
yt he might render death dead and overcome, and with what ardent zeal and
affection he embrased ye death and the pains thereof, for those yt be fearful
and for those yt abhor death and the pains thereof, and with what redines and
will he has first drunk of this most bitte^ cup, and after has somonid ye
weak and diseased to drink thereof, to the end yt they should not fear to drink
after him. Behold and se that no evil is happened unto him, but rather a
great inestymable benefyte has followed in that he rose again. It is most
certain that this precious mirrhe, is made most sweet and amiable, distilling
by the lips, and the words of Jesus Christ praising them, as the sweet
savor and beauty of lillies. Also Saint Peter says, in his. 4. Chapter in
his. 1. Epistle. For as much as Christ has suffered in the flesh, arm your
selves with the same mind. And to ye hebrews. 12. Chapter. Thapostle says.
Consider diligently him that has suffered such gain saying of sinners against
him self, to the end that you should not be weary nor slack in your minds.
Wherefore if we have learned to suffer patiently the euelles that be about us
and enclose us: behold in this last considerations of our afflictions shadowed
in Jesus Christ, surmountith all euelles, and makes yt we not only
endeavoring our selves to suffer: but also to love, to wish and search for it.
And the farther that one is from this affection and zeal: the less strength
has the passion of Jesus Christ in him. And those that will worship the
Roodes, Baners and Crosses of Christ, for to put away death and afflictions,
that they may not suffer them, and so not to dye: behold they use means
clean contrary to the cross of Christ and his death. And for this cause it
is necessary in this seventh consideration yt all ye afflictions which we
suffer, should be consumed, that it may not grieve us to suffer, but rather to
pleasure in sufferi^g. This ought ever to be in our hearts, and to be lively
rooted in our minds.

Here follows the second part of this treatise.
Here shall be declared in this second table, seven considerations contrary to
these before. The first shall be the good within us, the second the good to come,
the third the good passed, the fourth the good beneath us, the fist the good on
the left side, the sixth the good on the right side, the seventh the good above
us.

The first Chapter of the first consideration which is the good within us.
WHat man is he that ca^ number the goods and treasures, that one possesses
in his own person? First, who can esteem how great the bodily graces be? that
is to say. Health, strength, beauty, the quickening of the spirit, and also the
noble kind of man, which is mete to put in execution many excellent things
as well privately as in public, the which other creatures can not do? But I
pray you what great thing is it, if we have used these good gifts, ten,
twenty or thirty years, with quietness and pleasures, by the grace and goodness
of God? And yet the Germans have a proverb: there is many euelles in one good
hour. What ought we to do, we that have received so long rest, and so many
good hours, and will not suffer a little euel one poor hour? We se then how
we be covered all with the goodness of God. And how small be the euelles that we
be touched or stricken with (at the least y^ greatest part of us) our good God
not being only content with these goods: but joins to the^ riches,
abundance of all things? And although it be not common to all, yet it is to
many, and principally to those that be not strong enough, to suffer euelles
and misery. For as I have said before, he gives greater strength to those
whom he gives less goods, that all things may be equal, and he may be
known a righteous judge in all things. For great abundance of goods and
riches brings not so great consolation: as does a good conscience and a
joyful heart. And also he geeueth to some plenty of children, which is a
souereign pleasure (as they say). To other glory, power, principality, good
renoume, favor, honor and other like things, the which though they be given
us to pleasure in, either long time or short, yet they give us to understand,
how we shall behave our selves in small euelles, when they come. But the goods
of the spirit, be much more excellent then all these aforesaid. As
understanding, judgment, facundity, knowledge, prudence, or wisdom. Now our
good God, does moderate the equality of his administration in these goods,
as well as in the other, so that he does not prefer the one before the other.
For in steed of these goods which lacks to some: he gives more courage, or
more rest, or greater tranquillity. Now in all these things we must consider
the great liberality of God, with thankesgeuing, and comfort our infirmity,
so that we do not dismay in our selves, although in this multitude of
excellent goods, there is some sharpness mingled with it. For among us men
that be volupteous, there is no meat sodden, roasted or otherwise, what soever
it be, which is found good nor sauery without sauce, that has some egar taste
of nature, or that may season it. For this is most true, that when one uses
to eat nothing, but sweet things, and does continue with the same: it is a
thing intolerable, so that it is well said of some, that say all pleasure and
volupteousnesse engenders werines, when it is continued. Also volupruositie is
finally converted into wearines and pain, that is to weet. This life is not so
strong, that it may bear the only use of goods and pleasures, without some
temperature of euelles mixed therewith. From thence comes this proverb, that
the bones ought to be strong, which should bear all their days in wealth and
prosperity. And for my part, I have well considered this proverb and
oftentimes, and I maruail of the sentence, which contains so effectual
truth. For there is in man certain destres which do repugne the one against
the other the which seek but good days, and nevertheless, when they have
that they most desire: they can less suffer it, then if they had euel days.
For what does God set before us in this point: but that ye cross to be
meruailed at, namely of the enemies of the cross? So that God does temper and
season all things, by these before said means, and sanctifies the^ that they
perish not, in such manner as one salteth flesh, least that therein breed
mag^ts. From whence comes it then that we do not accept willingly, this
temperature sent of God? For when he does not send it: our life which can not
bear the voluptuous pleasures of prosperity, will call or desire it of his
own proper accord. By this means we see how true it is that Solomon says of
God, which quenches by little and little with great power, and disposes all
things easily. For if they behold well these commodities: they may sone know
how true it is that is recited by Moises in the. 32. Chapter of Deuteronomiu^.
He has horn us on his back, he has led us about, and preserved us, as the
apple of his eye. By these things we may stop ye mouths of those that with
great unthankfulness babble and say, that there is more euelles in this life
then goods. Behold we have no lack of felicity and co^ modities with infinite
numbers of delectatio^s, but rather there is great lack of such as do well
understand, that the Psalmist recites. The earth is full of ye mercy of the
Lord, and again the earth is full of his praise. And in the Psalm. 104. The
earth is full of thy blessing. Lord thou haste given me reioising in thy
wurkes. From thence comes it, yt they sing in ye Church ordinarely. The
heavens and the earth, O Lord, be filled with thy glory. And wherefore is that?
Because that there is many felicities for the which he ought to be praised:
but it is only for those that have their eyes set to behold his dooinges. For
as we have said of the euelles in the first part. For the greater knowledge
that any one has: so much more has he the infelicitie great. And as the
goods and commodities comes about us on every side, and by a manner of saying
do blind the^ eyes

Nevertheless they be no greater then we do estee me them, for all things
that God has created be excellent good, yea notwithstanding they be not so
known nor understand of all men, as it is said of some, In ye Psalm. 77. They
have nothing esteemed the Land which was good and pleasant. Job gives us a
good example of this speculation, the which seeing all his good quite from him
and deffroied, said. If we have received goodness at the hand of the Lord:
wherefore shall we not also suffer euelles? Truly this is a wurd wurthy to be
engraued within our hearts, and a singular comfort of great power in our
temptations. For certainly Job did not only suffer: but with the same he was
tempted with impatience of his own wife, the which said to him
contemptuously. Thou remainest still in thy si^plicity. Blaspheme the Lord and
dye, as if she had said. All me^ may plainly see that there is no God that will
leave thee so and forsake thee. Wherefore then do thou put thy trust in him,
and do not rather deny him? And in such sort after she had angered him,
said. Wherefore do thou not knowledge thy self to be mortal, and that
nothing is left unto thee after this life? There is none of us the which his
own wife (that is to say sensuality) shall not furnish enough of such
matters, for the sensual man understands not the things that ^e of God. Now
all goods that be corporal be common to all, but the Christian and faithful
has other goods much more excellent, which be inward goods, that is to
weet the faith of Jesus Christ, of whom it is said in the Psalm. 44. The
kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothi^g is all of wrought gold.
For as ye^ have seen the euelles in the first consideration, that there is no
evil so great in man: as the evil within him. Also the faithful may not nor
cannot se the inestimable great goodness or felicity that is with in him, for
if he felt it: be hold he should be incontinent in heaven, for ye kingdom
of heaven is within us, as says Jesus Christ. For to have faith, is to have
the truth and the wurd of God. Now to have the wurd of God: is to have God the
creator and maker of all things And if these things were reveled to the
soul, in such perfection as they be in deed: she would spring out of the
body incontinent, for the great abundaunce of joy and sweetness. Wherefore of
good right, the loving corrections of which we have spoke before, be called
aduertisementes of the goods, which we have within us, the which our good
God declares to us by the same, because this life can not bear nor suffer that
they vereueled to it, but through the great goodness and mercy of God: they be
hid to us, until toey be grown in their perfect measure. This is it that
the Fathers and Mothers do give to their Children, sometimes little Horses,
Tabors, Pipes and other trifels, by the which they do incite and stur up the
minds of their children, to greater and more excellent things. Nevertheless
they do break forth and show them selves sometimes, as when the conscience
reioiceth and triumphs in the confidence and sure trust of God, and when she
speaks willingly and freely of God, when she hears his wurd with a gracious
ear and an attentife heart, when she is brought to be ready and diligent to
serve him, obey him, to do good wurkes and to suffer adversities, the which
things be certain tokens of an inestimable good, which is therein hidden, the
which springs out through a certain conduit by small drops, although it
happens sometimes that this is reveled more fully at large, unto those
spirits which be given to contemplation, so they find them selves as it were
swallowed up: yt they wot not where they be, as Saint Augustine confesses him
self to be and many others.

The second Chapter of the second consideration the which is the good to come
or before us.
THose that be no Christians can find no great comefort in hope of the good to
come, in the mids of their troubles, because all things be to them
uncertain. For this affection and vain hope, does bring to them a certain
tumult, but through faith we do comfort one an other freendly. And we do
hope for better things, but the weaker do at tempt and clime up to great
things and often in vncertitude, and yet they be often deceived and void of
their hope, as Jesus Christ shows in ye. 12. of S. Luke, of him yt said to
his soul. I will pull down my barns, and make the^ greater and say to my soul.
Take thy rest, dri^k, eat and make good cheer, for you have goods enough for
many years but God said. Fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee:
and the goods that you have heapid together, whose shall they be the^? Even so
is it with him yt gathers treasure and is not rich in God. But ye Christians
have a more excellent felycitie which comes certainly, but it is through
afflictions and death. Also they rejoice in a certain and sure hope so that
the present euel ends, and contrary ye good augmenteth which is the verity
in Jesus Christ, where in they prospet and profit, from day to day, and for
the love thereof they live in hope, and over and above these things, they have
two most great commodities in the death to come. First the death is an end of
all the tragedy of euelles, of this present life, as it is written. The death
of the faithful is precious before the face of God, and again. I shall sleep
in peace and rest me. If the righteous be prevented by death: he finds
quickening and comfort. And contrary the death to the wicked, and Infidels: is
the beginning of euelles, as it is said. The death of the wicked is most
unhappy, also the euel does overtake and katche ye wicked in his death. In
this manner was Lazarus comforted yt which has received here his euel, and the
rich glotton, unhappy was tormented, because he received his goods here in
this life. By this means also it comes that the Christian finds him self
always better and increasing in goodness, whether he live or whether he dye,
so blessed a thing it is to be a Christian, and to believe in Jesus Christ, and
therefore Saint Paul says. Christ is to me advantage, whether I live or
whether I die. And to the Romans. 15. He that lives: lives to the Lord,
and he that dies, dies to the Lord, be it whether we live, or whether we die:
we be the Lords. Jesus Christ has begotten us this assurance. For he is dead
and risen again, to thend that he might be Lord of the quick and the dead,
having power to make us sure and to certify us as well in the death as in the
life, as is said in the. 23. Psalm. Though I should walk in the midst of
the shadow of death yet will I fear no euel, for thou art with me. But if we
be not certified of this advantage of death: it is a sign that the faith of
Jesus Christ is in firm and weak in us, the which do not wurthely esteem the
gain and price of his most precious death. They cannot believe yet the death
to be good: because that is let by the old man, and the wisdom of the
flesh, which has yet to much vigor and strength, and therefore we ought to
assay and auaunce to know and to love this benefit of death. It is a hard
saying and difficul, to say that the death which is to others the greatist of
all euelles, shall be to us the most excellent gain and profit. And if Jesus
Christ had not wrought this good in us: what profit were it for us to habandon
and forsake our selves? But this wurke that he has wrought in us, is a
singular divine wurk. For this cause no man ought to dismay, for he has made
the euel of death to be turned to most good and profit. Wherefore death is
now to the faithful dead, and is not terrible but only the outward appearance,
even as a slain serpent has yet remaining the terrible figure or appearance of
a serpent that he had: and yet is it but the figure or image. So there is but
one euel dead, and it may no more noy or hurt us. And also as Moses commanded
to make a serpent of brass, and to behold and look upon it, did put away the
stinging of the quick serpents, as it is said, in the. 21. of Numery:
likewise if our death be looked upon with a godly eye, and steadfast in the
faith of Christ: it perishes and nothing appears but only ye figure of
death. So lovingly does the bountifulnes and mercy of God entreat us, which
yet be weaklinges and infirm through these and such like figures, because of
necessity, death must take us away. Nevertheless he has so overcome and
brought to naught the strength and power of death, that to us remains no more
but the only figure, and for this cause the scriptures do rather call it a
sleep then a death. The second benefit of death is, that not only it makes
an end of pains and euelles of this present life: but also brings a more
excellent thing, that is an end of vice and sin, the which chiefly makes
death most desirable to the faithful souls, yea more then does any worldly
felicity, as we have treated here before. For truly the euelles of the soul
which is vice and sin, be without comparison, worse then the euelles of the
body, for if we were wise: these only euelles in deed should make to us death
more desirable, and more lovingly to embrace it, which if it do not: it is a
sign that we feel not that we ought to feel, nor yet do sufficiently hate the
euelles of our soulles, considering that this life, is subject to many
dangers, and the falli^g and sliding of sin does compass us about, with
snares on every side. And finally we cannot live without sin. Beeholde then
that death is a most singular good remedy, for it delivers us from these
dangers, it cutteth us away and delivers us wholly from sin, and therefore
the author of the book of Sapience concludes in the praise of the righteouse
in the. 4. Chapter, saying. Being made at one and beloved of God living
amongst sinners, was taken away and tra^sported to the end that sin and
evil should not change his understanding or that deceitfulness should not
begile his soul, for the bewitching of lies and dremes makes good things
dark, the unsteadfastness of volupteous desire: turns away the understanding
of the siple. O how true be these things? and how do we se this to come pas
daily? And in an other text. Though he was soon dead: yet fulfilled he much
time, for his soul pleased God, therefore he hasted to take him away from among
the wicked. So it comes to pass by the mercy of God, that the death which
was the pain of sin to man: is now made the end of sin, and the beginning
of life and righteousness to the Christian. Therefore of necessity he that
loves life and righteousness: loves also death, which is the minister and
the shop of life, and is in no case afraid of it. For otherwise he shall never
attain to life nor righteousness, and he that cannot so do: let him be
diligent to pray to God that he may have such aminde. For the cause why God
teaches us to say, thy will be done, is that we can not desire this of our
selves, but we rather do abhor death, so that we do rather love sin and
death: then life and righteousness. Therefore did God ordeine death, for the
destruction of sin. For we may gather by this, that incontinent after sin he
set and ordained death to Adam as a deliverance from sin, and that before he
cast him out of Paradise, to the end that he would show us that death neither
does nor wurketh any evil in us but is the causer of all good, for it was set
forth in Paradise in manner of a satisfaction. But truth it is, by the envy of
the deuel, death is entered into the world, but through the mercy and goodness
of God, he does cause that death is not hurtful to us, but has ordained it
from the beginning, to be the punishment and death of sin, for he signified
the same when he spoke before of death to Adam in the commandment.
Nevertheless he stayed not in his wurds: but pronounced death and qualifyed the
rigor of the commandment. But GOD did not in plain wurdes declare death:
but only said, thou art dust, and into dust thou shall return. Item thou shall
return into earth from the which thou art come. As even then hating death would
not name it, as it is said.

Wrath is in his indignation, and life in his will. Now it may be said that if
death had not been necessary, to put away sin: God would not have pronounced it
But God takes no other wepons against sin which has engendered death, but
death it self. Here is fulfilled that one said properly, that the inuentor of
death is dead by his own inuencion, also the sin is destroyed by his own
fruit, and slain by the death that he has engendered. As a viper is slain by
her own yung serpents. Beeholde a thing most pleasant to here and
understand, that sin is destroyed by no other means, but by her own proper
wurk, and her throat cut by her own knife, and her head cut of by her own
sword as was Goliath. Goliath was the figure of sin. This Giaunt was fearful
to all men except to little David, that is to say the Son of GOD Jesus
Christ: the which has overthrown this terrible Giant, and has cut of his
head with his own sword. Now it may be said that there is no sword meter the^
Goliath own sword. 1. Samuel. 21. Chapter. If now we do meditate these
joys of the virtue of the Son of GOD and the gifts of his grace, how should
any little evil torment us: seeing so great euelles which may happen is turned
to so great good?

The third Chapter of the third consideration which is the good passed or
after us.
THis good is easy to consider by his opposite or contrary euel passed, only it
is a help to him yt would consider here Saint Augustine in his confessions,
He is a good teacher in this, where he recites the good graces and benefits
that he has received from his mothers womb. So is likewise the Psalmist in
the. 138. Psalm. Saying. Lord thou have proved me, or among other things
meruailing of the providence of God, upon him self says* Thou have known my
thoughts afar of, thou have tried my heart and my raines, as if he had said I
see now how far of it is from me all that ever I thought or did, or all that I
might obtain or posses, or how little is put in execution by my proper means
or industry, but that all this has been disposed and ordained long time before
by thy ordinance and providence (O Lord) breefly thou have foreseen all my
ways, or rather in thy might and power we do learn these things by our own
experience, for if we call to remembrance our life passed, is it notenough to
astunny us that we have thought willed, done, and said such things, which
we have little or nothing foreseen? How often had we done things, clean
contrary, if we had been left in our own free will? So that we now beginning to
understand and to behold the providence and care of God, to be present and
favorable toward us by his vigila^t help and succoure, that we have nether
thought willed nor said, but that he has before ordained. As it is said in
the. 7. Chapter of Sapience. We and our wurdes be all in the hand of God, as
Saint Paul says, the which does all things in us. Wherefore then be we so
without understanding, and have our hearts so hardened? Wherefore be we not
ashamed miserable that we be? that being showed by our own proper
experience we seeing plainly and openly, how often the Lord has been careful
for us, and watcheful even unto this hour, and how he has endowed us with all
manner of good and great benefits, and yet cannot we resign and acknowledge to
him the only care and watch over us in a very little present euel. But we
behave our selves as though he had forsaken us or as though that we could put
it of or quit our selves of it. Is it not said in the. 139. Psalm. I am poor
and miserable but the Lord cares for me? Upon this. S. Augustine says.

He that made thee cares for thee. Permit and render to him that made thee,
before thou were any thing, to have cure and charge of thee. How should he not
now have cure over thee, forasmuch as thou art now that same that he would
have thee? But we will be partakers of his kingdom with him, we do attribute
to him this, that he made us, and yet will we scarcely do that: or at the
least do it very coldely, and yet notwithstanding we usurp the custody that
he has over us, as if he (after he had made us) would retire him self far
from us, to forsake us and leave us in our own hands. But if our wisdom,
councelles, and deliberations do let us or blind our eyes that we can not
see this care of GOD over us, when paraduenture many things happen to us
according to our deliberations and purposes: let us return to the Psalmist in
ye. 138. Psalm. and consider our own selves, which says. My bones are not
hidden from thee (O Lord) says he, though I was made in a secret place, that
is to say. Thou saw my bones in my mothers womb, when as yet I was not, and
when my mother knew not what was made in her, and my substance was in the
lowest parts of the earth, that is to say, the figure or form of my body was
not hidden to thee being in the profound entrailles of my mother, for thou
formedst them and made them What does he declare by these wurdes, but only
proposes this great example how our good God has always had care of us
without us? What is he that glory that he has made any thing of that is made?
Who has given understanding or knowledge, to the mothers to give suck, to
entertain, nourishe, love, and do all duties and offices of a mother, even
then when we did not feel our life, brefly, we know, not these things and
believe not that they were done to us, if we had not seen the like things
done to others which were done to us, even as though we had slept, or as
though we had been dead, or more aptly to say, as if we had not yet been
borne, as touching our own knowledge. Also seeing how true this is, yt without
our help we have been brought and directed unto divine comfort and great
mercifulness, and yet we dout or that worce is we despair that our good God
has care of us. If parauenture there be any which is not instructed or moved
by this experience: I know no way how he may be taught or instructed, for
there is not one Infant that we do see with our eyes but may instruct us, in
this ca^e evidently. Now seeing so many examples setle before our eyes: we
ought to be ashamed of our folly and ignorance. But if we dout that any manner of
good or evil may happen to us, how little so ever it be, without the singular
providence of God, read Saint Peter in his first Epistle the fifth Chapter.
Cast all our care upon him, for he cares for us, and in the^. 54. Psalm.
Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nurishe thee.

And. S. Augustine speaks in his confessions to his soul. Wherefore do
thou stay thee upon thy self, and continuest not firm and stable? cast thy
self upon thy God, for he will not withdraw his hand from thee nor suffer thee
to fall. And moreover Saint Peter says in the. 4. Chapter of his first
Epistle. Those that suffer by the will of God: let them commit their souls in
well doing to the creator which is most faithful. O the bountifulness of
our GOD. If any may know God in this manner, in what suerty, rest and joy shall
he live? Such a one has GOD verily within him. He is well assured and most
certain that all that he has or may have, be it great or small things, or
what so ever shall happen or con^e to him at any time, that it comes by the
good will and disposition of God. The sentence of Saint Peter stands allwaies
most true and undoubted. He has care for you. May one hear wurdes more sweet
and comfortable then these? and therefore he says. Cast all your care upon
him, but now if we do not: what other thing do we but assay and prove to
stop and let the care that GOD has of us, and to bring our life full of sorrow,
heuines and care, with thought and turmoiling within our selves. And what ca^
we get by thus doing? Our salvation is nothing advanced nor preferred, but as
says Ecclesiastes. It is a vanity of vanities and affliction of spirit, for
that book speaks against such doutfulnesse in such wise, as he that had
proved many things in him self. Nevertheless could find in all these
things but labor vanity and affliction of spirit so that he concludes that
it is a gift of God, for any man to eat drink and rejoice with his wife, that
is to say, if he live without care, committyng to GOD all the care of him self
and his, Wherefore to conclude we ought not to be careful for our selves, nor
to pluck from God the care over us, thus you may easily understand the rest, as
I have said before by the calling to mind your life passed.

The fourth Chapter of the fourth consideration of the good under us.
Hitherto we have seen the goods which be ours and which be in our
selves, now let us see those that be in others, and without us. The first of
these is in those that be under us, that is to say in the reprobate damned
souls, but this is wundrefull. For what good may one find in the dead and
(...)? But ye mercy and goodness of God is so great universally, that he
teaches us to se our good in ye midst of great euelles. Let us in the first
place compare them and us together; and then we shall see our ^able gains, as
one may gather easily by the opposite consideratio^s or contrary euelles. For so
many eueles of death, hell and dampnation as we do see in them: so many
gains do we see in our selves, and so much the greater as theses be gre^o
and great. This consideration ought not lightly to be passed over, because
these things do propose and set before our eyes the great merey of God which
is most excellent and marvelous, and it is dangerous not to way these things
so great and excellent, that we be not found ingrate and on thankful, and to
be dampened with the or more greuoussy tormented* And the more that weese them
howl and lament: the more we ought to rejoice in the bounty and mercy of God
toward us, according as is said in ye. 65. Chapter of Esaias. Behold my
servants eat and drink, and you die in hunger and sorrow and languor for
thirst. Beeholde my servants rejoice in great gladness of heart, and you
houle and lament for the very dolours and sorrow of your hearts, and cry for the
great oppression of spirit, your name shall not be sworn by among my elect.
etc. Finally as I have said these horrible examples of euel livers and
reprobate, do help and further to our advertisement and gives us good
instructions as Saint Gregory recites in his dialogues, that he is happy
which can beware by the dangers of others. And although this benefit touch
not our hearts but faintly, because it is common and happens often: yet
nevertheless it is wurthy to be esteemed and numbered among ye greatest
benefits, and greatly approved of wise men, and of those that have godly
understanding. Behold a great part of the holy scriptures, teach to this
end. And when we be taught and showed the wrath, the judgments and horrible
threatninges of GOD, what helthful doctrines do these examples bring to us of
these accursed and miserable people, for to confirm us more and more?

It does then begin to make us the more to feel the effect and strength
thereof: when we do put upon us the affection of those that do suffer, and
after a manner to say when we be in their place and person, for then they do
move us and advertise us greatly to praise and magnify the goodness of him,
which has preserved us from these horrible euelles. Now let us be hold the
justice of Gods divinity in them. Forasmuch as God is a just judge,
therefore must we love and greatly praise his righteousness and justice, and by
this means rejoice in God, even when he destroys the wicked body and soul.
For his admirable and great justice, shines in a a merueilous manner in all
these things. For the very hell is filled with the magesty and goodness of God,
as also is the heavens. For the justice of God, is God him self. And God is the
high sovereign goodness. And therefore as we ought to love the bounty and
mercy of God: so ought we also to love his justice and judgment, to praise it
and show it forth. In this sense David says. The righteous shall rejoice when
he shall se the vengeance, he shall wash his hands in the blood of the
wicked. Also the Lord for bad Samuel any longer to lament Saul, as it is
written in the.16. Chapter of the first book of Samuel, saying. How long
will thou la meant Saull? Behold I have cast him of that he reign no more
^uer Israel, as if he had said, does my will displease thee, that thou
preferrist the will of man before mine? Breefly this is the voice of praise and
rejoicing, the which is so often spoken of in the Psalms, that the Lord is
the judge of widows, and father of orphelins, he will revenge the poor and
the oppressed, his enemies shall be confounded, the wicked shall be destroyed, and
many other like things. But if any of a foolish pity, will lament or bewail
this cruel generation, the which has not only put to death the righteous and
innocent, but also the Son of GOD, and all by the conspiracy of these wicked
impes: shall he not be found as one that rejoices in their eniquitie with the^
and approving that which they have done, yea and is worthy to perish with
the^ which would not have their sins punished? Now hear that is said in
the.19. Chapter of the second book of Samuel. Thou love those which hate
thee, and hate those yt love thee. This Joab said to David when he lamented
ouermuche for his murderer Absalom. Wherefore in this consideration we ought to
rejoice together with all the faithful of GOD, for his righteousness the
which punishes most justly the persecutors of the true religion, to the end
that the elect of God may be delivered from the hand of them. In this part we
se shining in the reprobate and dampened such benefits and tresures as be not
small, but great and excellent, that is to say, the vengeance of the outrage
done to the faithful, yea the injury done to thee if thou be righteous with
them, wherefore then be not dismayed if God by thy present evil, he takes
vengeance of thine enemy, that is to say, the sin of thy body, but rather thou
ought to rejoice, and to praise God, for the execution hereof, which is
most just and right, which yet before thou can open thy mouth to pray does
sley and distroy in thy self the most wicked enemy that thou have, that is the
sins that is within thee, but if thou have compassion of this enemy: thou
shall be found a friend of sin, and enemy of justice and righteousness
which woorketh in thee. Wherefore we ought to take heed that it be not said
to us, thou love those that hate thee: and hate those that love thee. For
as thou ought to rejoice in the justice of God, perse cuting thy sin: even
so rejoice in the execution against sinners, enemies to God and to man. We
hear now what excellent benefits is found in great and horrible eueles, and
how we ought to rejoice in our great miseries, not because of ye eueles it
self: but because of the inestimable goodness and justice of God, the which
takes vengeance of our sins and wickedness.

The fifth Chapter of the fyfth consideration of the good on the left hand.
HEre is to be spoken of the adversaries that be yet living in the world, for
in the Chapter going before we have treated of the adversaries that be all
damned and made like to the deuelles, but we must consider these here with an
other affection, and consider them two manner of ways. First they abound and
prosper in temporal things, in such sort that the Prophets them selves were
almost moved to envy the^, because of their felicity, as it is said in the.
73. Psalm. My foot had all most slipped, my steps were almost gone seeing
the wicked in such prosperity and felicity, I had even all most borne them
envy. And in the same Psalm. Behold the wicked (habunding in iniquity) have
obtained great riches. And in the. 12. of Jeremy. Thou art verily righteous
Lord when I do argue against thee, nevertheless I shall consider of the
things that be righteous with thee. Wherefore do I see the wicked prosper, the
affairs of all those which wurk wickedness and go forward. But ye questions
is, Wherefore does he pour upon them so great benefits, and so undeserved:
but to the end to comefort us, and to show how good he will be to them that are
of an upright heart, as it is said in ye same Psalm. He that is so good to the
wicked: how much more will he be good to the faithful? and in that he does not
torment the wicked with any manner euelles, but the good he proves them by
many euelles: that they may know that he is good to them, not only in goods
that be present: but also in riches which be hidden and inuinsible, that they
may say with the Psalmist. It is good for me to join my self to the Lord, and
to set my hope and trust in my God, as if he had said. Although I suffer,
seeing them delivered and free without trouble, yet I have this confidence,
that God will let me feel his clemency and goodness much more then shall
they. And therefore the disible goods of the wicked: be spurs to move us to
trust in the invisible goods and to despise and set light by the euelles
which we suffer. It is it that ye Lord Jesus commands us in the sixth
Chapter of Saint Matthew, to behold the birds of the air and the Lillyes of
the feeld, saying. If God so clothe the grass which is to day in his flower
and to morrow cast into the furnace: how much rather will he clothe you? O ye of
little faith. Wherefore by the comparison of the goods, which the wicked
abuse and the euelles and miseries which we suffer: our faith is exercised,
and we obtain consolation in God, which is the most holy consolation and
comfort. So necessary it is that all things happen to the best to ye faithful.
The other goods, which is much more to be meruailed at: is that their
euelles be turned to our good and profit as GOD has ordained it. For all
though their sins be offensive to ye weakest and infirm and feeble s^^les,
nevertheless they be exercises of virtue, and of spiritual battle and of
greater health to the strong and faithful. For blessed is the man that suffers
in temptation, for when he shall be tried: he shall receive a crown of life.
Now is there a greater temptation then these multitude of most evil examples?
And ye chief reason why the world is called an enemy to the faithful and
elect of God: is that by their enticementes and wicked wurkes, they may draw
us, allure, provoke and turn us from the way of God to their ways. As is
said in ye. 6. of Genesis. The Sons of God saw the daughters of men that
they were fair, and joined them selves to them. Also in Numeri. 25. Chapter.
The Children of Israel are fallen with the daughters of the Moabites, insomuche
that it is a thing helthful to us to be continually pressed and holden down by
some misfortune, so that we striving with the evil occasions of the world:
fall not into sin and wickedness, we I say that be so weak. Also Saint
Peter in the. 2. Chapter of his second Epistle commends Lot, for that he
suffered many wicked examples of the Sodomites, so that he profited and
encreaced in righteousness through these things. Therefore it is necessary ye
offenses happen which engender war and victory. Yet notwithstanding, woe be
to ye world because of offenses. Now if God procure us so great goodness, in
the sins and wickedness of others: how much more ought we to believe with
all our hearts that he shall procure and turn into good our euelles and
misfortunes, although the sense and feeling of the flesh judges otherwise?
The world brings us no less goodness on the other side with his euelles,
which is called adversity and misery. For those which he can not swallow by
enticementes and incorporate to him self by offenses: he assayeth to repulse
and put fro him by adueru^tyes, and drives them of by pains and torments,
procuring always against them snares by examples of sin, and foining out his
furies by horrible torments and pains. This is the monster that the Poets do
call Chimery, which has the hedde of a damsel and gracious countenance,
the womb of a Lion, and the tail of a venemus serpent. For the end to which
the world pretends, what with his volupteousnes, and what with his tyranny: is
poisoned death and dampnation eternally. So now we see that God has made us
to find our cheef goods in ye midst of the sinn^ of ye world, to thend that
ye persecutious and afflictions which he sends be not to us idle nor vai^.
They be or deyned us for the increasing of our benefits, in such wise that
the same wherewith the world does noy and molest us: be constrained to profit
us. As Saint Augustine says of the little Children that Herod put to death.
That he never profyted so much by love and good will: as he did by hate. And
Saint Agathe went into the Prison very ioyously as to a banquet, saying thus. If
thou do not tame my body by thy tormentors: my soul shall not come into
heaven, for to receive ye most blessed crown.

And as the grain of wheat is not laid up into the barnes, but first is driven
out of the ear, and sore beaten in the air barn. But wherefore do we tarry
upon things so small, seeing the holy scriptures and all ye sayings of the
ancient fathers, the acts of all the holy faithful saints and servants of
God accord to this? For those that seem to be most hurtful to the beleuers: be
those that do them most good, if they do suffer it patiently. As Saint Peter
says in the. 3. Chapter of his. 1. Epistle. And who is he that can hurt you
if ye follow that is good. And in the Psalm. ^^. His enemy shall not overtake
him, and the son of wickedness shall not hurt him. And how shall he not hurt
him? Doothe he not kill often?

But yet in hurting and melesting, he does service and profit very much to the
faithful. So now we may see our selves dwelling in the midst of al perfect
goodness which compasses us about on every side If we be wise and consider
them with a godly eye, and notwithstanding yet we remain in the midst of
thaforsaid euelles. So wunderfully be things tempered and mingled by the
co^ning and marvelous wurk of Gods divine power.

The sixth Chapter of the sixth consideration of the good on the right hand.
THis benefit is the Church or congregation of the faithful, the new creature
of God, our brethern and friends, wherein we see nothing but all goodness and
consolation, although we se not this continually with the corporal eyes as we
may see in the contrary Image of euelles: but with the spiritual eye, and also
that those goods, which we see the faithful possess, be not to be rejected:
but rather to consider yt God does comfort us in such commodities, For the
Psalmist in the. 73. Psalm durst not condemn nor reject those that possessed
riches of the world, says. If I should speak so: I should condemn the
generatio^s of thy Children, that is to say. If I should say, that they be all
wicked, and that all those that be rich, honorable, and helthful, be
reprobate: I should condemn thy very servants, of whom there be rich,
honorable, and helthfull. And also where as Saint Paul exhorts Timothe to
give commandment to the rich of this world that they be not proud, yet he
does not forbid to have riches: and the scriptures shows that Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, were rich, and Daniell and his fellows were honored in Babilo^, and
also many other kings in Juda were found faithful servants of GOD. The
Psalmist casts his eyes upon these, and says. If I had so said: I had
reproved the generations of thy Children, GOD (I say) gives abundance of these
riches to his people of tentimes, for the relief as well of the^ selves as of
others, but these goods be not there own proper and effectual goods: but
only figures and shadows of the true goods, which be faith, hope, charity
and other graces and gifts, which be all made common by charity. This is
the communion of saints in the which we should glory. And who is he that will
not recoyce now, yea although it be in the midst of great euelles, if he
believe that this is true, that is to say If he believe that the goodness of
all the Saints be his, and that his euel is their euel also? This Image is
most pleasant and amiable to behold, which the Apostle to the Galathians
painteth and describes to us in this sorre. Bear the burdens one of an
other, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Is not this a good thing to be in
such a ^ace: that when one member suffers, all the rest suffer also? and when
one is glorified all the other rejoice with him? As it is said in Saint Paul
to the Corinthians. When I suffer, I suffer not alone, Jesus Christ and all
the Christians suffer with me, as God him self says. He that touches you
touches the apple of mine eye. Also the Church does feel and bear with my
burden, their virtue is my virtue, the faith of the Church and congregation
does strengthen my Infidelity. The chastity of the Church does help to
bear with the temptation of my flesh. The prayer of them is watcheful for
me, and also most necessary. Breefly the members have such care the one for
the other, that the most honest do cover the most simple, they do serve
them and honor the^, as the Apostle doothe very well describe to ye
Corinthians. Now in this case I may glory, that is, in the goodness of other as
in mine own proper, and also they be mine own when I am content to
communicate with them. Now though I be filthy and wretched, yet those that I
love and of whom I am one, be fair and beautiful, by the which love I make
not only their goodness mine: but also them selves be made mine, and therefore
under the glory of the^ my shame shall be covered and bewtified, by their
habundance: my poverty shall be fulfilled. Who is he the^ yt can despair in his
sins? Who is he that will not now rejoice in his afflictions and suffringes?
For behold he bears no more his afflictions and pains, but they do bear
with him, he bears the^ not alone: but is helped by a blessed company of the
Children of God, and of Jesus Christ him self. Such an excellent thing is it
to be of the Communion of the faithful, and of the Church of Jesus Christ.
But if there be any that believes not these things to be thus: he is an
Infidel, and does disalow Jesus Christ and his Church, because he feels
not these things which be infallible true. But what is the cause that thou
fallest not into despair, and that thou art not become utterly impatient? Is
it thy virtue? No truly, but the communion of the faithful. For otherwise thou
could not bear the least sin that is, nor suffer one wurd of a man spoken
against thee. So good is Jesus Christ to thee, and so nigh to thee is he and
his Church. This is it that we say, I ^eleeue in the holy Ghost and the holy
universal congregation or Church. What is it to believe ye holy Church
universal, but the communion of the holy and faithful?

But now in what things do the saints communicate? They communicate in good
and euel. For all things be to all men, as the sacrament of the supper of the
Lord represents the same to us, in bread and wine, where we be called by
Saint Paul one only body, one bread, and one drink. For who is he that can
offend or hurt the least part of our body: but by and by he greeueth the whole
body in the same? Who may suffer the least prick in our toe, but all the body
will be grieved with the same? What good is done to the foot, but all the body
will rejoice? Even so are we all one body, for all that one suffers: I suffer
also, and what soever good is done to one, is done to my self. For who can
take any part or portion of the bread or supper of the Lord how little so ever
it be, to whom it may not be said that he has received the Lords supper?
Who is he that does despise the least portion of the bread: the which
likewise may not be said that he has despised the holy communion or supper?
Wherefore if we be angered, if we suffer, yea if we die, cast our eyes upon
this, and believe firmly, be we certain that it is not we that be sad or
heavy, or that do suffer, or that do die, no we be not alone: but Jesus Christ
and his Church suffers with us. So is it that Jesus Christ has willed that
the way of death should be to us comfortable and that we should pass over all
our miseries by the same the which all me^ have in horror and be afraid of.
But now we entering into the way of the passion and of the death, having all
the Church to accompany us, and the Church does suffer more constantly then
we can our selves, so that we may truly appropriat and take to our selves that
which Elie said to his servant Giezi, which was taken with fear in the
second, of Kings the sixth Chapter. Fear not for there are more on our sides
then of our ennemies. And after Elie had prayed: he said Lord yt it may
please thee to open the eyes of this Lad that he may se, and then the Lord
opened the eyes of Giezi and he saw and behold the mountain was full of
soldiers and of Chariottes round about Elie. And now their lacks no more to
us, but that we pray that God will open our eyes that we may see the Church
or congregation of GOD round about us, yea the eyes of our faith, and the^ there
shall be nothing so horrible nor fearful that shall make us a fraid, as is said
in the. 134. Psalm. As the hye mountains are round about him: even so
stands the Lord about his people from this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
The seventh Chapter of the seventh consideration of the good which is above
us.
I Do not speak of the eternal and celestial goods, which the blessed do
enjoy, as in a clear light and vision of God: but rather or at the least I
speak of those according to faith, and after the means by the which these
things may be comprehended of us. Also this seventh consideration is Jesus
Christ the king of glory, rising from death. For as we read in the seventh
consideration of euelles, he suffered, died, and was buried: so heerewe may
behold ye souerein i^estimable joy of our hearts and the strength of our
felicity and comfort. The Son of God being raised from death dies no more,
death shall no more reign nor have domination over him. This is the furnace of
Charity and the fire of GOD in Sion, as says Esaias. For Jesus Christ is born
to us, and not only so: but is also given to us, and therefore his resurrection
is mine, and all that he has accomplished by his most glorious resurrection.
And as Saint Paul in the. 8. to the Romans, does glory and rejoice, saying.
How shall he not give us all things with him?

Now what has he done in rising from death? He has destroyed sin, he has
raised the righteous and just, he has swalowed up death, he has brought
life, he has obtained victory over hell, and prepared for us ever lasting
glory. Behold the inestimable goods, so that the understanding of man can
very hardly perceive o^beleeue that they be given to him. As Jacob in the. 45.
Chapter of Genesis, hearing that his Son Joseph reigned in Egypt, he as rising
from a deep and profound dream: might not believe those which told him
those things until they showed him the Chariottes with stuff, sent from
Joseph. Also as difficil and hard a thing it is to us to believe yt so great
goods is prepared for us by Jesus Christ, to us which be so vnwurthy except
he him self do make us believe it by his wurd in many sure textes and places.
And as he did appear and declare him self to his disciples, by many
apparitions, Also he does now allure and draw us to him, as by Chariottes, by
long experience and usage, and this is a Chariot most gracious and loving,
that he is made of God to us righteousness, wisdom, sanctification and
redemption. As Saint Paul says. 1. Corinthians the. 1. Chapter. I am a
sinner, but I am borne and lifted up in his righteousness which is made mine.
I a^ filthy shameful, and miserable, but his holiness is made to me my
sanctification and my purgation in the which I am most graciously and
lovingly trained and brought up. I am foolish, but his wisdom does sustain
and bear me. I am wurthy of damnation, but his liberty is my sufficient
rau^some. O Chariot most sure, so that ye Christian and faithful person
(which believes the same) may as much glory and rejoice in all these goods
and merits of our Lord Jesus Christ: as him self had done them. They be his
own proper, so that now he may boldly abide the judgment of God, the which
without this is of all men importable. This faith is a thing most excellent,
for it brings to us such inestimable goods, so glorious, that it does
constitute us the glorious Children of God, for we can not be Children, but
we must possess and obtain the goods of our father and the enheritaunce.
Now the Christians may boldly say, death where is thy victory? O death where
is thy sting? that is to say sin, for the ^^ing of death: is sin* and the
strength of sin: is the law. Thanks be to our Lord God which has made
us to obtain victory by Jesus Christ our Lord, yt is to say. The law does
constitute and declare us sinners, sin makes us culpable of death and da^p
nation. Now who has vanquished these things? Is it our righteousness? Is it
our good life? No truly, it is the Lord Jesus rising from death, co^demning
death and sin, making us partakers of his righteousness, resigning to us his
merits, putting his hand upon us and takes us to him, and fulfilleth the law,
and overcomes sin and death. Now for all these things, honor, giving of
thanks, and praise be to our good God for ever and ever. Amen.

This is the most sovereign consideration in the which we be all ready so by
lifted up, not only above our euelles: but also above our goodness, and be
all ready in possession of the goods of others, gotten by the labor of other,
in place where we were couched before in the euells of other, and conquered by
the sins of other, and augmented by our own* We be now couched and set in
the place of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, yt which is to him
righteousness, for as much as we are joined to hi, which is agreeable to God,
and as a mediator does intercede and make request for us and this most holy
sacrificator and advocate is made whole altogether ours. These thing do make
the Christian to be full of all strength Lord of all things, having all
^^^nges, and all without sin, and wh^ he shall be yet in any: sin, the sin
shall not green him, but be perd^ned, because of ye insuperable righteousness
of the Lord Jesus, the which does as it were swalow up all our sins* upon
whom our faith is stayed, hoping sted fastly that Jesus Christ is even such
a one as we believe that he is. And he that believes not this: it is to him as
one ye told him a fable or as to a dum man or one that knows not Christ,
nor what he does profit him, nor what utility is in Jesus Christ. Where
fore if we had no other meditations or considerations but this only, it were
sufficient to fulfill us with unspeakable consolation, if it be diligently
considered with an attentife heart, we shall not only be sorrowful for our
euelles: but also we shall glory and rejoice in out tribulations, through the
great joy that we have in our Lord Jesus, and shall scantly feel our miseries
and euelles. That good Lord Jesus our God blessed for ever: make us to feel and
perceive this Glory. So be it.

A brief Table of the principal matters contained in this book, and here you
shall understand that this letter (a) be tokeneth the first side of the leaf,
the letter (b) betokens the last side, and (l) be tokeneth the number of the
lines on the same side.
A
Abundaunce of riches brings not so great consolation as does a good
conscience, fo, 28. b. line. 9 Afflictions are to be loved. fo. 24. a. l. 23
Afflictions good to us, fo, 25. a. l. 4 Afflictions of a Christian, be not as
ye afflictions of ye wicked, fo, 25. a. l. 19 Agathe went into prison. fo. 49.
b. l. 13
B
Benignity of God is great, fo, 15. a. li. 21. Bodily graces can not be
esteemed, Fo, 27, b. li20
C
Care of God for us, fo, 9. a, li. 19. fo, 10. b li. 14. Fo, 42. b. li.
Christian ought to be grieved with the misery of others. fo. 15. b. li. 3.
Christian is always better and increceth in goodness whether he live or die. fo.
34. a. li. 20. Comfort to man, is that he feels not all his finnes. Fo. 3.
a. li. 3. Communion of Saints what it is. so. 51. b. li. 2. it is in good and
euel. fo. 53. a. li. 13. Confession of sins proceeding from faith justifies
and sanctifies. fo. 22. b. li. 16. Corporal tribulation, is advertisement of
the inward euel. fo. 1. b. l. 11 Curse is the cause of blessing. fo. 24. a. li.
18.
D
David the figure of Christ. fo. 38. a. li. 16. Dampnation of some for less
euelles then we do. fo. 13. a. li. 14. Death greatest of all terrible things
fo. 6* a. li. 4 Death feared of Saints. fo. 6. b. li. 3. Death feared of
Christ. fo. 6. b. li. 4. Death is to be desired rather the^ this life if we
love God. fo. 8. a. li. 11. Death is rather to be chosen then to return to the
whole kind of life passed. Fo. 8. b. li. 11. Death of the wicked is often
times deserved of other which God does keep. fo. 12. a. li. 11. Death good to
us. fo. 25. a. li. 5. Death of a Christian likened to the brazen serpent. fo.
25. a. li. 7. Death is the beginning of life. fo. 25. a. li. 23. Death is never
tasted of him that keeps the wurd of Christ. fo. 25. b. li. 1 Death of the
faithful is precious. Fo 34. a. li. 4. Death of the wicked is most unhappy Fo.
34. a. li. 12. Death makes an end of euelles and pains, vice and sins. Fo.
35. b. li* 21. Fo. 36. a. li. 20. Death which was the pain of sin: is now the
end of sin and beginning of righteousness. fo. 36. b. li. 21. Death the cause
of al good. Fo. 37. a. li. 21.
E
Euelles within a man most miserable. fo. 1. a. l. 11. Euelles full known
would make a man perish. Fo. 1. b. li. 5. Euelles long continued we make no
count of them. Fo. 4. a. li. 7. Euelles be not measured according to the fact:
but after thoppinion. Fo. 4. a. l,. 13 Euelles what soever one suffers none
can be surely exempted from them. Fo. 5. b. li. 19. Euelles common to all men.
Fo. 6. b. li. 13. Euelles to come are most to be feared Fo. 6. b. li. 18.
Euelles of adversaries let by God. Fo, 14. b. li. 7 Euelles of other shall
make our own seem light, Fo, 17. b. li. 25 Euelles and sorrows be molified,
^^ 18. b. li. 4 Euelles of the soul be worse then the euelles of the body,
fo, 36. a li. 5. E^ample of euel livers do help to our advertise mentes. fo.
43. b. li. 14
F
Feeble and weak have most need of comfort in death, Fo, 6. b. li. 11
Felicity of Christians, through afflictions and death. Fo. 33. b. li. 15.
G
God does chasten us benignly, discovering unto us the least euelles fo, 1. b.
l. 1 Goliath was the figure of sin. Fo. 38. a. li. 14. Goodness that GOD does
to the wicked moves us to consider his goodness to the good, fo, 47. a. li. 14.
Goods of ye wicked be spurs to move us to trust in the invisible goods and
set light by the euelles which we do suffer. Fo. 47. b. li. 8. Goods that a
man has in his own person cannot be nombred. Fo. 27. b. li. 15. Goods of the
spirit more excellent then the goods of honor fame. etc. Fo. 28. b. li. 9.
H
Hermit complained because he was one year without trouble. Fo. 21. b. li. 7.
Hye degree is subsect to many temptations. Fo. 14. b. li. 15. Honorable estate
engenders fear. Fo. 5. a. li. 13. Horror of diseased persons. Fo. 16. b.
li. 12. Hurtful things yt seem to hurt ye beleuers: do the^ most good. Fo.
59. a. li. 3.
I
Ignomini mother of glory. Fo. 24. a. li. 20. Ingratitude not to esteem
wurthely the benefits of God. Fo. 13. b. line. 11. Injuries sanctified by
Christ, Fo, 24 b. li. ^ Justice of God is but one. Fo. 13. a. l. 16
L
Lot was ^exed by the wurkes of the wicked, Fo, 16. a li, 15 Lot increased in
righteousness through suffering wicked examples of the Sodomites, Fo, 48. b.
li. 13 Love of righteousness is the love of death, Fo, 36. b. li. 25
M
Maladies hurtig the body be named CCC. Fo, 5. a. li. 2 Mankind is noble and
can do many things that no oother creature ca^ do, Fo, 28. a. li. 2 Meat
among volupteous men is not found good with out sauce, Fo, 29. a li 16 Members
of one body help one an other, Fo, 52. a. line. 10 Mountain of mirre, what it
is, Fo, 23. a. line. 18 Parents loving their Children, Fo 1. b. line. 23
Passion of Christ called a baptism Fo, 24. b. li. 14 Passion of Christ is ^^
somuche the less strength in a man as he is far there from the love of suffering
troubles of this world, fo, 27. a. l. 3 Percecutions sanctified by Christ's
suffringes, Fo, 24. a. li. 11 Pleasure and volupte ousnes engelldre werines,
Fo; 29. a li. 2 Poverty enriched by Christ, fo, 24. a. li. 16 Presence of God
among us, Fo, 9. b. li. 21 Providence of God is always present toward us, Fo,
39. b. li. 21 Purpose of man, Fo, 9. a. line. 4
R
Rebukes of the world are rather to be embraced and kissed then the Apparel,
Cups or other be sselles that Christ touched, Fo, 25. b. li. 23 Relics do
not so much good as troubles in this world, fo, 26. a line. 8 Resurrection of
Christ what good it does to us, Fo, 55. a. lin. 18
S
Saint John Bapt^^^ beheaded, Fo, 19. b. li. 9 Saints prayed for the euelles
of other, fo, 15 b. li. 25 fo, 18. a. li. 7 Soul of the Sinner more horribls
then the sore diseased body, fo, 17. a. line. 3 Saints have suffered torments
to have a Crown of life, Fo, 18. b. l. 16 Sensual man understands not the
things that be of God, Fo, 21. a. l. 15 Shame is glorified by christ, Fo, 24.
a. line. 15 Shames of the world be to be embraced, Fo, 25. a. line. 23 Sin is
destroyed by his own fruit, Fo, 38, a, li. 4 Sufferinges of other domoue us to
praise God, Fo, 44. a. li. 14 Suffering of our troubles is nothing if it be
compared to the s^^^^ing of the Saints, Fo, 21. ^. li. 18 Supper of the Lord,
Fo, 53. a. li. 16
W
Wicked be as a raging Sea, Fo, 17. b. line. 4. World likened to the Sea, Fo,
4. a line. ^
Faults escaped in ye printig
Leaf. ^de. line. fault. correction. 11 1 11. it spoken, it is spoken. 14 1 21.
same of the. sea, sa^d of the sea. 1^ 2 25. the the euelles, the euelles. 28 1
24. riches abu^da^ce, riches ^ abundance 31 1 ^. yea yet. 50 2 (...). albeit,
also. 51 2 (...) re^oice, rejoice.

Imprinted at London at the Long S^ adioining unto Saint Mildreds Church in
the Pultriees by John Alde.


