A DEFENSE OF THE ROMAN CHVRCH. VVHERIN Is treated, Whether the said Church of
Rome has fallen in faith, or no? Written in Latin by the R. F. Martinus
Becanus of the Society of Jesus, Professor in Divinity: AND Now translated
into English.

Anno Domini, M. DC. XII.

THE PRINTER to the Reader.
GOOD Reader, this short Treatise being so^t unto me long since from a friend,
who had caused it to be translated out of Latin into English; I have judged it
worthy to be imparted unto theo, for that it will give thee light in a matter
which greatly imports thee to know, and on which the Adversaries do employ
their whole endeauours to cast a cloud of obscurity.

The matter in Controversy is, Whether the Church of Rome has fallen from her
ancient faith? The Protestants affirm the same: and if they could in place of
often saying it, once prove it, their cause were much the better. The
Catholics on the contrary side deny, that She ever admitted the least change
in any point of faith. Which if thou find to be so, as by reading this little
Phamphlet, I hope thou shall, then have thou a clear and sure way laid before
thee, to resolve thyselfe of all doubts, that may concern Religion.

Bestow therefore the reading thereof, and thou shall find the profit to
counteruaile thy pains. And so wishing thee everlasting happiness, I bid thee
farewell.

WHETHER THE CHVRCH OF ROME has fallen in faith or no?
THE sense hereof is, Whether the Roman Church, together with those other
Churches which adhere unto it, has so fallen and degenerated, that it should
cease to be any longer a true Church? John Lib. 4. Inst. c. 7.. 24. v de. lib.
^ c. 6.. 26
Calvin affirms that it has so fallen away in these words: Fuerit sane olim
Roma omnium Ecclesiarum Matter etc. Verily Rome in times past, was the Mother of
all Churches; but in that it has begu^ to be the Seat of Antichrist, it
cease to be that which it was. Here he affirms two things. One is, that the
Roman Church was sometimes the true Church, and more the^ this, that it was the
mother of all Churches. This we admit. The other is, that it is now fallen and
become the seat of Antichrist. And of this we dispute.

2. Two ways we may understand it to have fallen. First in Manners. Secondly
in doctrine of Faith. The former defect takes not away the nature of a true
Church, but the later. This therefore is the State of the controversy, Whether
the Roman Church hall The State of the controversy.
sallen in doctrine of says? Calvin affirms it has thus fallen: neither
does he otherwise prove it, then by a gross and manifest untruth. For he
says, that long ago the Popes of Rome have taught 3. most greiuous errors
touching Faith: to wit, That there is no God, Lib. 4. Inst. cap. 7.. 27.
no Christ, no Resurrection.

3. But I will contrariwise demonstrate, not by untruths as he does, but by
strong arguments, that the Church of Rome, as heertofore it was, so still to be
at this present, the true Church of Christ: nor ever to have fallen away from
her purity; and that three manner of ways. 1. By Scripture. 2. by Fathers. 3.
by Calvin himself and his own principles. And that I may be brief, I will use
this last kind of proof most; especially seeing that many others have long
since both out of Scriptures and Fathers very copiously handled the same
argument. To the end therefore that the whole matter may be the more easily
perceived. I will labor to deduce, and explicate the same by certain
Conclusions. This then is,

The 1. Conclusion.
THERE must be granted some visible Church on earth, which both is, and is
also called Catholic, Holy, the Spouse of Christ, the house of God, the Pillar
and firmament of Truth.

1 THIS conclusion is wholly granted by Calvin in his 4. book of Institutions
Chap. 1. for many paragraphes together, where he purposely disputes of the
Visible Church. And verily in the 2.. he affirms, that by Faith we believe
the visible Church, when we say in the Apostles Creed, I believe the Holy
Catholic Church. Wherefore that a visible Church be granted, is an article of
Faith, according to Calvin. And full rightly. For albeit we see with external
eyes, the multitude of those me^, whereof the visible Church consists: yet
notwithstanding that there is the true doctrine of Christ and his Apostles in
the said multitude, this we see not, but believe it. So that the visible Church
is contained partly under sight, partly under Faith. With external eyes we see
those men that be in the Church: with internal faith we believe, that amongst
them the true doctrine of Christ is both delivered and conserved.

2. And thus is that Cauil of the Lutherans solued: That which we believe by
faith, is not visible. But the Church we believe by faith. Ergo, the Church is
not visible. For the Mayor Proposition ought thus to be understood: That which
we believe by Faith is not visible, according to the thing that is contained
under Faith, although it be visible according to some other thing, that is not
contained under Faith. And of this matter there be diverse examples. In Christ
the Apostles saw his humanity, they believed his Divinity. In baptism we see
the external water and washing; but the internal force of regeneration and
remission of sins we believe. In the volume of the Bible, we see the paper,
the writing, and the volume it self; we believe that to be the word of God,
which is read therein. The same judgment therefore there is of the Church.
Somewhat there is in it which we believe; and somewhat which we perceive by
sense.

3. But least that any should be mistaken, we must yet use another distinction.
For it may be two ways understood, that we believe the Church by Faith. First,
that by faith we believe, that each man which is in the Church, is truly
faithful, and does with internal affection follow the doctrine of Christ.
Secondly, that by faith we believe the doctrine of Christ to be both taught,
and conserved in it. The former sense is false: the later is true. For we do
not believe, that as many, as are in the visible Church with us, are according
to internal affection, truly faithful, because it is plain, that many
hypocrites are in the Church, as I will show you afterward: yet do we believe
that doctrine, which by external voice the men that are in the visible Church
do profess to be that true doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, without which
there is no salvation.

4. And that this visible Church is to be called Catholic, Holy, the Spouse of
Christ, the house of God, the pillar and firmament of Truth, Calvin confesses.
2. 9. 10. and the rest that follow. And the matter is certain. For both
Scriptures, Creeds, and Fathers teach so every where. It is called Catholic or
Universal, for three causes. First in respect of place, because it is spread
over the whole world. Marc. 16. 15. Going into (...) whole world, preach the
gospel to every creature. Secondly, in respect of Time, because it shall last
for ever, Dan. 2. 44. The God of heaven will set up a Kingdom, which shall
never be dissipated, or dissolved. Thirdly in respect of the Men that are to be
saved, because no man can be saved out of the Church. Herby appears the
difference betwixt the Church of Christ, and the Synagogue of the Jews. For
the Jews Synagogue was none of these ways Catholic or Universal. Not the
first way: for it was not spread over the whole world, but over Palestine only.
Not the second, because it lasted but a certain time. Not the third, because
men, out of the Synagogue, might be saved, as Job, the Ninevites, and others
were.

5. It is called Holy, for these causes, First, because no man enters into it,
unless he be washed and sanctified by Baptism. And in this sense the Apostle
said, that Christ has washed his Ephesians. 5. 26.
Church in the lauer of water. And in another place: These verily you were, but
1. Cor. v. 11.
we are washed, and sanctified. Secondly, because all her institutions,
worshipings, ceremonies, and Sacraments are ordained to sanctity. For they tend
to this, that we either become holy, or that we increase, and be conserved in
holiness. Thirdly because out of it, there is no holiness. Fourthly, because
Christ is her head, who is the Holy Sanctus Sanctoru^
of Holies. Calvin. 17. adds, that she is called Holy, because she profits
in sanctity daily, and aspireth to the very top, or butt of sanctity.

6. She is called the Spouse of Christ, because Christ has by an indissoluble
band coupled her to himself, as the Apostle teaches Ephesians. 5. And she has ^.
31. 32.
three privileges. The first is, that she is fruitful. The second is, that
she is Ever a Virgin. The third is, that she issued out of the side of her
Spouse. All these three taken together, never happened to any spouse. Mary the
wife of Joseph was indeed both fruitful, and ever a Virgin; yet did she not
come out of the side of her husband. Contrariwise, Eua was made out of the side
of Adam, and was fruitful; yet was she not a perpetual Virgin. But the Spouse
of Christ has obtained all these at once. And first, that is fruitful,
appears by that Gal. 4. We are not the children of the hand-mayde, but of
the freewoman. ^. 31.
That she is a Virgin, appears by that 2. Cor. 11. I have espoused you to one
man, ^. 2.
to exhibit a chaste Virgin unto Christ. That she came out of the side of
Christ, many do gather out of that in S. John 19. ^. 34.
One of the Soldiers opening his side with a lance, forthwith there issued out
blood and water.

7. It is called, the house of God, because although God be every where, as
himself confesses in Jeremy, saying, Cap. 23. 4.
I fill heaven and earth: yet is he said to dwell after a peculiar manner in the
Church, as in his house, by his singular assistance, government, and
distribution of supernatural gifts and graces, Matthew. 28. 20. This house he
built for himself, Matthew. 16. 18. In this house, he has a Dispenser, and
Steward over his family, Luc. 12. 42. In this house he begets children by
Baptism, he instructs and fostereth them by preaching; and nourishes them
with the Eucharist. In this house he has vesells of all sorts, of gold, and of
silver, of wood, and of earth, 2. Tim. 2. 20. In this house he celebrateth
marriages and makes Nuptials to his Son, Matthew. 22. 2. Out of this house,
or Church, there are neither laws, nor miracles, nor Sacraments, nor
Sacrifices, to wit, profitable to salvation.

8. It is called The Pillar and Firmament of Truth, both because, she is a
faithful Keeper of Gods truth, as Calvin explayneth:. 10*
as also, because in no part of the world besides, does Gods truth dwell, but
in the visible Church, as Beza does interpret 1. Tim. 3. 15. as lastly also
because she can not err from the truth, as Catholics do expound it. And thus
much concerning the first Conclusion.

The second conclusion.
IN this visible, and Catholic Church, whereof we have spoken, are all such as
are through Baptism admitted into the faith of Christ, not the good only; but
the bad also: not only the predestinate, but also the reprobate.

1 THIS Conclusion also Calvin ^. 4. c. 2. ^. 7.
admits in these words: But in this Church there are mixed many hyprocrites
ambitious, covetous, enutous, and evil speakers. And. 13. They allege that
Christ's Church is holy: but yet so, as that withal they understand it to be
mixed of good and bad. Let them hear that Parable from the mouth of Christ,
wherein She is compared to a net, in which all sorts of fishes are gathered,
but are not ^ or chose^ out.
severed, until they be laid out upon the shore.

2. All Catholics do agree herein. We confess (says S. Augustine) ^ract. 6.
^n Joan.
that in the Catholic Church, are both good and bad, but as grain and chafe.
Again. The Church has in her strong men, she has ^erm. 107. ^e temp.
infirm; she has just men, she has also unjust. And again: Now all are
accounted In Ps. 47
Gods people, that bear his sacraments; but all appertain not to his mercy.
For all that receive the Sacrament of the Baptism of Christ, are called
Christians; but all live not worthily in that Sacrament.

3. The like do other Fathers write, and that worthily. For as Calvin himself
has observed, Christ's Church is compared in Scripture to a Barn, in which not
only wheat, but chafe also is to be found. It is compared to a net that is
cast into the sea, gathering fishes of all sorts together. It is compared to
a Nuptial feast, to the which both good and bad are called. It is compared to
ten Virgins, five whereof were wise, and as many of them foolish. It is
compared to a sheepfold, in which are both sheep and goats. Lastly it is
compared to a great House, wherein are vessels of al sorts, some unto honor,
and other some unto contumely.

The third Conclusion.
OVT of this visible and Catholic Church, no man can be saved, or obtain
remission of Sins.

1 THIS Calvin. 4. teaches in these words: Extraeius gremiu^ nulla est
speranda peccatorum remissio, nec vlla salus. Out of her lap, no remission of
sins is to be hoped for, nor any salvation at all. And. 20. The Lord has not
promised his mercy, but in the Communion of Saints. And. 22. This benefit (to
wit of the remission of sins) is so proper unto the Church, that we cannot
otherwise enjoy it, but by remaining in the communion of it. And in the same
place. Therefore let every of us think this to be his duty, not to seek for
remission of his sins elswere, but where the Lord has put it, to wit, in the
visible Church.

2. The same teach Catholics: He has not God for his Father (says S.
Cyprian) De Vnitate Ecclesiae
that has not the Church for his mother. The holy vniuer sal Church, says S.
Gregory, Lib. 14. Moral. c. 2.
preaches, that no man can truly be saved, but in her, affirming that all such
as are out of her, can in no wise be saved. The Catholic Church Ep. 50. a^
Bonifaciu^ Comitenm sub finen^
only (says S. Augustine) is the body of Christ, whose Savior he is. Out of
this body the Holy Ghost quickneth no man. And, Whosoever he be, and what
manner of man soever he be, he is Ser. 181 de tempore.
no Christian, that is not in the Church of Christ.

3. Diverse causes hereof are assigned by S. Augustine. First because in the
Church only, the Host of the Redeemer is immolated or offered up. 2. Those that
labor in the vineyard only do receive their penny hire. 3. All that were out
of the Arc, were drowned in the flood. 4. That member which abides not in the
body, cannot have life. 5. The bough that is cut off from the tree, cannot
branch out or grow. 6. A river separated from his fountain dries up. These
and the like S. Augustine sets down sermon. 181. de tempore.

4. To the same purpose is that prophesy Isa. 60. Open shall thy gates be
continually; v. 11.
neither night, nor day shall they be shut, that the strength of the Gentiles
may be brought unto thee, and that their Kings may be brought. For the Nation
and the Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish. In which words there
are two things foretold. One is, that Christ's Church should be visible, which
should be continually open for all Nations, if they will enter into it. The
other is, that all that entered not into it, should perish.

The fourth Conclusion.
SVCH as forsake this visible, and Catholic Church, are forsakers of
Religion, and Traitors and violators of holy VVedlocke.

1. THVS Calvin. 10. when he says: So great account does the Lord make of the
communion of his Church, that he shall he held a traitorous turne-coate, and
forsaker of Religion, whosoever disobediently alienates himself from the
Christian society. And then again: Whence it follows, that the departing
from the Church, is the denying of God and Christ, and therefore so much the
more must we beware of such kind of disagreement, or breach of faith. And yet
again: Neither can there be a more heinous crime imagined, the^ with
sacrilegious disloyalty, to violate that wedlock, which the only begotten
Son of God vouchsased to contract with us.

2. The like has S. Augustine lib. de side and operibus cap. 5. and lib. 2.
contra Cresconium cap. 34. where he teaches* that the visible Church (albeit
many bad men be in it) is in no wise to be forsaken, or divided. And amongst
other things, he cites that out of S. Cyprian. Although we see (says he)
cockle to be in the Church, yet ought not our faith or charity to be hindered,
that we should start back from the Church, because we see cockle to be in the
Church. We are only to labor, that we may become good corn, that when the
corn begins to be laid up in our Lords barnes, we may reap fruit for our
work and labor. The Apostle in his Epistle says: In a great house there are
not only great vessels of gould and silver; but also of wood and earth; and
verily some are honored, other some dishonored: Let us endeavor that we may
be a goulden and silver vessel.

3. And the reason appears by that which has been said, because that out of
the Church no man can be saved. Ergo, he that voluntarily forsakes the Church,
can have no hope of salvation. For he is like a member cut from the body, or a
branch cut from the Vine, or a sheep out of the sheepfold, straying among
wolves; or like to those, who being out of the Arc, were swallowed up by the
deluge, or flood of waters.

The fifth Conclusion.
THIS visible Church of Christ cannot be without Pastors, Doctors, Bishops,
and other Ministers, that have a lawful calling and ordination.

SO teaches Call.. 11. where he says. Now does Satan with the same wickedness
endeavor to destroy that ministry, which notwithstanding Christ has ordained
in his Church, that it being taken away, the edificatio^ thereof might perish.
And c. 3.. 4. Phere follow Pastors and Doctors whom the Church can never
want. And in this sort speak the Fathers. S. Hierome l. cont. Luciferianos
says: That is no Church, which has no Priests. And S. Cyprian. l. 4. epist.
9. Thou ought to know that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in
the Bishop* and that if any be not with the Bishop, neither are they in the
Church. And in the same place: The Church is a company united to the Priest,
and a slocke adhering to their Pastor.

2. And the reason hereof is threefold. The first is, because the Church cannot
be without faith. And faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 14. How shall they
invoke, in whom they have not believed? or how shall they believe him, whom
they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? or how shall
they preach, except they be sent? The second reason is, because the Church is
not without Sacraments, the dispensatio^ whereof appertains to Bishops and
Pastors. The third is, because in every Commonwealth there ought to be order:
Some are to govern, and others to obey: therefore in like manner in the Church
some ought to be sheep, others Pastors or Sheepheards. Here hence is that of
the Acts 20. 28. Attend to your selves, and to the whole slocke, over which
the Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to govern the Church of God. And Ephesians.
4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some
Evangelists, and others Pastors and Doctors, to the consumation of Saints,
unto the work of the ministry, unto the edification of the body of Christ.
Upon which words Beza Caluins disciple writes thus: Out of which words it is
plain enough, that these two gifts (to wit, of being Pastors and Doctors)
ought to be perpetual in the Church of God.

The sixth Conclusion.
THIS visible Church is so firmly founded upon Christ, that it cannot possibly
fall away, or perish.

1. THIS Calvin cannot deny, because it follows evidently out of his own
principles. This I will show you by these arguments following. First, no man
can be saved out of the visible Church, according to the third Conclusion
granted by Calvin. But always there are some saved. Ergo, always there is a
visible Church. Secondly, Christ conjoined to himself the visible Church, as a
Spouse, with an indissoluble band, according to the first* Conclusion. Ergo,
the Church can by no means be separated or pulled away from Christ. Thirdly It
is an article of faith, that a visible Church be granted, according to the
same Conclusion. But articles of faith are always true. Ergo, it is always*
true, that a visible Church be granted. These are out Calvin himself.

2. Now follows an argument out of the Scripture, especially out of that
place Matthew. 16. 18. Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against her. Here Christ promises two things. 1. that
he will build his Church upon a rock. 2. that Hell gates shall never prevail
against her. In both which, he alludeth to that which he had said Matthew. 7. 24.
that the wise man is he, who builds his house upon a rock; and he a fool,
that builds on the sand. And he shows the cause why: for that when some
more violent tempest does arise, that house which was built upon the sand,
falls down to the ground: but not that which was founded on a rock. Christ
then would imitate the wise builder, and build his Church upon a rock, that by
no force of winds or storms, it may be disturbed.

3. Hereby it appears, that such as teach, the Church of Christ to have
fallen, or that it may fall, do great injury unto Christ. For thereupon it
plainly follows, that he built it not upon a rock, but on the sand, and
therefore to have imitated the foolish, not the wise builders, yea to have been a
fabler, in that he promised to build it upon a rock, and did not: and because
he said, the gates of Hell should not prevail against it, and yet have
prevailed. Neither may it be objected, that Christ spoke of the invisible
Church. For he plainly speaks there of the visible Church, as Beza upon that
place confesses, and others every where.

4. The same is confirmed by that, Psalm. 47. 9. God has sounded it for ever.
Upon which place S. Augustine writes thus. But perhaps that City (he speaks
of the Church) which has held up the world, shall be some time ouerturned? God
forbid. God has sounded it for ever. If therefore God has sounded it for ever,
why searest thou least the sky should fall? And upon the 101. Psalm. concione
2. disputing there against the Donatists, who said, that the whole visible
Church was perished, and remained only in Africa, amongst certain just persons
only, he thus says: But that Church which was of all nations, is now no where,
she has utterly perished. This they say, who are not in her. Oh impudent
voice! She is not, because thou art not in her* But beware, least thou therefore
be not: for the shall be, although thou be not. And afterward he brings
in the Church speaking thus: How long shall I be in this world? Tell me for
their sake that say, she was, but is not now. The Church has played the
Apostata, and is perished from among all nations: and he told me: Behold I am
with you, even to the end of the world.

The seventh Conclusion.
THE Roman Church, for the first 500. years after Christ, was that visible and
Catholic Church of Christ, whereof we have hitherto spoken.

1. THIS Conclusion may be understood two ways. 1. That the Roman Church, that
is, only that Church which was at Rome, was Catholic and Universal. But this
is false, and is as falsely imposed upon us by certain of our Adversaries.
Secondly that the Roman Church, that is, all that whole multitude of the
faithful, which did at that time adhere unto the Pope, was the Catholic and
Universal Church. This now is true, and Calvin confesses as much, when he
says, that, The Roman Church, was the mother of all Churches, to wit, because
all the particular Churches of Christ, which then were dispersed over the face
of the earth, did adhere to the Roman Church, or Bishop of Rome.

2. In this sense the ancient Fathers took the Roman Church, and the Catholic
Church for one and the same: as S. Hierome cont. Rufinum Apol. 1. near the
beginning; Ambros. de obitu Satyrifratris, and others. Yea, when they would
recount, and unfold the Catalogue of such Bishops as had lawfully succeeded one
another in the Catholic and Apostolic Church; they al ways spoke of the
Roman Church, and of the succession of the Popes of Rome, as appears by
Irenaeus, Optatus, Augustine, Epiphanius, and Eusebius Caesariensis. For these,
although they were Bishops themselves, to wit, Ireriaeus of Lions in France,
Optatus and Augustine in Africa, Epiphanius of Salamina in Cyprus, Eusebius of
Caesarea in Palestine; yet did they not recount the succession of their own
particular Churches, but of the Roman Church only, to which as to their mother,
the other particular Churches did adhere.

3. This may be confirmed two ways. First, because after the first 300. years
flourished Pope Gregory, to who^ as to their Head, the whole Christian world
was conjoined, as appears by his Epistles which he sent to all Provinces,
especially to the Bishops of the East, of Afric, Spain, France, and Italy*
Secondly because after Pope Gregory's death, was celebrated the sixth General
Council, which our Adversaries receive for most holy, as appears, as well by
others, as also by the Tigurine Confession, and by the Centuries of the
Magdeburgians. But it is manifestly gathered out of the said Council, that the
whole East and West at that time conspired, and consented with Agatho Pope of
Rome, as members with their head. For that his sentence, which by his Legates
and Epistles he declared unto the^, Cent. 7^ cap. 9.
they all followed, as the Magdeburgians do record at large.

4. Thus have we found therefore, that for the first 500. years, the Catholic
Church was that very company of faithful people, dispersed over the face of
the earth, which did adhere, in doctrine of faith, to the Pope of Rome. Now we
must see whether in the mean time, there be any thing in this matter changed,
or altered.

The eight Conclusion.
THE Church of Rome hitherto has never fallen from that state wherein she was
the first 500. years: and therefore as she was the true Catholic and
Apostolic Church then, so is she also now.

1. THIS Conclusion is proved two ways. First directly, in this wise. The
Roman Church retains still the self same doctrine of faith, and succession of
Bishops, which it had in the first 500. years. Ergo, it is not fallen from
that state, wherein it then was. Secondly indirectly, in this manner. The visibe
Church of Christ, and the lawful succession of Bishops, cannot fall on earth,
as is already proved out of Calvin. Ergo it must needs be, that both now there
is, and hitherto the visible Church of Christ has been upon earth, with a law*
full succession of Bishops, which in doctrine consents, or has consented
with the primitive Church, which was in the first 500. years. But no other
Church, besides the Roman Church* either is now, or has been hitherto, which
either now has, or has had a lawful succession of Bishops, and now
consents, or has consented with the primitive Church, in doctrine of faith:
Ergo the Roman Church now is, and always has been the visible Church of Christ
on earth. Both which points are now to be explicated.

The explication of the former Argument.
2. THE former argument contains in it two parts; the one touching the
doctrine of faith, the other cocerning the succession of Bishops. Our
Adversaries grant, that the succession of Bishops remains yet in the Church
of Rome, because they se they cannot deny it: but they deny the self same
doctrine to remain, which was in the first 500. years. This is the thing
therefore which we are to demonstrate. But it cannot be demo^strated more
certainly, then by a collation, or comparing of the old ancient doctrine, with
that of ours, which I do in this manner.

3. Whatsoever the Roman Church now teaches, concerning the principal
mysteries of our Faith, to wit, of Christ's real Presence in the Eucharist, of
the necessity of baptizing Infants, of the sacrifice of the Mass, of
Justification, of the necessity and merit of good works, touching invocation of
Saints, single life of Priests, fasting, satisfaction, and Traditions; this
was taught heretofore by the primitive Church, which flourished in the first
500. years. Ergo, the Roman Church has not fallen from the primitive Church
in matters of faith. The Antecedent may be proved two ways. 1. By an
induction, through each part or member. 2. By the concession or grant of Calvin
himself. Both which I will perform in that which follows.

The explication of the later Argument.
4. THE later Argument has diverse parts; only two whereof have need of proof.
One is, that there is no visible Church on earth at this time, besides the
Roman, which can have a lawful succession of Bishops, or consent in doctrine
of faith with the primitive Church, which was in the first 500. years. The
other is, that neither for a 1000. years from Pope Gregory's time, until
Martin Luther, was there any such Church besides the Church of Rome.

5. The former part I thus prove. If there were at this time any such Church on
earth, besides the Church of Rome, without all doubt it should be the
Caluinists Church. But this is not. Ergo, there is none but the Roman. The
Mayor, the Caluinists (against whom I dispute) do willingly grant. The Minor
I prove two ways. First, because the Caluinists Church, which is now extant,
neither has any lawful Priests, or Bishops; or if it have any, it cannot
deduce their succession any further the^ Luthers time. Ergo it has failed in
the continued succession of Bishops. But the true Church ought to have a
continued, and not an interrupted succession of Bishops: as we have before
proved out of Calvin himself. Secondly, because the Caluinists Church
co^senteth not in doctrine of faith, with the primitive Church, which was in
the first 500. years. This again I will show two ways. First by the grant
of Galuin himself. For he plainly confesses, that he dissenteth from the
ancient Church in these points following.

1. Touching Freewill. l. 2. Inst. c. 2.. 4.

2. Concerning the cooperation of Free Will with the grace of God. l. 2. c. 3..
7.

3. Touching Justification. l. 3. c. 11.. 15. Nec Augustini quide sententia
recipieda est etc. Neither verily is the opinion of Augustine to be received
etc.

4. Touching the person of the Mediator. l. 2. c. 14.. 3. And here the error
of the Aneie^ts cannot be excused etc.

5. Touching Concupiscence. l. 3. c. 3.. 10. Neque opus est multu^ inuestigando
laborare, quid hic veteres senscrint. Neither need we labor much in searching
out what the old writers have thought heerin.

6. Concerning Satisfaction. l 2. c. 4.. 38. But little do these things move me,
which do every where occur in the books of the old VVriters.

7. Concerning Prayer for the dead. l. 3. c. 5.. 10. When the adversaries
object unto me, that it has been received by custom above 1300. years, to pray
for the dead etc. [And a little after he says that although they saw they
should not have don so, yet they did so. But the very old Fathers themselves
(says Calvin) that prayed for the dead, did see, that heerin they wanted both
commandment of God, and lawful example. But who upon Caluins words will
believe, that these Blessed Saints of God, would do that which they yet saw was
offensive unto God?]

8. Touching Merit. l. 3. c. 15.. 2. The old writers of the Church (I confess)
commonly used the word Merit etc.

9. Touching Traditions. l. 4. c. 12.. 23. But this prohibition does clearly
show how pestiferous all traditions are.

10. Touching solemn Penance. l. 4. c. 12.. 8. In which behalf the
immeasurable austerity of the ancient Fathers cannot be excused.

11. Concerning Lent. l. 4. c. 12.. 20. At that time the superstitious
observation of Lent, was grown in use every where etc.

12. Touching Laickes baptizing in time of necessity. l. 4. c. 15.. 20. And
that it has been for many ages past, yea, and in a manner, at the very
beginning of the Church, received in use, that in peril of death Laics might
baptize, I see not with how strong a reason it may be defended.

6. Thus have I showed you by Caluins own grant, that the Caluinists Church
dissenteth in doctrine from the Primitive Church. Now I will declare the same
by this brief induction.

The Caluinists do teach,
1. THAT God is the author of sin. Calvin l. 1. Inst. c. 18.. 3. And now I
have showed plainly enough, that God is to be called the author of all those
things which these Censurers will have to happen only (...) his idle sufferance.
and. 4. Man, by Gods just impulsion, does that which is not lawful for him to
do. And. 1. Absalom defiling his Fathers bed with incestuous adultery,
committed detestable wickedness, yet does God pronounce this to be his. And in
the same place. Whatsoever men, or Satan himself do attempt; yet does God
hold the stern. And. 2. Satan is said to blind the minds of the vnsaithfull.
But whence is this, but that the effectual working of error comes from God
himself? And l. 3. c. 23.. 9. The reprobate would be thought excusable,
because they cannot escape the necessity of sinning: especially since by the
ordinance of God, such necessity is cast upon them.

2. That God by his only will did predestinate men to eternal death, without
any fault or theirs. Call. l. 3. c. 21.. 1. It is evident, that it is wrought by
the will of God, that to some salvation is freely offered; And other some are
debarred for coming to it. Et infra. I his (as many think) is a combersome
question; because they think nothing to be less reasonable, then out of the
common multitude of men^ some to be predestined unto salvation, and other
some to destruction. And. 5. We call predestination that eternal decree of
God, whereby he had it determined with himself, what he willed to become of
every man. For all are not created to a like condition: but to some eternal
life, to other some eternal damnation is preordained. Therefore, as to one of
these two ends every man is ordained: so we say he is predestinate either to
life, or to death. And Cap. 22.. 7. But wheresoever this pleasure of God
reigns, there no works come to be considered. And. c. 23.. 1. It is in no
wise meet to assign the preparing to destruction to any other thing, then to
the secret counsel of God. And. 2. Men by the bare will of God, without their
own deserving, are predestinate to eternal death. And. 5. I say that they
were created of the Lord, whom he without doubt foreknew were to go into
destruction; and that it was so done, because he so willed.

3. That Christ's body is not in the Eucharist, but in heaven only. Calvin in
his Consent with the Tigurines in the matter of the Sacrament. All local
imagination of presence must be taken away; sor when the signs are here in
this world, we see them with our eyes, we seele them with our hands. Christ,
as he is man, is no other where to be sought for, then in heaven, nor otherwise
then with the mind, and understanding of says. Perverse therefore and impious
superstition it is, to include him under the elements of this world. Wherefore
such as in the solene words of the Supper, Hoc est corpus meu^, Hic est sangius
meus, do precisely urge the litterall sense (as they say) let us reject them as
preposterous interpreters. For we hold it to be without all controversy, that
they are to be taken figuratively; and that the bread and wine are said to be
that which they do signify. Neither ought this to seem either new or insolent,
that the name of the thing figured, should by the figure called Metonymia be
transferred unto the sign; seeing such like speeches do every where occurr in
Scriptures. Neither do we by so speaking, say any thing more, then what is
extant amongst all the ancientest, and best approved writers of the Church. And
yet again. Because the body of Christ is finite, and contained in heaven, as
in a place: it must needs be so far distant from us, as Heaven is from Earth.

4. That Baptism is not necessary to Salvation for children of faithful
parents, because that such children are sanctified from their mothers womb, and
are heirs of eternal life, through that promise Genesis 17. 7. I will be thy God,
and of thy seed after thee. Calu. in Antidot. Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap.
5. But it has pleased the Council to drive such Children away from the
Kingdom of God, as are first taken out of this life, before they could be
offered unto Baptism: as though it were said in vain, that such are borne
holy that are borne of faithful parents? For unless the promise of life
should already belong to them before; he should profane Baptism, whosoever
should give it them. But if that God have adopted the^ unto his Kingdom; how
great an injury is there done to the promise, as if it were not sufficient of
it self unto their salvation? The contrary opinion (I confess) has borne
sway: but it is an unjust thing that Gods truth should be overwhelmed with man's
error, though of never so long continuance. The salvation of children is
included in the promise, by which God testifies to the faithful, that he will
be a God to them, and to their seed. In this respect did he pronounce such to
be borne unto him, as came from Abraham. Not from baptism therefore has their
salvation beginning, but that which was already founded in the word, is now
sealed by Baptism.

5. That Original Sin is not taken away by Baptism, but still remains in
us so long as we live. Call l. 2. Inst. c. 1.. 8. This perverseness never
cesseth in us. And. l. 4. c. 15.. 10. Now it is clear, how false it is, that
by baptism we are loosed, and delivered from Original sin. And in Antidoto
Conc. Trid. sess. 5. Sin truly abides in us: neither is it by Baptism
extinguished.

6. That only faith does justify, and is sufficient to Salvation* Call. Inst.
l. 3. c. 11.. 18. We say that man is justified by says only. And a little
after. Does not he perfectly enough give all things unto says, that takes all
things from works? And in Antid. Conc. Trid. sess. 6. can. 11. Vim
iustificandi, ac facultatem fidei in solidum vindicamus. And in the same place,
can. 20. We are to know, that the trust of Salvation in no wise depends of
keeping the commandments. For that sentence of Paul ever stands, That the
Gospel differs from the Law in this, that it promises life, not under the
condition of works* as it did, but through Faith.

7. That all the works of the Just, are defilings and mortal sins. Call. l.
Inst. 3. c. 12.. 4. All the works of men are nothing else, but defilings and
filthiness; and that which amongst the common sort is accounted righteousness,
is before God mere iniquity. And c. 14.. 9. Thus have we showed, that not so
much as one good work comes out of holy me^, which if it be judged in it
self, deserves not the just reward of shame. And. 11. Upon these 2. points we
must firmly stand, that there was never yet any work of a godly man, which if
it were examined by the severe Judgment of God, was not damnable. Again. If
any such work were showed (which is not possible for man,) yet being corrupted
and defiled with sin, wherewith most certain it is that the doer of it is
burdened and defiled it loses grace. And c. 15.. 3. Nothing comes out of
any man, how perfect soever he be, which is not defiled with some spot.

8. That the law of God is impossible to be kept, neither by any man though
never so holy, was it ever yet kept, or can possibly be kept hereafter. Calvin
l. 2. Inst. c. 7.. 5. VVheras we said the keeping of the Law was impossible,
that is in few words both to be expounded and proved. And in Antid. Conc. Trid.
sess. 6. c. 12. It suffices me abou^dantly that there never was any yet, that
satisfied the law of God: neither can there be any such found. Again. He
denies that the Prophets and Patriarchs, and godly Kings, how soever they
might be helped by the spirit of God, were not meet or able to bear the yoke
of the Law: neither does he doubtfully pronounce that the keeping of the Law
was impossible.

9. That faith and holiness is proper to the elect, and that being once had,
it cannot be lost any more. Call. l. 3. c. 2.. 11. Therefore as God does
regenerate only the elect with incorruptible seed for ever, so that the seed of
life planted in their hearts may never perish: so sou^dly does he seat the grace
of his adoption in them, that it may be stable and sure. And. 11. This in the
mean time is to be holden for truth, that how small and weak soever faith be
in the elect; yet because it is a sure pledge unto them of the spirit of God,
and a seal of their adoption, the print thereof can never be blotted out of
their hearts. And. c. 24.. 6. And neither is this now doubtful, that Christ
when he prays for all the faithful, asks the same thing for them, which he
asked for Peter, that their says may never fail: whereby we may gather that
they are out of danger of falling away.

10. That indeed God calls reprobates to the faith; but yet with the
external voice only; not by internal grace; neither does God do it seriously,
and with a purpose to help the^, but feignedly, and with intention to hurt
the^. Call. l. 3. c. 24.. 13. He directs his voice unto them, but to the end
they may wax more deaf. He lights a light, but that they may be made the
blinder. He profers them doctrine, but that they may be more astonyshed thereby.
He applies a remedy unto them, but that they may not be healed. etc.

These and the like do Caluinists teach. But the primitive Church in the first
500. years taught no such thing. Yea, it taught the contrary in all things, as
shall appear by the Inductio^ following.

The Primitive Church taught,
1. THAT God was not author of sin. S. Chrysostom hom. 2 3. in Acta
Apostoloru^: Let no man say, God is to us author of evils. Again. Better it
were to be buried six hundred times, the^ that God should hear of such things
by us. Aug. l. 2. de peccat. meritis c. 17. Make not God the cause of any ma^s
fault. Prosp. in respo^sione ad capitul. Gallor. c. 14. God is the author of
good things, but not of evil things. Fulge^t. l. 2. ad Monim. c. 19. Deus non
est vltor, cuius est author. Therefore seeing he is reue^ger of Sins, he is
not author of them.

2. That God did not predestinate any man unto death, but by reason of sin.
Aug. l. 3. cont. Iuliannm. c. 18. God is good, and God is just; he can save men
without good merits because he is good: but he cannot damn man without evil
merits, because he is just. And ad articulos falso sibi impositos art. 2. That
men are borne, it is a good turn; but it is the fault of the preuaricator,
that they perish. Tertul. in libro de resurrectione carnis, Deus de suo optimus
est, de nostro iustus. Fulgentius l. 1. ad Monimun. c. 26. It is well known
there can not be said to be Gods wrath, but where ma^s iniquity is believed to
have gone before.

3. That the Body and Blood of Christ is truly and really in the Eucharist,
Hilarious. l 8. de Trinit. Concerning the verity of the flesh and blood there is
left no place of doubt. Cyril. Hierosolymitan. Cateches. 4. When Christ
himself so affirms, and says of the bread, Hoc est corpus meum, who dare
afterward doubt thereof? And in the same place: Under the form of bread his
body is given thee, and under the form of wine there is given his blood. and
infra. Holding this for most certain that this bread, which we see, is not
bread, though the taste judge it to be bread, but the body of Christ. Ambrosius
l. 4. de Sacrament is c. 4. When the consecration is made of bread it becomes
the body of Christ. And in lib. de mysterijs initia^dis c. 9. Perhaps thou will
say; I see another thing: how tellest thou me, that shall receive the body of
Christ? And this point remains yet, that we prove it etc. [Aug. sermon. 28. de
verbis Domini, Before the words of Christ, that which is offered is called
bread, but when the words of Christ are uttered, it is no longer called bread,
sed CORPUS appellatur.]

4. That Baptism for Infa^ts is necessary to salvation. Aug. l. 3. de anima
and cius origin c. 9. Believe not, say not, teach not, that children prevented
by death, before they be baptized, can attain to the pardon of original
sin, if thou will be a Catholic. And epist. 28. ad Hieronymum: Whosoever
shall say, that eue^ such children shall be quickened in Christ, as depart this
life without participation of his Sacrament, this man verily condemns the
whole Church. Let al Caluinists liste^ unto this.

5. That original sin is taken away by Baptism. Aug. Conc. 1. in Psalm. 115.
That as the Aegyptia^s were drowned in the sea, so are our sins droumed and
extinct in baptism, the Prophet does intimate more clearly then the light it
self, saying: He will cast all our sins into the depth of the sea. Amb. l. 2.
de Sacram. c. 4. VVorthily is that water sweet, wherein our fault is swallowed
up. Lactantius. l. 3. c. 26. By one lauare is all evil abolished.

6. That faith without works and the keeping of the commandments is not
sufficient to salvation. Clemens Alexandrinui l. 5. stromatum. By grace we are
saved, but yet not without good works. Nazra. orat. in sanctum lauacru^. Do
good, because that faith without works is dead. Chrysostom. homil. lib. 3. in
Joan. Does it suffice unto eternal life to believe in the Son* No, it does
not, says he. S. Hierome in cap. 26. Isaiae. Let a wall, and a forewall be set
therein. The wall of good works, and the forewall of Faith. For it is not
sufficient to have a wall of faith, unless that says it self be strengthened
by good works. Aug. in lib. de fide and operibus. Now let us see that which
must be shaken out of all religious hearts, least by an evil security they
loose their salvation, if they shall think only says to be sufficient for the
obtaining of it etc.

7. That the works of the Just are meritorious before God. Aug. sermon. 102. de
tempore. Deus pro meritis sidei a tque bonoru^ operum dabit suis fidelibus
regnum caeloru^. God for the merits of faith and of God works will give unto
his faithful children the Kingdom of Heaven. Basil. orat. in initium
Prouerbiorum. All we that walk the way of the Gospel, are merchants; getting
unto our selves the possession of heaven, by the works of the commandments.

8. That the law of God is not impossible. Basil. in illud Attend tibi. It is
a wicked thing to say that the Commandments are impossible. Chrysostom. hom. 8.
de poenitentia. Do not accuse our Lord; he commands not impossible things.
S. Hier. l. 3. co^tr. Pelagianos. God has commanded things that are possible:
this no man doubts. Aug. l. de natura and gratia, c. 43. God therefore
commands not impossible things.

9. That faith, and holiness being once had, may yet be lost again: neither
is it proper to the elect only. Aug. in lib. de corrept. and gratiac. 13. We
must believe, that some of the Children of perdition, (having not received the
gift of perseverance to the end) have begun to live in that faith, which
works by charity, and do for some while live both faithfully and justly, and
afterward fall.

10. That God by his internal grace calls al, eue^ reprobates unto the
faith, and as much as lies in him seeks their salvation. Ambr. sermon. 8. in
Psalm. 118. The Sun of Justice is risen unto all, comen unto all, suffered for
all, and rose again for all. But if any believe not in Christ, he defraudeth
himself of as general a benefit, as if a man having his windows shut, should
bar forth the beams of the Sun, Chrysostom. hom. 7. in leremiam* He
enlighteneth every man, as much as in him lies. But if any voluntarily (the
eyes of their mind being closed) will not direct their eyesight unto the beams
of this light, such persist not in darkness by reason of the light, but
through their own malice or fault.

Now thou see, Good Reader, I suppose, that the Caluinists Church teaches
one thing, and the Primitive Church another thing, in matters of says, Calvin
himself confesses as much; and it manifestly appears by these few things,
which we have alleged. Whereupon I conclude that which was to be proved, viz.
that the Caluinists Church at this time is not the true Church of Christ,
because that it disagreeth from the Primitive Church, which all men grant was
the true Catholic, and Apostolic Church, Ergo the Roman Church is the
Catholic Church.

Hitherto have we spoken of the former part. The latter is, that for the space
of a 1000. years from Pope Gregory until Mart. Luther, there was no visible
Church but the Roman which had a lawful succession of Bishops, and consent with
the primitive Church in doctrine of faith. This needs no proof, because the
Caluinists can assign forth no such Church, besides the Roman. Or if they
think that they can, I entreat the^ to show unto me, who were the Doctors of
that Church? who were the Bishops and Pastors? who were the Martyrs? what
Kings and Emperors adhered unto it? what heretikos were cast forth by it? What
Universities were confirmed by it? what Churches it builded? To none of these
can they answer any other thing but that they know not, or cannot tell.

But I will urge them further. If there were any visible Church for these 1000.
years, either it was known or unknown to men. If it were known, name then
the Doctors and Bishops thereof. Name the Province, City, Castle, wherein it
was? Who has reueiled this matter unto you? None of you lived in those days.
And to them that lived then, it was unknown, you say. By what means then know
you, that such a Church there was? Here you are plunged, and stick fast. And
still I tarry, until you give me an answer. Therefore once again I conclude,
that there neither now is, nor has been hitherto any visible Church, besides
the Church of Rome, which has agreed with the Primitive Church, in matters of
faith, and had a lawful succession of Bishops.

FINIS.

