THE DEVOVT HEART OR ROYAL THRONE OF THE PACIFICAL Solomon.

Composed by F. St. Lu^uic S. I. Translated out of Latin into English.

Enlarged with Incentiue^ by F. St. Binet of the same (...) and now enriched
with Hymns by a new hand.

Printed by John Cousturier. 1634.

TO THE R. WORTHY AND VIRTUOUS COVPLE, W. STANDFORD ESQr, AND ELIZABETH his
wife.
MY DEAREST,
I here present you with a HEART, not framed of flesh and blood, the seat and
citadel of the vital spirits, but the image of a HEART fully fraught with pious
and amorous affects; a heart, not in idaea, but lively deciphered with devout
Embleams* Pictures (as Symonides says) are silent Poesies, and Poesies
speaking pictures. Both the one and the other are here exhibited to your
viewes, accompanied with devout Meditations, where every title speaks but the
love of JESUS. If you eye well and mark these silent Poesies, give care to
these speaking pictures, but chiefly make use of the Meditations in the repose
of your recollected thoughts, you will prove by a happy experience how proper
they are to raise a soul to a sovereign aspiration of divine things. The
Authors Preface points you forth his scope, and his whole discourse displayes
it better; to which I refer you, and my self and labors heerin to your more
fanourable acceptance, that could not be satisfied but with thus expressing
and professing my self to all the world, to be

Your most obliged and devoted H. A.

TO THE AMOROVS AND DEVOVT HEARTS TO JESUS.
I Present you, my HEARTS most dear to Jesus, with a wounded HEART, enfla^ed al
with divine love. This is the Royal Throne of your Spouse the Pacifical
Solomon, the Sanctuary wherein* God would have perpetual Sacrifice to be offered,
the Tower which JESUS has taken to defend against al hostile invasion; which
being wrongfully usurped, and sacrilegiously profaned, he recouers, purges,
expiates, then takes and co^secrates for his Palace, Temple, and Tribunal. Here
Jesus exercises his commands, here he reigns, here he teaches, here cutting
off al demurres of appeals he pronounces sentence of eternal predestination
or reprobation; here he rayseth thunders and lightnings, here sweetly darts he
rays of light, not usually seen in this sublunary Globe. Finally I offer here
the HEART, the heaven and Court of the supreme Moderatour of souls. But why
especially to you? Surely I should think this gift could be nowhere held in
more esteem or taken for a greater favor, then by you, whom I know well to be
not only singularly trained up and exercised in these diuiner things, but so
ardently affected to them, as that you set by the love of this one JESUS more
then all the graces and favors of Kings and Princes in the world: Since in your
souls the Cross of Christ and love of holy poverty, is deeper and more
strongly impressed, then al those mushrumps of honors, that pelf of riches,
those Grand-Sires seals, and famous images of old, then al those goods, so
commonly called, which men of your rank and quality either easily promise to
themselves, or more ambitiously hunt after.

I present to you a breife Table, wherein (speaking with modesty) I have
succ^nctly delineated in short points of meditations the sum of al Christian
perfection, and that merely for your sakes, and the rest who think and love
the same with you; where no sooner shall you fix your eyes on that image of
Divine love, how il pourtraicted soever with a ride pencil, but you shall easily
discern, I ^ow, a lively Image, truly represented, of al those fair and
goodly virtues you have formed in your minds, and shall find no doubt by what
ways and degrees the divine goodness has led you to the top of this Mount,
from whence, remaining yet on earth, you may contemplate even heaven itself,
that land of promise, and blessed inheritance of the children of God; and where
you have the most calamitous regions of the unfortunate Egypt and Babylon, the
mother of confusion, not only subject to your eyes, but trod upon and trampled
underfoot. Accept then, my souls most dear to heaven, this gift such as it
is, not regarding so much the hand which gives, as the giuers heart. For my part
I have but dipped, as I may say, my finger in the hony-combs, which here lie hid
in certain figures and Images, as folded up in wax: but the Holy Ghost, I
trust, will copiously derive the purest honey thence, and consequently open the
very fountains of nectar itself, and most abundantly dew your minds with
showers of divine graces; so do I heartily vow, so wish, remaining,

Your most humble and obedient servant in Christ. STEVEN LVZVIC.

THE HEART CONSECRATED to the love of JESUS.
THE HYMN.
IESV, behold the heart dilates
It-selfe to thee, and consecrates
It Is triple power, and al within.
But oh! that heavy burden, sin,
Draws to the earth, and makes it fall
From high aspiring thoughts. Not al,
Who now support, give it repose;
Thou art the Atlas, here enclose
Thy self within the heart, give rest
To it, which otherwise oppressed,
With the heavy load, the world, sinks down.
Make it despise (to gain a crown)
The earth, it is Nathir, and with thee
It Is Zenith make Eternity.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. WHere our treasure is, there is our heart Luc 12.
. JESUS is a treasure, wherein our hopes, our riches, and al we have, are lodged
and laid up in store. Where then shall we better place the heart, then in the
heart, the Reliquary of the divinity itself, at JESUS feet, the most sure Altar
of the miserable, in his hands, the richest Magazin of al graces?

2. Lo here a heart burning al with love, how many and what flames it sends
forth like a furnace. Happy and thrice happy he, who, but for Heaven, has no
love, no heart at al!

3. Go to then, al you pious and sincere hearts, come and consecrate your
selves to the honor and love of JESUS. For to whom better? since what we pay
to him we allow our selves; and what we take from him we quite forgo and loose
for ever.

THE PREAMBLE TO THE first Meditation.
WHo shall sever us from the charity of Christ? (exclaymes that great Apostle)
tribulation? or distress? or famine? or nakedness? peril? persecution? or the
sword? Sure I am, that death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principa^es, nor
virtues, nor present, nor future things, nor fortitude, altitude, nor depth,
nor any other creature, can separate us from the charity of God, which is in
Christ JESUS Romans 8.
. This is the fire, which gliding from heaven consumes al things, burns al
things; yea enkindles such flames as even the Ocean of evils, wherewith the
flows, and aboundes, c^a not quenchit. This subtle, active, spreading, and
devouring flame, takes force and vigor even from very crosses and torments
themselves, surmounts al things, cleaues to one God, and with an inextricable
knot is united with him. Whether it be the fire, which always suffers
somewhat, or actuates this or that, I know not; this I am sure of, that the
liuelyer it puts forth the force it has, the less it yealds to the enemy, and
is the hardlyer overcome. This fire, when once it takes on the little furnace of
the heart, good God! what strange, and how many heates, of love enkindles it
there! They only know the excesses of this unquiet fever, who love JESUS
dearly indeed, and passionately thirst after him.

Now shall you see this languishing heart break out into frequent, abrupt, and
interrupting sighs, and now and then hear certain brief interiections
withal, cast forth here and there by the poor soul, liquefying with a sweet
ecstasy of love: Tell my beloved, o blessed spirits, that I languish al for love
Cant. 5.
and that unless with the prop of his golden scepter he come, as once Ass^erus
to Hester Ester 15.
and powerfully sustain and hold up my fleeting soul, I shall faint at his
feet: for now the unequal and feeble pulse even mortally beats, and now my
face is foully dight with an asky and deadly color, the extatical heat now
wholly wastes the marrow, so as now remaynes in me nothing which suffers not of
this fire.

But anon you will wonder to see that heart excited with the same love of God,
resuming as it were new strength, to be suddenly carried and snacht with
violence into the thing beloved. I will rise, said the Spouse extremely
enamoured with her beloved, I will compass the City, through streets and
lanes, I will seek whom my soul loves Cant. 3.
; nor will I give over til obteyning my desire I take hold of him. I will enquire
of created things, and ask them, where is my God? I will seek and perticularly
demand of al; nor will I truly rest satisfied finding some image only of God in
them superficially shadowed, or discovering but a glimmer only of divine
perfections, for these will but excite my thirst, not quenh it wholly; but I will
hunt further and constantly seek him, whom my souls loves Cant. 1.
. For the heart enflamed with love, continually machinates and works something;
nor has divine love learned to be idle: it is always in action, and still
proceeds from virtue to virtue, and if it rest at any time, and seem but to
sabothize, it is no longer divine love Greg. Hom. 30. in Euang.
.

Amidst these symptoms of this disease, the mind obteynes three things, and
proves them in it-selfe: for first, how much soever it occupyes itself in
difficult things, and seriously attends, to its own abasement, to a perfect
cont^ept of worldly things, to repress untamed and unbridled appetites, yet al
these acts, most worthy and heroical, it puts in the last place, yea when it
works and effects the most, thinks it has done as good as nothing, and lastly
accounts the time so long spent in the lists of virtue to be exceeding short,
which even the sacred Scriptures record of the Patriarch Jacob, whom the beauty
and love of the fair Rachel had so taken and enveigled, as he reckoned years
very tedious for toils, as weeks for days, days for moments Genesis 29.
. I have yet said but little: The heart which is enamoured with JESUS, thinks it
cannot be broken or tamed with anything, and therefore dares provoke even death
itself, and challenge it to a single fight, as not his match, to scorn its
weapons, and not so only, but insolently to insult upon this pale Goddess, who
yet is she which tramples the Crowns and Scepters of Kings and Caesar's,
subdues the armed Sampsons and lays them at her foot, forbids the Alexanders,
not satisfied with one world, to spread their Ensigns any further; lastly,
puts the Hel^n^^s, as deformed, under a base yoke. What more? This heart is so
impatient of rest, delays, al things, as while most ardently it loves and
seeks the only JESUS, and groans after him, it holds a moment for a year,
regards not any thing else, nothing likes, nothing pleases, nothing satiates or
recreates a whit, as to whom, besides JESUS, al things are nauseous and but
dreams unto it. Lastly, for his sake, after whom it sighs and languishes with
the heat of thirsting love, scorning the stinking lakes of wordly pleasures,
and the filthy mire of the Egyptian bogs, like a Stag nigh perishing with
thirst and deadly wounds, with a rapid course and willing mind, rushes through
the brakes and craggy rocks of precipices, and hastes to the founteynes of
endless waters, to God the living spring Psalm. 41.
.

Oh inexhaustible spring of love, quench this thirst, satiate this hunger! O
beauty so ancient August. Conf. lib. 10. cap. 21.
and so young! take here possession of the heart devoted to thee. Be this I pray
a Temple, a Chapel, an Altar consecrated to the true and only Godhead. Admit
the incense Exodus 37. and 40.
in an odor of sweetness, which shall hereafter fume from this golden table, nor
ever suffer, o God of my heart, the place thus duly dedicated to thy honor and
love, to be ever once defiled with sordityes or crimes, but rather may it ever
and ever stand inviolable and untouched.

I. MEDITATION.
The Preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras quaesumus, etc.
FIRST PRELVDE.
Imagine God being in Heaven, seated on the Cherubins, most highly blessed, and
in essential perfection infinite, to require here on earth an Inn to lodge in.

2. PRELVDE.
Imagine the Tabernacle erected of old, through divine precept, by Moses Exodus
26.
there the Temple by Solomon 3. Reg. 6.
most sumpteously and magnificently built, and therein the Propitiatory reposed
whence divine Oracles were afforded to men.

The heart of a pious man and a Temple of the Godhead, and has three parth with
it, whereof the first the mind, is to be seen in the upper place. Here God in
the production of things, as in a high Altar, proposes the omnipotency to be
seen and worshipped in the gouern'ment of them the highest wisdom, and the
infinite goodness in the conservation. The interior part of the Temple is the
other portion of the heart, the will; and here that infinite either goodness, or
beauty above al things, exhibits itself most amiable. Lastly for the out most
face of the whole Temple stand the exterior senses which, as reason, and true
piety would, religiously obey the will commanding duly divine things.

2. Point* Moreover, the Consecration of this T^eple, the heart I mean devoted
unto God, is performed with the same ceremonies, our Temples rightly dedicated
are. The manner of sanctifying Temples is, to strew the pauements al with
ashes; to affige twelve Crosses on the wall; to burn as many tapers set before
them, to have water blessed after the solemn formulary of Processions, and in
the Ashes sprinkled on the ground, the Greek and Latin Alphabet scored out.
So his heart that would be the Oratory of the Godhead, should first be imbued
with humility and the knowledge of his own nothing; be illustrated with
excellent faith, signed with the love of the Cross and mortification, as well
inward as outward, be instructed by the Holy Ghost; and lastly, in like manner,
purely, and holily to be cleansed, with the heavenly waters of divine graces.

3. Point Now then the heart thus dedicated, with so many, and so chaste
ceremonies, is so in the power and worship of the divinity, as hereafter
without a great sacrilege, and a heinous crime, it may not be violated; and
therefore thence forth, by no means, should ever any sordityes be seen there,
or, as things profane, the idols Ezech. 8.
of worldly fantasies, be there suffered to have admittance.

4. Point. The Oratory of the heart should rather be dressed and adorned with
the worthy tapistries of virtues and heavenly ornaments; and great care be had,
that neither by night nor day the incense of prayer, the fire of divine love
Leuit. 6.
the gold Apoc. 3.
of charity be wanting, or frequent vows, prayers; holocausts, or the rest of
victimes ever fail.

THE COLLOQVY.
ARe we then to think that God truly inhabits on the earth? Since if Heaven,
and the Heavens of Heavens be not able no conteyne thee, how much less, this
house? 3. Reg. 8.
What? My dear then (O love!) it is even thy place, thy Temple, Reg. 18.
thy seat, thy Tribunal? My JESUS the delight of my soul, great this day I
beseech thee, thy divine presence may consecrate my heart to thee, as I truly,
freely, and voluntarily vow, give, and dedicate the same to thy Majesty.
Possess it with the best right and assure it with so firm a tie, as I may not
recover it again by any law or time surely I will not; but from this
Propitiatory, begin thou to give Answers; yea send down from heaven, the fire
of the Holy Ghost, now presently to consume the hoasts, and holocausts laid on
thy Altar.

Pater. Aue.
THE WORLD, THE FLESH, THE DEVIL, assail the heart, JESUS saues it for himself.
THE HYMN.
Mine eyes are open now I see
The nets and snares prepare for me
The world, and flesh have laid their baits
T'allure my heart, the devil waits.
While pleasures of a moment [past
E're they are enioyd] entice: He last
But first protector, midst those ginnes,
Midst snares, and tangling nets of sins
Lies lurking: And when he'spies
The bird ensnared, out he flies:
OIESV, may my prayer be he^^^,
Spread forth thy nets, I am thy bird
To catch my heart, 'a Pitfal make
Set lime-twigs, do but touch and take.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. THe world, with silk and golden chains, the devil, with horrid and
crooked irons, the flesh with libidinous flames of Hell, through force, through
craft, through industry, here openly, and here covertly labor very busily to
ensnare, and entrap man's heart. Unless, good IESV, thou as from an ambush do
speedily reskue it, with thy succors, it is lost, it is undone.

2. Look, what the world sets forth to sale are al laid open, but the wines
she carouseth in her golden cup lie hid the brimms are al besmeared with honny,
the gal with in is it, that hurts, that kills. Happy he who by divine power can
well acquit himself of these snares, these nets.

3. And now behold how amourously good JESUS. loves, embraces, pulls this heart
unto himself, and hugs and clings it to his heart, Do so good IESV; place my
heart in thy Heaven; I say, with thy delights and love, fill, and ouerflow it.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
HElp here, O Lord of Saboth! Lo bring thy succors hither. The enemies invade
thy Sanctuary to pollute the same; they seek the sacred fires to extinguish
them; they violate the Altar of Holocauste to overthrow (...); they bring in
strange and foraine incense, sacrilegiously to burn to their Numens Leuit. 10.
Send down thy auxiliary bands from heaven; the confederate host of Angels,
those spirits, which weild and brandish thine arms; else certainly al things
will demolish and utterly perish: Traynes are set on every side, net and
snares laid every where. God gingerly and take heed if you be wise. Here the
world that cheating and perfidious Mounte-banck fete forth his wares, to sals,
precious indeed and specious to the eye at first, but whem you heed them
bitter, alas mere trumpery and counterfeit stuff. The purse this pedlery
merchant shows you, believe me, is puffed up with wind rather then filled with
coin. The diadems glittering al of gold, or rather glass, amid the few and
bastard gemm's, affright with thorns and briars. The cheynes of gold or jewels
take which you will, like iron fetters, honor not, but onerate, and straightly
bind. What apparel? The Silk-wormes excrements, with us being rare, and scarce,
are therefore dear; for with the Thracians long a go, these silks have been
but little worth; nor will they like us, if not wrought; or interwouen with gold
and glitter here and there, with sparckling gemmes. But to what end? forsooth
to shroud our nakedness and deformity with a precious mantle. With these
allurements then the world seeks to entice to it the heart, and to that end
promises huge mountains of gold, but yet performs besides the blasts and
fickle winds of words, even just nothing. For what law can he keep or true
fidelity, that wants them both? It is much for it to afford one a vulgar fame,
to puff an empty breath of a little glory which by and by scarce sensible, it
blows another way. For as often as you purchase the grace, not of the vulgar
only, but even of Princes also with the least offense it is suddenly snatched
away from you and leaves you gaping after it, with a light smatch only.

Help, help again O Heaven! Behold here a new enemy at hand the Stygian
Dragon, as anciently as subtlily trained up in this field, that Serpent I mean
now so long since cast down to hell Isaye. 14.
from Heaven and that degree of dignity he aimed and aspired to. The Devil, I
say, that Calumniatour, assayes to rush into thy hold, and that he may hauock
and disturb al things rangeth up and down like a fell Lion in a horrible
manner, that with his dreadful roaring if he crush not the heart altogether, at
least he may shake it shrewdly. Imagine him an Aspike, his throat to swel with
poison his tooth already fastened in the wound, the very venom now ready to
come forth, where the soul is as good as dead already. Conceive him a
Basiliske: this as king of serpe^ts, is more pernicious then the rest, as he,
which with the only eyes inspireth death, like a theif encha^ts the ears with
a false whistle and gently distills into the heart a pest with all: When being
gotten in soaking the humor thence he pines it up, and kills it quite? Or shall
I call him a Crocadille? You have then a sworn enemy no less of our salvation
then of the heavenly Court, for he faines our human tears, puts on our effects
to deceive the better. Nor does Proteus so transform himself into every
figure, as this pragmatike of the world turns and winds himself every way into
each slight. Nor does this warrior use always the same weapons or manner of
fight for now he takes prosperity for arms, and now adversity; nor leaves he
any time or place for truce or respite. Help therefore, o you Citizens of
heaven, help I say! In this combat the Anihonyes, the Hilarions, and the rest
of Moncks, most stout Champions, tremble, sweat, and change there color; who
surely were not ignorant of the forces of this Adversary. Is the Casket of the
heart repleat with celestial riches? with pride and presumption of mind he
breaks it open, steals the treasure. Is the heart empty and void of the
riches of virtues and the ornaments of divine graces? with despair he attempts
to perpetrate any horrible fact; and always bends the artyllery on that side
he notes to be weaker then the rest, where he batters sore and shakes the wall,
while happily the soul attends the less or makes the less resistance. And
holdst thou thy peace yet, o^ God of Hosts? nor sendst thou as yet, thy
subsidiary spirits, with Michael their invincible Captain, to appose a new and
stand against this Pest, to chase, pursue, to put to flight, and then so bound
to cast it into the inmost dungeon of Hell, where being once shut up, there may
appear no way for it, to issue forth?

Ay me poor wretch! the external forth thus foiled, the enemy begins to rage
at home, the flesh rebels and proud for the good success of the noble
victoryes got upon those stout adversaries of hers, tosseth the warlike
firebrarnds of concupiscence, here the fires are more dreadful far then were
the Grecians flames. Water, water, I call for? Rayn down from Heaven whole
clouds of graces, O the only prop, and stay of my heart, my God; quench with
divine showers, those fiery weapons, fordged with the hellish coals; Ephesians. 6.
wherewith this impudent brat of Vulcan, Venus wicked imp, lasciuiously armed
dares to assalt this heart; which thou thy self would have for Palace, Tower,
and Temple.

II. MEDITATION.
The Preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras. etc.
FIRST POINT.
I Will consider the largenes and amplenes of my heart which nothing can fill,
neither the vastnes of the Heavens, the circuit of the earth, nor Angels, nor
men, nor yet riches or delights, themselves and that but he only is able to fill
and b^esse it, who framed it for himself.

2. Point. Hence will I gather the worthiness and noblenes of my heart, while it
contemnes al created things nor uses them otherwise then as a footstool or
stayers, by setting foot where on it may mount to God himself. So from the
odor and beauty of flowers, ascends it to the sweetness and glory of the
Creator, from the light of the San-climbs it to the light increated, from the
framing of the world, it finds out the influence of divine love into other
things, and discouers therein a certain plenty and affluence of his gifts.

3. Point. I will further weigh how great must the beauty of man's heart be, with
whose love al things are so enamoured, as vehemently to wish have some place,
in the secret cabinet thereof. The world, that woes it with allurem^ets of
honors, riches, jewels, and with the same guile the flesh in presenting
enticem^ets, pleasures, feasts, banquets, good fellowships, plays, revels,
singing and enchanting bewitches it wholly: The devil, being pleased better to
use violence, seeks rather with engines, and frightful terrors to address his
way. Now these three enemies al conspire in one, and to work more effectually
their ends with a wicked treason of the five senses, by undermining seek to
surprise it. To the eyes they straight object what soever is pleasant and
beautiful to behold; whether you would the deliciousnes of flowers, or rather
regard the luster of Adamants and the rest of stones. To the ears, they apply
their melodious ditties, both perilous and lascivious songs of Sirens. Odours
and sweet perfumes are couveighed to the nostrils with full sails. For the
palate the kitchings fume, daintyes are dressed, and served up in full dishes;
wines are fetched from Cellars, te^pered for the anciens Co^suls, Albana
Tiuoly, Romanesco, Falerna, and the like. And so likewise for the other senses
delights are studiously sought for with all industry and art.

4. Point. JESUS on the contrary, together with the Angel Guardian, very
seriously defendes the Tower of the heart; he there succors it with the
singular assist^ace of his divine grace, this here, in pouring forth light amid
the thick obscureties therein, teaches what to shun and what it is be done
breaks the engines laid against it, repels the assaults of the world, detects
the obscenes of the flesh.

THE COLLOQVY.
O MOST sweet IESV the love of my heart which thou have consecrated for thy
self? Oh permit not in the walls of this Temple the abominable figures of
created things to be seen: barricado thy Tower beseiged of al sides by enemies
Ezech. 8.
with the countermure of thy fear, defend it with the flames of love. Thou
easily detectest how false the things are which the world objects before our
eyes, while here the miserable heart discernes nor heeds the nets nor poison.
Then help it I beseech thee, O Lord of Saboth, in these streights, and send thy
warlike squadrons, down from heaven, to its aid.

THE MOST AMOVROVS JESUS KNOCKS AT the door of the heart.
THE HYMN.
I Saw a little glimps of light
As I lay slumbring in the night,
Which through a cranny of my wall
Glaunc'd on mine eyes and therewith-al,
I heard one speak, and rapping hard,
While al my doors were locked and barred
With that I half awakt looked round,
And in my heart a theife I found
Discovered by the light. The walls
Were bare, and naked, while he calls
Who stood without, more light appears,
TO augment my hopes, and lessen fears;
Then, IESV, I cried out, come in,
Here Is nonght but a privation sin.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. HOw often has JESUS, to enter into the Tower of thy heart, assailed it with
arms, to wit, with the engines of love; that to the Angels thou mighst I be a
Paradise, to him a Heaven; if thou let him in. O iron heart? O heart of Adamant?
God still is knocking at thy Gates, and is not yet admitted in.

2. But how great is the favor of this loving Numen? God, even God himself
attendes thee, pryes, and looks about him, watching time and place to enter
in, that he might sweetly rest with thee. But thou sticktst upon it, while the
Angelical spirits stand amazd thereat, as I may say, either at this goodness of
God, or thy pertinacity, yet thou art nothing moved.

3. Oh ungrateful heart! oh perfidiousnes! To whom will thou yeald them, if to
so patient and sweet a lover peeuishly thou holdst out longer. If thou flyest
as coylie as constantly he sues?

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
O Fairest soul among the fair, awake; for what Lethean sleep oppresses
thee? Thy little JESUS, the purest joy and delight of Heaven, raps at the
door: the golden locks of his head are wet yea trickle with the nightly dewes;
his singers still the primest mirrh; Cant. 5.
he wholly drowned and melt with all beats at the gate of thy heart. Open then
and let him in Alas how thy doors are frozen with the rock of Caucasus! How
soundly thou sleep, oh slug, O fooslish soul! Or is it the noise perhaps of
the Ghests thou have admitted in already, which so taked up, and stupifies
thine ears, as thou can not hear thy beloued's voice? Oh Ghests, or hanting
Ghosts I may call you rather! Oh sinister affections! Oh inordinate appetits!
What a tumult have you made here? And thou, a stony heart! How long have thou
been so hard to hear, and deaf, as not to aduert the Spouses voice, who to
bless and enrich thee, merely pushed, with what wind of beatitude I know not,
has touched on this unfaithful Port? Alas! stay I beseech thee, stay awhile,
most radiant Sun, nor with thy swifter steedes, make have away; for if thou
once substractst thy self, I fear thou will go far enough, and be long
absent; a favor freely offered once, and lost by a repulse, is not easily
recovered. The divine hand pow^^ out it is benefits for a day, an hour, a
moment only, it lists not always to attend to work miracles, or to be curing
maladyes: the Angel moves the water of that Poole, Probatica, Joan. 5.
but on a certain time of the day; if thou suffrest occasion once to slide
away, or be taken by another, thou art to attend the return of another
Angel-mouer. Hasten therefore, O fairest of al beautyes; what? sleepst thou
yet? shake off this sluggishnes. Is there a mutiny at home then quiet the
tumults, command silence, bid the door be set open. And if thy Spouse now
wearied with thy demurrs should chance to divert from thee, and go his ways,
follow him at the heels with cries, and prayers, and trying him outright,
urge him hard, that he would deyne to return again to his Sanctuary. If yet
being called upon he go flying still away. Like a she-Goat or nimble pricket on
the mountains of Bethel: Cant. 2.
double thy cries, put out thy throat, and cry aloud, Draw me after thee and we
shall ruun Cant. 4.
my beloved. If the watchmen of the walls lay hold on thee, and beat thee
cruelly, yea take away thy cloak from thee: let al these mischiefs move thee
nothing; the prey thou huntst for with all these same, is cheap enough. Sigh
therefore and groan the while, and privily shoot forth the fiery shafts of
vehement love; and if thou can, wound him flying with the alluring tresses
Cant. 4.
of thy desires, with which chains at least, so thrown upon him, stay his
flight: and when thou art so happy as to overtake him, now grown at length more
slack, through flight, thy wound, and chains so hampering him pray entreat,
and beseech him, by the holy Wounds of his body; For his ancient and faithful
mercies sake, Psalm. 88. Isaiae 55.
he would please to permit himself to be led back again to his Spouses house.
But see you hold him fast Cant. 3.
nor let him go; he is a lightning, and passes in an instant; he is a Sun
whose revolution is without rest, nor ever stops but at the voice of the true
Iosue, and the courageous soul, fighting valiantly against the Gabaonites.
Iosue. 10.


This Sampson Iosue. 10.
carries the gates of the City with him, when he feels himself but tampered
in the enemies snares, bind him, if you catch him; tie him fast, with the
triple cord of love, for this is hardly broken Eccl.
Lastly if now being caught he try, as once the Angel did with Jacob, by
wrasling to strugle and escape away, tell him roundly, I will not let thee go
til thou give me thy blessing Genesis 3.
But hola thou happyest of souls thou dove, thou darling, take heed thou
suffer not thy self to be ouer-seen so any more; but as soon as thy
beloued's voice shall sound the word that JESUS comes, boldly and confidently
open both the leaves of thy heart unto him, receive him; hug him in thy arms,
in thy besome, in thy bowels with thy whole heart.

III. MEDITATION.
The Preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras quaesumus, etc.
FIRST POINT.
THE lover JESUS, after a weary search in vain, of a quiet place to rest in,
having spent therein a long and tedious night a broad with his head even hoary
with the serene and nightly dewes Cant. 5.
knockes at the gate of thy heart, Apoc. 3.
and because thou lockst him out; greeues and complains against. thee.

2. Point. I will seek out the cause of these so tedious and irksome delays,
or what is it that stope so our ears, that we cannot perceive the sound and
voice of him that raps at the door. Surely it is, because the inordinate
passions do mutiny and tumultuate with in us, and stir up, not one only, but
many deaf and dismal tempests, now of anger, now pusilanimity, now self love,
and many others; just as it happens in a wel-frequ^eted Tavern, where the
Ghests make such a noise among themselves, as one cannot hear another, that
one knows not who comes in or who goes forth, or who knocks at the gate; such
a world there is of Ghests within, such a rabble of al sorts.

3. Point. I will weigh the danger, least JESUS suffering a repulse so auerted,
turn a side into some bywayes and corners, so as after he may not be found
with the miserable Spouse any more; whose complaints are read in the Canticles
Cant. 3.
in this manner. I will seek whom my loves soul, in the streets and lanes,
saying, Have you seen whom my soul loves? The watchmen of the City, have met
with me, smit me, and wounded me. Cant. 5.
Which hurts, wounds, and tears, surely had not been if she had but presently
set open her doors to her beloved.

THE COLLOQVY.
SHALL be framed much after the manner of the earnest instance made heretofore,
by the two Disciples going to Emaus Luc. 24.
saying: Mane nobiscum Domine. Come into the secret Closet of my heart; for if
thou once but turnest thy back, who can follow thee, or ever look to overtake
thee, that Giant, who in a moment runst from Heaven to earth, like a lightning
and thunderbolt in an instant casts forth a flash, and vanishest with all; and
if thou getst not a place to harbor with us, like a nimble kid or faune, thou
take thy flight to the mountains of Bethel, Cant. 2.
to the heavenly Quyers of blessed spirits. I know sometimes, the storms of my
inordinate concupiscences arising make such obstre perous noise with in me, as
the pulses sound without cannot be heard; but yet do thou good IESV, through
thy power, wherewith thou art able to do al things break the brazen bars of
the gate, trust back the iron bolts, and so the doors unlocked, enter into thy
house and Sanctuary.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS SEARCHES OVT THE MONSTERS lurking in the dark corners of the heart.
THE HYMN.
MY sins I thought l^y out of sight,
But now I see, al comes to light,
When he to search does once begin,
Who finds an Attome of a sin
See there an ougly monster breaths,
An other here, wish horrid wreathts,
Is lurking in this darksome cave.
Oh had I sooner what I have
Of light; I think no loathsome beast
Had in my heart, made-vp his nest.
Oh IESV, still thy beams dissilay,
All this is but the break of day.
Vouchsafe to send with luster heat,
To make it lightsome, fervent, neat.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. SO long as JESUS is absent from my heart. Ah me! what monsters? what
sordityes? what Gorgons? what wicked fiends? what hels are centered there?

2. When JESUS enters into the heart, and therein pours his light, Good God?
what foul, what horrible prodigies of vices the mind discouers there which the
eyes had never yet detected? I say while JESUS puts forth his rays, what
bestial manners? what perfidiousnes? what blots of an ungrateful mind? what
heinous crimes are represented in this detestable heart?

3. At these portents the very Angels tremble. Yet go thou on, my most sweet
JESUS; Illuminate the darksom corners of the foul, cleanse this foul infamous
stable. Amid this Cymerian darkness, with glimps of thy light bewray me to my
self that being hateful to my self, I may abhor and shune my self and so at
length may fly to thee, love nothing else but thee. Oh the only Darling of my
soul! O only love of my heart, my little JESUS!

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
LOrd enter then into the Tower set open to thee, and dismantled wholly; which
thou long since have purchased with the price of thy blood, and in this thy
triumphal entry, as it were, so shoot forth the divine rays of thy
countenance, that the clouds being vanished quite and slunck away, the strange
portents of vices, and restles Enemies, which lurk therein, may be constrained
to fly away. Search Lord with thee shini^g lamp of thy knowledge all the hidden
corners of this thy Sanctuary. Ay-me! what horrible beasts have we here? What
harpyes, what hydreas, or other monsters, more foul and virulent then these,
harbor in this Porch of Hell? Ambition avarice, those base and detestable
beasts, here set up their rests here the ominous screechoules, here the black
and fatal progeny of ravens, have built their nest. Oh! my Dearly beloved, go
on; Search with thy lantern Soph. 1.
the closest corners of the heart, and discovering the swarine of lewd
concupiscences, which here even pester the miserable heart, crush and destroy
them quite. I have groaned to thee long, but hitherto my sighs were
intercepted, and the broken sound of my strayn'd voice, the stronger outcries
of the Enemies, have so choked and stifled, as we could not be heard. Above al
things (for hence must you begin) survey, and illumine, my God, the abstruse
and winding corners of my mind; and bringing in the light of the knowledge
banish thence foul ignorance of things even necessary for the conservation of
thy Sanctuary. Alas what a faint and languishing light of faith have we here?
unless it borrow force of thy light, it cannot dissipate the fogs, nigh
palpable, which here have place: whereas if thou shall but shead the lightest
beam of thy presence thereinto, straight shall infidelity, apostasy, ignorance
of thy mysteries, or any other error blinding the mind, even banish quite.

Go forward then, bring thou thy clearest lamp, into the inmost cabins of my
will. Alas! how foul it is? How like it is Augias stable, or a sty for Swine? I
blush thereat. How crooked and untoward is my will from thine, my God, who are
even rectitude, sanctity and goodness itself? Correct, direct this crookednes
of mine; frame my vows and effects to the most just square and norme of thy
divine will. But now bring that both of thine into the regions of the memory.
Aim! what corners and windings have we here again, of brawles, of enmityes,
which frequent thoughts of injuries feed, foster, and cherish, whereas indeed
they should not once be thought upon. But as soon as thou shall shine therein
I know well those foul notes of ingratitude, vnmindfulnes of benefits; memory
of ini^ries, deeply rooted, shall clean be expunged thence: Go further now if
you please, into those blind holes, search there with in those black and ugly
dens; I say those secret allies of the heart and bowels. Oh how I tremble-at it,
to see how many snakes there are! What spiders, what scorpions, and other such
like plagues, and alas! what a huge swarm there is of them? How many busy
buzzing gnats; peevish wasps, il-fauoured butterflyes! What a vast throng of
worms there is, and what a stench from thence exhales to heauenwards!

O thou most burning Sun, who with da^ting of thy rays heretofore, did
suddenly scortch and wither the green and flourishing Iuy, Ion. 4.
soake and dry up the noxious humor of concupiscence, which enuirons the heart,
til thou have quite exhausted al. The cloudy Pillar Number. 1.
in times past, detecting a far off, the snares of the Enemy, as a faithful
Guide of the way, went before and conducted the people; So let thy heavenly
rays of thy countenance strike then with a dread and horror, who have the
face, or rather are so impudent, as to dare once hostily to invade the heart by
thee so rescued, saved, and purchased for thy self. Be there no night hereafter
in this place, but let a cloudles, seren, and perpetual day here reign: and as
in the seats of the blessed Spirits, the Sun, nor Phebe's face is to be seen,
but thou Sun of justice placed in the midst of a most bright and quiet
Kingdom; spreadst round about and sendst forth a glorious light: Apoc. 21.
so, (I beseech thee) shine, burn, and flame forth in this little orb of my
heart, O immense light, O dateles and infinite verity of my God.

IIII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
THe eyes of our. Lord are more lucid then the Sun, 2. Cor. 6.
more bright then lightning, and yet says he, I will survey Hierusaelems with
lamps. (b)

1. Point. Consider in JESUS his absence with how many, and what mists of
obscurities, the heart of man is beset. JESUS indeed, is the true light, which
illumines a like the Angelical and sublunary world. For as well from Angelical
spirits as humane minds, with light divinely shed, he banisheth the darkness of
ignorance, and errors; which shining forth anon gives every thing it is price
and estimation; while the good, the evil, the profitable, and hurtful, are
known, and distinguished as they are indeed; and lastly thou may easily
discern, whither thou art black or white, even as the Sun arising gives to
each thing its colors, which the dark and sable night had confounded before.

2. Point. Consider then, how powerfully JESUS, as soon as admitted to enter
into the heart, expels and banisheth al sins from the secretst nookes thereof,
to wit, his most capital enemies, wherewith he would not have any thing to do;
and surely what society can be, between light and darkness 2. Cor. 6.
Mark this also, how aptly vices are expressed in the forms of Serpents,
owls toads, dragons, and what else, in Styx or Libia, is more ugly, foul,
pernicious.

3. Point. Behold how the Angels are astonished, seeing those monsters of vices
so detected, and chased away by JESUS: What madness, say they, or blindness is
this of men, to suffer so importune and vicious a pest to domineer and reign
over them?

THE COLLOQVY.
LORD, how long shall the worms of sins possess and gnaw my bones, which in
the accursed soil of my heart, without seed rise up alone of their accord? Shall
these Stygian Dragons, and cruel vipers, stand always before the eyes of my
mind, to strike and wound my soul with a thousand and a thousand terrors?
Shall I eternally feel that gauling prick of conscience, day and night, like
furyes, to wound, to lance, and murder me outright? search very seriously,
good IESV, every corner of my heart; omit not the least path of this
labyrinthian error, where thou studiously pryest not, least perhaps some
dormouse, batts, worms, escape thine eyes. So truly is it fit thy seat should
be expiated and purged from these Hellish fiends, which now for so many Ages
past thou willingly would have to be dedicated and consecrated to thee.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS SVVEEP^ THE DVST OF SINS from the heart.
THE HYMN.
O IESV thou art come from Heaven,
Find'st lying al at, six and seven,
In several shapes, my horrid sins
To sweep away the broom begins;
Not like the chips, when thou did keep
At home, and with the besome sweep
The dust, and little chips, which flew
About the house, but now in view,
Thou sweep'st, as chips cut from that tree
Which was the sourse of misery,
Those mo^sters, loathsome dust, where breeds
The Old serpent; on this filth he feeds.
Hels Scauendger, come take thy load,
The muck the viper, serpent, toad.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. GO to, you pure Inhabitants of Heaven, which joined prayers tire out the
gracious and benign JESUS, that he would deyne to cleanse this heart, of al its
filth. For we sily dwarfs, as woulded but of slime, can neither lift up our
eyes to Heaven, nor open our lips to prayer.

2. Would any one believe? Oh force! Oh excess of divine love! God with a
secret force applied, of holy affections, and a lively sorrow of the mind
truly penitent, as certain besomes, conferres succors of divine grace;
wherewith from the flower of the heart he sweeps out the filth of ^innes.

3. Go on, my little IESV, and oh! expel, tread, crush under thy holy feet
this poisonous virulence of serpe^ts, which with their venom intoxicate and
kill my soul. Destroy them quite, and so frame me a heart wholly according to thy
heart.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
When Lucifer, foiled by the invincible forces of Michael Apoc. 12.
that great Leader of the heavenly Host, with his factious and rebellious
squadrons, was cast down headlong into Hell, a new light was seen to shine in
heaven, new peace to smile, new loves to burn, and new delights to power forth
themselves.

Besides, the glorious victories acheiued upon the Moabits, Iebus^ans, and
other barbarous Nations, either expulsed or else constreined at least to pay
tributes to the people of Israel, bred a general peace and joy to the whole
Palestine.

But alas! the Leader of this infernal Legion, thus precipitously thrown
down, what a dreadful terror brought he unto sea and land? For hence amid the
joyful and triumphant acclamations of the blessed Angels, this verse was rung
into the ears of miserable mortals, Woe to sea and land, because the devil in
a great rage descendes unto you. Apoc. 12.


Hence truly, the open springs of al our evils, hence flow our tears, hence
these so many snakes derive their being, which occupy and so cruelly torture
our minds. But what is this? I am deceived. For methinks I see a huge shole of
serpents, chased away from the lurking den of the heart. But alas! how I fear,
least the enemies in their flight may leave therein some impression or print
behind them. Surely thou excellent David did daily exercise thy self, and
sweepst thy spirit, as thou have written of thy self Psalm. 76.
yet with all thy study and exactnes, do what thou could, thou could never
bring to pass, but some little dust would always yet remain, or slimy trace
be left behind, at least from the trailing of those serpents.

It is very well: JESUS with new brooms in the Chapel of the heart stands
sweeping out the dust, least ought should escape his industry or eyes. O
admirable thing! The blessed Spirits, stand amazed at this, either lowlynes of
mind, or officious diligence of his, and yeald him thanks for that benefit
bestowed on man. Go to then, O thou victorious and triumphant JESUS, spurn,
trample this Hydra, a beast of so many wicked serpents heads, kill him with thy
flames, that hereafter he may have no entrance or place in thy Sanctuary. And
thou, most Blessed Dearling of my heart, fortify and prevent all the ways and
passages of the enemy, and place strong Guards at the entryes and gates
thereof, least happily they steal or rush in any where; for they are not al of
one and the self-same kind. Some there are which like dragons with a foul and
ugly flight corrupt the air; some like Aspikes and vipers, craule on the
ground, some suddenly peep up like lizards, and leap away again; others like
touds lie lurking at the very gate of the heart, upon advantage, yet slouthful
the while. These like bats be stir themselves by night only; they on the
contrary of the race of harpyes or hauks, appear by day, and attend their
prey: So great necessity thou have, dear soul, not to be idle at any time or
place. Nor yet truly as soon as they are thrust out* by the power and industry
of JESUS, is all the business quite done: For then the banished pests even choke
the air again with an intolerable stench, thunder and lightnings, cast forth
outrageous storms, they tumult, they rage, they mutiny, they trouble al
things, and even menace and threaten al extreamities, unless (which they claim
as their right, and exclayme to be their due by title of victory) they may be
suffered and have leave to return to their ancient home, again. But thou my
sweet IESV, open the earth the while with a horrible rupture, and fold them up
with a like ruin, to that, wherein of old thou threwest to Hell the double
prodigyes, those spirits, refractory and rebellions to thee. And that they may
never be seen or heard of more, or raise any new tumult, being-bound, and sent
to those dismal vaults beneath the ground, damn them to eternal darkness; that
they may loose al hope of return again, or raging any more.

V. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
FIRST POINT.
HOw fierce and cruel a war God made in Heaven once against sin, may hence
be gathered, in that he damned Satan and his Co^plices, precipitously thrown
down from those happy seats of beatitude unto the extreme torments of
everlasting fires. How implacable a war likewise he brought against the same
very enemy on earth as easily appears, in that he feared not to descend into
the lists of this mortal life Joan. 3.
that fighting foot to foot, and hand to hand, he might utterly defeat the
devils works, to wit, sin. Lastly, how deadly a hatred he bears in Hell to
that wicked enemy, is clear enough by this, that not enduring sinners to
remain any longer in these lists, bidding them depart, he banisheth them, into
such miserable dungeons of eternal punishments.

2. Point. Attend besides, with what study and diligence, he command the
monsters of vices, to pack away from our heart, like as a noble General in war,
as soon as he has taken some Town or fort, either by a sudden stratagem or
assault, remoues the ancient Magistrates, and pute the soldiers in Garrison
from their rank and place, nor suffers any one to remain behind, that might
stir up the least sparckle of any treason.

3. Point Now with what iubiley and joyful signs the Angels exult and triumph
in a manner, when they behold that infamous rabble of portents to be thrust
forth, and chased from our heart! How stand they amazd in the mean time, at so
great a multitude and deformity of enemies! But how especially they admire,
that infelicity or stupidity of ours, that we should ever seem to afford any
place to such execrable and damned Ghosts as these.

THE COLLOQVY.
OH what dulnes of mind is this, what stupidity of heart, that we should so long
suffer these monsters, to rest and abide with us, as if they were some friends
and familiars of ours! Oh truly admirable goodness of God! who has attended and
expected us so long to return to the duty and office of good men; and now at
last most powerfully has brought us into liberty, wherefore we will steadfastly
purpose, and determine hereafter, to die rather, then once to afford any place
in our heart to sins.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS THE LIVING FOVNTAINE IN THE HEART.
THE HYMN.
BEhold the fountains living springs:
Both here and there in Angel bring*
Souls soyl'd with ugly spots within:
Oh how I now am loathing sin!
Which naught could wash but streams of
blood,
That issued from Christ's wounds o flood:
The sourse. from whence thy torrent flows,
Is JESUS heart? it is that bestows
Even the lasts drop, to cleanse my spots.
O scribled heart, with blurrs and blots
Of horrid crimes! wash, wash, with tears,
Thy sins. Thy paper written b^ares
Being once made white, (what does afford,
Al joy, content, repose) the WORD.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. IF JESUS be absent, I am arid, dry and with out juice; so as neither I
feel God, nor any thing of God. Oh cruel aridity! O fatal drought!

2. IF JESUS be present, he sheads divine dewes of graces, he opens springs of
incredible sweetness; the heart flotes only and swimes, and sincks in these
torrents of celestial delights. Oh grateful dewes! O blessed springs! O
ineffable delights!

3. Angelical hands lade heither those waters of life, sprinckle therewith my
heart and soul, cleanse, and water them with endless springs of Paradise.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
O Wholesome streams of Siloe John. 9.
Whereof the blind no sooner drink, but they presently recover the Light of
their eyes! O powerful waters of Jordan, where in Naaman plunging himself, his
flesh became imediately like the flesh of a little Child, and so was clean! 4.
Reg. 5.
O profou^d Spring which streaming down in the midst of Paradise, Genesis 2.
thence diuides itself into four heads, so many rivers, wherewith it washes
a great part of the earth. The one called Phison* which passes by the Region
Heulach, with a most commodious river, for the use of mortals, washes and
waters all the parts of the world. The other G^hon, passes along by Ethiopia.
The third Tigris, that rapid and violent stream, with scours the Assyria^* The
fourth Euphrates, so renowned in the monuments of sacred Writ. And oh! to me
sweet waters of Jacobs well! with one draught whereof the poor Samaritan woman
Joan. 4.
felt the thirst; and head of concupiscence slacked and quenched in her, which
til that time no springs, nor yet whole floods, could take away quite, or so
much as refresh or diminish never so little. Nor can I choose but admire thee,
O prodigious springs, which with an endless stream sprungst from the iaw bone,
with whose Herculean strength, Sampson, as armed with a triple knotted club
foiled and vanquished a thousand Philistines. I^dic. 15.
Lastly, O thou most blessed Spring, at whose waters, those so happy flames of
nuptial affects, betwixt Isaac and Rebecca Genesis 24.
were anciently kinled!

But, O miraculous things behold here from the bottom of the heart, an endless
spring to arise, plenteously watering with seven channels the universal face
of the earth. Behold there that master, pipe, more large and ample then the
rest, from whose head as it were eternal waters flow into the other six. But
^ix thine eyes especially upon JESUS who keeping in the center of the heart, in
prodigal and profuse vrnes or cesterns distributes whole floods of graces.
Hence may thou discern the primary springs of justification, to break
forth, thence more copious streams of conservation to flow, and of the other
side, the flux or flow of graces to swel again and grow into a vast sea of
waters. These are dealt to such as first begin, those are offered them who walk
the way of perfection, others with full channel are powered forth to such as
climbing the ^ublime mount of virtue are got to the top. Casting thine eyes
here also behold how in these streams of limpid, veins, certain little
Ethiops (who I know not) are washed, with the ministry of Angels, and how
bring cleansed, from the coale-black race of crows they are transmitted into
the candid family of doves. Come h^ there then you dry and thirsty souls,
flock you hither: Why drink you so long of those bloody streams of Egypt? Why
carouse you so those muddy marish waters of the durty Babylon? Why prize you
those false bewitching cups of the world, to with, that C^cean hag? Here may
thou rather, o thou fool, drink thy belly-ful of endless living waters; and
wash if thou will, and rinsh thy whole mouth; with which draught thou may put
off the old man, quench, thy thirst, take courage lastly derive thee a whole
stream of water Springing to eternal life (a) John. 4.
Wherefore do thou wash me Lord from mine iniquity, which vow was familiar
with David. Psalm. 50.
Wash I pray and first my will, alas! defiled with the filth of extrauagant and
wandering affections; and especially with the sordid dust of self love. Wash my
mind also, and with all wipe away al darkness of ignorance and error from it.
Wash likewise my hands, ah! (how I blush for them) so fowly dight with crimes.
Wash my mouth; how I blush again! how slow, infamous, impudent Wash my tongue
I even tremble to say it) so intoxicated with the poison of scurrility and
calumny. Wash my palate, alas! with sootist relishes corrupted. Wash mine eyes,
ouer-cast with the noxious colors of wrath and melancholy humors: mine ears,
enchanted with the entici^g charms of witches, Sirens: my feet also soyled
with the dust and mire of lewd concupisce^ce: my hayr, and lastly cogitations,
for these also are in foul plight: so is there nothing in me that is not
impure and il affected. Ah! I dye of thirst, and desire of thy love! Oh quench
and extinguish the thirst, the heat of my dying heart! O eternal love!
inexhaustible Spring! But your, thrice happy Citizens of heaven, o glorious
Angels, who as certain rivers flow from this fountain of al good, receive and
shut up first with full minds the whole spring itself, them in the open lakes
of your hearts, plunge this my dry and thirsty heart, drown it in the ocean of
love. So I conjure your by that very love, which is the immense spring and
fountain itself, from whence you have taken both your nature and spirit, of
whose draught you still live, and shall live, as long as Eternity lasts: very
happy and blessed.

VI. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
FIRST POINT.
COnsider sin to be a true leprosy: for as this infects and foully spots the
body; so that vitiates and corruptes every part of the heart and soul; and
though the act be past, yet leaves a foul and ugly blot behind it.

2. Point. Consider further, this most ugly and foul blot is not washed away,
but with the blood of the only immaculate Lamb: which neither the sacrifices or
ceremonies of the old Law, nor fasts, nor other austerities of this kind can
wipe away without the sprinckling of this blood: For without blood, remission
is not had. Heb. 9.


3. Point. Consider lastly, that as heretofore the posts and threshal of the
house being smeared with the blood of the Lamb, with held the sword now drawn
and ready to strike, of the smiting Angel, from killing them in the house by a
death so studiously prepared Exodus 12.
so with this blood, al hellish power is expelled, and restrained, that those
wicked foes of our salvation may not touch the very entrance of our heart, or
dare so much as look upon it: Lastly as the Preistly robes, yea the Sanctuary
itself was sanctified and hollowed by the blood of the Lamb Exodus 29.
so believe from the blood of Christ al sanctimony Heb. 9.
deriues into our minds.

THE COLLOQVY.
LOrd wash me again, from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin. Psalm.
50.
Wash the mind, and let all the clouds of ignorance vanish quite. Wash the will,
and purge il appetits conceived from the false nuages of transitory things:
wash the memory, and wipe away self-loue growing, from an ouer-weening of my
self, and my own doeings.

Cleanse my feet, hands, eyes, and tongue, nor let any thing remain in me,
that is foul and polluted, or which may any ways offend thy Majesty, never so
little.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS PVRGETH THE HEART WITH expiatory blood.
THE HYMN.
OHart lie open freely take,
These sprinkled drops, enough to slake
The flames of lust and quench the fire,
Of bell itself, O Heart desire
Thy Lord, now is he entered in,
To put to flight the devil sin,
The world the flesh: Behold h'is gone,
Thy contrite heart* plowed, harrowd, sown,
May, wat^red with his heavenly dew,
Spring forth, and fructify anew:
To which annex some pearlik drops,
That thou with joy may reap thy crops.
Rain follows wind; sigh, tears begin,
And drown as with a deluge sin
THE INCENTIVE.
1. ALthough the heart be unworthy and wholly incapable of score of celestial
graces, yet JESUS howsoever, of his soueraign goodness, powrs thereon and
sprinckles it at least with some little drops thereof, to instill thereby into
the soul the first loves of heaven, and to excite a thirst thereof.

2. Behold in JESUS absence, how dry, dull untoward, poor, miserable the heart
languisheth and pines away; how the Angels likewise scanding round about, and
full of horror, are amazed the while, and with reverence are praying to JESUS
to be moved at so great a misery of the humane heart.

3. Go to then, water, water, O most sweet IEVSV, this unhappy heart: sprinckle
it at least with some little drop of the full fountains of thy sweetness. It is
now enough, sweet JESUS; for lo the heart came presently to itself again, as
soon as it felt but one little drop of thy divine love to be spri^ckled on it.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
Moses, it is to no purpose to take the aspersour in heart Exodus 24. Heb. 9.
and with a purple thread to tie the ysop so about it; with which dipped in the
blood of the victime; thou busily purges the Altar, the volume of the Law, the
whole people, attentively listening to the statutes and precepts of God: this
shed and sprinkled blood, will not expiate sins, ror to the Tabernacle or
Leuits afford any sanctity a whit nor wipe away the spots of leprosy, nor
cancel the stigma or seared print of sin; unless with all thou reguardst this
fountain, this blood, which alone can wash away the monstrous sordidues and
which shed on the tree of the Cross yeald life to soul imparts a candor and
beauty to them, and that like to the ^unne, which in the full of the Moon,
powers forth his light upon her orb and to sick mortals makes her more
amiable. Nor truly for ought else that water and blood so flowed from the side
of dying JESUS; then to ennoble souls, being cleansed with that purple to wash
their robes, to make them fit and apt, that crowned with victorious laurels
they may eternally triumph, with the immaculate Lamb.

Take therefore O JESUS, love of my soul, from this infinite bath of thine some
few little drops, at least, and sprinckle thy Sanctuary therewith, I say, the
ample field of my heart; whose shure possessi^o, thou have taken to thy self
long since. But you, O smitting Angels, go far away hence, the house is
marked already, the signs of Tau is printed on the doors: be-gone I say; for
where this mark is seen, it is a crime to enter in. Oh would to God, my JESUS
dearly beloved, with David's fervor, I could pray and obtain this favor at
thy hands.

Lord blot out my iniquities, wash me yet more from my wickedness, purge me of
my sin. Thou shall, sprinckle me with ysop, and I shall be clean, thou shall
wash me, and I shall be whiter then the snow. Turn away thy face from my
sins; and blot out al my iniquities. Create in me, O God, a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit in my bowels. Psalm. 50,
Let there be no corner, I beseech thee, which thou purgest not no portion of
my soul, which thou blessest not with the fruit of thy precious blood. The
swallow with her own blood restotes sight to her bling young ones. The blood of
a Goat expels al manner of poison. Again, the blood of doves, let forth
beneath the wings, quickens the dulled species of the eyes: nor is it fit my
God, nor just that from thy precious blood, my heart should not feel likewise
the same effects. The blood of victimes shed from the sacrificed Holocausts,
bred no corruption, nor stench, nor flies, that sordid creature, but rather
eu^n destroyed those importune and irksome things. The Sacrifice at Bethel Genesis
35.
offered up by Jacob, they say, was so purely and holily performed that not a
fly disquieted the Patriarch: busy in this rites. I will not, Lord I will not
have my heart a Bethanues, or Temple of Bell Ose. 10.
a pestered with flies, and ruining al with filthy and corrupt goare: where
Belsebub 4. Reg. 1.
gives forth his Oracles, and exhibits himself, awful and terrible to men, in
despair of their salvation. How I hate these direful and dreadful Sacrifices,
these rites! Thy blood, O sweet IESV, is always red with purple, and white
with lylies intermixed. Cant. 5.
For these two colors thou affect'st, the purple red, and snowy vhite; would
thy Cliens, and deuotes addicted to them, and to be known by them. This blood
of thine, to thirsty souls quenches their heat, to hot and toyled spirits
sends a humid breath; to broken and dismayed hearts, gives fortitude and courage.

VII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
IN the midst of the Temple, was placed a huge brazen vessel, wh^ece many
channels issued forth, apt to communicate their waters, for the use of Priests
and Leuits, where with they washed themselves when they went to sacrifice.
Exodus 3.


Weigh the munificence of God, who thought it not enough, for declaration of
his famous and good will toward us, to water the heart of man with his own
blood, unless he left us also a fountain famous for seven channels, from
whence the gifts of graces might plentifully and prodigally flow into our
minds, to wit seven Sacraments instituted to this end, to wash us, to expiate
our sins, and to wipe al steynes from the heart.

2. Point. Consider the grace, which flows from the fountains of the
Sacraments, to be a golden water, which turns al it touches, into gold; and
that so powrefully and divinely, as there is not the least action of our life
(so it be sprinkled with the liquour of divine grace) which we ought not to
make more reckoning of, then of all the treasures and riches of the world; as
meritorious and worthy of eternal happiness.

3. Point. Consider now, how al graces, and merits depend of the only Son of
God, and thence ^re derived by certain pipes or aqueducts as from the rock or
head of these living waters: Wherefore we are most studiously to receive and
keep this liquour of grace; least any whit thereof should break from the
bancks of our heart; nor is any occasion of heaping merits to be omitted, which
we greedily reach or catch not at.

THE COLLOQVY TO the wounds of our Savior.
MY soul, O God, has thirsted after thee; Psalm. 62.
unless thou replenish it with heau^ely waters, who shall recreate or refresh it?
My soul is blacker then a coal; Thren. 4.
who shall wash it whiter then snow, Psalm. 50.
unless thou powrest forth thy grace into it, which clearer then any crystal,
falls from the streams of thy side, hands, and feet? Oh sacred springs of Syloe
Joan 9.
infusing light to the blind! Oh Springs of Elun, which refreshed the heat of
the people of Israel Exodus 15.
dying nigh with thirst, amid those parched sands of that vast desert! Oh rock
Exodus 17.
smit cruelly with the tongue and hand of the Sinagogue! a rock, I say, not
exhaling flames of fire, but pouring out abundant streams and floods of
benedictions; which with a continued course, accompanied the pilgrim people
into Palestine. Oh you wholesome Iourdan waters of Naaman 4. Reg. 5.
flow with a copious channel into my heart, that no locks or sluice at any time
may hinder your course. But your, O you heavenly Ministers of God and man's
salvation diue and plunge in this fountain placed in the midst of the house of
God, those Ethiops our minds, I say, so ugly and deformed with the wretched
color of vices; that by your means, being rised and cleansed once they may
issue forth like doves. Amen.

Pater. Ave.
JESUS RVLES AND REIGNS IN THE loving and devout heart.
THE HYMN.
OMightie Souer aigne, if you please,
To deigne a look and view our seas;
Where hearts like ships with wind and tide
Are sailing; some at anchor ride,
Some with waves and boystrous winds
Tossed to and fro;' among them you find
My floating heart, with every blast
Of grief or of affliction past,
As' twere immersed with in the maine.
But yet, Great Monarch, if you deigne
To be my Neptune, or to guide
The stern of my poor heart, beside
The surges flying ore my decks,
Reign in my heart, let Hell play reks.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. When JESUS sits in the heart, as in a Throne and there commands, the heart
is a Paradise, our cogitations, affects, desires, are even as Angels,
Cherubins, yea Seraphins, so here do al things burn with divine love.

2. God reigns nor rules not? Sin therefore swayes and bears the rule, most
tyrant-like; and strikes and wounds the miserable heart, already stretched on
the cruel rack and torture, with terrors, scruples, horrid specter, bestial
appetits: no heart, but even a Hell.

3. Little King, great God, tame my rebellious heart, subdue it to thy heasts,
and eternally command it: Surely I will do what I can to dedicate and
consecrate it to thee: do thou defend the place, wherein thou likest well to be
shut up.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
THe pacifical Solomon in those days of old had built him a Throne of iuory 3.
Reg. 10.
six degrees or steps in height, on both sides whereof watched a Lion, very
exquisitly wrought, the truest symbol of regal Majesty; and likewise for the
people beneath in the midst of the Temple he erected a very eminent and stately
Chapel. And so to thee Immortal God; the heaven is a Throne the earth a
footstool. For thou sit'st (as sacred scriptures Psalm. 17.
tell) upon the wings of Cherubins, whence thou give Oracles, prescribest
laws to the world; and even with the only look, majesty, and state, becomst
most terrible to the haughtiest mids. Hence thou exactst just punishments from
the damned: hence thou inebriatst the blessed Citizens of Heaven, with the
nectaral honey of thy goodness: lastly hence thou carrousest cups mingled with
the gal of justice, and honey of pure goodness, to the earth, suspended between
heaven and hell. Besides in the triumphant Church the celestial spirits, whom we
call Thrones, are thy royal seat; and in the militant, the sacred Altar is thy
lodging chamber, where thou sweetly take thy rest.

But nothing is thine own so much or due unto thee, with a better title, then
the heart of man, which with a low abasement of thy self, and a singular
obedience to thy father, thou have lawfully recovered and bought with the price
of immense labor and pains; yea redeemed with thy blood, and a shameful death
on the Cross. Here, o pacifical Solomon, thou rulest, there thou commands
with a beck, in this soil or seat, as in thine own dominion, thou swayst in
that manner, as there is none so bold or of so impudent a face, that dares,
unbidden, step in a foot, or, not touched with the point of thy golden scepter,
Ester, 5.
look in a-doores. Here thou hear the humble suits, and petitions of thy
subiets, here thou stiflest lewd desires, putst a bridle on the rebellious
senses, tamest the insolence of carnal concupiscence, sweetnest the acerbity of
labors. And, (O most happy kind of government!) thou alone sufficiently
sillest the whole heart, attended with a most happy train of heavenly Citizens
which thy retinew or Court can never depart from thy side, or vanish from thine
eyes; so strongly tyest then the minds, hearts, and loves of al unto thee.
Moreover in the basis or foundation of this royal edifice, stands faith, more
clear then any Crystal; in which glass of Eternity, man's heart sees and
beholds the past and future things. The whole frame susteines itself, on that,
thy surest and most constant truth; where with thou proppest and holds it up.
For if faith lean not upon thee, it cannot hold the name or dignity, of faith.
Now the steps by which they ascend into this Throne of the heart, are those
which the Kingly Prophet insinuats, where he says: They shall pass from virtue
to virtue. Psalm. 83.
Humility lies in the lowest place, obedience followers, anon piety arises
then patience shows itself; resignation attends and perseverance tops and
crowns them al. The foundation faith consists of Iaspar, each stair shines
with his special gemmes. The first, is black with ieat, the second, green with
the emarald, being the color of hope, the third glissens with the purest
crystal, the fourth is hard with the adamant, which no contrary violence or
force can master; the fifth even sprinckles fire with the chrisolite, but the
Carbuncle, the sixth, flashes forth both fire and flames at once: yet thou midst
al, my sweetest IESV, o prodigy! not only sits secure, but even deliciatst thy
self.

There are besides, two little columns or pillastres of this Throne; love
appears on the right hand, and fear of thy justice is to be seen on the left:
yet sitst thou so venerable with divine Majesty, in this humane seat of the
heart; as the face of thine enemies, cannot behold the dignity of thy
countenance, or endure thy aspect. There thou give precepts, and art
presently obeyed; commaundst, and thy heasts performed in a moment. The Angels
themselves, even the Cherubins and Seraphins, tremble to approach any nearer;
as who know well enough, this little region to be properly thine, so only made
for thee, and so due to thee by right of purchase, as whatsoever is less then
thee, or shorter then eternity cannot please or satiate the heart; grown proud
of such a Lord. For it is hungry and thirsty, nor lives contented with any
owner, unless thou fix the seat of thy kingdom in its precincts. If thou be
present with it desires no more; if absent, come in all created things at once,
and woo it never so much, there will yet be place enough for more. If thou
getst from thence, al felicity departs with thee: if thou abidest, al beatitude
comes suddenly thither. Reign therefore, and eternally reign in my heart, O
love of my heart. Quiet the motions of perturbations, nor ever suffer the
unhappy heart; to thrust the King out of his seat; then which cannot happen a
greater disastre to it. Nor suffer I say, o darling and delight of my heart,
that one heart should be shared into many parts. For thou suffer no riual. Oh
suffer it not ever to be enticed with the allurements of worldly pleasure,
which gate being once set open, I see how easily the enemy will rush in. Be thou
to it a brazen, yea, a wall of fire, which may so roundly girt the Tower, as
that no passage may be found unto it. But that only the Holy Ghost may come
down from Heaven, whereto the heart lies open and enter therein, with a full
gale and occupy the whole heart; that so I may truly profess and glory, My
beloved to me and I to him. Cant. 2.


VIII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
MY Kingdom, is not of this world, (a) for my Kingdom is thy heart, o soul
devout to God.

1. Point Consider how God seems to make but little reckoning of the rule, and
government of heaven and earth, in regard of the dominion and care he has of
man's heart; wherein, as in a breife epitome or abridgement, he sums and
collects together the whole perfection of the Universe.

2. Point. Consider again, how sweet the yoke of Christ is; compared with the
most cruel and direful tyranny of the devil. For into what horrible vices and
abominations, does not this wicked Tyrant and cruel butcher of souls, draw
men who are subject to him? How far this Lord differs from the genius of the
world. For if this Impostour promise mountains of gold to his clients and
followers, after a long and irksome bondage, after a tedious yoke, and loads of
intolerable injuries, which it lays upon them, it really performs nothing
but smoke of words and empty shadows. Lastly, how diverse this Masters benity
is from the hard and cruel apprentiship of the flesh, which for a singular
reward of most abject services, repaies nothing but a thousand sordities, and
miseries, as well of the soul as body.

3. Point. But on the contrary, where JESUS rules in the heart, the appetits,
which were before unbridled, comply with the law of reason, and the
soule-it-self, reduced as it were into the form and order of a watch, being in
tune and well disposed, poyseth al her thoughts, words, and works, with just
weight and measure.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be with the most sweet JESUS, earnestly beseeching him he would take full
possession of the heart, command therein, as in his Kingdom, and exercise an
ample power upon all the faculties of the soul: that he would advance, pull
down, enrich, impouerish; lastly fraue it to each beck and sign of the most
holy and divine will.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS TEACHES the devout heart.
THE HYMN.
O IESV speak, thy servant hears,
But thou must find me pliant ears,
For of itself my heart and will
Is seeking drops that do distill
From a limbeck that is raised on high
With streines of wit, which soon are dry.
Oh let me hear what thou do speak
(Peace) in my heart! Ah, if it leake,
As does a vessel pierced through,
It naught avails to hear. For how
Can I retain that in my breast,
Except some heat of grace digest?
Oh with thy lessons that impart!
With thee I Will soon get al by heart.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. BEhold here my little Doctor teaching from the pulpit of the heart. O
speeches al of milk! O nectar! How affectiously the speeches! With what a grace
he teaches How joyfully the heart leaps, while it takes the words of eternal
life.

2. Like Master like Scholar; especially if he take delight to hang on the
lips of God, instructing as a Master; and with prompt and ready ears and mind
but drinck his inspirations. Here truly he plays not the man's, but teaches
the Angels part, yea is indeed a very Angel.

3. Divine Doctor, teach me to do thy most holy will, every, where and in all
things; for I require no more. I shall sure be wise enough, when thou alone
shall taste and relish with me.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
THe time will come, o delight of my soul, O Spouse of blood, Exodus 4.
when mount Caluery shall be thine Accademy, thy divine humanity, thy book; for
woden Chair, the hard Cross, where this volumne shall be laid upon, for points,
stripes, Lashes for commaes, for Auditary of so divine a Master, the wicked
Jews. Al men shall read in that book, and if they mark, understand, how potent
thou art, who can so aptly linck together, things by nature so far distant
from each other; life with death, folly with wisdom, poverty with rich,
strength, with weakness, gal with honey, high with low. Here the disciples of
the. Cross shall learn; with what pretty slight of thy wisdom, the most tender
worm 2. Reg. 23.
of thy humanity hanging on the line and hook of the Cross has drawn out of
the bowels of men's hearts, that horrid and cruel fish Leuiathan Job. 40.
and crushed his head: with how vnvsual an instrument, the engine of thy
humility, thou ouer-threwest that mad Tower of Babel, brakest with thy meekenes
the adamantin heart of the Jews, how with thy admirable sweetness and
affability, like that worm (which seemed a prodigy to Jonas) Ion. 4.
thou did so smit the root of that flowrishing iuy, as suddenly all the leaves
withered, that is the ceremonies of the ancient Sacrifices were abolished,
Altars demolished, the preistly and regal power of the Jews, the splendor of
that flourishing nation, in times past, withered like a tree strooken and
blasted from heaven. Lastly in this open and unfolded book, al posterity shall
acknowledge what were those ancient mercies, of thine, Psalm. 88.
hidden hitherto in the immense treasures of thy bowels, and even the Gentiles
themselves whom the divine goodness might seem to have cast off for so many
Ages past, shall now behold the most abstruse secrets of the highest things,
hidden heretofore. But now, [most loving Doctor) do I see another. School
set open to thee, the spacious Galery of man's heart, a noble Lyceum, wherein
thou Lord and Master teach the soul, thy disciple within and instructest
her with the precepts of thy most holy will. Speak therefore, I beseech thee
Lord, the ears of my heart are open, speak O love of my heart, for thy words
are sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb: Psalm. 18.
milk and holy under thy tongue, the honycomb distilleth from thy lips. Cant. 4.
Oh fiery words of love! Strong, efficatious, endless, thundering words, which
impetuously throw al things to the ground, ruin Ceders, fetch up mountains by
the root, rear the lowly hill lying in the plains strengthen collapsed minds,
dash and crush the proud: Lastly; words of a most indulgent Parent, teaching
his dearest child al manner of wholesome precepts. Lend thine ears then my heart;
God is he that speaks. Hear my Child (for so JESUS aduyses from the pulpit of
the heart) do thou give thy self to me: Let me be thy possession, thy nurse,
thy food, for nothing can satiate thine appetite without me. My Child, throw
away those leekes and garlik of Egypt, turn thy face from the stinking waters
of pleasure, and put thy mouth rather to my side, the wine-cellar of graces,
whence at ease thou may draw and derive to thy self most sovereign and
incomparable joys: For sake thy self and thou shall find me; leave the vain
contentments, of the senses, and thou shall purchase to thy self the solid and
sincere delights of Heaven. Learn of me, child, not to build thee worlds, or
frame new Heavens, nor to work wounders, Aug. sermon. 10. de sermon. Dom.
but learn that I am me^k and humble of heart. Mat. 11.
Be always mindful of benefits bestowed upon thee; for nothing so exhausts the
rivers of divine grace, as the blasting vice, of an ungrateful mind. Be present
to thy self follow thine own affairs, square al thy actions to the exact rule
of reason, and persuade thy self this, and have it always in thine eyes, that
thine; and the felicity of al rests in me the only sovereign good.

IX. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
THey shall be al docible of God. Joan. 6.


1. Point. Consider how Almighty God, from the first creation of things, has
proposed al his perfections to be openly read in the book of creatures. Sap.
13. Rom* 1.
For by the ample spaces of Heavens, he has manifested his immensnes; by the
diversity of celestial influences, the variety of his gifts and graces; by the
splendor of the sun and moon, his beauty; by the admirable viciscitude of
the seasons of the year, his providence; by the immovable firmnes and
stability of the earthly globe, his constancy and immutability, by the plenty
of his benefits wherewith he has most copiously endowed us, his goodness;
Lastly in the huge vastnes and depth of the seas, he has left the
inexhaustible abyss of his essence expressed as it were in a paincted cloth.

2. Point. Consider besides by what means the same God heretofore has
explicated his mysteries to us, with diverse Oracles of Prophets, and with the
manifold shadows and figures of the old law. 1. Cor. 10. Heb. 11.
So the green bush Exodus 3.
untouched in the flames, signified the virginity and ^ecundity of the
Virgin Mother. The brazen Serpent Number. 21.
with whose aspect, erected in the wilderness, were cured the wounded, slung
with serpents, expressed the Cross, and death of the son of God, to be the
wholesome remedy of miserable mortals. The marriage solemnized between Solomon
and the Egyptian, woman 2. Reg. 11.
and represented the hypostatical union of the eternal Word with the humane
nature.

3. Point. But while these things seemed but small to the great immensity of his
love, he himself being made man, came down unto us; and taking possession of
the heart; and assuming to him the office of a Teatcher, instructs it, and
delivers the art, not of working miracles, nor of building new worlds, but
imbuing it with new precepts and altogether unheard of hitherto. Learn says
he of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart. Mat. 11.


4. Point. I will endeavor to give my mind very frequently and seriousl^y to
learn this lesson by heart, wherein consists the sum of al Christian
perfection, and I will examine my self how diligently hitherto I have behaved my
self therein, and what method I will afterward keep to be exact.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed to the Holy Ghost, most earnestly craving him to afford me
light to comprehend the divine mysteries; a heart docile and apt to receive such
lights and motions; strength of memory, least the species of things once
received may easily vanish away; and force sufficient wherewith to execute what
I shall think fit to be dove.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS PAINTS THE IMAGES OF THE LAST things in the table of the heart.
THE HYMN.
O Rare Apelles; lo the frame,
My heart; but first prepare the same,
Which is al slubbered 'ore with sin,
Wipe al away, and then begin
To draw the shapes of virtue here
And make the four last things appeare^
That no Chimeraes of the brain,
Or Fantasies I may retain.
Besides vouchsafe to draw some Saint,
Begin, sweet IESV, figure paint,
Whom I may imitate, and love,
As did Narcissus. From above
Descend Apelles, thou divine,
Come every day and draw some line.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. NOthing is more miserable then the heart when it gives license to wandering
imaginations, and liberty to self love. My God! what images! what fantasies!
what enormityes! what folies are depainted there!

2.But after that JESUS, the divine Painter, has entered into the shop of the
heart, and taken the heart itself as a table to draw and paint therein, thou
may straight discover the image of God and Trinity reformed; the effigies of
JESUS, and MARY drawn, the whole celestial Court represented, and the face of
the gallantst virtues expressed; whether with greater luster of colors, or
feeling of piety, or delectation of the mind I can not say.

3. O most loving IESV, imbue my heart with the colors of Heaven, paint not
shadows, but genuine and native images, snowy innocence, greenes of hope, the
purest gold of charity; that so the closet of my heart may come to be a certain
Cabinet or Reliquary of al perfections.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
MY heart (my JESUS) is an empty table, since thou have wipped away thence the
images and fading shadows of worldly things, and thrown down the idols which
I my self had wickedly erected in thy Sanctuary; take then, I pray, thy p^ecils
in thy hands, and dip them in the liuelyest colors thou have; that no series
or tract of years, nor inclemency of the air, nor dust raised from the earth,
may blemish or deface what thy al-working hand from the most absolute idaeas of
the eternal wisdom, has divinely painted. For thou, o great Artisan, have set
down in writing with thy hand, those noble souls, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
the rest of the family of the predestinate. Thou truly, art that admirable
Author, who did put the last hand to the azure orbs of Heaven, appliedst
the purest gold to the Stars; the greenes of the emerald, to the herbs, the
snowy candor to the lillyes, the crimson to the rose, the purple to the
violet, pale with yellow mixed. Thou sprincklest cristal on the adamant, the
etherean brightness, on the saphir, the Vulcan flame; on the carbuncle: Lastly,
thou have endowed al things, as well sensible as insensible, with such variety
of colors, and sweet delectation as the eye cannot be satisfied with beholding
them. Eccl. 1.


And in this huge vastnes of the world, my God, thou have shown thy
omnipotence, which the eye of the mind may well admire, though not conceive or
comprehend but in the diversity of created things, which a strange knot,
concording discord, and discording concord most streihtly ties together: thou
have impressed the lively image of thy infinite wisdom in the order of this
universal Al; but there is not among al thy creatures any one, no not the least
of them, wherein conspicuous draughts of thy goodness, shine not euery-where.
Since therefore my heart is a void table, already sit to be wrought, draw I
beseech thee divine Painter, and here delineate only these four images, which
devouring time with no age may cancel or were out. And first frame in this
table, that last grimme, and dreadful line or period of my life, and let these
here be the draughts of this sad image: Let me lie as dying, with eyes sunk
into my head, with pale and deadly face, leaden lips, let death stand by
threatening with a terrible iauelin in hand, here the devil menacing with
weapons of temptation, there the Guard an Angel breaking his thrusts, in my
defense. Above be the Judge seen attending the passage and issue of the soul,
let the children houle at the doleful bed; the servants, each providing for
himself: add, if thou list, the cossin lying not far off, wherein the
senselles corpse is to be laid, until that day, when the last trumpet's found
shall sumon the buried to arise. Oh wholesome and profitable Picturel whole only
aspect will show me that is, my nothing, to my self; and laying the swelling
winds, will hold me in my earth, that I grow, not proud yea will give me a
generous and stout heart, that triumphantly I may trample on the trash and
trumpery of the world, and creeping on the ground with frequent sighs
preocupying death, before my death mount up to heaven.

Now pious IESV, I pray draw, and finish also the other part of the table, of
the other side; with due lineaments. Be that majesty set forth, wherewith as
Judge thou shall appear one day, and be seen of al to handle and discuss the
causes of the living and dead: let me here behold thee sitting in the clouds,
with the mouth armed, with a two edged sword, and with an eternal separation
seuering the sheep from goats. On which image as often as I shall cast mine
eyes, I may feel the bit and fear of thy dreadful justice cast upon me,
whenever I shall lash out like a fury, into the precipices of unbridled
appetites.

Go on heavenly Artificer, now must thou, paint a Hell, that lake so dreadful
for its sulphur and flames, where the unhappy souls cheyned together, with
howling and disparing cries fill al things, and with that tragedy publish their
wretchedness, and miserable condition. So exhibit the whole, as I may seem to
behold the unclean spirits, touch the darkness self as with the finger, feel
the gnashing of teeth, hear the horrible blasphemies, their cries, their
paths, their phlegm which in vain they cast forth against God, their bans and
cursings, wherewith they cruelly tear one another, that being astonished with
the sight of this picture, I may eternally sing thy mercies, Psalm. 88.
which has held me unworthy a thousand and a thousand times, from this
lamentable abyss of infinite evils.

Lastly, my good Painter, look where the rest of the ample space of my heart,
seems void, I say not express, but shadow, I pray, the image at least of
eternal glory and beatitude. Exhibit howsoever which a rude draught that house
and royal seat, where thou layst open the most divine treasure which thou have
reserved for thy children, with the title of inheritance. Here let that great
and blessed City of celestial Jerusalem, built al of gold Apoc. 21.
and precious stones, even dazzle the eyes; there let the Citizens of heaven be
seen clothed with the sun that grave Senate of Patriarchs and Apostles, with
heads crowned with golden diadems, besides those valiant Heroes, who with the
price of their blood and life, have purchased themselves immortal laurels.
Figure also that mount, purer then crystal, wherein the candid mother of the
lamb, and the rest of the virginal flock deliciat with the Lamb himself, amid
the chaste delights and Quires. Apoc. 14.


Now then that these four pictures may the better be conferued, let them not
be enclosed I pray in Mosaical work with certain little stones linked and
cimented together, least perhaps disagreeing with themselves they fly a
sunder, but let one be set in ebony, another in cypres wood, the other be
garnished round with plates of silver, al enameled and set with topase stones;
and finally the last be decked with the richest gemmes. Take off thy hand now if
thou please, the work is fully finished. Yet one thing more remains, my
divine Painter, of no small reguard, forsooth, that to thine exquisit work thou
add a curten, least unluckily the dust, or moister air, or more untoward
mind, may ever taint or least obscure so elegant and terse a picture.

X. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
I Would to God they would be wise, and provide for the last things. Deuteronomy. 32.


1. Point. Consider JESUS to be an excellent Painter, who with the only pencil
of the mouth, to wit, the draught of one little word of fiat, painted the whole
world with so great and artificious a variety of colors; and how in each
creature he has expressed very excellent lineaments of his power, wisdom, and
goodness.

2. Point. Think what force has the lively image and representation of death,
particular judgment, and Hell, to restrain the lawles liberty of our life and
too excessive mirth; and how much the remembrance of the heavenly glory
preuayles to stir up the mind in the course of virtue, and to take away the
difficulties they use to meet with, who walk that way.

3. Point. Think this also with thy self, how the pictures and the images of
the foresaid things expressed, at no time, should be wiped away from the table
of the heart, this being the sourse of al our tears and errors, to be so
careless and backwards to conceive and premeditate before hand, what is to be
exhibited in the last act and period of our life.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be made to God, beseeching him not to suffer, that either the delights
and honors of the world, or prosperity and adversity may ever race out of our
minds those pictures, whose affect is so necessary for us to our Salvation.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS BRINGS IN THE CROSS INTO the heart, and easily imprints it in the lover.
THE HYMN.
Have thou no Harbinger to bring
Thy furniture, so great a King,
But must thy self in person come
To order al, and hang this room?
My heart alas! (...) hardly brooks,
To be tran^fixt with tenter book^;
For nails and hamner, now I see,
And ladder, al prepared for me.
Ah! without sheets I see thy bed;
Thy Cross, no bolster for thy head
Except it be a crown of thorn,
Thy canopy is Heaven forlorn.
Al things lament thy pains to see,
IESV come in, I Will mourn with thee.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. Go in lovely Cross enter lance, sponge, nails, scourge, bloody,
thorns, get you in to the Closet of the heart. Welcome still, but on this
condition that JESUS bring you in himself; for mirrh with JESUS, is admirable,
and mere sweetness.

2. Thou say thou love JESUS; then needs must thou his Cross: for if
otherwise thou boast to love JESUS, thou deceiuest thy self and others.

3. Most sweet child; what have you and I to do with this lumber here? scarce
art thou come into the world, but thou art oppressed with the weight of
punishments. Oh plant thy seat in my Heart! and then shall I challenge Hell
itself: for if JESUS and I hold together, what Hercules can stand against us
both?

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
MOst worthy Painter, Psalm. 87.
I pray, take the table in hand again, for before thou, make an end of thy
work in the escuchion of my heart, thou must needs paint thine arms, with some
motto or other that by the devise thou may be known to be the Master of the
house.

The Palaces of Kings, and their houses, as well in the Country as City,
euery-where are wont to give forth their titles, arms, and names of their
Ancestors, to wit, the monuments of their royal stock and ancient nobility. As
for thine arms and tropheues of thy name good IESV; I take them to be thy
Cross; nails, lau^ce, crown' of thorns scourges; that Pillar whereto thou
were bound; and those very cords, wherewith thou wast tied. I (said he) have,
been trained up in labors from my youth.

Go to then, for my sake, among those four images of the last things, which
thou have fully finished in all points, let these instruments, as Tropheye of
thy Passion, be likewise pourtraited. The Cross would be of Cedar, that is
painted in his proper color; the spear sprinkled with blood, the nails dipped
in the same dye, the pillar marked with drops and streakes of blood; lastly,
the cords and scourges with blood also, but so as washed away with tears here
and there they make certain distinctions between. At sight of these arms, if
they offer to encroch or approach nearer to the heart be the enemies dispersed;
and fly as wax before the face of the fire. But ho^ my Lord, print I pray that
Cross more deep into my heart; if it be churlish and resist, use violence with
it and soften it if need be; if with too much softnes it prove il and diffuse
itself, constrain the parts, to consist and hold together; but be sure that
every color thou here workest with be well mixed with thy blood, for this
color pleases best, as being the simbol of love. Be this Cross to me sweet
JESUS, as a buckler, to rebate and blunt the weapons of the enemies: be it a
wall, or trench to girt me in; arms for me to assail my enemies with all, may
it stir in me always, first a fresh and lively memory of thy passion, then a
burning desire of suffering with alacrity for thee al hard and cruel things; no
otherwise indeed then of those thorns were roses the black-berries; the
whitest-lillyes: let this wood, cast into my-mind, turn the bitterness of the
waters, into sweetness Exodus 5.
change gaul into honey, alloes to sugar, Let the Cross be the mast of the
sailing ship, wherein transported I may happily land at the haven of salvation;
my bed; where couching as the Phoenix in her nest, and consumed with the flame
of love, and turned to ashes I may dye Jacobs ladder Genesis 28.
to mount to Heaven by; the Pilgrims staff to pass the Iourdan Genesis 32.
the sheep-hooke, to keep in the straying senses in their duties; Pharus
whereto I may direct my course in the tempestuous Sea of the world, amid the
thickest fogs or fowlest weather. May the lance and scourges strike a terror
to the proud and rebellious spirits, that menace a far-off, and reuewing the
assault by sits try to invade thy Sanctuary. Pitch Lord, and plant this Cross
of thine in the turret of the heart; be it there a standard, which being aimed
at, as the Captayns sign and sign of war, may all the faculties of my mind
anon, be summoned with alarmes, and pel-mel directly rush upon the enemy. Being
armed with this Cross as with the keenest sword, I may cut off the wretched
head of the cruel Holofernes Iud^^^h 13.
and rise up against my Adversaries, like that Angel, who in a night alone
foiled and vanquished at once, a huge army of the proud 4. Reg. 19.
Senacherib. Wherefore auant you hellish troops, pack hence away, and fly unto
those darkesome vaults. There is none of you that dares abide before the Tower
of the heart, where the arms of the Supreme Numen are now set up: in sight
whereof the Angelical squadrons stand in battle array; where not only horror
and dread but imm^nent and most present ruin waits upon you. For death himself
at the sight only of the Cross, turns his back; sin also takes his flight a
long with him, and both together with their common Captain Satan the devil,
in great despair tumble headlong in the lowest Hell.

XI. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
Pv^^^ as a sign upon thy har^. Cant. 8.
Be thou as wax, for every form; I vvil be the seal, and imprint the arms of
my passion in thee.

1. Point. In the conquered and vanquished Tower of the heart the victorious
Jesus, places the trophies and triumphs of his passion, forsooth, as Lord and
Master of the place, least any one hereafter may chance to challenge it to
himself, or seek to invade it.

2. Point. There can be no such force or power of temptations, which with the
lively apprehe^sion of these arms may not utterly be defeated; no adversity so
great, which may not cheerfully be borne; no such allureme^ts of worldly
pleasures; which with a generous loathing may not be rejected.

3. Point How happy the soul which is nailed with Christ upon the Cross! how
rich, while under that wood are found to be the riches of Heaven and earth! how
defensible and secure against all the power of Hell, being the imprenable Tovver
of Christians, whereon a thousand targets hang Cant. 4.
the whole armary of the strong, either to endure the shock of the enemies or
to assail them.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be made by turni^g the speech, by way of Apostrophe, to all the symbols of
Christ's Passion, as nails, lance, whips, and also unto Christ himself,
craving most earnestly of him, as well to conserve in our minds the memory of
those things which he has suffered for our sakes, as to admit us into the
society, and communion of his most bitter chalice; that we may also merit one
day to enjoy our part of glory and eternal felicity.

Pater, Aue.
THE HEART CONSECRATED TO THE love of JESUS is a flourishing garden.
THE HYMN.
JESUS, thy power and gracious will
Is always drawing good from il,
And life from death, and joy from groans,
And Abraham's children mak^st of stones.
Behold a quick-set is my heart,
With thorns and briars on every part;
One drop of blood alone thou shedst
Will make a rose, wheres'er thou treadst:
Oh may my heart sweet odours breath
Of virtue! Ah! thy thorny wreath
That pear^'d into thy brain made red
And parple roses on thy head.
Then for my sins, that I may mourn,
With roses grant a pricking thorn.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. IF JESUS, be in thy heart, thou needst not fear, the unlucky accidents of
man's life, for he of very thorns makes sweetest roses.

2. The most sweet odor of the white and ruddy rose, which JESUS is, recreates
and refreshes men and Angels, kills the ravenous fowls. Hence when the heart
with JESUS is beset and closed in with roses, sin and the devil get them far
enough; for they cannot abide the smell of them.

3. Will thou be a soft couch, wherein little JESUS may like to repose and rest
in? let the Heart be crowned with the roses of virtues with the snowy flower, of
innocence, with the purple of patience, and breath the frangrancy of true
devotion. Here JESUS feeds Cant. 1.
here he sleeps.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
Our little bed is flourishing Cant. 1.
our garden likewise is al beset with flowers. Here the sweet smelling balm
exhales an odoriferous breath here amid the snowes of lillyes, the rose-grow al
purple; here Cinnamon with safron, cassia mixed with mirrh, have a fragrant
odor with them; there is nothing here that breathes not admirable sweetenes to
the smelling. Come therefore, O love of my heart, my beloved, that feedst among
the Cant. 2.
lillyes, who delightst in flowers, come into the sweet delicious bed, or
rather, if thou will walk the spacious allies of the orchard and in the
walks. Oh my Sun, dart those fruitful rays of thine eyes, and with thy
sweetest breath more gentle then Zephirus. inspire an odoriferous soul into
the flowers, wherewith my heart being hedged in, like garden-plot; even smiles
upon thee. Here the humble violet, fairer for her lownes, even wooes thee with
her soothing flatteryes, the higher sending her odours as she stoopes the
lower; a noble symbol of a lowly mind; which virtue; as a first begotten
daughter thou have kissed from the cradle and tenderly embraced, Here the lilly
rising somewhat higher, from the ground, amidst, the whitest leaves, in form
of a silver cup, shows forth her golden threads of safron in her open bosom;
a noble Hierogrisike of a snowy mind, a candid purity, and a clean heart, which
now long since have been thy loves: for hence that strange obsequiousnes of
thine in those thy younger days, seeking and complying so with thy
Virgin Mother.

Here now besides the pourpourrizing rose, the flower of Martyrs dyed with the
sanguine tincture of their blood, represents that incredible love which put
thee [o love piously cruel!) and nailed thee on the Cross; so as it is less
to be wondered, it should dare so afterward to cast the martyrs into flaming
furnaces, into cauldro^s of melted lead, into burning fires, with living
coals; load them with Crosses gibbets, punishments, and take away those active
souls, which yet these generous and noble Champions, very willingly laid
down of their own accord. Here also that bitter mirrh, but bitter now no
more, whose chief force consists, in preserving bodies from corruption;
distills those first Cant. 1.
tears of hers more bitter then the later ones that follow after; but so much
sweeter, as more powerful: This shows and represents those tears, sighs,
pressures, labors, which thy dearlings, Confessors, Mo^ks, Anchorites, have
taken voluntarily upon the^, while in the doubtful course of this life the
pious Pilgrims hyed them to the heavenly country.

But, O most sweet JESUS to ravish thee above the rest with admiration, and his
love, the heliotropion of my heart, that flower, the genuine image of the Sun
conuerts itself to thee; whom therefore so assiduously it follows, for having
so from nature such, a hidden force and sympathy with that eye of the world,
the parent of al light. In this flower do nestle hearts enflamed with thy love,
whose voice is even the very same, with that of thy Spouse; My beloved to me,
and I to him. Cant. 2.
Deliciate thy self then, IESV the delight of my heart, amidst these amenityes
of flowers, and from those fragrant and odoriferous garden beds, let the
blessed Spirits thy companions weaue them co^onets, and delightful garlands,
more pleasing, I dare say, to thy divine Majesty, then those of old, so offered
up in Lachary Zach. 6.
wherewith the head was decked of the son of Iosedech, the High Priest. Yea
will I be a little bolder with thee; do thou thy self, my IESV, from thy Garden
gather and pluck thee flowers make thee posyes, wreath thee chaplets, and do
your Angels only help the while. My little JESUS first shall choose the gathered
flowers himself, then shall you bind them up with a golden thread, and lastly he
with these flowers these wreaths, these chaplets shall compass in the heart
about, that with this preservative and odor of these flowers, he may banish
from the mind al contagion that may vitiat or infect.

Go to then go on you blessed Spirits, but I pray give him the rarest flowers
into his hand, even the pride and honor of the eternal spring, which neither
heat of sun may fade, nor tempest or showers deface nor obscure the luster,
beauty or dignity, which the divine graces prodigally have powered upon them.

XII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
Our bed flourishes, says the Spouse. Cant. 1.


1. Point. Consider JESUS to be truly a Nazarean, that is flowery or
flourishing; for the loves to be conversant with the sweet odours, and flowers
of virtues. Wherefore I will ponder, how grateful it is to him to repose and
rest himself among the lillyes of purity and chastity; the roses of martyrdom
and mortification, the violets of humility and prayer; the Sunne-affecting
marigolds, that is, the noble souls, and pliant to every beck, of the divine
will; and other garden plots, of the rest of virtues, with whose loves, he is so
taken, as that euery-where, at al occasions, he sents their odours and hunts
after them.

2. Point. These flowers should never fade, with any weather, not with the
parching heat of the sun, I say should not wither with the heat of carnal
temptations, nor hang the head with the southerly wind of austere sadness; nor
pinched with the cold and frozen blust^ring of the north, that is, not nipt or
blasted with the evil breath of dulnes in spiritual things: but should rather
be continually watered with the dew of celestial graces, and from the substance
of the heart, deuo'yd of al corruption, draw and derive their juice and blood,
where by they might prosper and flourish euer^more.

3. Point. I vvil seem to behold the little JESUS, sporting in this little
flovvry garden of the heart, picking here and there, and plucking with his hand,
now those flowers; the Angels remaining astonished at so great familiarity, and
adoring the while. But for me I will resolve with my self, to keep especially
the lilly of chastity inviolable, without the least stain or blemish of its
candor.

THE COLLOQVY.
TO the most Blessed Virgin, Mother and Disciple of al chastity, of whom I
vvil crave the means first to keep chastity, and then earnestly beg her help
and patronage, to vanquish easily all the temptations of the flesh.

Aue maris stella.
JESUS SINGS IN THE QVIRE OF THE heart, to the Angels playing on musical
instruments.
THE HYMN.
IF thou within my heart would a well;
OIESV, then what Philom^l,
Could warble with so sugared throat,
To make me listen to her note?
The Sirens of the world to me;
Would seem to make no harmony.
When they a long a large resound
Of pleasures, thou do them confound,
Chanting a long, a large to me,
With ecchoing voice, Eternity!
A brief of pleasure, with like strain
Thou soundst a long of endl^sse pain,
The Diapason, joys for me,
To live in bliss eternally.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. What do me hear my heart, what do we seem to hear. How sweet are these
rapts? how sweetly this ^clestial harmony enchants the soul, and rauisheth it
quite besides himself. Oh happy houer! O happy lot! when JESUS and the Angels
sing in parts, to the melody of the Heavens.

2. When the heart sweetly respires, it sighs for and after, JESUS, and chants
forth his praises with a glad some spirit. O music. O incredible consort! I
hear methinks the Quires of celestial symphony to sound; and see my self in
the midst of celestial joys.

3. Let thy voice sound in mine ears Psalm. 88.
my Beloved. For to speak in a ward, most humbly prostrate at thy feet, I
here, protest; that neither I do nor will ever love any other then the sweetest
dolours and passions of JESUS. Away with these flatteryes of self: Away with
these bewitching Prostitute of carnal pleasures. Sirens auaunt with your
alluring charms of my affections, Let JESUS only sound in mine ears. For his
voice is sw^^t and graceous his sface. Isa. 48.


THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
O Sweet harmony! O divine confort! Or are we mocked the white? I hear
me-thinke a lute, the harp plays, the flutes and cornets wind, a whole Quire
is kept in the heart; and if I be not deceived it is a song of three parts; they
seem to play according to the number of the musicians that play. For the
Angels here of the one side, though they use diverse instruments; yet sounding
but one thing seem to play but one part; then JESUS the skilful and most
exquisit Musician tunes his voice, and bears his part; lastly the heart has
his. For amidst these numbers it sings and dances al at once. How quaintly and
aptly the strings, wind instruments, and voice al agree: With how admirable a
pleasure the numbers quauer and iump with all. But then how noble a Hymn is
sung the while how curious and elegant JESUS stands in the midst, not only a
singer, but as a Rectour of the Quire also with a magistrate rod in hand now
lifted up, and then let fall; keeping the time, and ordering the key and air of
the whole song. If you ask me the subject of the dicty the Royal Psalmist
Psalm. 88.
had designed and penned it long a go, when he said: I will chant the mercies
of the Lord for ever. For to this purpose JESUS the prime Christ, records his
ancient loves to the humane heart, and now mixing with admirable skill flats with
sharps, sharps with flats, the tenor with the base, and running diversely
divisions he touches with a sweet remembrance now with a moderate, now
remiss, now slow, and now with a quick voice, the innumerable number of his
benefits vvhere-vvith heretofore he has vvooed the heart: Wherefore recording
things in this manner, now he stirs up pious desires, which he had often
enkindled before, now with a grauer tone, he exaggerats the horrid fears of
sins, and hell, which he not rarely had inculcated heretofore, and now
again with a sharper streyne of the voice, call he to mind the lively and
sudden impressions of compunction for sins, the agitations and excitations,
of the mind, determining a change of life, new undertakings of great things,
heroical entreprises, and a thousand other of the sort; with which divine
love is wont to play and dully in the hearts of lovers. Mean while the Angels
tune their instruments and strings to this argument, and while themselves for
astonishment cannot open the mouth or express a word; they betake them to
their instruments, and apply all the industry and art they have to play upon
them, and with a sacred silence, tacitly admire the divine mercy toward men,
and even with the gesture of this dumb admiration most vehemently stir up and
incite themselves to magnify and extol the praises of God to the Heavens! whose
manner is and chief delight, to rescue mortals from the jaws of hell, to put
the burning coals of divine love the cold, tepid, and sloth full minds, and
with water as it were to extinguish the flames of libidinous lust. Lastly with
one glance or cast of the eye, as with a thunderbolt to ruin and depresse the
proud and haughty and for the humble and modest, with the only beck of his will
to raise them sudenly. But what does the heart while, in whose music roame is
all this harmony made? Now it dilates itself, now contracts, now it rises, now
falls, it fears, it hapes, it loves, it hates, it composeth and wholly frames
itself and al it is appetites to the rules, numbers, and sweet modulation of
music.

Then truly it observes and clearly discernes the difference between the
celestial, that true, stable, melodious music, and the false voices, the
harsh, the trembling, the broken, and ungrateful tunes of the world. For tell me
I pray, what is that bewitching, or, as you call, delicious music of the
world, but confusions of B^bel, mad baulings, strange clamours, vnquoth noyses?
One sings the perilous tops of dignities, the smokes of honors, the uncertain
degrees of Magistrates, the vain breath of popular glory: another with a
sordid mouth sounds for the obseene and foul delectations of the flesh,
bestial delights, wine, feasts, and banckets: another sings outrage in's
angers: another with a feigned voice dissembles, choler and rancour, harboring
within. Some like rather to flatter, as Sirens, some with singing to plot and
coner guile and deceit Thus are all the songs of the world but a hydeous and
tumultuous noise, no harmony; inarticulate and hoarse murmurs, no music; or if
a harmony it be, it dulles truly as well the hearers as singers; and even kills
with the very absurdnes thereof, since peace indeed cannot rest with the wicked
Isa. 48.
nor any quietness be among tumults, nor tranquillity, nor calmes, amidst the
black, and hydeous storms and tempests of malice. Whereas on the contrary,
heavenly music delights the heart, wipes away troubles and tediousnes,
composeth the evil motions of the sick mind, repels the force of the enemies
lastly puts Satan to flight, as heretofore was signified in David; who
restored Saul to his wits again being taken and vexed by an evil spirit, with
the only playing on a harp. 1. Reg. 16.


Now therefore my heart (for now remaynes thy part) sing a joyful and triumphant
song. Io, live JESUS Victorious, live he forever: live JESUS the triumphers,
the terror of hell, and father of life. Live JESUS the Spouse of Virgins, the
Doctor of Prophets, the fortitude of Martyrs. Live JESUS Prince of Heaven and
earth, JESUS triumph, the only possessour of my heart. Let JESUS, I say, live;
reign, and triumph eternaly.

XIII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
FIRST POINT.
I Will consider a triple music, whereof the first is heard in Heaven, the
second in earth, the third in the heart of man, devout to God. The first truly,
the Angels, frame of three parts, the Cherubins, Seraphins, Thrones, sing the
treble, who with a most high and shril contention of the voice, chant the
diuinest things, the eternity of God his immensity, power, and the rest of the
divine attributes. The Virtues, Dominations, Principates, in a certain middle
tenor are occupied in proclayming the mysteries of grace, the Incarnation, of
the Son of God, his virginal Nativity, Passion, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension. Lastly the Principates, Archa^gels, Angels, with a grave and lower
tone, sing the creation and conservation of the world, and the rest of this
kind.

4. Point. Attend now to the other music, made on earth, proclayming the
divine praises, which is the order, symetry, and apt agreement of all the parts
of the world, with and among themselves; in which Quire, the four elements
with an harmon^ous discord play their parts admirably together. The Heavens
likewise make up the consort, while they declare the glory of God to the whole
world, for neither are the words or speeches, whose voices, may not be hard.
Psalm. 18.


3. Point. The third symphony is held in the Temple of man's heart, and then is
that melody made, when all the faculties of the soul, contain themselves
within their parts and functions; when reason plays the treble, the
inferior appetite bears the base, when our wii agrees with the divine and
supreme will: and such is the sweetness of this harmony, as fills he mind with
immense pleasure. And no marvel, while JESUS hmself moderats all this music
with his most certain and temperate rules and measure.

THE COLLOQVY.
TO the blessed Spirits, whom I will inuit, first, to sing praises to the
Divinity: then will I also stir up my self to accommodate my voice with
theirs: wherefore with all the endeavor of my mind, will I sing with them this
divine verse, Lord thy will be done as in Heaven, so in earth.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS THE SON OF DAVID, PLAYS ON the harp in the heart, while the Angels
sing.
THE HYMN.
When JESUS does my heart insp^re,
As Orpheus, with his tuned lire,
The trees with power attractiue drew,
My heart deep rooted (where it grew
In baren soil without content)
So powerfully he draws, that rent
From thence, it follows him, takes root,
And so self-loue, which had set foot
Is banished far, who charmed before
My heart deluded. Evermore
IESV be al in all, my part,
My God, musician to my heart,
And harmony, which solace brings
Ah touch my heart, and tune it is strings.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. IF JESUS touch alone and move affects, which are the strings of our heart,
good God! how sweet, how divine a music he makes therein. But if self-loue
once play the Harper, and meddle with the quil, and touch the springs but never
so little, ah me! it is a hellish horror, and no music.

2. When JESUS with a soft modulation steals into my heart there is straight
such a sweetness in the marrow and bowels, as al things satisfy and please
alike; life, death, prosperity, adversity: You would verily say my miseries
were charmed by JESUS and his Angels.

3. Touch but the harp, little David, give it a lick with the quil, tvvang that
only, I say, tvvang the domestical harp but never so ligh^ly, whereon thy
Gransier David played so long a go, and it is enough. It was it dispersed the
horrid clouds of sadness and melancholy, and drove away the wicked Genius. O
God, when I hear this David both father and son of the Royal Psalmist,
playing on his harp, how my heart iumps the while, yea how ready it is to leap
out of itself.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
THe heavenly David in the midst of the Hale of the heart, with nimble fingers,
tickles the harp, to the musical numbers. Come hither Angels, then come you
dear souls to JESUS, come you al: Clear up your voices, and tune them to the
pulse, and harmony of this harp. This sound, believe me, will banish Satan, and
thoroughly purge away melancholy, that grateful seat of the wicked Genius.

But why the harp (most sweet JESUS) rather then another? Yet should I think
thou take it not by chance: Unless perhaps it be that the form and sound of
this Instrument. Ah! thou would present that figure which in mount Caluary
thou actedst so long a go; playing the Chorus of that sad Tragedy, in the
public Theater of Heaven and earth, in view of al? Ah, now I remember how
thine arms and feet were then stretched forth on the tentours, as in the harp
the strings are wont. How stiff were then the nerves and sinews of the whole
body: But here love plays the harper, and yealds so forth a sound most like
the harp, reaching far and wide, as far I say, as the highest, middle, and
nether orb extend heaven, earth, and hell. Satan felt thee harper, and maugre
al his power was constreyned to compresse his foaming anger, and bridle his
implicable fury. Death lurking at the gates of hell, felt the fatal point of his
dart (being no less then sin) to be sudenly rebated. But with us now at the
sound of his harp, the rocks being riu'd and split, began to fly asunder, hearts
harder then adamants to soften, wicked men touched with the prick of conscience
to confess their crimes, to knock their breast, the proper seat of the
penitent mind, and to give forth these words, most full of compunction, Truly
the Son of God was here. Mat. 27


Yea the sound went up to Heaven also; and sudenly stayed so the hand of the
divine Nemesis, menacing eternal ruin and calamity to men, and now ready
stretched forth to make a full revenge of al, as that by and by the same being
voluntarily unarmed, and now as the case were altered quite has given place to
mercy, which hitherto had layne hid.

But why do I call these things to memory? who knows my honey JESUS, whether,
with this harp thou playest not somewhat else? What? I know not Unless perhaps
with this sweet harmony of strings thou, would signify the sweetest and
sincerest pleasures, wherewith thou woest and courtst the hearts of pious men.
For who are able to express with what deliciousnes of thy pleasing tunes thou
recreatst now and then, and erectest minds afflicted with the irksomnes and
tediousnes of a wretched and miserable life? And for that we seely men, are
altogether unable, go on, o you Angelical spirits, and here sing again a new
mottet of thanksgiving in our behalf.

But you get you hence and far enough, you glosing dangers foul Sirens: Get
you hence unclean wicked and deceiptful world: I hate your rimes, your idle
sonnets; for your, music lines are nets, your notes, snares, your voice the
foulers whistle. I curse and detest these cunnings tricks. Your bals and revels
are the Theaters of impudent and infamous scenes; I execrat and detest these
Masks and mummeryes.

Therefore, o my heart, listen I pray, and when thou hear the voice of thy
God, anon being struck as it were and smil, give a sound with all, and attemper
and ply thy voice to his, make his will and mine to iump and sympathize
together: take heed thou yealdst not a rustike music; and a harsh ungrateful
tone; sing to the numbers right, and dance with all whether adversity maane
thee, or prosperity play with thee. But especially lend thine empty ears to
the most sweet ditty of the divine Harper: who sweetly allures thee a far of,
and nearer hand pulls thee with the sound of his harp. Come, for so he sings,
come my friend come and thou shall be crowned with the head of Amana, with the
top of Sanir and Hermon; from the lions dens, from the hills of Libbards. Cant.
4.
Take here the crown of flowers, which thou have wouen for thy self, fetched
from the highest and steepest mountains tops not with out much labor and
sweat receive the reward of the travels and combats, which thou have fought:
the prize of the victory which with taming and binding the lions and bears,
those unruly beasts of thy passions thou have most gloriously purchased. This
harmony of JESUS singing to the heart, my soul, vvil procure there light, and
gentle sleeps and imbue the whole breast with the nectar of divine
consolations, that thou may not feel the acerbity of molestations, which
are necessary to be drunk by mortals. Strike out therefore thy harp most
strongly, my beloved, there shall no murmr at al obstreperate and dull thine
ears; the closet of my heart is wholy vacant, that naught might hinder the
sweetness of this harmony. And you again good Angels, tune your voices to the
sound of this harp, and I the while from my immost bowels vvil sing these
verse of the Psalms I will bless the Lord at al times, his praise be always
in my mouth. Psalm. 33.
For he has taken compassion on me of his great mercy, he has blotted out my
iniquities. Psalm. 50.
He has delivered my soul from death. Psalm. 55.
He has crowned me in mercy and good works, He has replenished my soul in
good things. Psalm. 102.


XIIII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras quesumus, etc.
FIRST POINCT.
COnsider how easy and expedit is the contemplation of spiritual things, when
JESUS borne of the true stock of David, plays the harper, in the heart, and
with the sound of his divine instrument drives away the wicked spirit; even as
heretofore his great Grandsier David, restrained the intemperance of Saul.
Attend besides how seriously the Angels accommodate their voice to the sound of
the harp; that even look what they see JESUS to do for our good, they
endeavor to do also, studying to accommodate themselves to our occasions.

1. Point. Consider JESUS hanging and nailed on the Cross seemed to have
carried the figure of a harp with him, which being played on, gave forth as it
were seven sounds, very full of hidden mysteries and the first stroke truly of
his mystical harp was: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Luc. 23.
When he held up and staid the making of the world from falling, being then on
the point to demolish quite, and with it is ruin ready to swallow the impious
Parricides of God. But, o most unlucky stroke? in the last streyne a string
broke and snapt asunder, and the soul and body of the most blessed JESUS being
dissolved, the whole harmony of David's harp was utterly marred, which yet a
little after the parts being resumed and handsomely united together, so newly
raised again sung forth a triumphal song.

3. Point. Consider when JESUS is present what great festiuityes are made, what
divine rays do shine, what plenty of graces are powered forth, and what true
and solid pleasures abound: but in the contrary JESUS being absent what hydeous
darkness ouer-casts the minds, whole squadrons of calamities, troubles,
desperations, fears, mourning, tediousnes sloth, molestations, and what not?
come rushing in by troops.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed to the Blessed Virgin, of whom, with the greatest endeavor
of an earnest and submisse mind that may be, I will crave leave that what she
led before, I may sing after her: My soul does magnify the Lord, Luc. 1.
especially since the benefits I received from her son are likewise infinite;
Psalm. 116.
and I will further inuit not only the Angelical spirits to sing; but al
created things whatsoever, with that Psalm of David: Praise the Lord al you
nations.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS RESTS IN the lovers heart.
THE HYMN.
BEhold my heart does Christ enclose,
While he does sleep I do repose:
As I in him, he rests in me.
If he awake, I needs must be
The cause, that made the noise within;
For naught disquiets him but sin.
But I with crosses, soon am vexed.
With injuries and cares perplexed,
And I, who should my will resign,
Am soon disturbed greiue, fret, repine:
Til JESUS does his grace impart,
Who gives repose unto my heart;
O happy heart, with such a guest,
Which here has what he gives thee, rest.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. SO long as the heart in God, and God rests in the heart (which is wrought
with a holy consent of wills) let the Heavens thunders and lighten, the earth
quake, and move out of its seat, the elements tumult, the winds of temptations
rage and make a hurly-burly; yet the heart shall be quiet and laugh at al.

2. When thou have received JESUS, taking the venerable Sacrament of the
Eucharist, take heed thou awake him no^ deliciously sleeping there, either with
the hydeous noise of outrageous choler, or with the obstreperous clamor of the
other passions, or by any other way of breaking silence, so much as with the
hu^h only.

3. But do thou sleep, my little JESUS, and (as thou lists thy self) take thy
rest, in Gods name: We make thee a couch ready in the heart, we intend to love
none but thee we, will never break our faith with thee; though the winds
bluster and seas rore never so much.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
I Sleep and my heart wakes: Cant 5.
It is the voice of the most loving JESUS. Whist therefore you Heavens, earth
hold your peace. JESUS sleeping in the bed of the heart, sweetly rests. You
bustle in vain, o restless winds. The heart where JESUS takes his rest is safe
enough the ship is now in the Haven, which the Master-hand of so divine a Pilot
guides. Cease Aquilo, Ah thou cold, gelid, cruel stranger of the North; bridle
thy most ominou^ blasts, for thou exhausts and dryest up the rivers of
celestial graces freesest the hearts of men, with a slouthful ice, and nigh
killest them with cold; thou strippest the trees of fruit and leaves, make
the earth even horrid with hoary frosts and winter downs, dashest the tallest
ships and the best manned, and sinkest them in a fatal gulf.

Cease thou Southern enemy, Stormy Auster, froward, hot rhewmatike (and which
is worse) thou incentiue and firebrand of lusts, bridle thy fatal breath
wherewith thou burnest al things, stirrest humors, extinguishest the fires of
divine love; sprincklest the nerves and synnews, dishartnest minds, and makes
them languish.

And do thou cease likewise, sweeping faune or scourer of the eastern coasts,
thou fatal Affrican not only familiar with tempest, but full of a pestilent and
blasting breath thou rusflest here in vain, thou shall never shake this heart,
wherein JESUS takes his rest.

But thou the fauner of the Eastern sun gentle Eurus, whether thou would be
called Subsolanus or Vulturnus rather, who art thought to blow the winds of a
favorable and smiling fortune, remove those insolent blasts of thine. For the
heart intentive to divine things, and al enflamed with love, hears and attends
thee not.

Now come I then to thee, my little JESUS, tell me, go to, what slumber, is
this, which refreshed thy weary body with so gentle a shower of vapors? Thou
being once tired in the heat of the day, satest at the fountain, attending the
poor Samaritan, woman Io. 4
with whom, as the ancient Jacob, with his Reb^cca, thou struckest a new
contract of marriage. Again els-where being broken with toil of traveling
sherwd iournyes, thou gottest to the mountain tops about the shutting in of
the day Luc. 6.
to refresh thy wearied limbs with a short repose, when presently having now
hardly begun to enter into prayer, thou wast feign abruptly to break it off.
But what sleepst thou here now for. Nor do I think thou art so drowned in
sleep, or so idle is to meditate on nothing: If thy love deceive me not, I
should verily believe thou now reuolu^st in mind that sacred marriage which thou
one day wast to contract with the Church, thy immaculate Spouse, at that most
happy tree of the Cross, when the sleep of death should bind thee both hand
and foot, and from thine open side that other Eve should issue forth, as once
the form Eve had done our common Parent, who sudenly arose, so built of the
bone of Adam, cast into that prophetical and extatical sleep. Genesis 2.
Or whether art thou not perhaps voluing and reuoluing many things within thee,
studing and contriuing with thy self, what dowry to make thy new Spouse, and
peradventure think upon the ornaments and dressings for her head, earings,
bracelets, carkanets, and wedding robes, al embrodred with the richest gemmes
with such like nuptial honors, and presents fit for Spouses? Or thou
designest, who knovves? the form perhaps and solemn tables of Matrimony,
which hereafter in the public Theater of the world; thou art to celebrate
with the Church and the holy Soul. It may be thou considerest what her
poverty is, and want of al things, and what the rest of al her goodly stock
of miseries; or wherein only she is richly furnished and abundantly well
stored.

Or perhaps thou think of yet more full and happy things then these, which
here thou dreamest on, while thou sleep. For in those gentle slumbers; thou
take in the humane heart, thou now plottest perhaps in mind, the immense glory
thou will affoard the soul with a prodigal hand, who shall have the grace to
receive thee courteously indeed. This doubtless, thou handlest, now voluest,
reuoluest destinest, and designest.

O great Jacob, while thou slept'st so, with thy head resting on a hard stone,
what strange, what divine things there did thou b^hold! And how many Angels
were showed thee on that ladder going up and down, so pitched on the earth and
reaching up to heaven. Jacob (as we have in the sacred history) Genesis 28.
flying the more then deadly hate and fury which his brother Esau bare unto
him, came to Luza where he made a stone his pillow, lying on the bare ground,
in stead of a soft and easy bed, and behold he saw a ladder fixed on the ground
extended to heaven, God leaning on the top thereof, and the Angels ascending
and descend^ng to and fro: when being astonished and amazed thereat, he cried
out. The Lord is truly in this place, how terrible this place is! And presently
anointed it, and set up an Altar in the place in all have gave thanks to the
Divinity, and put the name of Bethel to it. O little Jacob! O most loving IESV,
rest in my heart a while (if it trouble thee not too much) though indeed it be
but a heart lodging, and thou have but a stone for a pillow and bolstre only,
yet surely it will be soft enough, as soon as thou shall but power thereon the
oil of thy mercy. Let the heart then so daily consecrated, be called Bethel,
that is the house of God. The house of vanity! Ah never be it said. But rather
stre^gthen it my God, be sure thou found it well, least the winds of inconstancy
and tempests shake it. But stand it rather immovable as the rock of Marpeia in
the midst of the sea dashed with the waves and scornfully shaking them off.

XV. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
A Great storm was made in the Sea, so as the ship was even covered over with
waves; but he slept. Mat. 18.


1. Point. Consider the nest where in the holy soul should live and dye, is
the thorny crown of the most loving JESUS; for this sticks so deep into the
crown of the sacred head of the Spouse, as none may pull it off; and so is as
safe being and a firm peace: and therefore will I sing with the most holy Job:
I will dye in my nest, and like to the Palm will multiply my days. Job. 39.
And I will always cause, I say such a new increase of merits in me, as there
shall no day slip wherein I add not some line or other to the absolute
pourtrait of virtue and sanctity

2. Point. The bed wherein JESUS loves to rest, is the heart of pious men, and
dedicated to his love. If JESUS lodge but there, though he sleep the while, al
things go well and rest quietly; and it were to no purpose to fear any winds,
storms, or thunders there. For the waves dashing thereon do but only foame
and no more, against the rocks of Epirus; then break in their retire and soon
after come to nothing.

3. Point. JESUS resting in the hearts of Martyrs, makes them so generous and
stout as they can equally endure the torments of fire, and water: and no
meruail; for while JESUS takes but his rest there, he gives them rest. So when
we admit JESUS by receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist into the lodging
chamber of our heart, there is nothing can trouble us or disturb us because
JESUS is there who is our peace. Romans 16. Ephesians. 2.


THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed, to the most sublime and divine Sacrament of the Eucharist:
First extol its force and power, which at that time we feel in our selves. For
the soul which receives and retaynes JESUS in her house, how stout, how
generous, how constant she becomes! Then inuit JESUS that he would often
deigne to lodge in the Inn of thy heart, and there securly take his rest. But
beware thou awakest him not in his sleep, nor ever suffer the noise of the
world, and commotions of the mind to make any tumult there, or that any idle
words (for the least thing hinders) should disturb his sweet and gentle sleeps.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS VVOVNDS AND PIERCED THE heart with the shafts of love.
THE HYMN.
THe Devils Archer, Erbinger
Of lust blind Cupid did appear,
But durst not stay to bend his bow,
He saw the heart with arrows glow,
Which made him slinke away the chaste
And spotles heart he cannot blast,
Which being cleans'd from sin, is shut
From that blind hoy, whose only but
Are hearts polluted, without white.
Behold the wounds Christ makes, delighte
See where the Angels pointing stand,
Give aim, by lifting up their hand;
Or rather while the shafts ahound,
Wish they had hearts that he might wou^d.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. MY good Archer shoot, Ah shoot again! shoot through this heart of mine,
with a million of shafts, this refractory and rebellious heart to thy divine
love: slay and kill al love, which is not thine, or is adversary to it. O sweet
wounds! o dear to me! o arrows dipped and tipped with honey.

2. And thou my heart, revenge those injuries so sweet, so acceptable, and for
thy part also shoot thou again into the heart of JESUS with a thousand shafts,
a thousand pious loves, a thousand bals of fiery love.

3. The heart is never in so good plight as when it is transfixed with a
thousand points of sharpest love and pain; so that the true love of JESUS
casts but the flames where with I pyne, I burn with love.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
But what a Gods name do thou here, thou Pander Cupid? Art thou so brazen
faced as to presume to abide where my love JESUS is? Come hither you good
Angels, thrust forth this wicked brat of that Cyprian strumpet, out of doors.
Break his quiver, snap his shafts a sunder. For what a shameless impudence is
this and saucy boldness, of that blind elf, that such a cowardly Jack as he
should not quake and tremble at the aspect; yea even but the shadow of my Lord
JESUS; dreadful to heaven and earth But; o powerful arrows of thy bow my
Chaster Cupid! my delight! my JESUS! In the Northeren seas they tell of a
flowing Island, which stands still and as it were, casts ankour as soon as shot
into with burning shafts, enkindling fire as they fly. I believe it: For lo
thy fiery shafts, very sudenly stay and arrest the ankored bark of my heart,
sailing in its full course, and even now most miserably floating in the midst of
the sea of the world. O love I say not blind as he! For how directly shoots he
at the mark, how dexterously and ready he discharges, and how powerful his
shafts! Wherewith when S. Augustine was touched and wounded once he cried out:
Lib. 9. Conf. c. 2.
Lord thou shottest into our heart, with thy charity, and thy word we bare
transfixed in our bowels. But the time shall come, my doughty warrior, when
from the divine bow of thy humanity bent and stretched on the Cross; thou
shall snake and brandish seven spears of perfect victory, true symbols of the
foyling, and utter ruin of the enemy. For as the Prophet Elizeus setting his
hand to King Ioas his bow, blessed the arrow, with these words: The shaft of
salvation of the Lord and the shaft of salvation against Syria. 4. Reg. 13.
so thy Divinity susteyning the humanity, impressed a certain more divine
force into those seven last words of his wherewith like bow and arrows they
might trouble, dissipat, and quite transfix the hellish legions. For there
truly are those shafts whereof once the royal Prophet sung: Thy arrows are
sharp, people shall fall before thee; into the hearts of the Kings enemies. Psalm.
44.
O wholesome blow! O happy chance! O admirable force of arrows! For lo, the
same both cure the crowned, and deeply wound those who seem in their opinion
to be whole. Go to then, be thou my heart the scope and bute, stand to it, why
shrinkst thou? stand I say, and stoutly take the shaft of love into thee. Yea
do thou shoot too, retort, and wound again. And be thou likewise as a heavenly
bow: and do thou stretch and streyne thy self with all thy nerves as much as
thou can. Let thy sighs and vows shot like thunderbolts and winged darts,
freely mount up the throne of God himself. But first be they fired with thy
heat; that they may fly the swiftter: add also flames, begged and fetched from
heaven, and as the most loving JESUS is al fire, al love, so do thou kindle
fire, burn, love, break into sighs, with frequent sobs, which reaching unto
God may instantly reuerberate, and return to thee again, and draw forth
bitter tears from thee in great abundance.

But thou, o incomprehensible love, divine spirit who so shadowest and sit
on the heart as heretofore in the first creation of things thou did, when
hatching the world from the rude, confused, and indigested Chaos thou
converted, so that vast abyss of waters; Genesis 1.
with the heavenly dew of thy graces, temper the flames of the boiling heart.
For my heart like wax molt with the fire; with the sweet ecstasy of love even
liquefyes with all, and so may I liquefy still til I liquefy and melt away for
altogether. Go to then, with the finger of thy charity, express in me the
lively form and image of thy love, that after in my bowels I shall kindle, and
take fire, and thou with water as it were shall quench or temper the same, that
there may be nothing found in me but divine dewes, celestial flames.

Let this fire then burn and increase in the midst of waters; and the fire of
concupisce^ce being utterly quenched, may these purer flames live and eternally
burn my heart, which neither the waters of tribulations, nor the roaring waves
of temptations, nor any violence of sickness, nor the Scilla of calumniating
tongues, nor the gulfs of blasphemous mouths, nor lastly the furious Charibdes
of any punishments may ever extinguish it, for endless Ages.

XVI. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones no^^ras, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
THou have wounded my heart* with thy love: says, the beloved Spouse to her
Spouse, in the burden or holding of her song. Cant. 4.


1. Point. Consider the heart to be like to that Island they say to be
continually carried and posted here and there, with the waves of the northern
sea, nor ever to rest til touched with burning shafts: so are men's hearts being
tossed with the tempests of diverse concupiscences, nor can be staid or kept in,
but touched and struck with the dart of divine love. Hence that saying of S.
Augustine being once carried away with the vogue and wind of evil affections and
now ceasing from the course of his former impieties, Thou have shot our heart,
my God, with thy charity. Cant. 4.


2. Point. Consider the blessed felicity and happy state to be wished for of
the heart, 2. Cor. 13.
as well wounded with the love of JESUS as dying of the wound. For this is a
kind of death whereof the Son of God himself and his holy Mother dyed; and
which al pious souls are wont to dye of.

3. Point. Attend to what are the motions and exultations of the heart, touched
with divine love. Charity (says that great Coripheus of the Quier of JESUS his
louers] is patient benign, not envious, or seeking its private commodities.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed to the Angels, beseeching them to drive away Cupid that
infamous princock boy, that lewd stripling, to knap his arrows asunder, and to
burst his quiver, that he may never more come near my heart, or offer any
violence to it.

THE HEART ENFLAMED WITH THE LOVE of JESUS shines al with light and flames.
THE HYMN.
COme Moses to the bush, draw nere:
Now God Incarnate does appear,
Man's heart the b^^^sh (cease to admir^^^)
With flames of love (...) sets on fire.
See here the scoriching flakes and f^me
of pr^^er, which burn and not consume,
But only dross of sin. Behold
A heart refi^'d of tried gold:
A Bush wherein love so contriues,
That JESUS, Phenix-like reu^ues,
Amidst sweet aromatike sents
A bush wherein one that contents
Is al in all. And now though rare
One bird in bush is better far.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. THe whole heart is al on fire these flames then either come from heaven; and
derive from JESUS, or al these fires are sprung from hell and lewd desires. Ah
my little soul! Why art thou so in doubt? Deliver thy whole heart to JESUS, that
he only may inflame it with the fires of divine love.

2. Behold his hands, feet, heart, eyes, face, the whole body: JESUS is nothing
else but fire, naught but little flames of love, whatsoever he does, speaks,
suffers, breath but love, and that the love of thee.

3. O love! o sweet love! o flames of love! Ah burn this heart I pray. Yea my
soul, do thou burn thee to ashes too in the loves of my JESUS; and in these
sweet flames, may it live, dye, revive again, like another Phoenix.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
JESUS was on the top of mount Thabor, in the friendly company of S. Peter,
James, John, Moses and Elias; Mat. 17.
when sudenly his face began to shine like the sun, his garments to be as
white as snow, and the hill itself to glitter al with flashing rays, flowing
from his countenance. But when Moses heretofore ascended on mount Sinay, to
receive the law of God in stony tables Exodus 29.
the people beheld all the place to be set on fire to sparkle, to burn, to
shine al over. Lastly Elias chariot 4. Reg. 2.
the fiery sword of the Cherubin, watching at the gate of Paradise, Genesis 3.
the four beasts of Ezechiel, Ezech. 1.
and al furniture about them, seemed not only to shine, but to burn also. But
what-said the Spouse of her beloved and his chaste love? His lamp, said she, are
lamps of fire and flames; many waters were not able to extinguish charity.
Cant. 8.
O fires and living flames even in the midst of floods of waters! This is the
fire which encloses the heart so, and sends forth such radiant and refulgent
rays, as banishing al darkness, al things shine and burn both within and
without. Of this lamp mercy is the oil; and that truly indeficient, as flowing
from an inexhaustible chanel, the very bowels of God. This is that wall of fire,
which God had prouised by the Prophet, Zach. 2.
which being interposed; the lions creast would fall, the enemy be forced to
turn his back, and he be smit and struck with a thunderbolt, who should once
go about to set there to his sacrilegious hand. But of al these wonders, this
is most to be wondered at, that as the green bush amidst the purest flames did
burn untouched Exodus 2.
and impeached a whit, and God himself was heard to preach therein, as in
pulpit; so the heart encompassed al with flames, and therewith round beset, most
consta^tly always burns and is not consumed, but ever shines and flasheth
ligth, since JESUS raises and resuscitates those fires, and feeds the immortal
flames. Mark here, how high the smoke of these fires mounts up to heaven. Go
to then, come hither with your thuribles and incense: How nigh in a moment the
incense of such fires sends forth most sweet odours to Heaven! How speedily the
vows and prayers commen. ded to this fume, arrive at the throne of heaven! The
Heavens with this exhalation shall breath forth Nectar: The air repurged shall
savor sweetly, the threats and rage of Devils shall expire; for indeed they can
no more endure these odours, the grunting snowts of swine abide the breath
exhaling from the sweetest smelling lillyes; and therefore shall they be
enforced to fly away, and return again into the immost and most hidden
receptacles of Hell.

This is the fire, this the flame, which quenches the heat of concupiscence;
for as one nail drives out another, so the fire of divine love expels and
represseth the libidinous flames of base and carnal loves.

Burn therefore my heart, o IESV, the dearling of my soul, and let not the
oil of the lamp be ever wanting: be this fire as a wall unto me; Zach. 2.
be it as a sun, and be this my chiefest ambition, that I burn and be
consumed with this flame: Yea, and be reduced into ashes; then those ashes into
a little worm, and presently become a new heart. O Metamorphosis of love! But
first would I have the old be thoroughly tried, in the little furnace of his
love, the dross, and all the dregs to be scoured thence, and no humane and
terrene lees to be left behind, but merely to take a heavenly state upon it: to
live a spiritual life, to feed on spiritual food to use a spiritual tongue, to
have spiritual feet and hands; yea divine cogitations and affections, and not
done by aspects only, but even Angelical. In sum may this heart, thus purged
and purified, give forth hereafter naught but a lively and everlasting figure
of a blessed immortality. So then do thou my dearest IESV) here fix thy heart,
at last; dwell here in thy Palace; and here shoot forth the glittering rays, of
thy glory,

XVII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras quesumus, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
I Came to send fire into the earth and what would I else but have it burn.
Luc. 12.


1. Point. Consider how necessary it is the heart enflamed with love, should
mount up and vanish into vapors; and so great is the force of this flame, as
it ascends to heaven straight, where it arriues without impediment: nor has
the world, without God, ought that can satiate and replenish the bosom of the
heart.

2. Point. Consider, how subtle and active the flame of divine love is
piercing, clear, never idle, unquiet, impatient to beheld shut up in any other
place then in the bosom of the Crucifix; where as in a furnace of love, it
purges and repurges over and over, and receives new life and vigor again.

3. Point. Note the matter and fuel of this fire to be al those things which
Superiors enjoin, in the execution whereof is manifestly discovered what
force there is in this fire,

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed to Christ whom I will seem to behold with two burning lamps
in his hands: I will beseech him, to purge whatsoever is imperfect or vicious in
me, and to reduce the very heart to dust and ashes: that a new may arise like a
Phoenix, which after he has laid down the spoils or weeds of his mortallity,
resuscitates a new, and reuiues again from the tomb itself, more beautiful
and a great deal better.

Pater Aue.
JESUS CROWNS HIS DEAR HEART WITH Palms and Laurels.
THE HYMN.
THe restles heart, which heretofore,
Could not stand still, but evermore
Was beating often with throbs oppressed
Til now could neu^r be at rest.
It was ambitious, now I find*
Naught could content the aspiring mind:
Had honors, pleasures, wealth good store,
Yet ever craved, was seeking more:
Which showed there was yet something still
Which this capacious heart might fill.
A triangle, the soul, has three
Distinctiue powers. The Trinity
Is such, that fills it; rest is found,
Lo the heart is quiet, new its crowned.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. YOu good Angels, weaue you garlands with garlands, laurels with laurels,
and crown therewith the fortunate heart, which then glories and triumphs most
when with Olympian study; and labor of virtues and mortification it has
gained but this prize, for reward, to deserve to be beloved of JESUS.

2. O joyful! O festiual day! wherein we may behold and gather even from thorns
and toils the purest roses; from sweat and arms, palms and laurels; lastly
of spitle, vinegre and clay immortal and eternal crowns: which JESUS, himself
plants and fastens on with his own hand.

3. What slookst thou then, o poor hartland tremblest at the multitude of
evils, which enuirone thee and beset thee round. Cast thine eyes rather on the
laurels which attend thee after thy victory. For nothing can break or so much
as move him whom the hope and expectation of palms erect susteynes.

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
Go to, you Angels, go to, o blessed Spirits make heart with your palms and
laurels, from your posyes, weaue you garlands and with them deck you up the
triumphant heart, victorious now after so many assiduous labors, Crowns are
sacred, free from thunder, privileged from the heavens, and signifye exemption
and immunity. Now the winter is passed away the showers blown over and quite
vanished Cant. 2.
Now the lyonly rage of the sworn and professed enemies of the heart is
repressed, vanquished, and tamed: provide you eternal laurels, victorious
palms, and give them into the hands of the most sweet JESUS that he may settle
on the heart, the crowns or garlands so prepared.

The magnanimous King David, affecting much the fat and fruitful olive symbol
of mercy, humbly prays Psalm. 102.
his heart, may be crowned with divine mercies. The penitent Magdalen Luc. 7.
and Peter Marc. 26.
weeping bitterly, resemble the Amaranth, an herb which in the midst of waters
retaynes both its native bitterness and perpetual greenes. The voluptuous,
worldly, and licentious men, are wholly taken with roses, and lyl^ies. Let us
crown our selves say they, with roses, before they wither be there no ^eadow
which our luxury ru^nes not over. Sap. 2.
O Phrigian luxury? O wantonness! But now a days forsooth the Princes and
Potentates of the earth, crown not themselves so much with golden diadems and
prec^ous stones, as load them rather. O ambition! o pride! But what does the
most sweet JESUS, I pray! he loves the victorious palms, with these crowns he
decks his dearest heart. For they indeed have truly merited those glorious
wreaths who have not only constantly opposed the heart as a target to receive
the shafts approaching of adverse fortune, but even as daring the enemy more
slow to anger, have scorned and derided dead itself. Surely the squadrons of
Martyrs, and Quiers of Virgins, triumphing in Heaven carry Palms in their
hands: Apoc. 10.
howbeit the 24. Seniours ware on their heads crowns of gold Apoc. 4.
which through their glorious conquests and set triumphs by them made upon
their enemies they had purchased to themselves. Bless therefore the Lord Psalm.
102.
thou holy soul, through whose singular and especial favor thou have atteined
to the top of perfection Praise thy Lord Psalm. 147.
through whose mighty power, thou have walked and trampled on the sands of the
sea, Exodus 14. Iosue. 3.
crossed the Iourdan with a dry foot, the people of hearts incircumcized, and
enemies professed, looking, on the while, and gazing with amazment: to whom so
vanquished, thou gave laws, and laidst perpetual tributes on them, they
being not able any ways to bar thee passage into the land of promise and
^egion of Pal^st^n^. Bless thy God ^hen o heart full of Heaven, and al of (...)
And since now thou have ob^ned a certain pledge of felicity, an infallible
hope, enter a Gods name at thy pleasure, with a notable and triumphant pomp
into the Capitol of the heavenly Jerusalem; whereso many purple Kings triu^ph
as have heretofore repressed their lewd concupiscences, and the insolence as
well of their interior as exterior senses.

Join thee to the invincible Martyrs, and keep among the Quiers of Virgins;
let the body be thy triumphal chariot, which Saphirs and Carbuncles, most
precious jewels embellish as with so many twinkling stars. Let Clarity,
Agility, Subtility, Impassibility, those four dotes of the blessed body, be as
so many wheels; and permit thy self to be drawn wheresoever the divine spirit
sitting on the coatch and wheels shall snatch thee, or fly thou where thou will
thy self, divine love shall play the Coachman? Besides the Princes of darkness,
sigh and groan as thy run before the chariot whom thou have vanquished with
the singular demission and lowlynes of mind. Let death itself be constreined
likewise to put on the cheynes and follow after; since by the death of Christ
thou have triumphed upon it also, weakened and broken, and that already by the
same guide and wagoner as before. Let the vanqui^hed world come in and make a
part of the said pomp; which then thou stoutly trampledst vnderfeet; when with
a generous scorn and loathing, contemning its wealth and honors, thou madst
no more reckoning of its vast immensnes, insolent cariages, and flanting
promises, then of a figure drawn in the water, or Chimaera laboriously framed
in the folish shop of the phantasy. Draw I say these ancient cruel enemies, now
happily vanquished and tamed well laden with cheines and reproaches, before the
oual and triumphant chariot, that is, the rich bootyes, noble spoils, ample
tropheyes and victories atcheiued in many wars. But especially have care that
sensuality above the rest, the chiefest part of the triumph, be tied and bound
to the Chariot, which with an heroical fortitude thou have conquered, and made
more like indeed to a dead then a living thing, pale, meagre and of so feeble
forces as it may never after dare to appear in the field, or make any
resistance.

But now in warlike standards and enseignes let the cities and towers, which
thou have ouer-throwne, be painted; which kind, let the mad tower be first set
down, which thou had leueld with the ground, and let all the accomplices and
confederates thereof, subdued and braught vnderyoke, and so cheyned together be
led, as ambition, vanity, arrogance, and the rest of those military troops. Let
another banner exhibit the bloody wars, to be read which thou have valiantly
attempted, faught, and the victoryes nobly atchiued against luxury and
rebellion of the senses. Let those gallant exploits be wouen here in silk, and
waued in banners, up and down through the air as thou passest,; wherewith thou
have mastered and tamed thy flesh, that fierce and cruel beast. Let the
invincible courage of thy mind be here seen and read, as fasts, abstinences,
austerities mortificatio^s, wherewith, as with a sword and buckler, thou have
fought against this fierce and mischeuous enemy.

Let the Stygian Pluto also, that damned love of riches, be carried in an other
flag; whom long since thou have trod underfoot, in preferring religious
poverty before all the treasures of the world.

Let besides the dastard, weak, and languishing sloth, sitting on her snayl,
come forth in this triumph, which slow and sluggish beast, thou have stirred up
with the sharp prick of generosity and diligence, and beyond al hope provoked
and prevailed with at last.

Lastly in a table, higher then the rest, let this inscription be read,
registered in capital letters, for a record and perpetual memory.

THROVGH THE HELP, SVCCOVRS, AND MERITS OF THE MOST LOVING JESUS, HAVE WE
FAVGHT, AND VANQVISHED AND ARE NOW CONVEYED TO HEAVEN, TO TRIVMPH THERE AMIDST
THE GLORIOUS PALMS AND LAVRELS.

But now what remains? forsooth this last of al; that when thou shall consort
thy self above, with those 24. Seniours, and Quiers of Angels; thou lay down
thy crown at the feet of the immaculate Lamb, Apoc. 4.
chanting with those blessed Citizens of Heaven this oual and triumphing song:
Benediction and clarity, and thanksgiving honor, vert^e and fortitude, to our
Lord for ever and ever. Amen. Apoc. 7.


XVIII. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras, etc.
FIRST POINT.
I Will feign my self to be armed at the top of the Hill, whither I had got with
great endeavor, and much labor and trouble. I will cast and reflect the eyes
of my mind on the diverse ways and traces I had passed thither; the precipices
I escaped, and the perils of assassinates and wild beasts I have avoided: For
so it is indeed with such as have attained to the top of perfection. For these
should attentively consider with themselves as from an eminent place, how many
and how great dangers, temptations, and sinister chances, being assisted by the
divine mercy, they have escaped from the world, and all the rest of the enemies
of man's salvation.

2. Point. I will consider the laws of these lifts to be such, that* None shall
be crowned but who have lawfully faught and conte^ded therein 2. Tim. 2.
The Palm belongs but to the Conqueror: Apoc. 7.
and I will admire also the goodness of God, for crowning us himself with his
graces, and commanding the Angels to crown us with those laurels, which we
have purchased to our selves with our own virtues.

3. Point. I will ponder and weigh with my self, with what rivers of joys the
heart flows, to whom is affoarded to arrive to the top of divine love, and who
already beholds his own perseurance; which only virtue makes us blessed and
secure, without which the rest avail but little, or nothing, for perseverance
alone is it, which is crowned.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed to the most loving JESUS, to whom of duty al our crowns
belong. For we are not conquerours so much as vanquished, while he indeed has
broken and subdued our refractory and rebellious heart. Wherefore to him as to
amost mighty conqueror, and victorious Captain, with those 24. Seniours in
the Apocalips Apoc. 4. and 7.
are we to offer up our crowns, palms, laurels, with this solemneverse of
theirs; Benediction and clarity, and thancks. gi-uing, honor and virtue, and
fortitude for ever and ever be to JESUS the Conqueror and triumpher to come.
Amen.

Pater. Aue.
JESUS CELEBRATES THE HEAVENLY Nuptials in the heart.
THE HYMN.
THe nu^t^al supper, now I see,
O happy soul! prepar^^d for thee;
The table's co^erd: but what sea^,
Have thou for thy repose? What meat?
Except a Lamb, I nothing find,
The amourous Spouse is now so kind,
That what ^e fed thee with before;
From the eye shall be concealed no more.
As with a fleece, in species white,
He long in earth appeared in sight.
As with a fleece, by grace gave heat:
But now behold the Lamb thy meat.
In ^im repose, freed from annoy
By seeing, comprehend, enjoy.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. JESUS the bloody Spouse or Spouse of blood Exodus 4.
leads his beloved, whom now long since he purchased with the price of his
life, unto the Nuptial supper of the Lamb, into the heavenly Bride-cha^ber. The
heart therefore (who admires not] is the banqueting room of these Nuptials and
the Bedchamber of the Spouse JESUS himself.

2. It is a supper truly, because these joys are not affoarded til after the
toils of the day and labors past. Expect not lamps; here hanging on
sumptuous and precious seelings: These Palaces shine within, and without
sun, moon, and stars. The Lamb himself is the lamp within, Apoc. 21.
and he the banque^ Host, and Ghest who is the Spouse.

3. See thou this royal Table here These things are al prepared for thee:
Seek thou daintyes? Hardly are thy seen of mortal eyes. Such as sit down
here are always feeding, they drink without gluttony, are always satiated,
and yet a-thirst, without any loathing or irksomnes at al. Behold al things are
ready. Come to the wedding, the Spouse calls. Mat. 22.


THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
JESUS, receives the soul, whom he graciously beheld, though fowly dight with
her immundityes before, and now having cleansed her with purging waters, and
adorned Ezech. 16.
with feminine bravery, takes her I say, not only to his Spouse, Osee. 2.
but if she keep her holily and chastely to him, casting her out of the most
miserable banishment of this life, he leads her unto the great solemnity of
the Nuptials, into the heavenly house of his Father: where he ties her
eternally to him with an indissoluble knot of wedlock. Whereto belongs that
sacred Epithalamium: Let us rejoice and exult; and give glory to him; because
the Nuptials of the lamb are come, and his Spouse has made herself ready, and
she has had given her shining and wh^e silk to wear. Apoc. 19.
Yt is surely a great matter to be reckoned of the family of the King of Kings,
more to be accounted among his friends and familiars; but most of al to beheld
the Son of God, the brother and coheyr of Christ: I will speak more boldly
yet; this same is surely more honorable then al these to be called in the
weding the Spouse or Wife of the Lamb, that is, partaker in a manner of his bed
and board, companion of his throne and crown. And this is that honor if I be
not deceived, which the Prophet Esaias means: Isa. 56.
I will give then a place in my house, and within my walls; and a better name
then sonns and daughters. For children being but a slender part or portion of
parents, challenge and retain indeed much of their right and substance from
them: but for man and wife, so great is the society and community between them
of their whole life and of al their goods and titles, and they are bound
together with so straight a tie, as how far so ever they be asunder, yet are
held to be as is were in one place, and al one, which happens also in the
celestial wedlock of JESUS with the soul. For who adheares to God is in all one
spirit with him, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 6.
has taught. Whence it is, that the soul perfectly united with God, is not
only divine, but in a certain manner (if I may so say) is made God. And hence
is al (whatsoever it is, which is surely very great) that dignity; profit, and
sweetness of these nuptials. For look whatsoever else besides have any connection
with them, do al even flow from thence, as from an endless spring of al good
and beatitudes; especially those three, (to say nothing of those of the body]
to wit, the most singular and eminent dotes of the soul espoused and wedded to
JESUS, as Vision, Comprehension, Fruition: S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 4. ar. 3.
Which are not procured her either of parents or nature itself, but being so
poor a Spouse, are most bountifully affoarded her by JESUS the Spouse himself
(as with Kings is wont when they match with any of low degree, most richly to
endow their beloved Spouses, by reason of their nuptials had between them. But
in reguard these things of themselves are greater then can be worthily weighed
by us, much less expressed, the divine Scriptures, do lightly shadow at least
and adumbrate in a sort all the excellencies and delicious fruits thereof, with
the pleasant and most apt figure (for our capacity) of royal nuptials, and a
wedding supper. Luc. 14. Mar. 22.
The reason is, for that no noises of affairs and negotiations, nor cares,
which commonly fall out by day, do not trouble or disturb the peace and
delights of suppers; and for the feasts of royal Nuptials, they use especially
to be very curious and dainty indeed, where no part of the senses abounds not
with exquisite delights. Here the eyes are fed with various Emblems of the
tapistries of the Hal most gallant to behold, with the gorgeous apparel of the
Ghests and waiters also, with the gold of the plates, and jewels of the whole
furniture there. Here the ears are charmed with the artificious harmony of
musical instruments and voices. Here the sent most sweetly is perfumed with the
delicate odours of flowers and herbs, and boxes full of the sweetest oyntme^ts:
the palate seasoned and relished with delicious wines, and the daintyest viands;
purchased with the greatest study and industry; and sought for far and near
by all the exquisit means that may be devised, and dressed especially by the
rarest Cooks. Lastly, to the end the sense of feeling, the most brutish sense
of all the rest, might not want it is peculiar delights also, the touching has
its proper delectation, from the softnes of downy beds, and curious carpets,
from the feathers, and down of swans and the like. Let us run over a while,
if you please, the gardens and pictures of the great Assuerus, that from that
feast, the royallest perhaps that ever was in the memory of men, by guess at
least we may gather in some manner, what a ba^quet it is, which JESUS
furnishes forth in the heart of his Spouse.

He then, as well, to show the riches of the glory of his Kingdom, and the
greatness and the ostentation of his power; as also in the third year of his
reign, to celebrate publicly the day wherein first he took a perfect
possession of Susa the chief seat of his Kingdom, prepared a Persian, royal,
and a sumptuous banquet. For first Assuerus himself was the Master of the feast
and who was he? He reigned from India to Ethiopea, from the East to the West:
and what more? He gave laws to 27. Provinces, appointing so many Prefects and
Governors to them, who in the Kings name might administer justice. Assu^^^rus
therefore was a mighty and most puissant King; yea truly he had conquered and
subdued to his own dominion the whole world, Ester. 1.
if we believe but his own Epistle: Ester. 13.
though indeed I should think it rather to be no more then a mere
exaggeration of insolent men, who extending their bounds a little wider, use to
flatter themselves with the Empire straight of the whole world: But be it so as
they boast of and make their braggs, Assuerus yet shall seem but a fly compared
with God himself; nor ever shall though he pusse up himself never so much, ariue
to the bulk and worth of an Elephant. JESUS, the Master of this feast, not
only as God, but even also as man, is the Sovereign and supreme Lord of al
things, in whose loins is written King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Apoc. 19.
and at whose aspect and tribunal coming to judgment shall Assuerus himself
appear one day, yea tremble and groan the while. The rest may likewise be
gathered by this: Yet if you please let us suruay them more perticularly that
our purpose and scope may appear more clearly.

Susa was not the head-Citty of the kindome of Persia, but a pleasant and most
delicious Tempe, which that river Coaspes washed as it went a long; whose
waters Kings, and those very far remote from thence, made use of for
daintyest drink: and for the amenity of the place; it took the name of Lilly,
which Susa signifies in Persia. Here therofore they reposed and lodged
themselves, and that truly in those royal and princely gardens, wodds and
groves Ester. 1.
in the Spring especially as we may believe. Here not only the pleasant variety
of flowers and herbs made a wanton daliance but even of the beautifullest trees
also; in disposing whereof in checker-wise, and distributing the allies, walks,
and arbours the royal hands themselves, after the Country fashion, had
labowred to some purpose. But what trow you was the rest of the garnishment of
this festiual Court Where the Pauilions were of a costly and rich stuff; of
cerulean, aetherean, and of the color of the Hyacinth, whose curteynes hung
with strings of purple silk, fastne with ^^^inges made of iuory: at either end
these rich and stately Canopyes were gallantly sustained with marble pillars;
beneath lay humble pallots on the ground a pleasant pauement, to rest upon al
of gold and silver, streyed with the fairest mantles and rich carpets (as the
70. Interpretours signify) wrought al over, embrodered and curiously set forth
with needle-works of roses, and diverse other flowers, glittering and beguiling
the senses: besides al which, the pauement itself shined al of a certain
square stone, and that in quadruple wise; enterstinguished with in the emerald,
and touchstone, and (as the Hebrew has) with marble and Hyacinth being
certain titles forsooth, diuersi^yed al in an admirable manner.

And these for the most part were p^^pared for the common Ghests; for I should
think those of the better ^^^t, were al entertained in the i^ most lodgings of
those Princely Palaces, where with tapistryes and pictures, were all the rooms
and lobbeyes sumpteously ha^g'd. Could there be ever any thing either for
majesty more royal and magnificent or for luxury and delight more soft and
delicious? O childish toys, and merely gugawes! O loose cogitations, of the
soul, even bendingto the earth! why creepest thou on the earth, thou little
mush rump, and please thy self so much with these trifles? Measure with the
eyes of thy mind at least, the vast immensnes of the Heavens gaze if thou
can, and behold the sun, moon, and the rest more then common people of
that starry house; which are but only outward ornaments: for those within,
far different from them, transcending not only the faculty of the senses, but
even the agility of the mind also are merely laid out of sight. Hear the
mellifluous Bernard: Bern. ep. 114.
that same indeed is the true and only joy, which is not of the creature, but
is truly conceived of the Creator himself, and which being p^ssessed by thee
no man can take away from thee: where to compared al pleasure otherwise is but
sorrow, al sweetes but bitterness, al beauty d^formity. Lastly al other things
naught else but tedious and irksome, which otherwise might seem more pleasing
and delightful.

Now then, which is the other point; look we into the great Assuerus Ghests
Ester. 1.
and directours of the feast. Of these I note two sorts, some purple Heroes of
tke Perseans and chief Prefects of those Countries and Provinces 127. in
number; who al (leaving magistrates of inferiors orders behind them in their
rooms, to take up differences accurring the while) flock to thy City and
Princely Court, to that great feast: the other Ghests were the common sort of
the City of Susa itself, from the highest to the lowest a vast people without
head or certain number of them.

But for the ministers and vvaiters there, I seem also to behold two orders
of them some Prefects of the royal Palace; who as Stervvards, V^^^hers, and
Sevvers of the feast appointed and placed the Ghests, prescribing laws and
rules to them to be kept amongst them; others to execute lesser and inferior
offices, as Butlers, Tasters, Cup-brearers, and the rest of vvayters al: But if
compared with the Angels, as well the Pages, and others of that divine table;
as the bidden Ghests themselves, or either with the number or splendor, of
the rest of the blessed Citizens of heaven, those are but dvvarfs; these
Giants, those vvretches, and for manners most commonly wicked, these blessed
and happy; yea most holy these except a fevv, an ignoble and base people, and
these not only most grave Senators, but Kings and Monarks al without
exception.

Behold here the Queene-Mother of God (to amit the Spouse himselfc, behold, the
Patriarks Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and all the rest of
the Court of Heaven, and let the Medes and Persian Ghests alone. Yet still
Assuerus Ester. 1.
vants and Boasts of the bowels and dishes of his feast. Be it so, let us set
down the^ to eat and drink our fill, for this is thesumme of al.

The dishes, plates, and trenchers, are often changed; such is the multitude
and variety there, and store of silver gold, and other precious vessels: For
here they eat and drink also in gold, and cups made al of ge^mes. As for the
cups the Septuaginta auerre there was one made of Carbuncles, surely of a vast
and immense price, to wit, of thirty thousant talents, which of our florens
comes to more then 101 millions. Let no man after this speak or wonder any
more at the suppers, excess, costs of Cleopa^^^ra, L^^^llus, or Heliog^balus.
But what was the meat now brought to the table? The sacred Scriptures speak
not a word thereof for that perhaps al might guess then, if they would, as well
by the Pe^^^sia^ pomp, very usual in those things, and now brought into a
prou^rb, as by the great ostentation touched above of the plates, cups, and
dishes had in that feast. What the drink? Forsooth the best forts, as became
the royal magnificence: there was abundance of al and the choycest ibid.
wines that could possibly be had, but on that condition that none should be
compelled to drink more or less; but euery-one have liberty to drink as much
and as little as he would. Surely a wholesome and laudable law of the King. For
this tyrannical order of Let him do reason or begone, spru^g first no doubt
from the Greek Tauernes, of I know non what Caldus, B^^^berius, or Mero Cicero.
lib. 5. Tuscul.
But now go to, thou great admirer of the Pe^^^sian banquet: what account
make thou of the gold, silver, jewels, in those cups and dishes? This gold,
silver, jewels, believe me are but a harder kind of earth, vvhereto the sun
and stars have given a color and some luster; vvhereon I say, lest avarice
perhaps might set to great a price, nature had vvissel hid them in the womb or
bowels of the elements, and these also where they are most in use, and worn
of al, become but cheap, and of little worth. But for meats and drinks what they
are, appears then, when hardly being let down into the stomach they are
straight egested thence. And will thou compare this filth, this dirt [to say no
worse) with the riches, and delights of heaven, with the Nuptials of JESUS with
the Euangelical supper, with the vision of the divine Essence, lastly with
those delights and inexhaustible pleasures, which flow incessantly from that
ocean of the highest good? The great lohn saw Apoc. 6. and 21.
this table in his Apocalypse, and wondered at it; the royal Psalmist saw it
likewise, and wholly astonished, exclaymed: ^hey shall be inebriated with the
plenty of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the torrent of pleasure.
Psalm. 55.
But take here a little this simple taste thereof. All the goods of this world are
nothing else, but as rinds and springs of the fruits of Paradise, cut off: and
if the rinds and springs be such that men even raie with the love and desire of
them, what shall the fruits themselves be, and the apples of Paradise itself?
and if such be the fruits and apples; what shall the rest be of those more solid
and better meats? Surely they shall be such as they may always be eaten without
loathing, and always desired without anxietie. Bellarm. de fell. 88.


And now finally how long have these feasts of Assuerus lasted? A hundred and
eightye days at most; scarce half a year, especially if we speak of the
feasts of the Peers and Nobles; for the common sort^ continued hardly a week
in these transitory delights.

Take me here a hundred thousand years, yea a thousand millions of years of
this Nuptial supper, which JESUS furni^eth in the lovers heart, and you shall
find no end of the feast, which end yet, if you seek further, measure
Eternity. As long as Heaven and God shall be, these Nuptials shall continue
always. Not so, in this banquet of Su^a. For (oh inconstancy of humane
things!) behold how in the tables of Assuerus himself mourning occupies the
last of joys. Pro. 14.
After the Persian King had well carroused, and now al enflamed with B^^^cchus,
deep in his cups, and thought he had done but little yet, if he showed not the
Queen Vasth^, to his Ghests; because the, either of pride or modesty rather,
refused to come into the drunken presence of al those Princes, by the King her
husband, she was fowly and ignominiously entreated, in the very banqueting
room itself, weere she feasted with her Ladies, being thrust from the royal
throne and dignity, was refused and rejected by him. Go to now, and praise the
feasts and nuptials of the great Assuerus, if you will; or rather be wise and
admire, and love the celestial Nuptials of the Lamb.

XIX. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras quesumus, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
BLessed are they who are called to the Nuptial supper of the Lamb

1. Point. Consider the highest dignity (then which a greater cannot be
imagined) as well of the soul, in love which JESUS, which from an abject and
base condition is advanced to the Nuptials of God himself, as of the humane
heart, wherein these divine Nuptials are celebrated. Whence comes it, O humane
soul, says S. Bernard, Bern. ser. 2. de mut. aquae in vinum.
whence happens this so in^stimable glory to thee, that thou should^st deserve
to be his Spouse, on whom the Angels wish to gaze? How happens this, that he
should be thy Spouse, whose beauty the sun and moon admire, at whose b^ck
are al things changed: What will thou yeald to thy Lord for all he has thus
afforded thee, to be his com^anion at table, and compartener of his Kingdom;
lastly his bedfellow, and to have the King himself to lead th^e into his
chamber? And by and by behold with what arms of mutual charity, he is to be
embraced, and loved again, who has made such reckning of thee; and at last:
forget thy people, and thy fathers house: Forsake carnal affects, unlearn
secular ma^ners abstain from former vices, commit al naughty customs to
oblivion.

2. Point. Weigh how great, sincere, and solid, the pleasures, are like to be,
which the spouse prepares for thee in the Nuptial supper: survey al things
which under heaven, are precious delightful, and dear to men, in the air,
earth, or ocean Sea, and then reason with S. Augustine thus: Is, my Lord, thou
affordest so much to us in prison; what will thou do in the Palace? For since
here al things are so exceeding good and delectable, which thou have conferred
on the evil as well as the good; what will those be which thou have laid up for
the good only? If so various and innumerable thy gifts are, which now thou
equally distribu^est to friends and enemies, how great and innumerabbe, how
sweet and delect^ble shall they be, thou will bestow on thy friends only! If in
this day of tears and mourning thou impar^st such things what will thou do on
the nuptial day? Hear thou this my soul, and yet exclaymest not? Blessed be
he who shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. Luc. 14.


3. Point Attend to this also; how of the ten Virgins of the Ghospel Mat. 25.
being al Virgins indeed, that is, espoused to Christ through true and sincere
faith, and who had sometimes pleased the Spouse in carrying lamps of good works
in their hands, five were become foolish, and from the nuptials and wedding
supper on hard fortune! quite excluded. Beware thou be not of their number let
thy lamp be always burning, and sending forth light; let the oil of charity
abound in thy lamp, and even, flow over, and especially take heed thou never
sleep or slumber a whit, nor be surprised unaware, suspecting nothing of death,
or judgment, or be unprovided. Have continually ringing in thine ears, that
voice of thy Spouse Vigilate, so often whispered in thy heart, that when that
cry shall be heard Behold the Spouse comes, go forth and meet him, thou maidst
presently meet him cheerfully coming to thee, and with him enter into the
wedding. For woe and a thousand woes to them, who unmindful wholly of so great a
good, and deaf to the words of God, being taken napping drowned in sleep with
their lamps extinguished, and so excluded from the sweetest nuptials of the
lamb, shall be forced to cry out in vain, Lord, Lord open to us; on whom that
iron bolt shall be obtruded, I know you not, or that wholly as lamentable; The
gate is shut.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be directed to JESUS the Spouse. Especially thou shall yeald him thanks
with all thy powers, for choosing thy soul to be his Spouse, for loving it so
dearly hitherto, and endowing it with the espousal gifts. Then shall thou
humbly beseech pardone of him, for having so coldly answered to his fervent
love, wherewith he has so often prevented thee; and sometimes perhaps for
breaking thy faith to him so firmly engaged. Lastly by that his love, wherewith
he has so of ten prevented thee, shall thou most earnestly beg at his hands,
that through his grace thou may be continually vigilant, and provided for
that last Aduent, which is like to be at mid-nigh, when perhaps thou least
suspectest the same; that then thou may meet him, with thy burning lamp, and
with the prudent Virgins enjoy him and his nuptial feast for ever. Mat. 25.


Pater. Aue.
JESUS MANIFESTES HIMSELF AND THE MOST holy Trinity in the mirror of the heart.
THE HYMN.
THe Painter cannot draw a face,
TO express to life each (...), grace,
And figure, with proportion fit
Except the party d^owne does sit:
But here in th'hart by being seen,
God draws the picture which had been
Before imperfect: though 'twere neat,
And often touched, 'twas not complete.
Til now, it lightened as upon see,
True picture of the Trinity.
The colors stem'd did fak and eye,
But now sbal last eternally.
While here the heart does quiet sit,
By vision God does sigure it.
THE INCENTIVE.
1. THe heart which loves God truly and perfectly indeed, is a heavenly
Paradise; so flowers it over and swimmes in delights; not the counterfeit, and
transitory delights of this world, but of the other life; such as here, neither
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ascended into man's heart Romans 8.


2. Here now JESUS stands not behind the wall, peeping at this Spouse through a
grate; Cant. 2.
but, which she begged at his hands, shows her his face, the divine Essence,
the three divine Persons, so clearly and manifestly indeed, as even the images
themselves expressed, reflect again in the Crystal of the heart. O Paradise! O
delights! O joys!

3. The heart faints through abundance of love and delights and nigh bursts
with all, O man! what a beast thou art, if hearing of these pleasures, thou
rather choosest the husks of swine? How like a block and stone, if yet thou
love not JESUS?

THE PREAMBLE to the Meditation.
SO great is the future beatitude to the soul which loves JESUS dearly
indeed, that mortal men being drowned in sensuality and mire, cannot easily
conceive it in the mind, nor less (without divine light and hope) expect it.
For (which S. Paul Romans 8.
took out of the prophecy of Esaias. Iza. 58.
The eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it ascended into the heart of
man, what God has prepared for such as love him. Surely those two most wise
and worthy men, to the end they might clearly propose the greatenes and
amplitude of the heavenly beatitude, assumed the first kind of measure to wit
the spacious orbs of eyes seeming most capacious, which though shut in a little
corner as it were, yet now and then get forth, wander and expatiate far and
wide, not only, into the vast champian fields, huge mountain tops, and the
golden and gemmy bowels of the waters, but with help especially of Mathematike
instruments reach even to the very heavens themselves, well nigh of an infinite
distance from us, and therein discover the lightest spots* changes, and
errors. And yet this scantling is found to be less then so to conclude or
comprehend beatitude. The eye has not seen.

Wherefore with the ^yes since we only apprehend things present, but with
hearing moreover as by histories perceive those things which have been formerly
acted, or now are wrought in any other place, or shall hereafter come to pass,
the ears have seemed more apt to measure the thing proposed. But so neither,
the immensnes of beatitude could be contained. Nor the ear has heard. There
remained now the vessel, for bulk surely not great, yet for capacity indeed
most ample, the heart of man. For in the shop of the heart we frame, cherish, and
embrace, as our proper issues, not only what our selves have seen, with our
eyes, or heard by relation from others but even many other things also, which
can not truly exist at al, as golden mountains, Chimeras, Hippocentaures, and
the like: And yet so neither, has it ascended into the ha^t of m^n, what God
has prepared for such as love him. This thing according to S. Augustine. Is not
comprehended through charity, it tra^scends as vows and wishes. Shall we
therefore despair? No it cannot be esteemed, it may be yet purchased Go to
yet let us value it, howsoever, and as well as beating the price, let us cheapen
it as we can. I for my part am truly of this opinion, that we are much taken
and carried away with nothing more then with pleasure, nor do I mislike them
who are so, if they be solid* sincere and honest pleasures we hung so after.
But believe me there can be nothing more sweet and delicious, then the ^oyes
and iubelies of the heart, drowned in the love of JESUS, and wherein JESUS
deliciats himself? For why? It is a Paradise truly and ^ot that terrestrial one
(though for (...) amenity of the soil and air, and the exceeding plenty of
flowers, trees, and fruits, it were so glorious and the very name of Paradise
itself imports no less then a place of pleasures and delights] but is indeed
a heavenly Paradise into the allies whereof and first walks, S. Paul being
hardly admitted, was so lulled with all delights, that forgetting himself and al
things else besides he was able to tell no more then this, I know a man; says
he, whether in body I know not, or without the body I know not God knows, to
be ravished into the third heaven, and to have heard so mysterious words, as
man might not utter. 2. Cor. 12.
But what were they whence so great a feeling of pleasure, and delight results?
Touch we the thing itself, with the needly of faith only. In that celestial
Paradise of the blessed heart, JESUS laying his Pilgrim habit a side, and the
veil of faith wherewith he was shrouded, shall exhibit his humanity to be seen
and enjoyed face to face: I have said too little, yea his divine essence also.
This perhaps were enough to beatitude yet will he cause the three divine
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. to be so present, as they may not only
be seen, but even seem in a manner to be touched also.

Besides, in this native and most lucid mirror of al things, many other
things, nigh infinite for number, for beauty and variety surely admirable, shall
shine with all, with so new always and so fresh an ob^ect, that as long as
eternity shall last they shall not breed any tediousnes in the beholders, or ever
diminish the ^hirst of seeing and beholding more, ^^ere therefore, as in a
lively pi^^ure expressed in their colors, those mysteries of faith and
religion shall be truly represented, which now hardly are but shadowed, and with all our endeavor never wholly atteined The Incarnation of the Word in the
Virgin, the Economy of man's Redemption, the divine providence in administering
things, the admirable and most hidden reasons of punishing the good and
prospering the wicked: lastly, the laws, traces, and rapts of divine love, by
which he has at last conducted the heart which loves him; sweetly indeed and
yet strongly, now by the pleasant, and then the horrid paths, now of joy then
of sadness, into the seats of al beatitudes From the clear knowledge of al
which verities, especially the object of the divine Nature, and Persons, and
conceiving the images in the mind, of so excellent and admirable things, who
sees not very sovereign and nigh incredible joys to arise?

Queen Saba, scarce entering into the room where Solomon, was fell into so
great admiration, and was so rapt and transported with delight, at the order
pomp, magnificence, especially at the presence of the King himself, that
recovering breath at last, which she had nigh lost, she cried out aloud:
Blessed are thy men, and blessed thy servants who stand always before thee,
and hearken to thy wisdom. 3. Reg. 10.
Yet these are but toys, chips, trifles, compared with the presence and sight
of God.

They report of S. Francis, that being once sadder then ordinary, he was so
taken and ravished with the short modulation an Angel made with the lightest
touch of his thumb on a Harp, as he seemed to him^^lf to be no more on the
earth, but to be conversant in heaven, amid the blessed Spirits there. S. Bona^
in vita S. Fran.
Good God! If these (which in heavenly delights is likely one of the least
amongst them) so short and slight touches of the Angelical hand, as they could
hardly be heard, were yet able to ravish the holyman, what would the harmony
work of so many Angelical and humane voices, what exultatio^s would be there
what dances and iubelyes? Besides, if the meanest things in heaven, as songs
and dances, so delight and tickle hearts, what will the rest do, both for number
and dignity far greater? What is more poor and slender with us the^ a bare
and simple thought of God? Yet David in his greatest troubles and afflictions
when he felt himself most oppressed, with the tip of the lips only of his soul,
as it were, would lick in this celestial (...) divine honey, and therewith take
extreme pleasure. I was mindful of God, says he, and took delight. Psalm. 56.


Again having but a thought only the fruition of God, of mere joy he could
hardly contain himself; but sing in triumph. I have rejoiced in the things
which have been told me we shall go into the house of the Lord. Psalm. 111.
Which triumphal verse of the Royal Psalmist, when our Angelical Blessed
Aloysius, being near his death through weakness, could not wholly bring forth,
Rejoicing says he, we go rejoicing, and with that so broken and abrupt verse
in his mouth, even dying wouderfully exulted. Another time when the Kingly
Prophet, not only considered that he was to go to the house of the Lord, but
sending his soul as it were before him into those galleryes themselves and
entryes of heaven, and privily laying his ears to the doors in a manner of
the Nuptial Chamber, and obscurely hearing a kind of whispering (I know not) of
some of the joys there within, it not only wiped away from him al sadness,
caused in him through the forms exprobration objected to him of Where is his
God? but dilating his breast, made him to power forth his soul into most sweet
and extatical pleasures: And wherefore? Because (says he) I shall enter into
the place of the admirable Tabernacle even to the house of God, in the voice of
exultation, and confession, the sound of the Master of the feast. Psalm. 41.


Lastly, another time, being yet mortal when creeping by stealth as it were he
had secretly insinuated himself into the bower or conclaue of the immortals,
comparing them with himself and our humane affairs, he brake forth into these
terms of joy, and congratulation: How lovely are thy Tabernacles oh Lord of
virtues! my soul couets and longs after the galleries of the Lord My heart and
my flesh, have rejoiced in the living God. Blessed are they, Lord, who dwell in
thy house, they shall praise thee forever and ever. Because in thy galleries one
day is better then a thousand, Psalm. 83.
to wit, so great is the pleasure of the eternal light, Which (S. Augustine,
expressly says in these words Aug. lib. 3. de lib. arb. c. vlt.
that though it were not lawful to enjoy it longer then a day, yet for that
only, innumerable years of this life, full of delights and the abundance of
temporal goods, were worthily and with reason to be contemned. For it was not
falsely or slightly said, that better is one day in thy Galleries, then a
thousand. So as it is less to be admired, that David should presently add this
also: I have chosen rather to be an abject in the house of my God, then to
dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners. 1. Par. 9.
I had rather, says he, be in the lowest office of a doore-keeper in the porch
of the Temple, and there watch at the entry as a slave before him, with the
hope of enjoying this celestial beatitude, then with the hazard of loosing it;
in the most ample and sumpteous Palaces and houses, to be observed and courted,
by a number of clyents, and friends. Hence, that affection of the mind aspiringe
unto Heaven with a swift course, As the Heart, couets the fountains of waters,
so my soul desires thee, O God. Psalm. 14.
That kind of beast truly is fleet and swift, but then flies he with most
speed, when either being chased by hounds, or bitten with serpents, he feels
an extraordinary thirst, for then to quench that heat he runs headlong to the
fountains, and flies like the winds. David thirsted likewise, and no less
groaned and sighed after heaven. When shall I come and appear before the face
of God? And for the great desire he had and love to the heavenly country and
the felicity of the Blessed, which even absent he had tasted now and then, had
so great a horror tediousnes and auersion from humane things, as tears to him
were of familiar as bread to others, nor used he food more frequently then
tears, yea tears themselves were food unto him; so as oppressed with dolours
neither would he take his food, or so much as think thereof; while to him thus
vehemently thirsting after the presence of God, this gibing taunt was obbrayded
to his face, Where is thy God?

From al which this same may be ^athered, that if in these Galleries, though
absent David and diverse other Saintly men have taken such pleasure, with what
joys and delights may we not imagine those to swmme in, who are admitted into
the secret closet and cabinet of the Spouse? If but a slight ray only of the
blessed vision, so dazzle the eyes of the mind; if but a drop of the water of
Paradise and fountain of the chiefest good but lightly sprinkled; if but a
crumme falling from the table of our Lord, so recreates and refreshes mortals,
what will the whole sun himself do? what will the very Ocean of al good
things? what will the table of our Lord himself confer to the immortals? Shall
not the heart even swim trow you, in these delights, yea be wholly immersed,
and drowned in them.

XX. MEDITATION.
The preparatory Prayer.
Actiones nostras quesumus, etc.
THE PRELVDE.
When he shall appear, we shall be like to him: because we shall see him, as he
is: And whosoever has this hope in him, sanctifies himself as he is holy.

1. Point. Consider how great a good, how excellent, how delectable it is, most
clear to behold one God in essence, three in Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and that eternally in the mirror of the heart: Surely, the eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it ascended into the heart of man what God
has prepared for such as love him: Romans 8.
Taste with the inward sense these delights of the heavenly Paradise, and loath
the leeke, and garlike of AEgipt the miry bogs, the empty husks and filthiness
of the world. Oh if thou could but take a taste or assay before hand with the
glorious S. Augustine of the joys of the Blessed, thou would say with him:
How sweet to me sudenly it was to want those svveets of idly toys, and what
before was a grief to loose was now a joy to forgo wholy thou eiectedst
them from me, the true and chiefest sweetness, and entredst thy self in;
instead of them, sweeter far then al pleasure. Lib. 9. Conf. cap. 1.


2. Point. Ponder how, much this same cogitation may and ought avail to endure
and go through with any heart and difficult entreprise for God and our
salvation. What changes sudenly and alterations of minds, those fruits wrought
whith come from the land of Promise, Number. 13.
which made them surmo^ut the difficulties, they feared so much before? What
do not the wrastlers generously perform and suffer in sight of the goal and
crowns proposed? Surely the sufferings of this time are not condign to the
future glory, which shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.
With which only napkin, (as S. Gregory observes in Job cap. 7.
that glorious and illustrious Champion of the Christian lists S. Paul. wiped
away all the sweat of the infinite and most grievous labors and troubles he
sustained; and so likewise the rest of Martyrs. But this especially when S.
Adrian being a Soldiers, in the flower of his ^ge, beheld a great number of
Christians to run very joyful and glad into torments, scaffolds, gibbets,
Crosses, fires, as it were to a wedding, asked what hope it was that drew and
led them to it: and when it was answered they hoped for those goods which the
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has ascended into the heart of man, he
was so moved and changed therewith, that presently he gave up his name to be
put into the list, and under Maximian most stoutly and valiantly suffered
Martyrdom. So much the hope of beatitude could work.

3. Point. See how immense and powerful is the divine love of JESUS, which
through grace at last leads a man unto the vision itself, of the divine
effence, wherewith even God himself is blessed. Then think what thou oughtst
to yeald to recompense this love again: no less no doubt then reciprocal
love. For when God loves, he would no more then to be loved again; knowing
the^ who love him only, to be truly blessed. So S. Bernard in his 83. Sermon on
the Canticles. But to the end thou may love God thou art wholly to empty thy
heart from the love of al other things. For even as a vessel (which is S.
Anselmes discourse) the more water is in it or any other liquour, conteynes
less oil; so the more the heart is taken up with other loves the more it
excludes this. There is yet another, that as stench is contrary to a good
^dour, and darkness to light, so is al other love contrary, to this: As
therefore contraries do never agree well together; so this love agrees not with
any other love in the heart.

THE COLLOQVY.
Shall be made to JESUS, the most dear lover of souls of whom shall thou
earnestly beg, to impart unto thee his divine love which this or the like
form: My God, give me tby self; behold I love thee, and if this be too little
may I love thee more. I cannot measure how much love I want, of that which were
c^ough. This know I only, it goes il with me, without thee: and al abundance
which is not my God, is mere poverty. Let the sweet power then of thy love
devour me, grant I may live and dye with the love of thy love, since first thou
have so loved, as thou have not only afforded me and done many great things for
me; but have likewise wouch safest to dye for me. Exs. Aug. and S. Francisco.


Lastly from the inward bowels make an act of the love of God above al things,
and so conclude in thee wonted manner with a Pater and Aue.

AN INCENTIVE Of the Act of the love of God above al things.
GOod God! thou command me to love thee, and threatnest if I do it not: Is
there any need of these chains for me to be tied to love theer Am I so void of
sense, as to be ignorant of thy benefits, graces, perfections? Or rather do I
want a heart, to love an infinite good? Now if love be to be recompensed with
love, what love can parallel the divine love? Thou have loved me eternally,
even when I was not or possibly could love thee: Thou have created the world,
and co^seruest it hitherto for my sake: Thou have given order to the Angels to
guard me: Thou would be my reward beyond measure. Thou call me a sinner to
grace and penance. But yet is this far more lovely, most sweet Savior, that
being God, thou would become man, to suffer so hard and cruel things and
lastly dye on the Cross for me who had (cruel as I am] so engaged thee death.
But this of al others is most sweet, that being near to death thou leftst me
thy body and blood in the Sacrament, an admirable pledge of thy love toward
me. Oh Love! o extasis of love! How thou deseru'st, my God, to be highly loved
of al men, above al things. May I therefore so love thee (my JESUS,) Savior of
lovers and love of Saviors, and so let the face of thy love even swallow me;
that I may live and dye with the love of thy love, who through the love of my
love, have likewise vouchsafed to dye for me. Oh infinite goodness of God?

A Formulary of the love of God above al things.
O Great God, I love thee above al things; I love thee with all my heart, with all
my soul, with all my powers, and merely of this same love I am sorry above al
things for offending thee the infinite good: most firmly re oluing hence forth,
through thy grace, to keep al thy commandments. And why do I love thee above
al things? surely for this; for thy immense perfection, incomprehensible power,
high^^ wisdom, infinite sanctity and godnes, that is, for thy self, O Father, O
Son, O Holy Ghost three persons, one God, who art above al things. Amen.
JESUS.

Ad maiorem Dei gloriam.
FINIS.

