THE CONFVTATION OF TORTVRA TORTI: OR, AGAINST ^he King of Englands Chaplain:
for that he has negligently defended his Kings Cause.

By the R. F. MARTINUS BECANVS, of the Society of JESUS: AND Professor in
Deuinity.

Translated out of Latin into English by W. I. ^.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.X.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND AND RIGHT HONORABLE PRINCE, AND LORD, LORD JOHN SVICARD,
Archbishop of the holy Sea of Mentz, Arch-chancellour of the Sacred Roman
Empire through Germany, and Prince Electour: His most Clement Prince, and Lord,
Martinus Becanus etc.
THere came of late (right Reverend and right Honorable Prince) two books out
of England; one whereof bare title of the Renowned King James; the other of his
Chaplain: both which, as manifestly oppugning the Roman Church, I have, for the
love of truth, refuted as modestly as I could. As for the former I have
dedicated the Confutation thereof to the Invincible Emperor Rodulph, and the
other renowned Kings, and Illustrious Princes of the Christian world (among
whom you are one:) But the later I have thought it not amiss to dedicate
specially unto your magnifice^t Name; and that for two reasons. The one, that
for so much as I have taken this pains for defense of the Catholic faith and
Religion; it seems unfit that the same should be published under the Patronage
of any other, then your self who are so great a professor and protector of the
said faith in Germany. The other reason is, for that your meritts and benefitts
toward our Archiepiscopall College of Mentz, do by a certain right
challenge, and exact the same at my hands. You will, I trust, take i^ in good
part, and favorably accept this my sincere token of Duty and Reverence.

THE TRANSLATOVR to the Reader.
WHEREAS (gentle Reader) in the year of our Lord God 1607. there being
published, both in English and Latin, a Book, entitled Triplici nodo triplex
cuneus, or, An Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, and this without Name of
Author: the same was answered very briefly and modestly in both languages by
the Catholic party the next year following. And first in English, by an
Englishman, who also concealed his Name: and then in latin by Card.
Bellarmine, under the Name of Matthaeus Tortus; Who not suspecting the said
Book to be his Majesty's of Great Britany, (as indeed it was) but rather of
some of his Ministers about him, thought it not fit to publish this his answer
in his own, but in the name of the foresaid Matthaeus Tortus. But when in the
year 1609. his Majesty (having now seen these answers to his book come
forth) resolved to publish anew his said Apology, with a large Preface or
Premonition To all Christian Princes etc. he therwithall forthwith gave
commandment to two of the best learned (as is thought) in his Realm, that
they should separately make Answer to both the fornamed Books, written against
his foresaid Apology, which presently they did. And that in English he
committed to M. Doctor Barlow, who made Answer thereto, and published it the
same year 1609. but how substantially he has performed the same, may perhaps
be shortly examined. The other in latin of the forsaid Matthaeus Tortus, he
recommended to M. Doctor Andrews, a man of great esteem and litterature in
our Country, who the same year in like manner, set forth an Answer thereto,
intituling it Tortura Torti: which Answer of his coming forth in latin, F.
Martinus Becanus, of the Society of Jesus, and Professor in Deuinity, has,
though briefly, yet substantially, confuted, this present year 1610. And for
that the said Fathers Book is very short, and written in latin, I have
bestowed a few hours to translate the same into our English tongue, for such,
as either understand not the latin, or else have not had the commodity to come
by any of the said Copyes of the former edition, published in that language.

W. I.

THE CONFVTATION OF TORTVRA TORTI: OR, AGAINST the King of England his
Chaplain.
YOU have written a book of late in defense of your King, against Matthaeus
Tortus, entitled Tortura Torti, (or the Torture of Tortus.) You discover not
your Name, but insinuate your self to be a Chaplain, Alm-nour, or Tormentor. I
(because it is more honorable) will call you Chaplain. In the said Book you
dispute principally of three heads. FIRST, of the Oath of Allegiance, which
your King^ exacteth of his subjects. SECONDLY, of the King^ Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical (or Spiritual) matters* THIRDLY, of the Popes power. If we
consider your words, you are neat and elegant enough: if you^ labor and
diligence, I accuse you not of idleness. But many other things there are, which
I do not so wel^ approve; especially these. First, that you are exceedingly
given to reproaching and taunting. Secondly, that you do every where insert
many falsities and absurdities. Thirdly, that you rather overthrow, then
establish your Kings Supremacy, which you would fortify: which is as foul a
fault as may be. Of these three heads then, will I treat in order.

1. Of the Chaplains Reproaches. 2. Of his Paradoxes. 3. Of the Kings
Supremacy overthrown by him.
I trust you will pardon me, Sir, if I modestly set before your eyes these
three things; as well for your own benefit as others. For your own, that
hereby you may know your self, and, if it be possible, become hereafter more
wise. For others, that they may learn not so lightly to trust you, who have so
often, and so foully faultred in things of so great moment. Hear me then
patiently.

THE FIRST CHAPTER:
Of the Chaplains Reproaches.
STRAIGHT then in the entrance of your Torture, you reprehended Matthaeus
Tortus, that he is altogether full of railings and reproaches. For thus you
writ of him: Per librum totum ita petulans, ita immodeste immodestus, ita totus
in conuitijs, facile vt quiuis, Matthaeum Tortum esse, possit intelligere etc.
Throughout all his book so impudent he is, so imodestly immodest, so wholly
given to reproaches, that every man may easily perceive him to be Matthew
Tortus etc. But you, Sir, do far surpass Matthaeus Tortus in this kind. You
spare no man. You provoke all with some reproach or other, where the least
occasion is offered. Pope Clement the 8. you call perfidious, Cardinal
Bellarmine, a Vow-breaker, D. Sanders, the greatest liar of all men living,
Edmund Campian and others who have suffered martyrdom for the Catholic faith,
you call Traitors. The Jesuits, Authors of most outrageous wickedness, the
Catholics you term the race of Malchus, who having their right ears cut of,
do hear and interpret all with the left. I pretermit, what you have malepertly
uttered against Matthaeus Tortus.

2. These and the like reproaches, which are very familiar with you, as I
perceive, do not beseem an honest man; much less the Chaplain or Almenour of
a King: yet perhaps do they not altogether misbecome a Tormentor. Neither may
you excuse your self by the example of Matthew Tortus, as though he had first
provoked you to these reproaches. First it is nothing so: and secondly if it
had been so: what? do you think it the part of a Christian man to requite evil
with evil? Truly the Apostle taught us otherwise, Romans 12. 17. Nulli malum
pro malo reddentes, to wit, that we should not render evil for evil to any
man. And lastly, if you would have done so, why have you not spared others? Was
not one Tortus enough for you to torture, unless with the like liberty you
railed upon others also? Hereafter therefore abstain from the like, and give
ear to that of the Wiseman, Proverb. 21. 23. Qui custodit os suum, and linguam
suam, custodit ab angustijs animam suam. He that keeps his mouth and his
tongue, does preserve his soul from distress. And again Matthew. 12. 35. Ex
abundantia cordis os loquitur. Bonus homo, de bono thesauro profert bona; and
malus homo de malo thesauro profert mala. Of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. A good man out of a good treasure, brings forth good things:
and an evil man out of an evil treasure brings forth evil things. See
then what kind of treasure this of yours is, from whence come forth so many
reproaches. And beware, Quia maledici Regnum Dei non possidebunt, 1. Cor. 6.
For that Raylers shall not possess the Kingdom of God.

THE SECOND CHAPTER:
Of the Chaplains Paradoxes.
AFTER your reproaches and railings, follow your Paradoxes, which are many in
your book: but especially these.

1. That the Puritans in England do sincerely swear to the Kings Supremacy.

2. That the said Supremacy is to be given to the King by all right.

3. That no man has yet denied, but that the Kings of the old Testament, had
Supremacy in the Church.

4. That the Kings of the new Testament are Pastors of the flock of Christ.

5. That Kings are often called in the Scripture Christ's, or, the Anointed
of our Lord; but Priests or Bishops are never so called.

6. That if the Pope were Head of the Church, besides Christ; it should be a
monstrous, and two-headed Church.

7. That if the Pope should have power to depose Kings; Ethnicks (or Infidels)
were better in condition then Christian Princes.

8. That if the Pope will have a Temporal Kingdom, it were to be persuaded
that he went to the Devil for it.

9. That power to excommunicate, was not given to S. Peter, but unto the Church.

10. That the Prophesy of the Revelation of Antichrist is already fulfilled;
and therefore is clear, and not intricate.

11. That the Kings of Denmark and Sweueland, as also the Princes of Germany
agree with the King of England in matters of faith.

12. That it is not now free for the King of England to change his own, or to
admit Catholic Religion in his Kingdom, for that he has sworn twice to the
contrary.

13. That Cardinal Bellarmine is a Vow-breaker, because of a Jesuit he is
become a Cardinal.

14. That Catholics teach, fidelity not to be kept, and falsehood to be lawful.

15. That Catholics are of the race of Malchus, because they interpret
nothing aright, but all sinistrously. These few heads of many, are now briefly
to be examined

The first Paradoxe.
2. FIRST therefore you say, that the Puritans in England do sincerely swear
to the Kings Supremacy. Your words are these page 379. toward the end of
the page: Quos vero Puritanos appellat, si Regium Primatum detestentur,
detestandi ipsi. Profitentur enim, subscribunt, iurant indies: sed and illi,
quod faciunt, ingenue faciunt etc. Those whom he (to wit Tortus) calls
Puritans, if they abhor the Kings Primacy, they are to be abhorred. For they
do profess, subscribe, and swear daily: And moreover, what they do, they do
sincerely etc. that is to say, they sincerely profess the Kings Supremacy,
they sincerely subscribe, they sincerely swear.

3. But your king himself thinks far otherwise of them in his Premonition to
the Emperor, Kings, and Princes. For thus he speaks: Praeclara sane laus,
praeclarum encomium, quo Puritanos ornaui, cum me plus fidei, vel in illis
efferis, cum montanis, tum limitaneis latronibus, quam in hoc genere hominum
inuenisse professus sim. Surely I give a fair commendation to the Puritans,
when I affirm, that I have found greater honesty with the high-land and border
thieves, then with that sort of people etc. Behold now how greatly you differ
from your King, your Head, and Ecclesiastical Primate. Your King professes,
that he has found more fidelity amongst barbarous or cruel thieves, the^
amongst the Puritans: You on the contrary side affirm, that the Puritans, what
they do, they do sincerely. So as those to you are sincere men, that to your
King are worse then cruel thieves.

4. Again, says the King: Ego a Puritanis, non solum a natiuitate continuo
vexatus fui; verum etiam in ipso matris vtero propemodum extinctus, antequam in
lucem editus essem etc. I have been persecuted by the Puritans, not only from my
birth, but almost extinguished also, even in my mothers womb, before I was yet
borne etc. What say you to this? Will you still chaunt your wonted song, That
the Puritans, what they do, they do sincerely? To wit, forsooth, as you
interpret, they would sincerely have extinguished the King in his mothers
womb, before he was borne. And is this in your Chapel, to be sincere indeed?

5. Moreover the King says: Ego in meo ad Filium Libro, multo acrius ac
vehementius in Puritanos, quam Pontificios inuectus sum. I in my book to my
Son, do speak ten times more bitterly of the Puritans then of the Papists
etc. So as by the Kings own judgment the Puritans are worse then the Papists:
But you call Papists, Traitors: Ergo, the Puritans are worse then Traitors.
And yet notwithstanding you write, that what they do, they do sincerely.

6. Again the King yet writes thus: Mihi praecipuus labor fuit, deiectos
Episcopos restituere, and Puritanorum Anarchiam expugnare. I have labored
nothing so much, as to depresse the Puritans Anarchy, and erect Bishops again
etc. To wit, the Puritans affect an Anarchy (or to be without a King,) they
hate a Monarchy, or Primacy: Contrariwise the King depresseth this Anarchy, and
establishes a Primacy. Now I demand, if the Puritans detest this Primacy, how
do they then swear thus sincerely thereunto? Ergo, either the Puritans are no
longer Puritans: or if they be the men they were (to wit Puritans,) they affect
Anarchy, and detest Primacy: and so what they do, they do not sincerely, but
fraudulently.

7. See then, how contrary in all these things you are to the King. Whom he
accuses, you excuse; and yet from impudency you cannot excuse them. And is it
not a great impudency, and (if you will) imprudencie, that the Caluinistes in
Germany, and Holland, who are nothing else but Puritans, should dare so often to
reprint the foresaid Premonition of your king, wherein they are so manifestly
and sharply touched? For what could more belong to their ignominy or
disgrace, then to be accounted worse then thieves, and that by the public
testimony of a King: For as much as they had conspired his death, being yet in
his mothers womb? And is it not impudency, to diuulge in print again and
again this their shameful ignominy, nor yet hereby to fear their public
infamy? And yet nevertheless with you, what they do, they do sin^urely.

The second Paradoxe.
8. THE Primacy Ecclesiastical, say you, is due to Kings by all Right: For
these are your words page 90. Primatus spiritualis debetur Regibus ^mni Iure.
The primacy spiritual is due to Kings by all right. Let us then see, if it be
so. Right, or power, as you know, is divided into natural, and positive: this
Right again is either divine or humane. Divine power, is partly of the old
Testament, and partly of the new. Humane likewise, is partly Canonical, partly
Civil. Will you then that the Primacy Ecclesiastical be due to kings by all
these kinds of Right? It seems you would. But in another place you confess,
that it is due by the only Right of the old Testament: Ergo, not by all the
former. For thus you write page 363. Amore, institutoque Israelis orditur
Apologia: inde enim vim habet, atque neruos suos quaestio haec omnis (de
Primatu.) In Israele enim populo suo regum instituit Deus, and Ecclesiam in
regno ex mente sua. Exemplum inde nolis sumendum est, cum in Testamento nouo
nullam habeamus. Nusquam enim in vnum coaluerunt Ecclesia and Imperium; procul
se habuit Imperium ab Ecclesia etc. From the custom and in^stitute of Israel
(to wit the old Testament) begins our defense: because from thence has all
this question her force, and strength (to wit of the Supremacy. For in Israel
did God erect a Kingdom for his people and in that Kingdom did he found a
Church to hi^ own liking. From thence are we to take an example: for so much
as in the new Testament we have none. For no where have the Church and Empire
been joined together in one: The Empire has kep^ aloof of from the Church etc.

9. I doubt not, you will acknowledge these your words, which do condemn you.
For if the Question of Supremacy, as here you affirm, has no other force,
then from the custom and institute of the People of Israel; then is not this
Supremacy due to Kings by natural Right; nor by divine of the new Testament;
nor by Canonical, or Civil. How then is it due by all Right? Again, if in
the new Testament the Church and Empire did no where consist or join together
in one: Then by right of the new Testament, it is not necessary, that they
should consist in one: Ergo, it is not due by all right. And truly, if no
where in the new Testament they consisted together in one: how comes it to
pass, that now of late in England they be thus united together in one? Here
you have plainly brought your self into straites.

The third Paradoxe.
10. NO man, say you, has yet denied, but that the kings of the old Testament
had Supremacy in the Church. For thus you write page 364. In Israele autem,
nondum os reperitam durum, quod negare etiam auderet, praecipuas in re
Religionis parts, penes Regem extitisse. In Israel (to wit the old Testament)
could I never yet find any man so impudent that durst deny, but that the
principal offices in matters of Religion, were in the Kings power etc. But I
have found, not one, but many, that dare deny the same. Of your own
Countrymen are found that dare deny it, Nicolas Sanders in his second book Of
the visible Monarchy of the Church, and 3. Chapter, in solution of the 5.
objection of Protestants: and Thomas Stapleton in his fifth book of Doctrinall
Principles of faith, the 23. Chapter. Of our men are found that dare deny it,
Cardinal Bellarmine in his first book Of Counsels, and 20. Chapter. Iacobus
Gretzerus in his second book Of Considerations to the Deuines of Venice, 1. 2.
and 3. Consider. Adam Tannerus in his first book Of the Defense of
Ecclesiastical liberty the 15. Chapter, and others.

11. All these said Authors in the places here cited, propose the argument,
which you are wont to use to prove the Kings Supremacy in Spiritual matters.
And it is this: Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Josias, and other Kings of the
old Testament have had the Primacy of the Church: Ergo, the Kings of the new
Testament have it also. In the solution of which argument, all deny the
antecedent. They deny (I say) that the kings of the old Testament (if precisely
we respect kingly power) had the Supremacy of the Church: although they grant,
that some of the^ had that power, not by any ordinary Right, as being Kings,
but for so much, as that they were both Prophets and Priests, by an
extraordinary concession or grant. The words of Bellarmine are these:
Respondeo primo, Moysen etc. I answer first, that Moses was not only a
Prince, but a chief Priest also, as is manifest out of the 98. Psalm, Moses
and Aaron in sacerdotibus eius. Moses and Aaron were accounted amongst his
Priests etc. Iosue, David, Solomon, and some others, were not only Kings, but
also Prophets, to whom God committed many things extraordinarily which
otherwise by office and Right belonged to the Priests. And in this sort King
Solomon removed Abiathar from his function of Priesthood, and appointed Sadoc
in his place. And this he did not as King, but as a Prophet, by divine
inspiration. Secondly I say (quoth Bellarmine) that diverse other good Kings of
the Synagogue, did never intermeddle in the affairs or offices of the Priests:
and if at any time they did, they were sorely punished by God for it etc. Thus
far Bellarmine. The like have the rest of the forenamed Authors.

12. This notwithstanding, I add moreover (wherein you deceive, or are
deceived) that some of the foresaid Authors do not only deny the antecedent,
but the consequence of the former argument also: and therefore they admit two
solutions. The first is this: We deny (say they) that the Kings of the old
Testament had Supremacy in the Church. The later this: Although we should
grant, that Kings of the old Testament had the Primacy of the Church; yet would
it not follow, by consequence, that the Kings of the new Testament have the
same also etc. For which they assign diverse reasons. Read what I have said in
solution of the same argument, in my Confutation of the King of Englands
Apology, the 2. Chapter.

The fourth Paradoxe.
13. YOU say, the Kings of the new Testament are Pastors of the flock of
Christ. And although those words Pasce oues meas, (Feed my sheep) were spoken
to Peter; yet notwithstanding do they belong to Christian Kings also: And for
that there were no Christian Kings in Christ's time, to whom the care of his
flock might be committed, therefore they were not spoken to them. For thus you
write page 53. Rex noster est Dux gregis sub Christo Pastorum Principe. Sunt
and alij Reges Christiani ad vnum omnes, sua si iura nossent, and vel vires
illis, vel animus non deesset etc. Our King (to wit of England) is Head of the
flock under Christ the chief of Pastors. And so are all other Christian
Kings, not one excepted, if either they knew their rights, or that their
strength, or courage failed them not etc. And yet more plainly page 91. Neque
quiquam ad rem, quod de Christo addis, non Regem aliquem, sed Apostolum gregis
sui Pastorem designante. Certe, vt nec Regem sub lege, quia nondum ibi Rex
vllus; at vbi iam Rex, tum nec ei Pastoris nomen negatum: Ita sub Euangelio,
cum non essent Reges adhuc, qui tum nulli erant, Pastores esse non poterant. At
vbi Reges Christo nomen dederant, tum demum, non minus pastores hi, quam olim
Reges Israelis. Quod si autem ab initio statim nomen Christo dedissent, nulla
ratio, quo minus Gregis Christiani Pastores designari potuissent. Neither (say
you) is that to any purpose, which you (to wit Tortus) add of Christ,
appointing not a King, but an Apostle the Pastor of his flock. Truly, as he
appointed no King under the law, for that there was yet no King, but when there
was a King, then the name of Pastor was not denied him: Even so under the
Gospel when there were not yet Kings, for that being none, they could not be
Pastors. But when Kings once became Christians, then at length were they no
less Pastors, then were of old the Kings of Israel. And if presently from the
beginning, they had been Christians, there can be no reason given, why they
should not have been designed Pastors of the Christian flock etc.

14. Here is not one alone, but many Paradoxes, or singular opinions. And
first I demand of you, if in Christ's time there had been any Christian King,
whether Christ would have said unto him, Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep? If
you affirm, yea, how prove you it? Or who did ever affirm it before your
self? Or whether are you the first that have revealed this mystery to the
Christian world? If you deny it, you do well. But if Christ did not say to any
Christian King, Feed my sheep; by what authority do you say now to King JAMES
Pasce oues Christi; feed the flock of Christ? What? Will you depose Peter from
his Pastoral office, who was ordained thereto by Christ, and suborne your King,
who was not ordained by Christ? Surely, a bold enterprise: and worthy, no
doubt, such a Chaplain.

15. Again I demand, what mean these words, Pasce oues meas, feed my flock?
You (in the 52. page of your book) expound them of the feeding by Word and
Doctrine. Be it so. But you your self (Page 380.) do confess, that your King
does not feed the sheep of Christ by Word and Doctrine: Ergo, the King, by your
own grant, is not the Pastor of the flock of Christ. Neither can those
words, Feed my sheep, in the sense that Christ spoke them, any way belong unto
the King. Here you may not so soon quit your self, I wot well. For of
necessity you must either confess, that these words, (Feed my sheep) are not
understood of the feeding by Word and Doctrine; or else that it belongs to the
King to feed by Word and Doctrine: or verily, that the King is not the Pastor
of Christ's flock. But all these 3. ways are against you. You will have the
words of Christ (feed my sheep) to be understood of feeding by Word and
Doctrine. You will have your King not to feed the flock of Christ by Word and
Doctrine: You will have your King to be the Pastor of Christ's flock. What
evasion then can you here have?

16. Thirdly I demand, why do not other Christian Kings take upon them this
Pastoral office, if they be truly Pastors of Christ's flock? They would do it
(say you) if either they knew their rights, or that their strength or courage
failed them not. And what, I pray you, is this, then as much to say, that the
King of England is wise, and the rest are fools? He has force and strength,
the rest are weak and impotent? He is courageous, the rest are fearful and
cowardly. Thus it comes to pass, that whilst you flatter your own King, you
become contumelious against others.

The fifth Paradoxe.
17. KINGS, say you, in Scripture are often called Christ's, or the Anointed
of our Lord, but Bishops and Priests are never so called: and therefore Matthew
Tortus did very ill to call the Pope by that Name. Your words are these page
114. Mihi vero multo magis improprium videtur, quod Pontificem nouo nomine, nec
ei in Scripturis sacris vsquam attributo CHRISTVM DOMINI indigitasti. Truly it
seems to me much more improper that you have entitled (or pointed out) the
Pope with a new name, to wit, The Anointed of our Lord, when as the same was
never attributed unto him in Scripture. And a little after, say you: Reges
quidem reperio sic in sacris litteris saepe saepius nominatos; Pontifici nomen
hoc tributum ibi non memini: Iuuet nos Matthaeus, and vel vnum locum designet
in toto volumine Bibliorum, vbi nomen hoc vlli Pontifici, sacri illi scriptores
attribuerint. Kings do I often find, to have been often so called in holy
Writ: but I remember not, that this name is there attributed to the Pope. Let
Matthew (to wit Tortus) help us to find out, though but one place only, in all
the volume of the Bible, where this name has been given to any Priest by any of
those sacred writers etc.

18. But stay (my friend) there is no need that Matthew should be sent for out
of Italy, to show you one place. I my self, that am nearer at hand will assign
you more then one. Hear me then. First Exodus 29. 7. Oleum vnctionis fundes
super caput eius (Aaronis) atque hoc ritu consecrabitur. Thou shall power out
oil of Annoynting upon his head (to wit of Aaron) and with this cerimony he
shall be consecrated. And Leuit. 4. 3. Si Sacerdos qui vnctus est, peccauerit. If
the Priest that is anointed, shall offend etc. Again Leuit. 8. 12. Fundens
oleum super caput Aaron, vnxit eum and consecrauit. Pouring out oil upon the
head of Aaron, he anointed and consecrated him. And Leuit. 16. 32. Expiabit
aute^ Sacerdos, qui vnctus fuerit. And the Priest that is anointed shall
expiate, or reconcile. And Numbers 3. 3. Haec nomina filiorum Aaron Sacerdotum,
qui vncti sunt, and quorum consecratae manus, vt Sacerdotio fungerentur. These
be the names of the Sons of Aaron, the Priests that were anointed, and whose
hands were consecrated to do the function of Priesthood. And again Number. 35.
25. Manebit ibi donec sacerdos magnus, qui oleo sancto vnctus est, moriatur. He
shall stay there, until the high Priest, that is anointed with holy oil, do
dye.

19. Behold here, you have diverse places of Scripture, in which Priests are
called Anointed; and therefore Kings are not alone so called. This you might
have learned out of S. August. upon the 26. Psalm, concerning the title
thereof, where he teaches, that in the old Testament, Kings and Priests were
anointed, for that both of them did prefigure one Christ (or Anointed) which
was to be both King and Priest. The words of S. Augustine are these: Tunc
vngebatur Rex and Sacerdos. Duae istae illo tempore, vnctae personae. In duabus
personis praefigurabatur futurus vnus Rex and Sacerdos, vtroque munere vnus
Christus; and ideo Christus a Chrismate. Then was anointed both the King and
the Priest. These two persons at that time were anointed. In two persons was
prefigured to be both a King and a Priest, one Christ in both offices: and
therefore was Christ so called, of Chrisme, etc. And again upon the 44. Psalm
about those words, vnxit te Deus, God has anointed thee etc. he writes thus:
Vnctum audis: Christum intellige: Etenim Christus a Chrismate. Hoc nomen quod
appellatur Christus, vnctionis est: Nec in aliquo alibi vngebantur Reges and
Sacerdotes nisi in illo regno, vbi Christus prophetabatur and vngebatur, and
vnde venturum erat Christi nomen. Nusquam est alibi omnino, in nulla gente, in
nullo regno. Thou hear (says S. Augustine) Anointed: understand Christ:
For Christ is derived of Chrisme. This name that is called Christ, is a name of
Anointing, or unction. Neither were Kings and Priests anointed in any sort
any where, then in that Kingdom, where Christ was prophesied and anointed,
and whence the name of Christ was to come. In no other place is it at all, in
no other nation, in no other Kingdom etc. So S. Augustine.

20. Therefore by the judgment both of Scripture and S. Augustine, no less
Priests then Kings, are called Anointed. But you will say they are not called
the Lords Anointed, as Kings are. First I answer, that that's no matter. For
we dispute not of words, but of the matter signified by words. Moreover these
two words Christ and Anointed do signify one and the same thing: and, as S.
Augustine speaks, This Name which is called Christ, is a Name of unction. And
secondly I say, you assume falsely. For that Priests are not called in Scripture
Anointed only, but also Christ's. And so we read in the second of Machabees 1.
10. Populus qui est Ierosolymis, and in Iudaea, Senatusque and Judas Aristobolo
Magistro Ptolomei Regis, qui est de genere Christorum Sacerdotum, and his, qui
in Aegypto sunt, Iudaeis, salutem and sanitatem. The people of Jerusalem, and
Judea, the Senate and Judas, do send greeting to Aristobolus Master to King
Ptolomey, who is of the race of Christ's (or Anointed) Priests, and to the
Jews that be in Aegipt, etc. Behold here, Aristobolus is of the race of
Christ's Priests, therefore Priests are called Christ's, that is to say,
Anointed.

21. But you will yet object: All these things are understood of Priests of the
old Testament: but I would feign see a place (say you) where the Priest of the
new Testament (to writ the Pope) is called Christ, or Anointed. Marry hark
you: And I in like manner would as feign see a place where Kings of the new
Testament are called by that Name. Is it lawful (trow ye) for you to
transfer this Name, which was of old given to ancient Kings and Priests by
the holy Ghost, to the King of England: and shall it not be lawful for us
likewise by the same right to transfer it to the Pope? Here you take upon
you too much.

22. Moreover I say, that once only this Name of Christ, or Anointed is to be
found in the new Testament, in that sense whereof we now treat, to wit in the
2. Chapter of S. Luke verse. 29. where it is said: Responsum acceperat Simeon a
Spiritu Sancto, non visurum se mortem, nisi prius videret Christu^ Domini.
Simeon had receiud an answer of the Holy Ghost, that he should nor see death,
unless he first saw the Christ (or Anointed) of our Lord. Here our Savior is
called the Christ of our Lord, to wit, Anointed of our Lord. He was anointed
both King and Priest as S. Augustine above noted, not with corporal oil, as
were the Kings and Priests of the old Testament; but with spiritual oil, to
wit, of the holy Ghost. For* upon him rested the spirit of our Lord, the spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and fortitude, the spirit
of knowledge and piety, as it is written in Isay the 11. Chapter verse. 3. And
this is that which David foretold Psalm 44. 8. Vnxit te Deus, Deus tuus, ole^
laetitiae prae consortibus tuis. God has anointed thee, yea thy God, with the
oil of gladness, before all thy companions: That is to say, God has anointed
thee Priest and King in a peculiar manner, before all other Kings and Priests.
For he anointed thee with the holy Ghost, and them with corporal oil only.
Heerehence I gather, that whereas the Kings and Priests of the old Testament,
were therefore anointed with corporal oil, that they might be a Type or
figure of the Messiah to come, who was to be anointed both King and Priest
with spiritual oil: so much the more does this Name Anointed, or, Christ our
Lord, agree to Priests, then unto Kings, by how much Christ took upon him the
office of a Priest in this life, more then of a King. Or else, if he equally
took upon him both offices: then by equal right, Priests as well as Kings may
be called Anointed, or, Christ's of our Lord And therefore I see no cause, why
you should attribute this Name only to Kings, and take it away from Priests,
unless it was, because it pleased your fancy so to do.

The sixth Paradoxe.
23. IF besides Christ (say you) the Pope should also be head of the Church, it
should be a monstrous and two-headed Church. For thus you write page 331. of
your Book. Monstrosum vero corpus, cui plus vno sit capite. That is a
monstrous body, that has more heads then one. And then again page 398. Vnicum
est caput vni corpori: Ecclesia vnum corpus. Nisi bicipitem aquilam fingas,
autem tricipitem Geryonem, cui tot capita sunt, quot in mitra Pontificia
coronae. Christus ergo solus Ecclesiae caput, non Papa. There is but one only
head to one body: The Church is one body. Except you imagine her to be a spread
Eagle, or a triple Geryon, who has as many heads, as there be Crowns in the
Popes myter. Christ therefore alone is Head of the Church, and not the Pope.

24. But if it be so, as here you would bear us in hand, that it is; why do
you otherwhere affirm (not a little forgetting your self) that the King is
Head of the Church? Do you not fear least the Church should be double headed,
if not Christ alone, but your King also be head thereof? For thus you say page
338. Iam vero vt nomen capitis ad Regem reuocetur, art mirabili non est opus.
Praeiuit nobis voce Spiritus Sanctus 1. Reg. 15. 17. Nonne cum peruulus esses
in oculis tuis, caput in tribubus Israel factus es? Inter tribus vero Israel,
tribus Leui. Caput ergo Rex vel tribus Leuiticae; qua in tributum Pontifex
Achimelech sub Rege capite suo. Chrysostomus camdem hanc vocem Capitis
reuocauit ad Theodosium, eumque dixit, non solum caput, sed quod in ipso capite
maxim sublime est, capitis verticem, idque omnium in terris hominum. Now that
the Name of Head may be given to the King, there shall need no great art. The
holy Ghost has gone before us in this word, 1. Reg. 15. 17. saying: When thou
wast a little one in thine own eyes, wast thou not made head in the Tribes of
Israel? Amongst the tribes of Israel, is the tribe of Leui. Therefore the King
is head at least of the Leuiticall tribe: in which Tribe was then the chief
Priest Achimelech under the King his Head. Chrysostom in like manner
attributed this Name of Head unto Theodosius, and called him not only Head, but
(which is most high in the head it self) the top or crown of the Head, and
that of all men on earth etc.

25. I wonder at your inconstancy: A little before you said, that only Christ
was head of the Church. And why so? That you might exclude the Pope, whom you
hate. Now you will also have the King to be head, and not only head, but the
top or crown of the head also. Why so? Because you seek to please and flatter
the King. And so it comes to pass, that you will easily endure a two-headed
Church, if the King may be one, but in no wise, if the Pope should be any. And
when you have placed Christ and the King of England as two Heads of this
Church, then it seems to you a fair and comely Church: but if Christ and the
Pope be placed together, then is it deformed and monstrous. Get you hence with
this your Head, wherein the Church has one while one head, another while two.
It seems that, that of Ecclesiasticus 27. 12. may be fittly applied unto you:
Stultus vt luna mutatur. A fool is changed like the moon. And that also of S.
James 1. 8. Vir duplex animo inconstans est in omnibus vijs suis. A double
dealing fellow is inconstant in all his ways.

The seventh Paradoxe.
26. You say, that if the Pope should have power to depose Kings; Ethnickes or
Infidels, were better in condition then Christian Princes: to wit, for that
these may be deposed by the Pope, the other may not. For thus you write page
36. of your book: Hac doctrina semel promulgata, non multa post sceptra,
credo, Christo subijcientur. Quid enim? Rex Ethnicus non potest deponi a Papa,
Christianus potest: Meliori ergo iure regnatur apud Ethnicos. Quis non dehin^
iem (sic vt est) manebit Ethnicus? Subditi, qui Ethnicisunt, officio suo in
Reges laxari nequeunt: at Christiani queunt. Quis non subditos suos malit
Ethnicos quam Christianos? Quis Christianus Rex esse velit? This Doctrine (to
wit of deposing Princes) being once set abroach, I believe few Scepters will
hereafter be subjected to Christ. For why? An Ethnicke King cannot be deposed
by the Pope, a Christian King may be: therefore it is better to be a King
amongst Ethnickes. Who will not he^ceforward now (if he be so) remain still an
Ethnicke? Subjects, if they be Ethnickes, cannot be absolved from their
obedience to their Kings, but Christian Subjects may. Who would not then have
his subjects Ethnickes rather then Christians? Who would be a Christian King?

27. You neither speak warily, nor Christianlike. Not warily: for first what
you have said, may be thus retorted upon you. If the King of England should
have power to depose Bishops (which you affirm;) then were the Bishop; in
Spain, France, and Poland better in condition then the Bishops of England: For
that here they may be deposed at the Kings pleasure, and there not. Secondly,
for as we say that Christian Princes may be deposed by the Pope, if they
offend, and not Ethnicks: so do you likewise confess, that Christian Princes
may be excommunicated, and not Ethnicks: Yet is it not well inferred of this
your Doctrine, that Ethnickes are better in condition then Christians, seeing
that it is a greater evil to be deprived of the spiritual goods of the Church
by excommunication; the^ of a temporal Kingdom by deposition. And therefore
can that be much less inferred out of our opinion.

28. You speak not Christianlike. For it is not a Christian man's part thus to
dispute: The offenses of Kings are punnished amongst Christians, but not
amongst Ethnickes, Ergo, I had rather be an Ethnic Prince, where I may not be
punnished, if I offend, then a Christian Prince, where I shall be punnished, if
I do offend. Thus truly you dispute. If (say you) Christian Kings, when they
deserve it, may be deposed, and Ethnicks, although they do offend, cannot be
deposed; I had rather be an Ethnicke King then a Christian. And so truly, you
plainly show, that you more esteem a temporal Kingdom, which you would not
loose, then a heavenly Kingdom, which you do not greatly care for.

The eight Paradoxe.
29. IF the Pope (say you) will have a Temporal Kingdom, it were to be
persuaded, that he went to the Devil for it: seeing that he has power to
dispose of the Kingdoms of this world. For thus you write page 36. Quod si
Pontifici animus est ad regna mundi; est in Euangelio (memini) mentio de
quodam, qui regna mundi penes se esse, eaque disponendi ius habere se dixit.
Eum adeat censeo; cum illo transigat. And if the Pope have a mind to a
temporal kingdom, there is mention in the Ghospel (I remember) of a certain
fellow (to wit the Devil) who said, that all the kingdoms of the world were
in his power, and that he had right to dispose of them. I think it best he go
unto him, and covenant with him etc.

30. Say, my friend, speak you this in jest or in earnest? In whether manner
you do it, you either become injurious to your own King, or else contumelious
to the Pope neither whereof does well beseem you. The injury you offer to your
King, you cannot deny. For durst you (without injury) have answered your king,
either in jest or earnest, when as, after the death of Queen Elizabeth, he
demanded the Crown of England, with these words: If you will reign in
England, go to the Devil, and covenant with him, who is the distributer of all
Kingdoms? I think you durst not. For if you had, then farewell Chaplaineship.
Wherefore then dare you be so saucy to speak thus to the Pope, but for that you
list to rail upon him?

31. But, you will say, the Pope seeks a temporal Kingdom, which is not due
unto him. Let him content himself with a spiritual Kingdom. But what if in
like manner I should say of your King? He seeks a spiritual Kingdom. Let him
content himself with a temporal. Moreover I add, that the Pope has far more
right to temporal Kingdoms, then you King has to the Church: which thing I am
to declare more largely in another place.

The ninth Paradoxe.
32. You say, that power to excommunicate was not given unto S. Peter, but unto
the Church: to wit, by those words, Dic Ecclesiae etc. Tell the Church: and if
he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnicke. As also by
those other words: Quaecumque solueris etc. Whatsoever you shall loose upon
earth, shall be loosed in heaven and whatsoever you bynd upon earth, shall be
bound in heaven etc. And yet notwithstanding you add, that the Church may
transfer this power to whom she please. For thus you write page 14. of your
book. Potestas haec ibi, cui data? Non Apostolo Petro. This power there, to
whom was it given? Not to Peter the Apostle. And again: Vt autem Petro
potestas ibi non data censuram hanc vsurpandi; ita nec Petro, si vsurparet,
ratihabitio promissa. Dicitur enim: Quoscumque ligaueritis. Non Petro igitur
vel Papae, sed Ecclesiae. And as power was not there given to Peter, to use
this censure; so neither if he had used it, was the ratihabition (or approving
thereof) promised to Peter. For it is said: Whomesoeuer ye shall bind: therefore
it was not given to Peter, or to the Pope, but to the Church. And yet again,
page 42. Res ipsa, rei ipsius promissio, ratihabitio, vsus denique Ecclesiae
datur: ab Ecclesia, and habetur, and transfertur in vnum, sieve plures, qui eius
post vel exercendae, vel denunciandae facultatem habeant. The thing it self,
the promise of the thing it self, the approving of it, yea the use thereof is
given to the Church. From the Church it is both had, and transferred to one or
more, who shall afterward have the faculty to exercise, or denounce the same.

33. Out of this your Doctrine it follows: first, that in the time of the
Apostles, power to excommunicate was immediately given to the Church of the
Corinthians, and from thence transferred to S. Paul the Apostle, that he might
exercise and publicly denounce the same upon the incestuous person. But this
very point you openly deny in the same place, in these words: Paulus
congregatis Corinthijs, potestatem censurae denunciandae facit. Paul having
gathered together the Corinthians, gives power to denounce the Censure.
Certes, if S. Paul give power to the Congregation or Church of Corinth to
denounce the Censure (upon the incestuous person) as here you affirm; how had
he then received the self same power from the same Church? Or what necessity
was there, I pray you, to give that power to the Church, if the Church had
received it before from Christ, by those words, Dic Ecclesiae, tell the Church?
These things do not agree together.

34. Secondly it follows: that now at this present in England the power to
excommunicate is immediately in the English Church, and not in the Bishops: and
from the Church the same may be transferred to Bishops. But if it be so, why
does not the Church of England give this power to the King, her Head, and
Primate? Why does she rather give it to the Bishopes, then to the King; when as
the Bishops are subordinate unto the King in spiritual Jurisdiction, as you
will needs have it? And is it not an absurd thing, that you (to wit the Church
of England) should give power to the Bishops, to excommunicate, and cast out of
the Church their King, their Head, their Pastor and their Primate, and yet
would not give the same power to the King to inflict the same Censures upon his
subjects, to wit the Bishops? Surely, you are either very cruel toward your
King, or else you do not seriously, and in good earnest give him the Supremacy.
One of the two must needs follow. Therefore look well with what spirit, you
wrote these words following in the 151. page of your book; Nos Principi
Censurae potestatem non facimus: We do not give power to our King to exercise
Censures upon us. And wherefore do ye not, if you truly acknowledge him for your
Pastor and Primate? But let us go forward.

The tenth Paradoxe*
35. You say, that the Prophesy of the revelation of Antichrist, is already
fulfilled and therefore it is so clear, that it may be seen with the eyes.
For thus you write page 186. Minime vero mirum, si ista, quae dixi, tam vel
claram, vel certam in scripturis Patrum interpretationem non habeant: signatus
adhuc liber huius Prophetiae erat. It is no marvel, if these things which I
have said, be neither clear nor certain in the writings of the Fathers. For
as yet the book of this Prophesy was not unsealed etc. And a little after, say
you: Mirari tamen non debeat quis, si non illis tam adeo explicita omnia
fuerint, quam Nobis per Dei gratiam iam sunt, qui consummatam iam Prophetiam
illam quotidie oculis vsurpamus. But yet let no man marvel, if all things
were not then so unfolded unto them, as now by Gods grace they be to us, who
daily see with our eyes that prophesy (to wit of Antichrist) to be already
fulfilled etc.

36. And is it so indeed? But your King thinks the contrary: For that in his
Premonition he plainly auerreth, that, That Prophesy of Antichrist, is yet
obscure, and intricate; and that by only conjectures it may be disputed of. His
words are these: Sane quod ad definitionem Antichristi, nolo rem tam obscuram
and inuolutam, tamquam omnibus Christianis ad credendum necessariam, vrgere. As
for the definition of Antichrist, I will not urge so obscure a point, as a
matter of faith to be necessarily believed of all Christians etc. And shall we
think that, that which is obscure and intricate to your King, is daily
manifest to you? No* It follows in the Kings words. Id autem maxim mihi in
votis est, vt si cui hanc meam de Antichristo coniecturam libebit refellere,
singulis disputationis meae partibus ordine respondeat. And my only wish
shall be, that if any man shall have a fancy to refute this my conjecture of
Antichrist, that he answer me orderly to every point of my discourse etc. But
for you, Sir, it shall not be necessary, to answer thus to every point: you may
dispatch the matter in one word, if you shall but say to your King: And it
shall please your Majesty, you are deceived in your conjecture: that which is
seen with the eye, needs no conjecture. We all daily see with our eyes this
Mystery of Antichrist: And are you the only man in England that sees it not
etc? If you do but thus, you have gotten the goal.

37. But indeed, you are not only contrary to the King heerin, but to your
self also. For if the Prophesy of Antichrist were now already revealed, and
clear in all men's eyes (as you affirm:) who is then this Antichrist, whom
the prophesy means? The Pope, you will say. And this also does your King
conjecture, though he see it not with his eyes. Well, be it so. But then in
another place you say, That your King may be excommunicated by the Pope, though
not deposed, or deprived of his Kingdom: Can therefore Antichrist
excommunicate your King? Take heed what you say, and beware least whilst you
please your King by flattery, you displease him through imprudency.

The eleauenth Paradoxe.
38. THE Kings of Denmark (say you) and Suetia, as also the Princes of
Germany with many others, do agree with the King of England in matters of
faith. For thus you write page 53. of your book. Quod si praesentis instituti
foret, edoceriposses, Serenissimum Magnae Britanniae Regem, and qui cum eo
sentiunt, Reges Daniae, and Suetiae, Germaniae Principes, Respublicas Heluctiae
and Rhetiae, quique per Galliam, Belgium, Poloniam, Hungariam, Bohemiam,
Austriam, Ordines a nobis sunt, partem esse Dominici gregis: nec minorem, nec
minus illustrem partem, quam quae est pars Pauli Quinti. But if it were our
present purpose here to declare, you (to wit Tortus) might be taught to know,
that the Kings excellent Majesty of Great Britany, and they which agree with
him, to wit, the Kings of Denmark and Suetia, the Princes of Germany, the
Comonwealthes of Suitzerland and Rhetia, and all other States, that adherre
unto us, throughout France, the Low Countries, Polonia, Hungary, Bohemia, and
Austria, are part of the Lords flock: and not a meaner, nor a less famous
part, then that of Paul the fifth etc.

39. Yea although it were your present purpose, you could never be able to
teach us, that which you hereaffirme. And this I will show you particulerly.
For first you say, your King agrees (in matters of faith) with the Kings of
Denmark and Suetia. But how can this be? They be Lutheran Princes, and
acknowledge Christ's Real Presence in the Eucharist, which your King does
utterly deny. Secondly, you affirm the same of the Princes of Germany, and
States of other Countries. But these do not agree amongst themselves, some
being open Lutherans, and others Caluinistes. How then can they, being divided
amongst themselves, agree with your King? except your king (as you insinuate he
does) profess Caluinian Religion with Caluinists, and Lutheran, with
Lutherans: Omnibus omnia factus, vt omnes lucrifaciat, being all to all that he
may gain all. Thirdly, suppose this were so, though it be not: and that all
Princes and States, as well Lutherans, as Caluinistes did agree among
themselves, and together with your king; how can it be verified, that they are
a part of the Lords flock? This I understand not. I understand it not (I say)
how they are a part of the flock, and not the whole flock: For either there
be yet others, besides those you have named which belong to the Lords flock,
or none. If there be others, why then did you not name them? or who be those
others? I suppose, by your own judgment, they are neither Papists nor
Anabaptists. For these you reject. If there be no others, besides those you
have named before, wherefore did you then call them a part, and not the whole
flock of Christ? I will speak yet more clearly. If the kings of England,
Denmark, and Suetia, and other Princes and States which agree with them, be
but a part of Christ's flock, and not the whole flock; then follows it of
necessity, that besides those, there is another part of Christ's flock which
agrees not with them: and so Christ's flock must consist of two parts, whereof
one is divided from the other. Do you think so indeed? If you do not, then
explicate your self better.

40. But let us grant this also, that they are a part of Christ's flock that
agree with your King in Religion: with what face dare you yet affirm, that
part to be no meaner, nor less famous a part, then that of Pope Paul the
fifth? This I understand less then the other. For with Paul the fifth, agree
Rodulph the Emperor, the Kings of Spain, France, Polonia, the Archdukes of
Austria, the Princes Electors of Mentz, Treuers, Cullen, the Dukes of Bauaria,
Lorayne, Brabant, Franconia, Tuscany, the Bishops of Bamberge, Constance,
Spire, Worms, Paderborne etc. to omit many others: and yet dare you be so
bold as to affirm that this is a more mean, and less famous part, then that
which agrees with your King in matters of Religion? You are totoo intemperate
in auouching: and I doubt not, but your King, who is of no dull wit, will
easily perceive, that you very grossly flatter him.

The tweluth Paradoxe.
41. YOU say, that it is not now free for the King of England to change his
Religion, or permit the Catholic in his Kingdom, because he has sworn
twice to the contrary. For thus you write page 81. of your book, speaking to
Tortus. Nec in eo Regi audiendus, qui consilium das de religione libere
habenda: integrum hoc iam illi non est. Nam non semel periurus sit, quin bis,
si te audiat. Qua enim (siqua est fidei bis data conscientia) vel conscientia,
vel fide, ferret in regnis suis ritus vestros, vel vsum eorum publicum, qui
suscepta primum Scotiae, suscepta deinde Angliae Corona Regia, vtrolique
solemni ritu, Deo iusiurandum praestitit de conseruanda in Statu suo illa
colendi Dei formula, nec alia, quam quae in regnis suis tum public recepta,
and vtriusque Gentis legibus stabilita esset? Neither in this point are you to
be heard of the King, in that you give him counsel to permit the free
exercise of religion; this being not lawful for him now to do. For that thereby
he shall not be once, but twice perjured, if he hear you herin. For with what
faith or conscience (if there be any conscience of faith twice given) can he
admit your ceremonies, or the public use thereof, who when he was first Crowned
in Scotland, and after in England, did most solemnly swear to God in both
places, to mantaine in his Dominions that form of Religion, and no other,
which was then received publicly in his Kingdoms, and established by the
laws of both Realms etc?

42. Truly I perceive you threaten your King, that he shall be accounted
perjured, if he permit the Catholic Religion in his Kingdom, or forsake his
own, and embrace another. What? do you not think it lawful for him to change
his Religion, if he have sworn he will not do it? So it seems, belike. But,
how if the Religion be false which he has sworn to mantaine? What shall he
then do? Shall he persist rather in his false Religion, then break his oath?
Take heed what you say. An oath (say the Lawiers) is no band of iniquity, and I
may add, nor of falsity. And therefore notwithstanding an oath never so often
made, a man may change his Religion if it be false: he may annull his pact or
covenant, if it be unjust. This is most certain. What would you do if your
King should say, that the Religion is false which he now professes? Would you
urge him upon his oath? That, in an evil act, is annulled. What? Would you
persuade him to forsake his false Religion, and embrace the true? I think you
would. Why do you then dissemble? Why do you so much urge the King upon his
oath, as though upon no occasion or event soever it were lawful to chang a
Religion that is once confirmed by an oath, although it be impious and false?
Go too, gather your wits together a little better, and then speak. 43. One
thing I would yet demand of you, and that is this: Your King in his book of
Premonition, does exhort Catholic Kings and Princes, that they should forsake
the faith and Religion, which hitherto they have professed under the Pope, and
embrace the English Religion which the King professes. Now, it is well known,
that most of these Princes, in their Coronation do swear, that they will never
do it, to wit, change their Religion. Here I demand (I say) whether your King
has lawfully and prudently exhorted them to do it, or no? If he has done it
lawfully and prudently, why do you accuse the Catholics, who do but the like
in a better cause? If he did it unlawfully and imprudently; why did you not
admonish him, to surcease from such an, Exhortation: seeing you are his
Chaplain, and perhaps in this matter, his Secretary? Thus you stumble at every
block.

The thirtenth Paradoxe.
44. You say, that Cardinal Bellarmine is a Vow-breaker, because of a Jesuit
he is become a Cardinal. For thus you write page 56. At votum non video cur a
Mattheaeo (Torto) nominari debuit, nisi si interposita voti mentione, Domino
suo (Bellarmino) gratificari voluit, quo olim Iesuita factus, voti se reum
fecit, and hoc votum iam fregit, postquam ostrum induit. But I do not see how
it can be called a vow by Matthew (Tortus,) unless, in mentioning of the same,
he would needs gratify his Master (Bellarmine), who being sometime a vowed
Jesuit, has now broken that vow by putting on purple etc.

45. It seems you understand as well what it is to be a Vow-breaker, as a
perjured person. And even as a little before you did pronounce your King to be
forsworn, if he should admit Catholic Religion in his Kingdom: So now you
pronounce Cardinal Bellarmine to be a Vow-breaker, because against his will he
admitted the Dignity of a Cardinal. Truly you are very ready to vpbraid and
taunt. And why, I pray you, do you not call Luther, a Vow-breaker, who of a
Monk became a married man (if he may be called a married man, and not rather a
sacrilegious fornicator and adulterer?) Why not also a perjured person, that
rejecting the ancient faith, which he had received from Christ, the Apostles,
and his Ancestors most holy and learned men, and sealed with an oath, did
embrace a new Religion, repugnant to Christ and the truth?

46. That you may therefore understand the matter, hear then what follows:
It is one thing to vow, or promise to God any thing absolutely and simply; and
another thing to do it with a certain limitation. He that voweth after the
first manner, is bound to perform that which he promises: he that voweth
after the second manner may be quit of his band, when the limitation thereof
does suffer the same. Examples hereof we have in the old Testament. For the
Daughters and Wives did use to vow with this limitation, to wit, if their
Parents and Husbands did consent thereto. (Numb. 30.) The Nazaraeans in like
manner vowed with this limitation, to wit, they bound themselves for a certain
time only, and not for their whole life. (Numb. 6.) So likewise do we in our
SOCIETY. He that binds himself by a simple vow, is not thought to be
otherwise obliged the^ at the arbitrament of his Superiors: So as if he should
be by them, for a just cause, dismissed out of the SOCIETY, the band or
obligation cease. But he that binds himself by a solemn vow, depends on
the arbitrament of the Pope, who may take him from the SOCIETY, and place him
in any other Degree or Dignity. And what new thing is this now I pray you? The
like is daily exercised amongst you. You promise your King Allegiance and
Obedience, but with this double limitatio^. First, as long as you remain in
England. Secondly, as long as the King does not chang his Religion. For if it
be otherwise, you think you are not bound thereunto.

The fourteenth Paradoxe.
47. YOU say, the Catholics teach, fidelity not to be kept, and falsehood to
be lawful. For thus you write page 156. of your book. Vos qui fidem non
seruandam, id est, perfidiam licitam, legitimamque docetis; etiamne vos
quicquam de perfidia audetis hiscere? and in turpitudinem vestram, etiam vel
nomen nominare? You, that teach fidelity not to be kept, that is to say,
falsehood to lawful; dare you (I say) as much as once open your lips against
falsehood or perfidiousnes? or to name the thing to your own shame?

48. But stay, my friend; who be they with us that teach this doctrine? If your
set purpose be nothing else, but to deal falsely and to calu^niate, it is no
great marvel, if you write thus. For (be it spoken with your good leave) this
is a loudlye, and a manifest calumniation. But if you be desirous of truth (as
it becommed you to have been;) why did you not examine the matter first, before
you wrote it down? No doubt, but you should have found another kind of
doctrine amongst Catholics. And if you yet please, you may see, what I have
formerly written of this argument in my Disputation, Of keeping faith (or
promise) to Heretics: and in my Sundry mixed Questions of the same matter. And
there shall you find, what the Catholics truly and really think of this
point; and what our Adversaries do falsely calumniate.

The fifteenth Paradoxe.
49. YOU say, that the Catholics are of the race of Malchus, for that they
hear and interpret all with the left ear, and nothing with the right. For
thus you write page 92. of your book: Interea tamen dextra datum, dextra
positum, quicquid in Iuramento positum. Quod dextra datum est, vos sinistra
accepistis, and de Malchi prosapia estis, cui praecisa auris dextra: nec vlla
vobis auris reliqua, nisi sinistra, qua auditis omnia; omnium, quae a nobis
dicuntur, sinistri auditores and interpretes. In the mean while
notwithstanding, whatsoever is put in an oath, is given with the right, is put
with the right. That which is given with the right, you receive with the left,
and are of the race of Malchus, who had his right ear cut of: Neither have you
any right ear, but a left, wherewith you hear, all things; and become the
sinister hearers and interpreters of all things, that are said by us etc.

50. Thus you hold on, after your wonted manner, either to trifle, or
calumniate. But I care not. Let us grant, what you say, to wit, that the
Catholics are of the race of Malchus. What get you by this? Truly nothing that
makes against us. For do you not know, out of the Gospel, that as soon as
Malchus his right ear was cut of, it was again presently restored by Christ?
And to this end, that he should hear or interpret nothing with the left, but
all with the right ear? If you therefore will have us to be of the race of
Malchus, you must confess, that this was so brought to pass by Christ for us,
that we should hear and interpret all with our right ears, and nothing with
our left alone.

51. But if I listed in like sort to jest, I would not say, that you were of
the race of Malchus, whose ear was cut of; but rather of the race of the
Jews, who have ears, and yet hear not, according to that of S. Matthew 13.
14. Auditu audietis etc. You shall hear with you ears, and you shall not
understand; and seeing, you shall see, and shall not see. For the heart of this
people is waxed gross, and with their ears they have heavily heard: and their
eyes they have shut etc. and the rest that follows. But I will not deal so
with you.

THE THIRD CHAPTER:
Of the Kings Supremacy badly defended by his Chaplain.
SEEING you have once determined to flatter the King, you go about to defend and
approve whatsoever you imagine will please him. And with this mind and desire,
you are imboldned to defend the Primacy of the Church, which he usurps to
himself. But truly very unluckily: For in this kind you commit a double fault.
First because you bring many Arguments which do overthrow the Kings Supremacy,
which yet you do for lack of foresight. SECONDLY because the Arguments you
bring for proof of the said Supremacy in the King, are of so small reckoning
or account, as they seem contemptible. I will lay them both open before you:
and for that which belongs to the first head or point, these Arguments may be
deduced out of your own Principles, against the Kings Supremacy.

The first Argument, against the Kings Supremacy, taken out of the Chaplains
own Doctrine.
2. THE first Argument I frame thus: He has not the Primacy of the Church, who
has no jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, neither in the interior Court, nor
exterior: But the King, out of your own Doctrine has no jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, neither in the interior Court, nor exterior: Ergo, he has
not the Primacy of the Church. The mayor proposition is clear of it self,
because by the name of Primacy, we understand nothing else in this place, but
supreme Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. He then who has no jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, neither internal nor external, has not the Primacy of the
Church: But the King, by your doctrine has none, neither internal, nor
external.

3. Not internal: For that this Jurisdiction consists in the power of the
Keys, or in the power or authority of forgiving sins in the Court of
Conscience, which the King has not, as you confess page 380. of your book,
in these words: Rex non assumit ius Clauium. The King does not assume, or take
upon him, the power of the Keys. And worthily. For that Christ spoke not to
Kings, but to the Apostles, when he said, Accipite Spiritum Sanctum etc.
Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins you forgive, shall be forgiven them: and
whose sins you retain, shall be retained etc.

4. Not external: For this I will evidently euince out of your own
Principles, which are these three. The first, that the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical of the exterior Court, is not founded upon any other place,
then that of S. Matthew 18. 17. Dic Ecclesiae etc. Tell the Church: if he will
not hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an Ethnicke and Publicane. Your
second Principle is, that the Jurisdiction which is founded on that place, is
nothing else, then the Right of Censuring, or power to excommunicate. Your third
is, that the King has not the Right of Censuring, or power to excommunicate. I
doubt not, but you will acknowledge these your three Principles. And the last,
you set down page 151. of your book in these words: Nos Principi potestatem
Censurae non facimus. We do not give power, or authority to the King to use
Censures. And again page 380. Rex non assumit ius Censurae. The King does not
take upon him the Right or power of using Censures. The former two Principles
you in like manner set down page 41. thus: Censura duplex est; Publicani and
Ethnici; minor and mayor. Minor a Sacramentis excludit modo. De maiore vero,
quae arcet Ecclesia ipsa, quae perinde reddit, vt Ethnicos, vix quisquam est,
quin fateatur, institutam eam a Christo, Matthew. 18. per verba, Dic Ecclesiae;
si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus. De exteriori foro ibi
agitur. Exterioris fori Iurisdictio, illo, nec alio loco fundata est. A Censure
is twofold; to wit of the Publican and Ethnic; the lesser and the greater.
The lesser does exclude from Sacraments for the present. But as for the
greater, which casts out of the Church it self, and makes men like unto
Ethnicks, there is scarce any man, but will confess, that it was instituted by
Christ Matthew. 18. by these words. Tell the Church; if he will not hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an Ethnicke. And in that place is it meant of
the exterior Court: the jurisdiction of which exterior Court is grounded on
that, and no other place etc. Mark well what here you say. The jurisdiction
of the external Court, where is it founded in the Gospel? In no other place,
(say you) then in Matthew. 18. It is well. I desire no more.

5. Hence then do I thus now conclude: All Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of the
external Court, is founded in that only place, Dic Ecclesiae, tell the Church:
But the King has not the Jurisdiction that is founded in that place: Ergo, he
has no jurisdiction founded in the Gospel of Christ, but in the brains of
his Chaplayne. Consider now well, how you will deal with your King, who by
your own Doctrine is deuested of all Ecclesiastical power: and recall those
words of yours, that you wrote page 90. of your Book, Primatus spiritualis
debetur Regibus omni iure. The spiritual Primacy is due unto Kings by all
right. No truly, not by all right: for, as now you confess, they have it not
by right of the Gospel, or new Testament.

The second Argument.
6. THE second argument which I produce, no less forcible then the former, is
this: He has not the Supremacy of the Church, who cannot (by his power
Spiritual) expel out of the Church, any man, although he be never so guilty
or faulty: and yet himself, if he be guilty, may be expelled by others: or
(which is the same thing) cannot excommunicate any man, and yet may be
excommunicated himself by others. But your King, by your own Doctrine cannot
excommunicate, or cast out of the Church any man; and yet himself may be
excommunicated, and cast out by others: Ergo, according to your Doctrine, he
has not the Primacy of the Church.

7. The Mayor is certain, and is manifest by a like example. For as he is not
accounted a King, who cannot banish or exile out of his Realm any man, though
never so wicked; and yet himself notwithstanding may be banished and exiled by
others, if he offend: even so stands the matter in this our case. Now I
subsume thus: But the King can excommunicate, or cast out of the Church no man,
because he has not the Right or power to censure, as your self speaks: and
yet notwithstanding may he be excommunicated himself, or driven out of the
Church, as you confess page 39. of your Book in these words: Aliudest priuare
Regem bonis Ecclesiae communibus, quod facit sententia, and potest forte
Pontifex: aliud priuare bono proprio, idest regno suo, quod non facit
sententia, nec potest Pontifex. Priuabit censura Pontificis societate fidelium,
qua fideles sunt: bonum illud enim spirituale and ab Ecclesia. Non priuabit
obedientia subditorum, qua subditi sunt: bonum enim civil hoc, nec ab Ecclesia
etc. It is one thing to deprive a King of the common (or spiritual) goods of
the Church which the sentence (of Excommunication) does, and perhaps the Pope
can: It is another thing to deprive him of his own proper good, to wit, his
Kingdom, which the sentence (of Excommunication) does not, nor the Pope can.
The Popes Censure shall deprive, or exclude him from the society of the
faithful, in that they be faithful: for that is a spiritual good and
depends of the Church. But it shall not deprive him of the obedience of his
subjects, in that they be his subjects: for this is a civil (or temporal) good,
nor does it depend of the Church etc. Then I conclude thus: Ergo, the King by
your own sentence has not the Supremacy of the Church.

8. And by this Argument, which is taken out of your own Doctrine, I not only
prove, the King to have no Supremacy Ecclesiastical: but also that himself
does think far otherwise, in this point, then you do. For you confess out of
your former words, that the King may be excommunicated by the Pope: Ergo, you
must also confess, that the King in this case is inferior to the Pope. But
your King in his Premonition to all Christian Princes, denies it in these
words: Na^ neque me Pontifice vlla ex part inferiorem esse credo, pace illius
dixerim. For neither do I think my self any way inferior to the Pope, by his
leave be it spoken. If he be no way inferior unto him; how can he then be
excommunicated or punished by him? See then by what means you will here
defend your King.

The third Argument.
9. MY third Argument is drawn from your own words page 177. of your Book,
which are these: Duo haecregna, Reipublicae and Ecclesiae, quamdiu duo manent,
hoc ab illo diuisum, duos habent: postquam in vnum cealescunt, non vt in ducbus
duo, sed vt in vno vnus Primus est. These two Kingdoms, to wit, of the
Commonwealth and the Church, so long as they remain two, this divided from
that, they have two Heads: but after they become one, not as two in two, but
as one in one, there is but one Chief etc. This you would say: There be two
distinct Kingdoms in this world, one of the Civil Comon-wealth, another of the
Church of Christ: These Kingdoms so long as they remain two, have two
Primates, or Heads: but when they grow into one, they have but one Primate or
chief Head. I accept that which you grant, and do subsume thus: But in the
new law, which Christ instituted, there remain two Kingdoms; nor are they
become one: Therefore in the new Law, there must be two distinct Primates, or
Heads, one whereof must rule the Church, the other the Civil Commonwealth:
Ergo, the King of England, if he belong to the new Law, does not rule both at
once.

10. What can you here now deny? Tell me, I pray you, in Christ's time, when
the new Law was instituted, were these two Kingdoms divided, or were they one?
This later, you neither can, nor dare affirm. For if the Church and
Commonwealth had been one in Christ's time, then should there have been but one
Chief or Head of both, according to your own doctrine. And therefore either
Christ should have been Chief both of the Church and common wealth, which you
will not grant; or else he should have been Chief or Head of neither, which is
against Scripture. It remains then, that in Christ's time those two Kingdoms
were distinct and divided, and had two different Primates or Heads; to wit
Christ, Head of the Church, and the King or Emperor, Head of the Commonwealth.

11. But now if in Christ's time, there were not one and the same Chief, or
Head, both of the Church and Commonwealth, which you ought to grant; how then
dare your King, who professes the Institution of Christ, usurp unto himself
both Primacies, to wit, both of the Church, and commonwealth: unless you will
say, that he follows herin the custom of the Jews, and not of the
Christians, and so in this point is more like a Jew then a Christian. For this
you do seem to insinuate, when as page 363. of your Book you say: A more,
institutoque Israelis orditur Apologia etc. From the custom and institute of
Israel (to wit the old Testament) our Apology or defense begins, and from
thence has all this question her force and strength (to wit of the Supremacy.)
For in Israel did God erect a Kingdom for his people, and in that Kingdom he
founded a Church to his own liking. From thence are we to take example: for so
much, as in the new Testament we have none. For no where have the Church and
Empire been joined, or united together in one etc.

12. Out of this your so clear and manifest confession I gather two things.
The one is, that your King of England does usurp unto himself the Primacy
both of the Church and Common wealth, without any example thereof in the new
Testament. The other: that either your King of England must needs be deceived,
or else that other Kings and Emperors are in error. For if, as you say, the
Church and Empire no where in the new Testament have conjoined together in
one; and that yet now in England they are united in one: it follows
necessarily, that hitherto all Kings and Emperors have erred in this point,
and your King only is the first that is wise: or else, truly, (which is more
credible) that other Kings and Princes have heerin been wise, and your King to
have been deceived, and missed the mark.

13. But I see well, what may be heerto objected, and that is this: That the
Pope, forsooth, in some part of Italy does usurp also the Primacy both of the
Co^monvvealth and Church. I confess it to be so. But this conioining (to wit,
of temporal and spiritual states) has been introducted by humane right
only: but you contend that your King has both Primacies by divine right. And
this you cannot prove.

The fourth Argument.
14. THE fourth Argument, is taken out of the words of your Book, page 35.
and 36. where you say: Christus enim, cuius hic vicem obtendis, non sic
praefuit, dum in terris fuit. Regnum quod de mundo fuit, non habuit. Regni,
quod non habuit, vices non commisit. Christ, whose office you pretend, did not
so rule, when he lived upon earth: he had no Kingdom which was of this world:
He gave not another his place in a Kingdom, which he had not etc. And the^
again a little after say you: Est ille quidem Rex Regum, sed qua Regum Rex est,
immortalis est; mortalem nullum Proregem habet. Papa mortalis ipse, non aliter
Christi vicarius, quam qua mortalis Christus. He truly (to wit Christ) is King
of Kings, but in that he is King of Kings, he is immortal: he has no mortal
Viceroy (or Vicar.) The pope is mortal; nor he is otherwise the Vicar of
Christ, then in that Christ is mortal etc.

15. In these words you go about to prove, that the Pope, although he be
Christ's Vicar; yet has he no temporal Kingdom. You suppose Christ to be
considered two manner of ways. First, as he is immortal, or according to his
Divinity: Secondly, as he is mortal, or according to his humanity. This done,
you argue thus: Christ according to his Divinity, or, in that he is immortal,
is King of Kings, and has all the Kingdoms of this world in his power, yet
notvvithstanding has he no mortal Vicar or Substitute: But the Pope is
mortal: Ergo, he is not the Vicar of Christ, in that Christ is immortal, or
God. Again: Christ according to his Humanity (say you) or, as he is mortal,
has no temporal Kingdom: and therefore cannot have any Vicar or Substitute in
a temporal Kingdom: Ergo, the Pope, although he be his Vicar, yet is he not
so in his temporal Kingdom, but in his Spiritual.

16. This is the force of your Argument. But do you not see that this may be in
like manner retorted back upon your King? Yea by the very same argument your
King may be deuested, both of his temporal Kingdom, and his Supremacy in the
Church. Which I prove thus: If your King have a temporal Kingdom, he has it
either as the Vicar of God immortal (which he pretends,) or else as the Vicar
of Christ mortal. But neither of these may be said. Not the first: Because
God, as he is immortal, has no mortal Vicar, as you freely affirm: But your
King, without all doubt is mortal: Ergo, he is not the Vicar of God immortal.
Not the later: Because Christ, as he is mortal, has no temporal Kingdom,
and consequently no temporal Vicar: Ergo, your King is not the Vicar of
Christ, in his temporal Kingdom. And so, he is either deuested of all
temporal dominion: or if he have any, he must needs be some other bodies
Vicar, then Gods immortal, or Christ's mortal. This, I know: you will not
grant, therefore the other must be granted.

17. Hence do I further conclude: Your King does not usurp unto himself the
Primacy of the Church, by any other title, then that he is a temporal Prince
and the Vicar of God: But now I have showed out of your own doctrine that he
is not a temporal King, nor the Vicar of God: Ergo, by the title of a
temporal Prince, he cannot claim the Primacy of the Church. Here you had
need to succor him, if you can.

The fifth Argument.
18. THE fifth Argument may be taken out of your own words, before rehearsed,
page 39. of your book thus: Aliud est priuare Regem bonis Ecclesiae communibus
etc. It is one thing to deprive a King of the common (or spiritual) goods of
the Church, which the sentence (of excommunication) does, and perhaps the Pope
can. It is another thing to deprive him of his own proper good, to wit, his
Kingdom, which the sentence (of excommunication) does not, nor the Pope can.
The Popes Ce^sure shall deprive or exclude him from the society (or communion)
of the faithful, in that they be faithful, for that is a spiritual good, and
depends of the Church. But it shall not deprive him of the obedience of his
subjects, in that they be subjects; for this is a civil (or te^porall) good,
nor does it depend of the Church etc.

19. Here you distinguish two sorts of good things which belong to the King.
Some you call Spiritual, which depend of the Church: others Civil, which
depend not of the Church. You add: These (to wit Civil) are proper to the
King, of which he cannot, by Censure, be deprived: The other, are the common
goods of the Church, of which he may be deprived. Now I demand whether the
Primacy of the Church, which the King usurps, belong to the common goods of
the Church, or rather to his own eiuill or temporal goods? One of these two
must you grant, if your distinction be good and sufficient. If this Primacy
belong to the common goods of the Church, it follows then, that every
faithful Christian, that is in the Church, is no less Head of the Church,
then your King. For that the goods, which be common to all Christians being in
the Church, may no less be usurped of one then of another. But if this Primacy
belong to the Civil goods of the Church; then it follows, that the King
cannot be deprived of the Primacy of the Church by any Ecclesiastical Censure:
and therefore after that he is excommunicated, and cast out of the Church, as an
Ethnicke, vet in him remains the Primacy of the Church: which is most absurd.

20. The like Argument is taken out of your words following, which are these
page 40. of your book. Rex quiuis cum de Ethnico Christianus fit, non perdit
terrenum ius, sed acquirit ius nouum; put a, in bonis Ecclesiae spiritualibus.
I tidem cum de Christiano fit sicut Ethnicus, vigore sententiae amittit nouum
ius, quod acquisierat in bonis Ecclesiae spiritualibus; sed retinet tamen
terrenum ius, antiquum ius in temporalibus quod fuerat illi proprium, priusquam
Christianus fieret. Every King when of an Ethnicke he is made a Christian, does
not thereby loose his temporal right, but gets a new right, to wit, in the
spiritual goods of the Church. In like manner, when of a Christian he is made
an Ethnicke (to wit by Excommunication) he, by force of the Censure, leeseth
his new right, which he had gotten in the spiritual goods of the Church: but
yet notwithstanding he keeps his temporal right, his ancient right in
temporalities, which was proper unto him, before he was a Christian.

21. Here also do you distinguish the double right of a King: the one ancient
and temporal, which a King has before he be a Christian; the other new and
spiritual, which he gets, when he is made a Christian. Now in like manner I
demand, whether does the Supremacy of the Church which your King usurps,
belong to that ancient and temporal right, or rather to this new and
spiritual? If it belong to the ancient and temporal right; it follows, that
Ethnicke Kings before they be made Christians, have the Supremacy of the
Church, which is absurd. If it belong to the new and spiritual right; it
follows, that Kings, when in baptism they be made Christians, or members of
the Church, do receive more in their baptism then other men; which in another
place of your Book you deny. For you contend, that all men, of what sort or
degree soever they be, are equal unto them, in those things, which are
obtained through baptism.

The sixth Argument.
22. THE sixth Argument you insinuate page 53. of your book, when you say: Nec
enim Regum subditi, qua subditi, Ecclesiae pars vlla sunt, sed Regni. Antequam
de Ecclesiae essent, subditi erant; cum extra Ecclesiam sunt, nihilominus
manent subditi. Qua fideles sunt, pars Ecclesiae sunt: qua subditi sunt, Regni
ac Reipublicae p^rs sunt. Neither are the subjects of a King, in that they be
subjects, any part of the Church, but of the Kingdom. Before they were of the
Church, they were subjects: when they are out of the Church, notwithstanding
they remain subjects. In that they be faithful, (or Christians) they are a
part of the Church: In that they be subjects, they are a part of the Kingdom
and Commonwealth.

23. Heerhence do I argue thus: The Jurisdiction of a King, does not extend it
self but to the subjects of the King, in that they are subjects (for if we
regard them, in that they be not subjects, they cannot be under the
Jurisdiction of the King:) But the subjects of a King, in that they be
subjects, are not a part of the Church, but only of the commonwealth, as you
affirm: So as the Jurisdiction of a King which he has over his subjects, in
that they be subjects, cannot be Ecclesiastical, but Civil only: Ergo, they
are not subject to the King in Ecclesiastical affairs, but only in Civil.
Nothing is more certain out of this your own Principle.

THE CHAPLAINS Argument for the Kings Supremacy.
24. HItherto have I showed, that out of your own doctrine strong Arguments
may be drawn to overthrow the Kings Supremacy: Now let us see, if your others
be as forcible to the contrary, wherewith you go about to establish the same
Supremacy in the King. I will pretermitt those, which are common to you, and
your King, and are by me refuted otherwhere. One, which is most peculiar and
principal to your self, I will here discuss. Thus then you propose it, in
the 157. page of your Book. Dixit autem olim Iosue populus, in omnibus
pariturum se ei, sicut and Moysi paruerunt; paruerunt autem and Moysi in
Ecclesiasticis. Non intercessit tum Pontifex Eleazarus, ne in omnibus, sed
temporalibus. Quod si quicquam interesse putet, quod Iosue verus Dei cultor
fuit, ne in Orthodoxis solis locum habere videatur; Rex Babel certe, haeretico
par, nempe Idololatra, cui tamen Propheta non modo non dissuasit populo, sed
author etiam fuit submittendi colla sub iugo eius, eique seruiendi. Idem
Pharaoni factum, cuius absque venia, nec pedem mouere voluerunt de Aegypto, vt
Deo sacrificarent. Idem Cyro, cuius itidem absque venia nec excedere Chaldaea,
vt templum aedificarent etc. The people sometime said unto Iosue, that they
would obey him in all things, as they had obeyed Moses, but they obeyed
Moses in Ecclesiastical matters. Nor did the high Priest Eleazarus then
meddle, no not in any thing, but in temporal. But if any man shall think this
more to avail, because Iosue was a true worshipper of God, and least this
right should seem to have place in only Orthodoxall, or right-beleeuing
Kings; Behold then the King of Babel, equal to an Heretic, to wit an
Idolater, whom notwithstanding the Prophet not only not dissuaded the people
to obey, but also was Author, that they submitted their necks under his yoke,
and served him. The like was done to Pharao, without whose leave, they (to wit
the Jews) would not move a foot out of Egypt, that they might sacrifice to
God. And the same to Cyrus without whose leave in like manner, they would not
depart out of Chaldaea, that they might build their Temple etc.

25. The force of your Argument is this, that not only Orthodoxall Kings in the
old Testament, but Gentiles also and Idolaters had the Primacy of the Church*
Ergo, the same is to be said of Kings of the new Testament. The former part of
the antecedent you prove by the example of Iosue, to whom the people of the
Jews said (Ios. 1. 17.) As we have obeyed Moses in all things, so will we
obey you. But they obeyed Moses, not only in temporal matters, but also in
Ecclesiastical: Ergo, did they so obey Iosue. The later you prove by the
example of the three Gentile Kings, Nabuchodonosor in Babylon, Pharao in
Egypt, and Cyrus in Chaldaea, to whom the Jews were subject, even in
Ecclesiastical matters, because without their leave, they durst neither offer
Sacrifice, nor build their Temple.

26. That you may then see, of what small moment this your Argument is; I will
briefly examine every part thereof. And first I will speak something of
Moses: secondly of Iosue, who succeeded him: and thirdly of the Gentile Kings
which you have cited. Concerning Moses then, it is certain, that he was not
only a Temporal Prince, but an Ecclesiastical also: or if we speak all, he
sustained a quadruple person, or the person of four men. The first of a
Temporal Prince, the second of a Lawmakers, the third of a high Priest, or
Bishop, and the fourth of a Prophet. And this is testified by Philo lib. ^. of
the life of Moses in the end, where he says: Haec est vita, hic exitus
Moysis, Regis, Legislatoris, Pontificis, Prophetae. This is the life and death
of Moses, a King, a Lawmakers, a high Priest, and a Prophet. And the same is
plainly euinced out of the Scripture. That he was a temporal Prince or Judge,
it is manifest by that of Exodus 18. 13. Altera die etc. And the next day
Moses sat to judge the people, who stood by Moses from morning until night:
which thing S. Augustine mentions in his 68. quaest. upon Exodus thus:
Sedebat (inquit) iudiciaria potestate solus, populo vniuerso stante. He sat
(says S. Augustine) alone with power to judge, all the people standing. That
he was a Lawmakers, it is manifest, as well by other places, as that of S. John
1. 17. Lex per Moysen data est. The law was given by Moses. That he was a
Bishop or high Priest, is partly gathered out of that of the Psalm 98. 6.
Moses and Aaron in Sacerdotibus eius. Moses and Aaron are numbered amongst his
Priests: and partly also by the Priestly fu^ction, that he exercised. For that
(as it is written Leuit. 8.) he consecrated Aaron a Priest, he sanctified the
Tabernacle and the Altar, he offered Sacrifice, Holocaustes, and Incense to
our Lord. And this was not lawful for any to do, but Priests, according to
that of 2. Paralip. 26. 18. Non est officij tui, Ozia, vt adoleas incensum
Domino, sed sacerdotum. It is not your office, Ozias, to offer incense to our
Lord, but the office of Priests. Lastly, that he was a Prophet, is manifest by
that Number. 12. 6. Si quis fuerit inter vos Propheta Domini etc. If there shall be
among you a Prophet of our Lord, in vision will I appear to him, or in sleep
will I speak unto him. But my servant Moses is not such a one, who in all my
house is most faithful: for mouth to mouth I speak to him, and openly, and
not by riddles and figures does he see the Lord etc.

27. Now as for Iosue, he succeeded not Moses in all these offices. For he
succeeded him not in Bishoply degree, or high Priesthood: Nor yet in law-making.
In Prophesy, whether he did or no, I dispute not. But that he succeeded him in
temporal Principality, it is manifest out of Number. 27. 18. Dixitque Dominus ad
Moysen, toll Iosue filium Nun etc. And our Lord said to Moses, take Iosue the
son of Nun etc. And put thy hand upon him: who shall stand before Eleazar the
Priest, and all the multitude: and thou shall give him precepts in the sight of
al, and part of thy glory that all the Synagogue of the Children of Israel may
hear him. For him, if any thing be to be done, Eleazar the Priest shall consult
the Lord. At his word shall he go out, and shall go in, and all the Children of
Israel with him, and the rest of the multitude etc. In which words three things
are to be noted which make to our purpose: the first, that Iosue, was designed
the successor of Moses: the second, that Moses gave him part of his glory,
that is to say, he gave him not all the power he had, as well Ecclesiastical, as
temporal, but temporal only: the third, that he should be subject to Eleazar
the High Priest, and do every thing at this commandment. For this do those
words signify, Pro hoc etc. For him (to wit Iosue) if any thing be to be done,
Eleazar the Priest shall consult the Lord. At his word (to wit of Eleazar)
shall Iosue go out, and in etc.

28. Here may you plainly see, in how different a sense you alleged that
place, Sicut in istis obediuimus Moysi, ita obediemus and tibi: As in these
things we obeyed Moses, so will we obey you. For you understand it thus; as
who should say, the people of the Jews ought to obey Iosue, in all things
both Ecclesiastical and civil, as they had obeyed Moses. But you are
deceived. First, for that in Ecclesiastical affairs they were to obey Eleazar
the Priest. Secondly, because those words (as we have obeyed Moses) were not
uttered of all the people, but only of the Rubenites, Gaddites, and of half
the Tribe of Manasses. Neither did they say, that they would obey Iosue in all
things simply, wherein they had before obeyed Moses (although somtymes they
murmured against him, and did not obey him:) but in those things only, which
were appointed them by Moses, to wit, that they should leave their wives,
children, and cattle in the place where they then were, and arming themselves,
together with the rest of the Tribes, should pass over Jordan, and fight
against their enemies, until they being vanquished, the rest of the Tribes
should there make their quiet possession. And this is evident out of the
context of Scripture it self Iosue 1. 12. in these words: Rubenitis quoque
and Gadditis, and dimidiae tribui Manasse ait etc. To the Rubenites also and
Gaddites, and to half the tribe of Manasses, Iosue said: Remember the word
which Moses the servant of our Lord commanded you, saying: Our Lord your God
has given you rest, and all this land, your wives and children, and cattle
shall tarry in the land, which Moses delivered unto you beyond Jordan: but
pass you over armed before your brethren, all that are strong of hand, and
fight for them, until our Lord give rest to your brethren, as to you also he
has given; and they also possess the land, which our Lord your God will give
them, and so return into the land of your possession: and you shall dwell in
it, which Moses the servant of our Lord gave you beyond Jordan, against the
rising of the sun etc. Thus Iosue to the people. So as that which immediately
follows (to wit, Omnia quae praecepisti nobis etc. All things that thou have
commanded us, we will do, and whithersoeuer thou shall send us, we will go. And
as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee also,) is referred to
that which went before. But there is no mention made of Ecclesiastical
matters, but only of taking arms against their enemies, who possessed their
land.

29. On this side then, as you see, your Argument falls to the ground, and
proceeds from a false principle. On the other side, that which you bring of
Gentile and Idolatrous Kings, I do not see what force it may have. For that
those three Kings, which you mention, were by your own confession either
Primates of the Church of God, or they were not. I hope you will not say that
they were, because you affirm the contrary more then once in your Tortura: and
that worthily: to wit, that they who be out of the Church of God, cannot be
Princes and Rulers in the same Church. If they were not Primates of the Church,
as certes they were not, how then will you prove by this their example, that
the King of England is head or Primate of the Church? This only you may
conclude, that as the Jews durst not go forth of Egypt, to sacrifice to God,
without King Pharao his leave, who had brought them into cruel bondage under
his yoke: So in like manner the Catholics, that live in England, dare not go
out to other Catholic Countries, where they may receive the holy Eucharist
after the Catholic manner, without King James his leave, who will not suffer
them so to do, without his license, under pain of death or imprisonment. And
the like may be said of the other two Idolatrous Kings. But what is this to the
Primacy of the Church? I should rather think it belonged to tyranny or impiety.

The Conclusion to the Chaplayne.
30. You have here briefly, what I have thought concerning your Book, which
you have written in defense of your King: You have here (I say) these three
points: First, that you have oftentimes handled the matter not so much in
Argument, as in raylings or exprobrations. Secondly, that you have defiled
every thing with Paradoxes, and false opinions. Thirdly, that you have rather
overthrown then established the Kings Primacy, which you sought to fortify:
and all these things have you done through a certain desire you have to
flatter the King. Therefore if you shall repress this your desire, and behold
the only truth of the thing it self, it will be very easy for you to amend
your former faults, which I altogether counsel you to do. And if you set
God before your eyes (who is the first and principal verity) you will do it.

AN APPENDIX,
Of the Comparison between a King and a Bishop.
IN your book you do so compare a King and a Bishop together, that you
manifestly depresse the Authority of the one, and extol the Dignity (higher
then is sitting) of the other. And therefore what others have thought before
you concerning this point, I will briefly lay before your eyes, that you may
choose whether, changing your opinion, you will stand to their judgments, or
else retayning it, still persist in your error. Thus then have others thought
and taught before you.

Number. 27. 21. Pro Iosue si quid agendum erit etc. If for Iosue any thing be to
be done, let Eleazar the Priest consult with the Lord. At his word (to wit
Eleazars) shall he go out, and go in, and with him all the sonns of Israel,
and the rest of the multitude etc. So as here the secular Prince is commanded
to do his affairs at the descretion of the Priest.

Deuter. 17. 12. Qui superbierit etc. He that shall be proud, refusing to obey
the commandment of the Priest, who at that time ministers to our Lord thy God
etc. that man shall dye, and thou shall take away the evil out of Israel etc.

1. Reg. 22. 27. Ait Rex Saul Emissarijs etc. King Saul said to his Servants
that stood about him: Turn your selves, and kill the Priests of the Lord etc.
And the Kings servants would not extend their hands upon the Priests of the
Lord. So as, they made greater esteem of the Priests authority, then of their
Kings commandment.

4. Reg. 11. 9. Fecerunt Centuriones iuxta omnia etc. And the Centurions did
according to all things, that Ioida the Priest had commanded them: and every
one taking their men etc. came to Ioida the Priest etc. And he brought forth
the Kings son, and put upon him the diadem, and the covenant etc. And Ioida
commanded the Centurions, and said to them: Bring forth Athalia (the Queen)
without the precincts of the Temple, and whosoever shall follow her, let him be
stricken with the sword etc.

2. Paralip. 19. 11. Amarias Sacerdos and Pontifex vester etc. Amarias the
Priest and your Bishop shallbe chief in those things, which pertayne to God.
Moreover Zabadias, the son of Ismael, who is the Prince of the house of Judah,
shall be over those works, which pertain to the Kings office etc.

2. Paralip. 26. 16. Cum rob oratus esset etc. When Ozias the King was
strengthened, his heart was elevated to his destruction etc. and entering into
the temple of our Lord, he would burn incense upon the altar of incense. And
presently Azarias the Priest entering in after him, and with him the Priests of
our Lord etc. they resisted the King and said: It is not thy office, Ozias, to
burn incense to our Lord, but the Priests etc. Get thee out of the Sanctuary,
contemn not, because this thing shall not be reputed unto thee for the glory
of our Lord God. And Ozias being angry etc. threatened the Priests. And
forthwith there arose a leprosy in his forehead before the Priests etc. and in
have they thrust him out etc.

Joan. 21. 32. Feed my sheep etc. Matthew. 16. 19. To thee will I give the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven etc. Act. 20. 28. The holy Ghost has placed
Bishops (not secular Kings) to govern the Church of God etc. 1. Cor. 4. 1. So
let a man esteem us, as the ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the
mysteries of God etc. 2. Cor. 5. 20. We are Legates for Christ etc.

S. Gregory Nazianzen, writing to the Emperors of Constantinople apud Gratian.
did. 10. can. 7. says: Libenter accipitis etc. You do willingly hear, that
the law of Christ does subject you to Priestly power. For he has given us that
power: yea, he has given us a Principality, much more perfect, then that of
yours etc.

S. Gregory the Pope writing to Hermannus Bishop of Metz did. 96. can. 6.
says: Quis dubitat etc. Who doubts, but that the Priests of Christ are to be
accounted the Fathers, and masters of Kings, and princes?

Joan. Papa, did. 96. can. 11. Si Imperator Catholicus est etc. If the
Emperor be a Catholic; he is a Son, and not a Prelate of the Church. What
belongs to Religion, he ought to learn, and not to teach. And then again
afterward: Imperatores etc. Christian Emperors; and Kings, ought to submit
their employments unto Ecclesiastical Prelates, and not prefer them.

Innocentius 3. in decret. de mayor. and obed. can. 6. Non negamus etc. We deny
not, but that the Emperor does excel in temporal things: but the Pope
excels in spiritual; which are so much the more worthy, then temporal, by
how much the soul is preferred before the body etc.

Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, to the Emperor Constantius, says:
Desine, quaeso, Imperator etc. Give over, I beseech you, o Emperor: do not
busy your self in Ecclesiastical affairs, nor in such things do not teach
us, but rather learn of us. To you has God committed the rule of the
Kingdom, but unto us has he delivered the affairs of his Church etc.

S. Ambrose in his 33. Epistle to his Sister Marcellina, writes, that he had
said to the Emperor Valentinian: Noli te grauare Imperator etc. Do not trouble
your self, o Emperor, to think that you have any Imperial right in those
things which are divine. To the Emperor do palaces belong; but Churches
pertain unto Priests etc.

Valentinianus the Emperor said: Mihi qui vnus e numero laicorum etc. It is
not lawful for me, that am but one of the number of laymen, to interpose my
self in such businesses, (to wit Ecclesiastical.) Let Priests and Bishops
meet, about these things, wheresoever it shall please them, to whom the care
of such affairs belong etc. This is related by Zozomenus lib* 6. hist. c. 7.
and by Nicephorus lib. 11. cap. 33. by Ruffinus lib* 1. cap. 2.

Eleanor Queen of England in an Epistle she wrote to Pope Celestine, has
these words: Non Rex, non Imperator a iugo vestrae Iurisdictionis eximitur.
Neither King, nor Emperor is exempted from the yoke of your Jurisdiction, or
power. More of this matter in another place.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 7. lin. vlt. in some copies dele is 17. lin. 7. shall read shall 19. lin.
21. to write read to wit 36. lin. 4. in some copies Mattheaeo read Matthaeo 38.
lin. 8. to lawful read to be lawful 40. lin. 7. in some copies you read yours
57. lin. 15. in some copies the read he 58. lin. 1^. in some copies this read
his

LAVS DEO.

