A RIGHT COMFORTABLE TREATISE CONTAINING fourteen points of consolation for
them that labor and are laden: WRITTEN BY D. MARTIN Luther to Prince Friderik
Duke of Saxony, he being sore sick, thereby to comfort him in the time of his
great distress.

Englished by W. GACE.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the Black Friars. 1578.

Martin Luther.
I Did write this book in the beginning of my procedings, to the most gracious
Prince Friderik Duke of Saxony, when he was sore sick. Now many thought good
that it should be imprinted, but when it had been eftsoon imprinted, it was so
corrupted and made imperfect, that I found many words wanting, which I my
self could not conjecture what they were: howbeit the sentences I have
restored after a sort, and such as I think I had in the beginning. Neither
have I thought it good now to change or adorn them as I could: For I will in
this book show a testimony of my proceeding, and gratify the adversaries,
that they may have wherewith to exercise their malice. It is sufficient for me
if I please my Lord Christ and his Saints: I rejoice from my heart, and give
thanks to my God that I am envied and hated of the devil and his Impes.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL M. HENRY DALE CITIZEN AND Merchant of the city of
London, VV. Gace wishes grace and peace from God the Father through Christ
Jesus our Lord.
MAnifold are the miseries of man's life, wherewith he is greatly grieved and
sundry ways molested, insomuch as Job says that man that is borne of a woman
has but a short time to live, and is replenished with misery. For he
begins his life with tears and weeping, he passes it with sorrow and
trouble, and ends it with dolor and pain. Wherefore it is no marvel if
some have thought that it is the best thing not to be borne, and the next to
dye quickly: and that other some have mourned and wept at the birthes of their
friends, and solemnly rejoiced at their burialls. For what could they being
destitute of the light of God and true religion, see in this life but trouble
and misery? Yea the godly themselves, as they have in all ages suffered many
afflictions in this life, so have they passed through the same as through a
strange country. For if heaven be our country, what is the earth else but a
place of banishment? wherein being exiled from true delights and pleasures, we
live in a state unquiet, troublesome, and many ways miserable, as to him that
shall duly consider the sundry troubles that are incident to all sorts of men
in this life, will easily appear.

Forasmuch then as this life is so miserable, as both the Saints of God have
pronounced of it, the very heathen have accounted it, and daily experience
proves it, and yet nevertheless we, seeing God has placed us in it, must
remain therein till he call us away: great need we have of such consolation
and encouragement as may be a mean to make us pass the time thereof without
grudging and impatiencie. For of our selves we are very frail and weak, not
able to resist, much less of power to overcome, as is manifest by them, who in
the time of affliction have through impacie^cie murmured against God, albeit
there both have been, and are many, who being not of them selves but by other
means supported, have patiently sustained many troubles and miseries.

Wherefore I trust that my labor shall not be thought ill bestowed, but rather
profitably employed, which I have taken in translating this treatise into the
English tongue, for that it tends chiefly to the consolation of such as are
in affliction and distress. For that which the title of this book portendeth,
the matter thereof sufficiently proves, namely that it contains consolations
for them that labor and are laden, that is, that suffer afflictions and
troubles in this life: so that they which shall diligently read and peruse the
same, may be so confirmed thereby, that when they be troubled with hardness of
adversity, they may not be overcome or thrown down therewith: when they be
molested with grief and sorrow, they may be also delited with spiritual joy:
when they be even distressed with troubles and afflictions, they may receive
courage again, being cheared with sundry consolations, and so patiently suffer
according to Gods will whatsoever it shall please him to lay upon them.

How great this commodity is, it plainly appears not only by this, that
the feelinge of the present affliction is thereby assuaged, but by this also,
that it is a mean to move and make us to obey Gods will, which otherwise we
would be ready to resist, and to suffer patiently, whereas otherwise we
would by impatiencie be stubborn against the righteousness of God.

Wherefore forasmuch as I am not ignorant that the cross is usually incident
to the godly, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom
of God, I am bold to commend this treatise to all the godly in general, to
be read of them to their singular commodity and comfort, but especially to
your worship, whose godly conversation both of a long time has been, and
daily is an evident testimony of your sincere and unfeigned profession of
Christ his religion: desiringe you to esteem thereof, not according to the
quantitye or outward appearance (for then shall you make but small account of
it, being both little in quantity, and adorned with no eloquent terms or
glorious words) but according to the fruit that the godly shall reap by
diligent reading thereof. For pearls and precious stones for the most part are
in quantity but small, and in outward appearance simple, which in value
notwithstanding are great and in virtue excellent. Howbeit being sufficiently
persuaded of your well accepting hereof, I will not stand upon this point, lest
I should seem in any wise to dout of it, but do desire Almighty God, that as
you have hitherto lived in his fear, so ye may daily increase, and constantly
continue in the same even unto the end.

Your worships at commandment W. GACE.

TO THE MOST FAMOVS PRINCE AND LORD, THE LORD FRIDERIK, Duke of Saxony, etc,
his very good Lord.
OUR Lord and Savior Jesus has left a commandment which pertayneth
indifferently to all Christians, that we should perform the duties of
humanity, or rather (as the Scripture calls them) the works of mercy to the
afflicted and miserable: that we should visit the sick, endeavor to deliver
the captives, and do such like to our neighbor, whereby the present evils
may be somewhat assuaged. Hereof our Lord Jesus Christ has in him self set
forth unto us a most manifest and singular example, whereas of his exceeding
love toward mankind, he came down from the bosom of the father into our
miseries and into our prison, that is, into our flesh and most miserable life,
and took the punishment of our sins upon him self, that we might be saved:
according as Esai says chap. 43: Thou have laden me with thy sins, and
wearied me with thy ungodliness, etc. If there be any whom this so manifest and
singular an example does not stir up, and the authority of Gods
commandment added thereunto does not move to perform these works of
charity, surely he shall worthily in the last judgment hear the voice of the
angry Judge: Go thou cursed into everlasting fire. For I was sick and thou
did not visit me, but being altogether unthankful for the exceeding benefits
which I bestowed on thee and all the world, thou did not even in the most
sclender duties relieve or help thy brethren, no not me Christ in my brethren.

Forasmuch therefore most famous Prince, as I see your Grace to be sore sick,
and that Christ also is sick in you, I have thought it my duty to visit your
Grace by writing somewhat unto you. For I can not dissemble, that I do not
hear the voice of Christ our of your Graces body and flesh crying to me, and
saying: Behold I am sick here. For these evils, namely sickness and such like,
not we Christians only, but Christ himself also our Lord and Savior, in whom
we live, does suffer, as he manifestly witnesses in the Gospel: Whatsoever
ye do to the least of mine, ye do it unto me. Now although we owe this
duty to all that are sick in general, that we do visit and comfort them,
yet do we owe it chiesly to them that be of the household of says. For Paul
does plainly distinguish between aliens, and them that profess the same
faith with us, or with whom we have some alliance. Galat. 6.

Howbeit I have other reasons also of my duty. For I know that I as one of
your Graces subjects, together with the rest of your subjects ought to be
moved with your Graces sickness, and to be as it were sick together with you,
as the member with the head, in whom all our good estate, safety, and
prosperity consists. For we acknowledge your Grace to be as a certain Naama^
by whom God at this day gives health to Germany, as in time past by him he
gave health to Syria. Wherefore even the whole Roman Empire has your Graece
in admiration, does reverence and honor you as a father of the country, as a
singular ornament and safeguard of the whole Empire, but especially of the
Germane nation.

Neither do we owe this only to your Grace, to comfort you as much as we are
able, and as it were to bear the present case with you, but much rather to
pray unto God for your health and recovery: which I hope is done with all
diligence and endeavor of your Graces subjects. As for my self, whom many
notable benefits and pleasures have made a dettour to your Grace more then the
rest, I acknowledge that I ought by some singular duty to declare my
thankfulness. But because in this sclendernes of ability and power, I am able
to perform no notable thing, D. George Spalatine, who is your Graces Chaplen,
aduertized me that I should do well to make some spiritual consolation and
send it to your Grace, for that that would be a thing very acceptable unto you.
Wherefore I thought it not good to do contrary to the aduertizement of my
friend, and therefore have I gathered together these fourteen chapters, being
comprised as it were in a table, and have entitled them That is, fourteen, or
that which consists of that number.
Tessaradecas, that they might be in steed of fourteen Saints which our
superstition made and called the driuers away of all evils. Howbeit this is
not a silver but a spiritual table, wherewith, not the walls of temples are to
be adorned, but the godly mind is to be comforted and confirmed. And I hope
that it will be very profitable to your Grace in this present state. Now it is
divided into two parts, whereof the former contains seven considerations of
evils, whereby the present griefs and troubles are mitigated and assuaged.
The latter contains likewise seven considerations of good things tending to
the same end. Wherefore I desire your Grace to take this my simple labor in
good part, which I pray God ye may so enjoy, that by diligent reading and
consideration of this treatise ye may have some ease. I humbly commend me to
your Grace.

Your humble and obedient subject MARTIN LVTHER.

THE PREFACE.
THe Apostle Paul in the 15. chapter of his Epistle to the Romans speaking of
christian comfort, says: Brethren, Whatsoever things have been written before
time, were written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope. Whereby he plainly teaches that our comforts
must be taken out of the holy Scriptures. Now the holy Scriptures use two
sorts of comfort, inasmuch as they commend unto us the consideration of two
sorts of things, namely of evil things and of good things, according as the
wise man says: In the day of affliction remember prosperity: and in the day
of prosperity be mindful of affliction. For the holy Ghost knows that every
thing is of such sort and so great to man, of what sort and how great his
opinion is thereof. For that which is counted vile and nothing esteemed, does
little move, either with love if it come, or with grief if it depart.
Wherefore he labors most earnestly to call man from the opinion and
affection of things, which when he has brought to pass, all things are
then indifferent. Now forasmuch as this calling is done especially by the
word, whereby the opinion is transferred from the thing, which is
presently felt to the thing which either is absent or not presently felt, it
is by good reason that we shall have no comfort but by the Scripture, which in
the day of affliction calls us to the consideration of prosperity, which is
either present or to come: also in the day of prosperity calls us to
consider affliction. But that these considerations may be more easy unto us,
we will divide either of them into seven parts. To the former shall be
referred the evils which are to be considered of a man: First within him
self: Secondly before him: Thirdly behind him: Fourthly beneath him: Fifthly on
the left hand: Sixthly on the right hand: Seventhly above him.

THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE FIRST CONsideration, which is of the inward evil.
THis is certain and most true, whether man believe it or not, that there can
be none so great trouble and veration in man, which is the worst of the evils
which are in him, so many more and greater evils are there in him then which he
feels. For if he felt his evil, he should feel even hell: for he has hell
in him self. Do thou demand, how? Man has hell in him self, which is the
greatest evil in him.
The Prophet says: All men are liars. And again: Every man living is
altogether vanity. Now to be a liar and vain is to be void of verity, and
not to be in deed: but to be without verity, and not to be in deed, is to be
without God, and to be nothing: and this is to be in hell, and to be condemned.
Therefore God mercifully chastening us, opens unto us and lays upon us the
smaller and lighter evils, knowing, that if he should bring man to ye knowledge
of his evil, he should forthwith perish in a moment: howbeit he has given it
to some to have a feeling and taste of it, of whom it is said: He brings
down to the grave, and fetches up again. Wherefore they say rightly who call
corporal sufferings certain aduertizements of the inward evil. And the
Apostle Heb. 12 calls them ye fatherly chastenings of God, saying: Why God
scourges every son whom he receives.
He scourges every son that he receives. Which he therefore does, that by
these scourges and small evils he may expel those great evils, least we
should at any time feel them, as it is said Proverb. 22: Foolishnes is bound
in the heart of the child, and the rod of correction shall drive it away. Are
not godly parents also more grieved by their children if they be thieves or
evil, then if they be wounded? yea they do them selves beat and wound them
that they may not be evil.

What therefore is the cause that this very evil is not felt? Godsuffereth not
man to feel his greatest evil, and why.
truly as I have said, God disposing it it comes so to pass, that man may
not be utterly discouraged, if he should see his most inward evils. For God
hides them, and will have them seen by only faith, while he shows them by
the evil that is felt. Therefore in the day of affliction or when thou
suffer evil things, remember good things: consider how great a good
thing it is not to know all the evil, be mindful of this good thing, and
the evil which thou feel shall less disquiet or trouble thee. So again in
the day when thou enioyest good things, remember evil things, that is, while
thou art not grieved with those that be very evils in deed, in this want of
grief be thankful, and remember the very evils, then will it come to pass
that thou shall less feel the evil that is felt.

It is manifest therefore that the want of grief is always greater in man in
this life, then grief, not for that the whole evil is not present, but
because there is no opinion or affection thereof by the goodness of God, who
hides it. Hereupon we see them to whom it is given to behold their very evil,
how rigorous and cruel they are against them selves, how they count it
nothing whatsoever they can suffer in their whole life, so as they feel not
their hell. So would every one do, if he either felt or firmly believed his
inward eeuill: he would of his own accord call for outward evils, he would
sport in them, and would never be more sad or sorrowful, the^ when he had no
evils, as we know some of the Saints to have done.

Wherefore in the first comfortable consideration, The comfort of the first
consideration.
a man may say to him self: thou do not yet, O man, feel thine evil,
rejoice and give thanks, that thou art not compeld to feel it: and so a small
evil being compared with one that is very great, shall be made light and easy.
This is that which some say: I have deserved far worse things, yea even hell
it self: an easy thing surely to be spoken, but intolerable to be felt. And
this evil albeit it be hid, yet does it show forth his fruits sufficient
grievous: Fruits of the greatest evil which is in man.
these are fear and the uncertainty of a trembling conscience, whereby faith
is impugned, whiles man knows not or douteth whether he has God favorable
unto him, which fruit is so much more bitter as faith is weaker. And this only
infirmity being well weyed, forasmuch as it is spiritual, is far more
grievous then that of the body, which it does make even most light, being
diligently compared unto it.

Beside these, to the inward evils pertains all that tragedy, which the
Preacher describes, whereas he so often makes mention of vanity and
affliction of the spirit. For how many counsels do we take in vain? how many
of our desires are frustrate? how many things do we see, how many things do
we hear which we would not? Even those things which tend to our desire, fall
out contrary to our desire, so that there is nothing entire and perfect.
Moreover all these things are so much greater as one is placed in higher
place or state, who must needs be roast with far more and greater sourges,
waves, and tempests, then the rest that are troubled with the same thing, so
that the 103. Psalm says well: small and great beasts, and things creeping
innumerable, are in the sea of this world, that is, infinite sorts of
tentations, wherefore Job chap. 7. calls the life of man a tentation. Now
these are not therefore no evils because they are little felt, but because
through use and daily custom they are nothing accounted of, and affliction and
opinion in these is worn out, by the work of God: wherefore those that be
rare do rather move, which as yet we have by no use learned to contemn. So
that it is true, that we do feel scarce the thousandth part of our evils: it
is also true that out evils are measured, felt, or not felt, not by the
verity of the thing, but by our opinion and affection.

The second chapter of the second consideration, which is of the evil to come
or before a man.
IT will not a little lighten every present evil, if thou turn thy mind to
them that are to come, which are so many, such, and so great, that hereunto
alone is referred that great and one of the principal affections which is
called fear, Fear what it is.
which some define to be an affection of the evil to come, according as the
Apostle says Romans 11: Be not hie minded but fear. The evil to come.
This evil is so much greater, as it is more uncertain, of what sort and how
great it will be when it come, so that it is a common saying: There is no age to
whom ye scabb may not come, which notwithstanding is an evil that is wont to
happen to children and infants. So that no man is free and exempt from any
evils of any man, but whatsoever one man suffers, the same also may an other
suffer.

This is verified by the histories and tragedies of all ages, by all the
complaints of the whole world: by more then three hundred sorts of diseases,
whereby man's body may be troubled, as some have well noted. If there be so many
diseases, how many other il chances think thou will there be of other
things, of friends, finally of the mind it self, which is the principal
subject of all evils, and the only receptacle of sorrow and evils?

Moreover the force and feeling of evils is so much more increased, by how
much the state is greater and more worthy, when as poverty, ignominy, and all
il chances, seeing that they may even suddenly come, must needs, forasmuch as
all things hang as it were by a sclender thread, be feared every hour, no
otherwise then that sword, which Dionyse the tyran hoonge over the head of his
guest. It ought greatly to comfort us, and move us to love and praise God, that
we being in danger of so many evils, few or none come unto us.
Now whatsoever of these do not come, it is to be counted for aduasitage, and
for no small comfort against that evil that chances, so that thou art here
compelled to say with Jeremy: it is through the mercies of ye Lord that we
are not destroyed. For whatsoever of them does not chance, it chances not,
the right hand of ye Highest letting or prohibiting it, which mightily
preserves us on every side as it is declared in Job, so that Satan and evils
do even grudge and bear it impatiently that they are let and prohibited.
Wherefore we see, how sweetly the Lord is to be loved, as often as any thing
chances unto us, forasmuch as by this one evil our most loving father
admonishes us to consider how many evils are ready to assail us, if he did
not stay and let them: as if he said: Satan and a huge heap of evils desire
to sifte thee: but I have set bounds to the sea, and have said unto it,
hitherto shall thy swelling waves come, Death the most terrible and most
certain evil to come, yet the time of the coming thereof most uncertain.
and here shall they stay, as he says in Job chap. 28. But none of them shall
come, perhaps the will of God being so: howbeit that which of all terrible
things is said to be the greatest, namely death, shall most certainly come,
and nothing is more uncertain then the hour thereof. Which evil is so great,
that we see that many men had rather live even with all the foresaid evils,
then they being ended to dye once. And to this one the Scripture also, whereas
it contemns the rest, refers fear, saying: Remember the end and thou
shall never do amiss.

Consider how many meditations, how many books, how many means and remedies
are ordained hereunto, so that with the remembrance of this only evil it is
usual to fray men from sins, and make the world contemptible, to lighten
sufferings and evils, and to comfort the afflicted by comparing their evils
with so horrible and great an evil, which shall at one time or other of
necessity come. There is no man, who would not wish to suffer all evils, if
thereby he might avoid the evil of death. This the Saints also have feared:
this Christ suffered with fear and sweat like dropps of blood. So that the
divine mercy has been careful to strengthen and comfort the weak and faint
hearted in nothing more then in this evil as we shall see hereafter.

As for Christians they have a special and proper cause to fear the evil to
come, What evil to come Christians ought to fear.
which exceeds all the other evils: this is that which ye Apostle sets
forth I. Cor. 10. saying: Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall. So slipperie is the way, so mighty is the enemy, being armed with our own
proper strength (that is, with the aids of the flesh and of all evil
affections) accompanied with infinite hands and companies of the world, with
delights and pleasures on the right hand, with troubles and the evil wills of
men on ye left, beside that art, a thousand ways to hurt, seduce, and destroy,
whereof he is most kilfull. We live so that we are not sure of our good purpose
so much as a moment. Cyprian speaking of many such things in his epistle of
mortality, teaches that death is to be wished as a speedy helper to avoid
these evils.

And for the most part where men have a good heart, True Christians con^ene
death, and all evils, that they may be delivered from the evil of sin.
and duly reuolue in their mind these infinite perils, we see them, despising
life and death, that is all the aforesaid evils, wish to be losed, that they
may be also losed from this evil of sins wherein they are, as we have said
in the first chapter, and into which they may fall, whereof we speak now. And
surely these are two most weighty reasons, to move us not only to wish for
death, but also to contemn all evils, not to bear one evil only lightly, if
the Lord shall give to any to be moved with them, for it is the gift of God to
be moved with them. For what true Christian will not wish even to dye, and not
only to be sick, who sees and feels, that he while he lives in health, is
not only in sins, and continually may and daily does fall into more, and so
without intermission does contrary to the most loving will of his most loving
Father? With this vehemency of indignation Paul being moved (as it is
declared Romans 7.) when he had complained that he did not the good which he
would, but the evil which he would not, cried out: O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God says he by
Jesus Christ, etc. He little loves God his Father, who does not choose rather
the evil of death, then this evil of sinning, seeing that he has ordained
death hereunto that this evil may at the last have an end, and death may be
the minister of life and righteousness, whereof shall be spoken hereafter.

The third chapter of the third consideration, which is of the evil past or
behind us.
HErein more then in ye rest notably shines the sweet mercy of God the
father, which is able to comfort us in all our distress. We shall then
chiefly perceive the goodness of God toward us, and the care which he has over
us, when we consider our life past.
For every man never feels the hand of God more present upon him, then when
he calls to mind the years of his life past. Saint Augustine says: If a
man should choose either to dye, or to lead again his life past, he would
choose rather to die, considering so great perils and evils, which he has
scarce and hardely avoided. Which saying is most true, if it be well and duly
weyed. For here a man may see, how often he has without his own study,
without his own care, yea without and contrary to his desire, done and
suffered many things, whereof he did not so much as think before they were
done, or in doing, that the work being ended, he is then first compelled to
say: How has it come to pass that I have done these things, which I did not
think on, or thought of other things? so that the proverb is true: Man
purposes, but God disposes, that is, alters, and brings to pass an other
thing then man purposes, that even in this one thing we can not deny, that
our life and actions are governed and directed, not by our own wisdom, but by
the marvelous power, counsel, and goodness of God. Hereby we perceive how often
God has been with us, when we neither saw nor felt it, and how truly Peter
said: Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you.

Wherefore if there were no books nor sermons, yet our life it self led
through so many evils and perils, if it be well considered, does abunda^tly
commend the goodness of God to be present with us, and most sweet unto us, who
has far otherwise then we either thought or felt, borne us as it were in his
bosom, and as Moses says Deuteronomy. 32: The Lord has kept him as the apple of his
eye, he has led him about, and carried him on his shoulders. And hereunon came
those sayings in the Psalter: I remember the time past, I meditate in all thy
works, yea I do meditate in the works of thy hands: I will remember the
wonders of old: And again: I remembered thy judgments of old, We ought
greatly to be comforted in the present evil when we consider from how many
evils God has preserved us in our life past
and have been comforted. All these and such like tend to this end, that we
should know, that if we see that God was then present with us, when we did not
think thereof, neither he did seem to be present, we should not doubt that
he is now also present, when he seems unto us to be absent. For he that
protected and preserved us in many necessities without our own care or
thinkinge thereof, he I say will not forsake us in a small matter although he
seem to forsake us, according as he says in Esai: A little while have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercifulnes shall I take thee unto me. Hereunto
thou may add: Who has had care of us so many nights when we flept? who was
careful for us as often as we labored, played, and did infinite other things,
wherein we were nothing careful for our selves?

So we see how al our care, whether we will or no, Why God leaves us sometime
to our own care, he him self seeming not to care for us.
must be referred to God alone, we being very seldom left to our own counsel
or care, which notwithstanding ye Lord sometime does, that he may teach us to
acknowledge his goodness, that we may perceive how much difference there is
between his care and ours. Wherefore he sometime suffers some light sickness
or other evil to come unto us, making semblance yt he has no care of us (for
in deed there is no time when he cares not for us) notwithstanding he does in
the mean season prohibit and let, that so many evils as are ready to assail
us, do not together on every side come violently upon us, that he may try us as
most dear children whether we will commit our selves to his care being known
of us through all ye rest of our life, and mark how unprofitable and impotent
our own care is. For what do we profit our selves, or what ca^ we profit our
selves in all our life, who in a little while can not cure and remedy one only
pain of the leg?

Why then are we so careful in the point of one peril or evil, and do not
leave the care to him, when as our life it self being witness, we are kept and
preserved in so many evils without our own labor or travel? To know and
duly to consider these things, is to know ye works of God, to meditate in his
works, and by ye remembrance of them to be comforted in adversity and
troubles: But they that are ignorant hereof shall fall into that which is
mentioned Psalm. 29. Because they have not understood the works of the Lord,
nor the operation of his hands, thou shall break them down, and not build
them up. For they are unthankful for all the care which God has taken for them
in all their life, who do not commit the care of them selves to him for a little
while.

The fourth chapter of the fourth consideration, which is of the evil beneath
us.
AS yet we have seen no other in all the evils which we suffer, but that ye
goodness of God is so great, and so present with us, that among innumerable
evils, wherewith we are compassed in this life, and wherein we are even
imprisoned, scarce a very few, and those not at all times are suffered to
assail us, so that every present evil wherewith we are troubled, is but an
aduertizement of certain great advantage, which we have through the goodness
of God, whiles that he suffers us not to be oppressed with ye multitude of
evils wherewith we are compassed. For it is a miracle, if one be assailed with
infinite blows, and be touched but with one alone, yea it is a grace that he is
not stricken with all, a miracle that he is not stricken with many.

Now the first of the evils that are beneath us, is death, the second, hell.
The evils beneath us what they are, and how we may take comfort by the
consideration of the first of them.
If we consider the shameful and vile death of others, wherewith sinners are
punished, we shall easily perceive with how great advantage we suffer less
then we have deserved. For how many are hanged, drowned, or stricken with the
sword, which perhaps have done far lesser sins then we, so that their
death and misery is set before us of Christ as a glass, wherein we may see
what we have deserved: as Luke 13. when certain showed him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilace had mingled with their sacrifices, he answered: suppose ye
that these Galileans were greater sinners then the other Galileans, because
they have suffered such things? I tell you, nay: but except ye amend your
lives, ye shall all likewise perish. Or think you that those eighteen, upon
whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, were sinners above all men that
dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you, nay: but except ye amend your lives, ye shall all
likewise perish. For we may not think that lesser evils are due unto us, who
have committed greater or like sins. Neither will the justice and truth of
God be unjust and false for us, who has determined to give to every man
according to his deeds.

Moreover, How we may take comfort by consideration of the second evil beneath
us.
in hell, and eternal damnation how many thousand are there, who have not
committed the thousandth part of our sins? how many virgins are there,
children, and they whom we call innocents? how many religious men, Priests,
etc. who in their whole life seemed to serve God, and perhapps through some one
fall are punished for ever? Here must be no dissembling: the justice of God is
ye same in every sin, he hates and condemns sin alike in whomsoever it
be found. Do we not here see the inestimable mercy of God, which has not
condemned them who have so often deserved it? How much, I pray you, is it
which we can suffer even in all our life, in respect of the eternal
punishment, which they suffer having deserved it perhaps by one offense, we in
the mean time being free, and saved from many sins which God passes over
and remitteth? Whereas we do not regard these benefits of God, or make light
account of them, it is through unthankfulness and a certain senseles hardness of
incredulity.

Hereunto moreover are to be referred so many Infidels, Gentiles, Jews, unto
whom if those things had been given which are given to us, they had been, not in
hell, but in heaven, and had far less sinned. Examples hereof Christ sets
before our eyes Matthew. II. saying: Woe be to thee Corazin: Woe be to thee
Bethsaida: for if the great works which were done in you, had been done in
Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long agone in sackcloth and ashes: but I say
to you, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon at the day of judgment, then for
you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted up unto heaven, shall be brought down
to hell: for if the great works which have been done in thee, had been done
among them of Sodom, they had remained to this day: but I say unto you, that it
shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for
thee. We see therefore what great praise and love we owe to our most gracious
God, in every evil of this life, for that we cast scarce of one drop of them
which we have deserved, which Job compares to the sea, and to the sand of the
sea.

The fifth chapter of the fifth consideration, which is of the evil on the left
hand.
HEre we must set before our eyes that great company of adversaries and evil
men, The first comfort which the consideration of the evil on the left hand
ministers unto us.
and in them we must first consider, that they have not done that evil to our
body substance, fame, souls, which they would have done, but that God did stay
and let them: and the higher calling and state that one is placed in, to so
many more deceits, subtle devises, sclaunders and troubles of the adversaries
is he subject, in all which he may perceive and feel the present hand of God.
What marvel is it then if we be sometime touched with some one?

Secondly their own evils are to be considered of us also, The second comfort
which we may take by considering the evil on the left hand.
not that we should rejoice at them, but that we should have compassion on
them. Now they also are subject to all the same evils, whereunto we are
subject, as it may be easily perceived by the former considerations. Howbeit
herein they are more miserable then we, that they are out of our society, as
well corporal as spiritual. For this evil which we suffer is nothing in
comparison of that, that they live in sins, in infidelity, under the wrath
of God, under the dominion of the devil, most miserable slaves of ungodliness
and sin, so that if the whole world should curse them, it could wish them
no worse. All which if we do thoroughly perceive, we shall also perceive, with
how great favor and blessing of God we, living in faith, in the kingdom of
Christ, in the service of God, do suffer some little evil of the body, which in
so great plenty of most excellent things, should not be so much as felt: yea
their misery ought to be so grievous to him that has a Christian and godly
heart, that he should think his own griefs delights. For so Paul wills
Philip. 2: Look not every man on his own things, but every man on the things
of other men. Let the same mind be in you, that was even in Christ Jesus, who
being in ye form of God, took on him the form of a servant, etc. That is,
with most loving affection he took on him our form, behauing him self no
otherwise in our evils, then if they had been his own, so, as it were
forgetting his own good things, and making him self of no reputation, that
he might be found altogether made like unto men, refusing to be subject to no
humane thing, being occupied only in our evils.

The Saints being animated by this affection, and by this example stirred up,
are wont to pray even for the evils of their enemies, and to do all things
according to the example of Christ, and forgetting their own injuries or
righteousness, to be careful how they may deliver them from their evils,
wherewith they are without comparison more troubled then with their own, as Peter
writes of Lot 2. Pet. 2, who dwelled among them, which vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.

Thou see therefore how deep a pit of evils here appears, and that we have
occasion to take pity and compassion, and to forget our own small evil, if the
love of God be in us: thou see also how little God permits us to suffer in
respect of those things which they suffer. Why the evils of our adversaries
and evil men do little move us.
But whereas these things do little move us, the cause is, for that the eye of
the heart is not sufficient clear, whereby we should see how great ye ignominy
and misery of man is lying under sin, that is, being separate from God and
in subjection under the devil. For who is so hard hearted, which is not
greatly moved with pity and compassion at the miserable sight of them that lie
in the porches of Churches, and in the streets, their faces being gnawne,
their noses and eyes eaten with corruption, and their other members wasted with
filth and rottennes, so that the mind detesteth to think thereof, much less
can ye eye abide to behold it. But what does God intend and purpose by these
miserable creatures, who have like flesh as we have, and are our brethren like
unto us, but that he may open the eyes of our mind, whereby we may see in how
more oughly a sort the filth and corruption of the soul of a sinner appears,
albeit he wear purple and gold, roses and lillies, as though he were a child
of Paradise. But how many sinners are there in the world, to one of them whose
bodies are full of sores?

Now these evils which are infinite as well in greatness as in multitude, being
contemned or not regarded in our neighbors, this contempt is the cause that
our own evil being even one of the least sort, seems unto us to be very
great, and that we think that no other are troubled with the like. Evil men
even in respect of out ward cuills are in worse case then the godly.
But it must needs be that even in outward evils also they are in worse case
then we. What, I pray you, can be delightful or thoroughly pleasant unto them,
albeit they have and enjoy all things that they desire, when as their
conscience can not be quiet? Is there a more grievous evil then the trouble of
a stinging conscience? For Esai says chap. 57: The wicked are like the raginge
sea that can not rest, whose water someth with the mire and gravel: even so
the wicked have no peace says God. Wherefore thou may see that verified in
them which is written Deuteronomy. 28: The Lord shall give thee an unquiet heart, and
dasing eyes, and sorrow of mind, and thy life shall hang in dout before thee:
thou shall fear both day and night, and shall have none assurance of thy life.
In ye morning thou shall say, Would God it were night: and at night thou shall
say, Would God it were morning, for fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall be
terrified, and because of those things which thou shall see with thine eyes.

Briefly, if one did with due affection see and consider all the evils of
evil men, cither of enemies or friends, he would not only forgette his own
evils, and seem unto him self to suffer nothing, but also with Moses and
the Apostle Paul earnestly wish that he might dye for them, and be rased out
of the book of life, and separate from Christ, as it is written Romans 9, that
they might be delivered. Christ burning with this zeal and inflamed affection
died for us, and descended into hell, leaving us an example, that we also
should be so careful for the evils of others, forgetting quite our own, yea
desirous of our own.

^^terward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are
thereby exercised. Thus much says Paul.

Who would not be terrified with these words of Paul, where he expressly
affirms, that they are not the sons of God, which are without the
correction of God? And who can be more strongly confirmed, and more effectually
comforted, then he that hears that they are loved of the Lord which are
chastened of him, that they are sons, that they have communion with all the
Saints, and that not they alone do suffer? This vehement exhortation is able
to make chastening and correction even amiable and to be loved. There ought not
therefore to be impatiencie in suffering, because all seem not to suffer alike.
Neither is here any place for excuse, for that some do suffer lighter evils,
some those that be more grievous, for every one is tried according to measure,
not above his strength, as it is said Psalm. 80: Thou shall feed them with the
bread of tears, and give them tears to drink with measure. The same Paul
also says: God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you be able, but will even give the issue with the tentation, that ye may
be able to bear it. Where therefore there is a greater evil, there are more
means to escape out of tentation, and more help, so that the inequality of
suffering is rather in appearance then in very deed.

Does not the example of John Baptist, A notable example of the evil on the
right hand, most diligently to be considered.
whose feast we celebrate at this day that he was beheaded of Herod, greatly
amaze us all, that so great a man, then whom a greater has not risen among
them that are begotten of women, the special friend of the bridegroom, ye
forerunner of Christ, greater then all the Prophets, that such a one I say, was
not put to death at the least by public judgment, was not at the least
accused of some feigned crime, as Christ was, nor for the peoples sake, but at
the request of the daughter of an harlot which had daunced before Herod, was
beheaded in the prison? The ignominious death of this one Sainet; and his life
so vilely and after so unworthy a sort yielded up into the hands of a most
malicious and cruel adulteress, ought to lighten and assuage all our evil.
Where was God here, who might see such things? where was Christ, who hearing
this, did quite hold his peace? He dies as though he were unknown unto God,
men, and all creatures. What do we suffer, wherein, I will not say we may
boast, but not at al be troubled, if it be compared to the death of this man?
Or where shall we appear, if we will suffer nothing, when as so great men do
undeservedly suffer so shameful and ignominious death, and their bodies are
mocked and scorned of their enemies after their death? Behold, says the Lord
in Jeremy, they that men thought were vmneete to drink of the cup have drunk
with the first, and think thou then to be free? No no, thou shall neither be
quit nor free, but thou must drink also.

Rightly therefore did that Eremite, A singular example of an Eremite
who when he had been sick every year, being at the last one whole year in
health, was very sorrowful, and wept bitterly, saying that God had forgotten
him, and denied unto him his grace. So necessary and wholesome is the chastising
of the Lord to all Christians. The sufferings of the Saints very comfortable
being well considered.


Wherefore we shall see that it is little or nothing which we suffer, if we
consider how the Saints were thrust under the nails with sharp pricks, how
they were imprisoned, slain with the sword, burned, torn in pieces with wild
beasts, and suffered infinite torments: yea if we do but wey ye tentations of
them which are present with us in this life, and suffer most grievous
persecutions of the devil. For there are which suffer more sharply and
grievously then we do, as well in spirit as in body.

Some say here: This I lament, that my suffering is not comparable to the
sufferings of the Saints, because I am a sinner, and not worthy to be compared
with them. They suffered for their innocence, I suffer for my sins, wherefore
it is no marvel if they suffered all things cheerfully. Our sins ought not
to hinder us from taking comfort by considering the sufferings of the Saints.
This is a very unwise saying. For if thou suffer for thy sins, thou must
rejoice, that thy sins are scoured: were not ye Saints also sinners? But
fear thou that thou art like Herod and the thief on the left hand? Thou
art not, if thou be patient: for what made difference between the thief on
the left hand and him on the right, but patience in faith? If thou be a
sinner, well, the thief was a sinner also, but by patience he attained to the
glory of righteousness and sanctity: which that thou may do, do likewise as
he did. For thou can not suffer but thou shall suffer either for sins, or
for righteousness: either suffering does sanctify and make blessed, if thou
love it, and suffer in faith: wherefore there is no excuse remaining. Finally
as soon as thou have faithfully confessed that thou do suffer justly for
thy sins, thou art righteous and holy, as the thief on the right hand. For
the confession of sin, inasmuch as it is of faith, does justify and make
holy, and so in a moment after such confession thou do not suffer for
sins, but for innocence: for he that is righteous does not suffer but
innocently: but thou art become righteous after faithful confession of thy
worthy suffering, and of thy sins. Wherefore thy suffering may truly and
worthily be compared to the sufferinges of the Saints, even as thy confession
of thy sins may truly and worthily be compared to the confession of them:
for there is one faith of all, one confession of sins, one suffering of
evils, and one true communion of Saints in all and through all.

The seventh chapter of the seventh consideration, which is of the evil above
us.
LAstly we must lift up our heart on hie, and ascend up the mountain of myrre
with the spouse. Here is Jesus Christ crucified, The evil above us, and the
comfort which the consideration thereof ministers.
the head of all the Saints, the chief of all that suffer. The memory of him
is commended to the spouse, where it is said: Set me as a seal upon thine
heart, and as a signet upon thine arm. The blood of this lamb being stricken
on the posts, suffers not the angel the destroyer to approach. Hereof is the
spouse commended, that her hear is like purple (that is, her meditation is red
by the memory of Christ's passion.) This is the tree which Moses was
commanded to cast into the waters of Marah, that is, bitter passions, and they
were made sweet. There is nothing that this passion does not make sweet, even
death, as the spouse says: His lips are like lillies, Cantic. 5.14
that drop pure myrrh. Now concerning this likeness of lillies and lips,
forasmuch as these are red, and those are white, surely she speaks
mystically, that the words of Christ are most gentle and pure, wherein is no
cruel bitterness or spite, but are sweet and mylde, which notwithstanding
drop and persuade pure and principal myrre (that is most bitter death.)
These most pure and sweet lips are able to make most bitter death (which as
pure myrre takes away at once all the stincke of sin) sweet, mild, gentle,
and acceptable. How shall this come to pass? Even while thou hear that Jesus
Christ the Son of God, has by his most holy suffering consecrated and made
holy all passions, even death it self, has blessed malediction, has glorified
ignominy, has enriched poverty. So that death is compelled to be ye gate of
life, malediction the beginning of blessedness, ignominy the way to glory. Now
how can thou be so hard hearted and unthankful, that thou would not even
wish for and love all the passions which by ye most pure and holy flesh and
blood of Christ are sanctified, made harmeles, wholesome, blessed and happy unto
thee?

For if by the touching of his most pure flesh he has sanctified all waters to
baptism, how much more by the touching of ye same his most pure flesh and
blood, has he sanctified all death, all sufferings, all injuries, all
sclaunders, all ignominy to ye baptism of the spirit or blood? as he says of
the same baptism of suffering Luke 12: I must be baptized with a baptism, and
how am I grieved till it be ended? Thou see how he is disquieted, how he is
grieved, how he thirsts to sanctify and make amiable, passions and death.
For he saw that we were terrified with passions, he saw that we did greatly fear
and dread death. Therefore as a most loving shepeheard, and faithful physician,
minding to moderate this evil, he makes have and with grief desires to die,
and by suffering to comme^d the same unto us. The death of a Christian.
So that the death of a Christian is to be counted like the brazen serpent that
Moses set up, which in every respect resembled ye form of a serpent, but was
wholly without life, without motion, without venim, without stinging: so the
righteous seem in ye eyes of the unwise to die, but they are in peace. We are
like to them that die, neither does our death appear any otherwise then the
death of others, notwithstanding it is an other thing, for death is dead unto
us. So also all our other sufferinges are like the sufferings of others,
howbeit in appearance only, but in very deed our sufferings are the
beginnings of rest, as death is the beginning of life. And this is that which
Christ says John 8: If a man keep my word he shall never see death. How
comes it to pass that he shall never see it? because he dying, begins to
live, so by reason of the life which he sees, he can not see death. For here
the night shines as the day, for that the light of the life beginning is more
clear, then of the death ending. These things are certain to all them that
believe in Christ, but to them that do not believe they are otherwise.

Wherefore if thou would kiss, love and embrace the coat of Christ, the
vessels, waterpots, and whatsoever things Christ has touched, and which he
has used, for most sweet relics, as consecrated by his touching and using
them: why do thou not much more love, embrace and kiss pains, troubles of
the world, ignominy and death, not only consecrated by his touching, but also
embrued and blessed with his most precious blood, moreover embraced with hearty
will and exceeding love, which vehemently moved him thereunto? especially seeing
yt in these thou have far greater benefits, rewards and good things, then in
those relics. For by these thou obtaynest victory of death and hell, and of
all thy sins, and not by them, O, if a man might have beheld the heart of
Christ, when hanging on ye cross he was distressed, that he might make death
dead and conte^ptible, how earnestly and sweetly he embraced death and pains
for the fearful and them that dread death and pains, how willingly he droonke
of this cup to the sick, that we also might not be afraid to drink thereof,
while we see that no evil, but only good came unto him by risinge again:
without doubt it would be pure myrre, distilling from his lips, most
pleasant and sweet, as the savor and goodlines of the lillies. Hereof
speaks Peter in his first Epistle and 4. chapter: Forasmuch as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind.
And Paul says Hebr. 12: Consider him that endured such speaking against of
sinners, least ye should be wearied and faint in your minds.

Wherefore if in the former considerations, which are of things set as yet
beneath us or by us, we have learned to suffer evil patiently: surely by this
last, which is of that yt is now above and not by us, we lifting up our hearts
unto Christ, and being made victors over all evils, What affection the
consideration of the evil above us ought to breed in us.
are taught not only to suffer them, but to love, wish, seek the^. And the
farther a man is of from this affection, of so much less force is the cross
of Christ in him, as it is in them that use the sign of the cross, and
Christ's passion against evils and death, that they may not suffer nor die,
endeavoring to attain unto that which is quite contrary to the cross and death
of Christ. Wherefore in this seventh consideration it must needs be swallowed
up and consumed, whatsoever evil we suffer, so that now it do not only not
grieve, but also delight, howbeit if this consideration perse the heart, and be
fixed in the inward affection of the mind.

Thus much concerning the former table: the latter follows.

WE will divide the second table into seven considerations also, contrary to
the former: whereof the first shall be of the inward good: The second of that
which is to come: The third of that which is paste: The fourth of that which
is beneath us: The sift of that which is on the left hand: The sixth of that
which is on the right hand: The seventh of that which is above us.

THE FIRST CHAPTER of the first consideration, which is of the inward good.
WHo is able to number even those good things only which every one possesses
in his one person? The gifts of the body
First how many are the gifts of the body? as beauty, strength, health,
quicknes of sense, whereunto in the male kind may be added the most noble
sex, whereby he is fit to do many things both private and public, and to
atchieue many notable exploytes, How we may take comfort by consideration of
the gifts of the body.
whereunto a woman is unapt. Now what a great matter is it, if by the blessing
of God thou enioyest these excellent gifts ten, twenty, thirty years with
pleasure, and at the last art troubled in some one of them for the space of ten
days? It is a common saying among notorious offenders: It is but one ill
hours matter, and again, A good hour is worth an ill hour. What shall be
said of us, who enjoy many good hours, and will not suffer evil so much as one
hour? We see therefore in how great plenty we enjoy the benefits of God, and
with how few evils we are scarce touched, at the least the most of us. Our
most gracious God not content with these good things, gives moreover riches,
abundance of all things, if not to all, surely to many, and to them especially
that are weak to bear evils. For as I have said before, upon whom he
bestows less riches, or gifts of the body, upon them he bestows more
gifts of the mind, that all things may be equal, and he a just judge of all.
For abundance of riches does not so much comfort as a joyful mind. Moreover he
gives unto some goodly children, great pleasure, power, rule, honor, fame,
glory, favor, etc. which if he permit to enjoy a long time, yea but a small
time, they will easily admonish what is to be done in a little evil.

But the gifts of the mind are more excellent then all these, as wit,
knowledge, How we may be comforted by consideration of the gifts of the mind.
judgment, eloquence, wisdom, and as in the other, so in bestowing of these
he uses a mean and equality, so that upon whom he has bestowed more of
these good things, he has not therefore preferred them before others, whom in
steed of these he has given more peace or pleasure of the mind. Now in all
these we must with thankfulness acknowledge the large liberality and
bountifulnes of God, and comfort our infirmity, that in the multitude and
plenty of good things we do not meruel, if some sharpenes be mingled therewith,
seeing that to delicat persons neither rostedmeate is liked without sauce,
neither almost any other meat, which either has not some sharp taste of it
self, or is tempered with some thing that has a sharp taste: so intolerable
a thing is continual and only sweetenes, that one said rightly: All
pleasure by continuance makes it self lothesome. And an other said: Pleasure
it self at the last is a labor, even because this life is more weak, then
that it is able without the temperature of evils, to enjoy only good things,
by reason of the overmuch abundance of good things, whereupon has risen this
proverb, The bones must be strong which shall bear good days, which
proverb I oftentimes considering do greatly marvel what a marvelous and true
meaning it has, that men's minds are contrary to them selves, who seek no other
but good days, which notwithstanding when they have obtained, they can worse
away with them then with evil.

Now what other thing are we taught hereby, but that even in the very enemies
of the cross, the cross is marvelous, so that by the means thereof all ought
to be tempered and sanctified least they perish, as flesh must be seasoned with
salt, lest it stincke and corrupt.

Why then do we not most willingly receive this te^perature sent of God, which
if he should not send, our life which is not able continually to suffer
pleasures and good things, would procure it of it own accord? We see
therefore how truly the wise man said of God: He reaches from one end to an
other mightily, and lovingly does he order all things. If we thoroughly consider
these things, that also will appear to be true which Moses says Deuteronomy. 32: He
has borne him on his shoulders, he has carried him about, and kept him as ye
apple of his eye. Hereby we may stop the mouths of them which unthankfully
babble that there are more evil then good things in this life, when as there
are not wanting infinite good things and sweet commodities, but they are
wanting which should see and acknowledge them with him that said: The earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord. And again: The earth is full of his praise.
And Psalm. 103: The earth is full of thy riches: thou have made me glad by thy
works. Hereupon we daily singe: Heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Why
so? because there are many good things whereby he may be praised, howbeit of
them only which see and acknowledge this fulness. For as we have said in the
first consideration of evils, that the evils of every one are so great, as is
his opinion and knowledge of them: so also good things although they come unto
us abundantly on every side, yet are they only so great as they are esteemed.
For all things that God has made are exceeding good, yet are they not so
acknowledged of all, as of them of whom ye 103. Psalm speaks: They contemned
that pleasant land.

Of this consideration we may in Job see a most goodly and singular example,
Job may be a most excellent example to move us patiently to suffer evils if
the Lord send them, seeing we receive so many good things at his hand.
who, all his goods being taken away, said: Shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and not receive evil? a very golden saying, and a mighty comfort in
tentation. For he did not only suffer him self, but was tempted of his own
wife to impatiencie, who said unto him: Do thou continue yet in thy
perfectnes? curse God and die: as if she should say: It is manifest that he is
not God, who has so forsaken thee, why therefore do thou trust in him, and
not rather denying and cursing him, acknowledgest thy self mortal, unto whom
nothing shall remain after this life? These and such like things does every
man's wife, that is his sensuality and corrupt understanding put into his mind
in ye time of tentation, because the sense sauoureth not the things that are of
God.

Howbeit these are good things common to all: The inward good things of a
Christian.
but a Christian is endued with far better inward good things, as with ye
faith of Christ, whereof is spoken Psalm. 44: The Kings daughter is al glorious
within, her clothing is of broidered gold. For as we have said entreating of
the consideration of ye first evil, that there can be none so great evil felt
in man, which is the worst of those evils that are in him: so the best of ye
good things that are in a Christian he him self can not se. For if he did, he
should be forthwith in heaven, forasmuch as the kingdom of heaven, as Christ
says, is within us. For to have faith is to have the truth and word of God: to
have the word of God is to have God the maker of all things. Which good
things how great are they? if they were revealed to the mind, it should in
a moment be losed from the body, by reason of exceeding sweetenes and
pleasure: wherefore ye other good things that we have spoken of are rightly
said to be as it were certain aduertizements of those good things, which we
have wtin, which God will have commended unto us by them, for yt this life can
not suffer that they should be revealed, and therefore God mercifully hides
them, until they have increased unto their full measure: no otherwise then
loving parents do sometime give unto their children trifles or things of
small value, thereby to allure their minds to hope for greater.

Notwithstanding they do sometimes show out and put forth them selves, Fruits
of the most excellent good thing in man.
when the joyful conscience rejoices in trust in God, willingly speaks of
him, hears his word with delight and pleasure, is ready and cherefull to
serve him, to do good works, to suffer evils, etc. All which are infallible
tokens of an infinite and incomparable treasure hidden within, which distilleth
forth these little drops in small measure: although it sometime comes to
pass that it is more manifestly revealed to minds that are given to divine
contemplation, so yt being as it were in a trance, they can not tell where
they are. Such were Augustine and his mother as they confess of them selves,
and many others.

The second chapter of the second consideration, which is of the good to come
or before a man.
TO them that are not Christians little comfort can be given in their evils by
the good things to come, for that al things be to them uncertain. Howbeit that
notable affection which is called hope, is here cause of great trouble.
Uncertain hope.
By which affection men comfort them selves and bid one an other hope for
better things, whereby we uncertainly seek after great things, being for
the most part deceived, as Christ teaches of that man in the Gospel Luke 12,
who said: I will pull down my barnes, and build greater, and therein will I
gather all my fruits and my goods: and I will say to my soul: soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink and be merry.
But God said unto him, O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from
thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? So is he that
gathers riches to him self, and is not rich in God.

Howbeit God leaves not the children of men so, God does not always suffer
our uncertain hope to be frustrate, and why.
but in this affection to put away evil and attain that which is good he
comfort them: albeit they be uncertain of the things to come, yet do they
hope well, whereby in the mean while they are sustained, lest that falling
into the evil of desperation, they suffer not the present evil, and so do
worse things. Wherefore even the affection of such hope is the gift of God,
not that he will have them trust unto it, but be moved to sound and true hope
which is in him alone. For he is therefore slow to anger that he may bring them
to repentance, as it is said Romans 2: neither does he suffer men to be deceived
by this deceitefull hope, if so be that they begin from the heart and truly
to hope in him.

But to Christians, beside these good things, two sorts of especial good
things shall assuredly come, howbeit by death and sufferinges. Now they also
rejoice in that common uncertain hope yt the present evil shall end, and the
contrary good shall be increased, although they do not so much regard that, as
they do that their own proper good is increased, which is truth in Christ,
wherein they go forward from day to day, for which they both live and hope.
Christians receive comfort by consideration of two especial good things to
come, where of one is, that by death their afflictions of this life being ended,
they shall be in rest and peace.
But beside these I have said that two especial good things shall come unto
them in death. The first is, that by death the whole tragedy of the evils
of this life is ended, as it is written: Precious in the sight of the Lord is
ye death of his Saints. And again: I will lay me down, and also sleep in
peace. Again: Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in
rest. Whereas contrariwise to the wicked death is the beginning of evils, as
the Psalmist says: The death of the wicked is very evil. Again, Evils shall
come upon the wicked man in destruction: so Lazarus shall be comforted, who
has suffered his evils here, whereas the rich glutton shall be tormented,
who has here enjoyed his pleasures. So it comes to pass, that a Christian
whether he dye or live, has always the better: so blessed a thing is it to
be a Christian, and to believe in Christ, whereupon Paul says: Christ is to me
life, and death is to me advantage. And Romans 14. he says: Whether we live, we
live unto the Lord: or whether we die, we die unto ye Lord: whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lords. This safety Christ has obtained for us,
inasmuch as he dyed and rose again that he might be Lord of the living and
dead, being able to make us quiet and safe as well in life as in death, as the
22. Psalm says: Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me. If this commodity of death do
little move us, it is a sign that the faith of Christ is weak in us, which
does not sufficiently esteem the treasure and commodity of a good death, or
does not yet believe that death is good, the old man which as yet lives too
much, and the wisdom of the flesh hindering us. We must endeavor therefore
that we may know and love this benefit of death. It is a great matter that
death which to others is exceeding evil, should be made to us exceeding good
and commodious. And if Christ had not brought this to pass for us, what thing
should he have done worthy of so great a price as he paid? It is a very divine
work which he did, and therefore it should be no marvel to any, that he made
the evil of death exceeding good.

Wherefore death is now dead to the faithful, and has nothing terrible but
only a certain semblance and appearance. Death can not hurt the faithful
No otherwise then a serpent that is slain, in outward form and appearance
he is cerrible as before, but in very deed it is only a seeming or appearance
of evil, the evil it self is now dead and harmless. Yea as in the 21.
chapter of Numb. God commanded a brazen serpent to be set up, by the sight
whereof the living serpents did perish: so also our death by faithful and
steadfast beholding of the death of Christ, does perish, and only appears
terrible, but can not hurt us in very deed. So does the mercy of God
aforehande exercise us that are weak, with these goodly figures or semblances,
that forasmuch as death cannot be taken away, he may at ye least make the force
thereof to be nothing but in outward show and appearance only, for which cause
also death in the Scriptures is called sleep rather then death.

The other good thing that comes by death, is, that it does not only end
the troubles and afflictions of this life, The other special good thing to
come, the consideration whereof is comfortable to Christians.
but which is more exccllent, it makes an end of vices and sins, which
makes death far more acceptable to the faithful, as we have said before,
then the good which we have now spoken of. For the evils of the soul which
are sins, are without comparison worse then the evils of the body. Which
only if we did know, they would make death most amiable unto us. Now if they
do not so, it is a sign that we do not sufficiently feel nor hate the evils
of our soul. Whereas therefore this life is most perilous, dangerous sin
seeking to deceive us on every side, and we can not live without sin: most
commodious death sets us free from these perils, and cutteth of sin quite
from us, whereupon in the book of wisdom it is said in praise of the
righteous: He pleased God and was beloved of him, so that whereas he lived
among sinners, he translated him. He was taken away least wickedness should
alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his mind. For wickedness by
bewitching obscuteth the things that are good, and the unsteadfastness of
concupiscence peruerteth the simple mind (O how true are these things and
confirmed by daily experience? Though he was soon dead, yet fulfilled he much
time, for his soul pleased God: therefore hasted he to take him away from
wickedness.

So by the mercy of God, death, which to man was the punishment of sin, is
made to Christians the end of sin, and the beginning of life and
righteousness. Wherefore he that loves life and righteousness, must needs, not
fear, but love death, which is the Minister of them, and mean to come unto
them: otherwise he shall never attain neither to life nor righteousness. Now
he that can not do this, let him pray unto God, that he may. For therefore
are we taught to say, Thy will be done, because we of our selves are not able
to do it, who fearinge death, do love death and sin rather then life and
righteousness. For, that God ordained death for the abolishinge of sin it
may hereof be gathered, for that he enjoined death to Adam by and by after he
had sinned, as it were amends of sins, and that before he cast him out of
Paradise, that he might show unto us that death works no evil, but all
good in us, seeing that it was enjoined in paradise as it were repentance and
satisfaction. It is true in deed that death entered into the world by the
malice of the Devil, but it is to be attributed to the singular goodness of God
that death being so entered, he not only suffered it not to hurt, but ordained
it even from the beginning thereof for the punishment and death of sin.

For this he signified, whereas when he had first denou^ced death unto Adam, in
his commandment that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge, he
afterward notwithstanding did not hold his peace, but did again enjoin
death, and tempered the rigor of his first denouncing, yea did not so much as
make mention of death in any syllable, but only said: In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread, till thou be turned again into the ground, for out
of it wast thou taken: Dust thou art, and into dust shall thou be turned again.
As though he then hated death, which he would not so much as name, according to
that saying: He endures but a while in his anger, but in his favor is life.
He seemed in thus speaking, that, unless death had been necessary for ye
abolishing of sin, he would not so much as mention or name it, much less
enjoin it. So against sin which had wrought death, the emulation of God
armeth no other thing but death it self, so that here thou may see that
saying of the Poet verified, The worker destroyed by his own work: sin
abolished by death which is it own proper fruit.
that the worker of death does perish by his own work, and that sin is
destroyed by it own proper fruit, and is slain by death which it brought
forth, as the viper of her offspring. This is a most goodly sight, to see how
sin is, not by an others, but by it own proper work destroyed, slain with
it own weapon, and as of Goliath, so ye head thereof cut of with it own
sword. For Goliath was a figure of sin, a terrible Champion to all, except
little David, that is, Christ, who alone overcame him, and cut of his head with
his own sword. If therefore we meditate upon the joys of this power of
Christ, and upon the gifts of his grace, why should a little evil trouble us,
when as in so great an evil to come we see so great good things?

The third chapter of the third consideration, which is of the good past, or
behind a man.
THe consideration of this good is easy, by the contrary consideration of the
evil past, we think it sufficient only to help him that shall consider hereof.
We are moved to the consideration of the good past, that is of Gods goodness
bestowed upon us heretofore, and to take comfort thereby, by the examples of
Augustine David, and by our own experience.
Herein B. Augustine does excellently well in his confessions, where in a most
goodly sort he rehearses ye benefits of God bestowed upon him from his mothers
womb. The same does David in that notable 138. Psalm, ye beginning whereof is:
O Lord, thou have tried me, where among other things wondering at ye providence
of God over him, he says: Thou understand my thoughts long before: thou
compassest my paths and my lying down. As if he said: Whatsoever I have ever
thought, whatsoever I have wrought, and whatsoever I was to obtain or
possess, I see now, how it was not done by mine own industry, but ordained by
thy care long before. Finally thou have foreseen all my ways: and there is
not a word in my tongue, where then? even in thy power. These things we learn
by our own experience. For if we call to mind our life past, is it not a
wonderful thing that we have thought, willed, done, and said such things, as
we never could foresee, but would have done far other things, if we had
been left to our own free will, which we now first perceive, namely we see
that the hand of God has been so present with us, that his care has been so
constant over us, that we could neither have spoken, neither willed nor thought
those things which we have, unless he had given ability, as it is said in the
book of wisdom chap. 7: In his hand are both we and our words. And Paul
says: who works all things in us. Why then are we not ashamed being
senseless and hard hearted, who being taught by our own experience, do see
how careful the Lord has been for us until this hour, and has given us
all good things? and yet we can not commit the same care of us to him in a
small present evil, but we so behave our selves, as though he had forsaken
us, or could by any means forsake us. David did not so in the 39. Psalm,
where he says: As for me, (...) him. For we see this most manifestly appear
unto us commonly in all infantes, so that so many examples let forth to our
folly and hardues, ought worthily to make us greatly ashamed, if we dout that
even the least good or evil comes unto us without the singular care of God.
We must cast our care on God for that he cares for us.
Blessed Peter says: Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you. And
David says Psalm. 36: Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he shall feed thee.
Moreover B. Augustine says unto his soul in his confessions: Why sta^dest
thou upon thy self and stand not in deed? cast thy self upon him, for he
will not withdrew his hand that thou may fall. And again Peter says, 1. Pet.
4: Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their
souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

O, if a man knew his God after this sort, how secure, how quiet, how pleasant
should he be? Such a one should have God truly, knowing assuredly that all his
things whatsoever they be, have come and do come unto him, by the direction
and disposing of God his most sweet will. The saying of Peter stands
certain, he cares for you. What can we hear more sweet and pleasant then
this saying? therefore says he, cast all your care upon him. What will ensue
if we cast not our care on God.
If we do not this, what do we else, but endeavor to let and hinder the care
of God, and also make our life unto our selves troublesome, painful, careful,
by many fears, cares and troubles? and that in vain, for we do not any thing
hereby further our rest or quietness, but as the Preacher in his book says:
This is a vanity of vanities, and vexation of the spirit. For in all the same
book he speaks of experience hereof, inasmuch as he had tried many things
for him self, and in all notwithstanding he found nothing but labor, vanity
and vexation of the spirit: so that he concludes, that it is the gift of God,
if a man eat and drink, and rejoice with his wife, that is, lives without
care, committing ye care of him self unto God. Wherefore we ought to have no
other care of our selves, the^ yt we may not be careful for our selves, and may
commit the care of us unto God. As for other things that might be spoken here,
every one may as I have said know them by the contrary consideration, and by
calling to mind his whole life past.

The fourth chapter of the fourth consideration, which is of the good beneath
us.
Hitherto we have seen the good things which are our own, and in our selves,
we will now consider those that are in others, and without us: the first
whereof is in them which are beneath us, that is the dead and damned. Howbeit
it seems very strange, that any good can be found in the dead and damned.
But the power of ye divine goodness is every where so great, By comparing the
state of the damned with our own, we shall perceive the exceeding mercy of God
toward us, and the inestimable commodities which we enjoy through his goodness.
that it makes that we may se good things even in the greatest evils. Now let
us first compare them with our selves, then shall we see our inestimable
commodities, as it may easily be understood by the contrary consideration of
evils. For as great evils of death and hell as we see in them, so great without
dout do we see our commodities to be, yea and so much greater, as their evils
are greater. All which are not to be lightly passed over, forasmuch as they do
greatly commend unto us the exceeding mercy of God. And it is to be feared,
that if we make small account of these, we shall be found unthankful, and
condemned together with them, or tormented worse, for that the more we see them
to be grieved and sorrowful, so much more ought we to rejoice for Gods goodness
toward us, according to that saying in Esai chap. 65: Behold, my servant
shall eat, but ye shall have hunger: behold, my servant shall drink, but ye
shall suffer thirst: behold, my servant shall be merry, but ye shallbe
confounded: behold my servant shall rejoice for very quietness of heart, but ye
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and complain for vexation of mind: your name
shall ye leave accursed among my chosen, etc. Finally as I have said, the
examples of them that die ill, and are condemned, as B. Gregory says in a
certain Dialogue, ought to bring this good unto us, that they should
admonish and teach us, that he is happy, whom other men's harms do make to
beware. Howbeit this good, forasmuch as it is commonly known, does little move
us, when as notwithstanding it is to be counted among the chief, and is not
lightly esteemed of them that are wise: forasmuch as a great part of the holy
Scripture tends hereunto, namely where it is taught of the wrath, judgments
and threatenings of God. Which most wholesome doctrine, the examples of the most
miserable should make most wholesome unto us, which then begin to be effectual,
when we are so affected as they are which suffer them, and as though we were in
their place and person. For then they will move and admonish us to praise his
goodness, who has preserved us from those things.

These dead and damned must be compared also with God him self, The
consideration of the state of the damned ought to move us to rejoice in God,
and to praise and extol his justice.
whereby we may see the divine justice in them. This albeit it be hard, yet
must we endeavor to do it. For seeing that God is a just Judge, his justice
must be loved and praised: and therefore must we rejoice in God even then when
he destroys the evil both in body and soul, because in all these his entire
and unspeakable justice shines. Wherefore hell also is full of God and the
sovereign good as well as heaven. For the justice of God is God himself, and
God is the sovereign good. As his mercy therefore, so also his justice or
judgment ought with most hearty affection to be loved, and most highly to be
extolled and praised. Whereupon David says: The righteous shall rejoice when
he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his hands in the blood of the wicked.
For this cause the Lord forbad Samuel 1. Kings. 16, that he should mourn
no more for Saul, saying: How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have
cast him away from reigning over Israel? As if he said: Does my will so
displease thee, that thou preferrest man's will before mine? Finally hereupon
come those sayings of praise and joy through the whole Psalter, that the
Lord is a Judge of the widows, and a Father of the fatherless, that he will
avenge the afflicted and judge the poor: that his enemies shall be confounded,
the wicked shall be destroyed, and many such like. If any will with foolish
pity have compassion on that bloody generation, which slays the righteous
(yea even the Son of God) and of that exceeding great company of the wicked,
he shall be found to rejoice at their wickedness, and to allow those things that
they have done, being worthy to perish together with them, whose sins he
would not have punished: and he shall hear that saying which is in the second
book of Kings chap. 19: Thou love thine enemies, and hate thy friends.
For so said Ioab to David, when he too much mourned for wicked Absolon his
son. Wherefore we ought here to rejoice at all the godliness of the Saints,
and the justice of God, who most justly punishes the persecutors of godliness,
that he may deliver his elect from them. And so thou see that not small but
exceeding good things do manifestly appear in the dead and damned: namely,
that the injury of all the Saints is revenged and punished, and thine also
if thou be righteous with them. What marvel is it then, if by thy present
evil he punish thine enemy, that is the sin of thy body, yea thou ought
to rejoice because of this most excellent benefit of Gods justice, who, thou
not desiring it, so slays and destroys in thy self thy worst enemy, that
is, thy sin. Whereof if thou have compassion, thou shall be found a friend of
sin, and an enemy of justice working in thee: which thou must especially
take heed of, lest it be said unto thee also: Thou love thine enemies, and
hate thy friends. As therefore thou ought to rejoice on the behalf of
justice being severe against thy sin, so thou ought to rejoice on the
behalf of the same also, being severe against the wicked, which are enemies of
men and God. Thus thou see that in the greatest evils are seen singular
good things, and that we may rejoice in the greatest evils, not because of
the evils them selves, but because of the sovereign goodness of justice that
delivers and auengeth us.

The fifth chapter of the fifth consideration, which is of the good on the left
hand.
HEre we must enter into consideration of our adversaries, who as yet remain
in this life (for in the chapter going before we have spoken of them that are
already damned and in like case with the devils) these we must behold with an
other affection, and consider two sorts of their good things. First that they
abound with temporal good things, The wicked most commonly abound with
temporal good things
so that the Prophets have been almost moved even to envy by their
prosperity, as David Psalm. 72: My feet were almost gone, my steps had
wellneare slipped: for I freated at the folish, when I saw the prosperity of the
wicked. And afterward: Lo these are the wicked, yet prosper they always, and
increase in riches. Jeremy chap. 12 says: O Lord thou art more righteous
then that I should dispute with thee, nevertheless let me talk with thee in
things reasonable: How happens it that the way of the ungodly is so
prosperous? and that it goes so well with them, which without any shame offend
and live in wickedness?

Why does he freely pour forth so many good things upon them, God bestows
abundance of temporal good things upon the wicked, that he may thereby comfort
us.
and lose them, but that he may comfort us, and declare how good he is unto
them which are pure in heart as the same 72 Psalm says. He that is so good to
the wicked, how much more good will he be to the godly? albeit he tries them
with many evils, so that not only in the present good things, but also in
them that be hid and as yet to come, they acknowledge him to be good unto them,
and say with David in the same Psalm: As for me, it is good for me to draw
near to God, to put my trust in the Lord. As if he said: Albeit I am somewhat
troubled, inasmuch as I see them free, notwithstanding I trust that God is
much more gracious unto me then unto them. And so the visible good things of
the wicked are a mean to stir us up to hope for invisible good things, and
to contemn the evils that we suffer, according to the commandment of Christ
Matthew. 6, where he bids us to behold the fowls of the air, and the
Lillies of the field, and says? If God then so clothe the grass of the
field, which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not do
much more unto you, O ye of little faith? Wherefore by comparing together the
good things wherewith the evil abound, and the evil which we suffer, our
faith is exercised, and we obtain comfort in God, which only is holy and
true comfort, so that all things work together for the best unto ye Saints.
The evils of the wicked turn unto good to the godly.


The other good, which is much more marvelous, is, that their evils are unto
us good, such a care has God of us. For although their sins be offensive to
the weaker sort, yet to the strong they are an exercise of virtue, and an
occasion more strongly to fight, and to obtain a more glorious victory. For
blessed is the man that endures tentation, for when he is tried he shall
receive the crown of life. Now what is a greater tentation then that multitude
of most wicked examples? Hereof is the world called one of the enemies of the
Saints of God, for that by the enticements and wicked works thereof it
moves, provoke and allureth from the way of God unto his own way, as it
appears Genesis 6: The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were
fair, and they took them wives such as they liked from among them all. And
Number. 25 it is said that the children of Israel committed whoredom with the
daughters of Moab, so that it is wholesome for us to be always afflicted with
some trouble, lest that being weak, and stumbling at the offenses of the
world, we fall and sin. Wherefore Lot is commended of Peter 2. Pet. 2, for that
he suffered many things by the most wicked example of the Zodomites, and
increased in righteousness hereby. It is needful therefore that these offenses
come, which may be an occasion to us to fight and obtain the victory.
Notwithstanding woe unto the world because of offenses. Now if in the sins of
others God procures unto us so great good things, how much more ought we to
believe with our whole heart that he will work good unto us in our own evil,
although the sense and flesh judge otherwise.

No less good does the world bring unto us on the otherside of his evils,
The troubles and afflictions which the godly suffer of the world turn to their
commodity and profit.
which is adversity. For whom it can not win by enticements, neither adioyne
to it self by evil examples, them it endeavors by afflictions to expel
from it self, and to trouble them by painful evils, always either seeking
deceitfully to entrap them by the example of the wicked, or cruelly raging
against the^ by grievous torments. For this is that monster Chimera having a
head fair like the head of a virgin, a belly terrible like the belly of a
Lion, a tail deadely like the tail of a Serpent: for the end as well of the
pleasure as of the tyranny of the world is poison and eternal death. As
therefore in the sins of the world God has made us to find good things, so
also the persecutions thereof are not in vain and frustrate, but are ordained
for the increase of our good things, that even in that wherein they hurt us,
they may be compelled to profit us, as B. Augustine speaks of Herod who slew
the children: He could never have profited so much by obedience, as he
profited by hatred. And B. Agatha went rejoicing to the prison as unto a
banquet, saying after this sort: Unless thou make my body to be handled
thoroughly of thy tormentors, my soul can not with glorious victory enter into
Paradise: even as the grain if it be not well threshed and beaten out of the
husk, is not laid up in the garner. But why do we here stand upon these
few examples? seeing we know that the whole Scripture, the writings and
sayings of all the Fathers, the works and deeds of all the Saints do agree
in this, that they are most profitable to the believers, who seem to be unto
them most hurtefull, so that they be rightly suffered and borne: as Peter
says in his first Epistle chap. 3: And who is it that can harm you, if ye
follow that which is good? And David says Psalm. 88: The enemy shall not
oppress him, neither shall the wicked hurt him. How shall he not hurt him,
when he oftentimes even kills him? surely because by hurting he does greatly
profitte him. So we see that we do on every side dwell in the mids of good
things, if we be wise, and yet also in the mids of evils, so meruelously
are all things ordered by the power of the divine goodness.

The sixth chapter of the sixth consideration, which is of the good on the right
hand.
THis is the Church of the Saints, The good on the right hand.
the new creature of God, our brethren and friends, in whom we see nothing but
good, nothing but consolation, howebeit not always with fleshly eyes (for
according to ye outward appeara^ce they are for ye most part to be referred to
the contrary consideration of evils) but with spiritual eyes. Although even
those their good things also which are seen with fleshly eyes, are not to be
rejected, but we may perceive that even in these God does comfort us. For David
in the 72 Psalm durst not disalow of all that possessed riches in the world,
saying: If I should say that I would judge after this sort, lo then I should
condemn ye generation of thy children, that is, if I should say that all are
evil, which are rich, healthful, and had in estimation, I should then
condemn thy Saints, of whom many are such. The Apostle moreover teaches
Timothe to charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not hie
minded, not forbidding them to be rich. And ye Scripture declares that
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were rich. Daniel with his fellows were had in
honor and reputacion even in Babylon: finally many Kings of Judah were holy
men. David therefore considering these says: If I should say that I would judge
so, I should condemn the generation of thy children. God I say gives to his
abundance of these good things, to the comfort of them and of others, but
these are not their proper good things, yea they are but shadows in respect
of the true good things, which are faith, hope, love, and other graces and
gifts, all which are made common by love.

This is the Communion of Saints, What great joy and comfort we have by the
communion of Saints, which is the good on the right hand.
wherein we rejoice. And who does not glory here even in great evils, who
believes, as it is in deed, that the good things of all the Saints are his
good things, that his evil is theirs also, For this consideration is most
sweet and pleasant, whereof the Apostle admonishes in the Epistle, to the
Galathians in this saying: Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the
law of Christ. Is it not good for us to be here, where if one member, as the
Apostle says 1. Cor. 12, suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in
honor, all the members rejoice with it? Therefore when I suffer, I suffer not
now alone, all Christians suffer with me, yea Christ him self, as it is said:
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. So others bear my
burden, their power is mine, the faith of the Church helps my infirmity, the
chastity of others bears the tentation of my lust, the fastings of others
are for my commodity, the prayer of an other is careful for me, and briefly
the members are so careful one for an other, that those which are more honest
do cover, keep, honor them that seem dishonest, as the Apostle notably
describes 1. Cor. 12. And so I may truly rejoice in the good things of an
other, as if they were mine own. Be it then that I be foul and filthye, yet
they whom I love, and with whom I rejoice, are fair and goodly; by which love
I make not only their good things, but even them selves mine. Wherefore my
ignominy shall be easily honored under their glory, their abundance shall
supply my want. Who then can despeire in sin? who does not rejoice in
afflictions, for that he does not now bear his sins and pains, or if he
bear them, he bears them not alone, being helped with so many Saints that
are the sons of God, yea being helped of Christ him self? So excellent a
thing is the Communion of Saints, and the church of Christ.

Now if there be any that does not believe that these things are thus, he is an
infidel, and has denied Christ and the church. For although these things
were not felt, yet are they so in deed: but who does not feel them? For that
thou do not despeire, that thou do not become impatient, who is the
cause? Thine own power? no surely, but the communion of Saints. Otherwise
thou were not able to bear even a small sin, thou could not suffer the
word of a man against thy self: so nighe is Christ and the Church. This is
that which we say: I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints. Now wherein do the Saints communicate? As in the
Lords supper the bread is one though it consist of many grains, and the wine
one though pressed out of many grapes: so the Saints being partakers of this
Supper, though they be many, yet are they me body, and therefore communicate
both in good and evil.
even in good and evil things, all things are common among them all, as the
Sacrament of the Lords supper does signify in the bread and wine, we are
said of the Apostle to be one bread, one body. Now who offends a part of
the body, wherein he offends not the whole body? what does ye little toe
suffer, which ye whole body does not suffer? what good is done even to the
feet, wherein the whole body does not rejoice? But we are one body: whatsoever
an other suffers, I suffer and bear it, and whatsoever good is done to him,
it is done to me. So says Christ, that it is done to him, whatsoever is done
to the least of his. Who taking a piece of the bread of the Lords Supper, is
not said to take bread? who contemning a piece thereof, is not said to contemn
bread?

Wherefore if we be grieved, if we suffer, if we die, let us remember and
firmly believe and be assured, that not we, or that not we alone, but Christ
and the Church are grieved, suffer and die with us. Christ would not have us to
be alone in the way of death, which every man dreadeth, but the whole Church
accompanying us, we enter into the way of suffering and death, and the Church
does suffer more strongly then we our selves, so that we may truly apply to
our selves yt which Eliseus said to his servant being afraid: 4. King 6: Fear
not, for they that be with us are more then they that be with them. And Eliseus
prayed and said: Lord I beseech thee open the eyes of this young man that he may
see: and the Lord opened the eyes of the young man and he looked: and behold the
mountain was full of borses and charrets of fire round about Eliseus. This
only also remains unto us, that we pray that our eyes may be opened, that we
may see the Church about us, that, I say, the eyes of our faith may be opened,
then shall we fear nothing, but shall perceive that to be most true which
David says Psalm. 124: As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord
about his people from henceforth and for ever. Amen.

The seventh chapter of the seventh consideration, which is of the good above
us.
I Speak nothing of the eternal and heavenly good things which the blessed
enjoy in the manifest sight of God, or at the least I speak of them in faith,
The good above us, and the most sweet joy and comfort which the due
consideration thereof brings.
and as they may be comprehended of us. So this seventh consideration is of
Jesus Christ, the King of glory, raised from the dead: as the seventh
consideration of evils was of him suffering, dead, and buried. Here we may see
the chief joy of our heart, and certain and sure good things: here is no evil
at all, because Christ being raised from ye dead, dies no more: death has no
more dominion over him. This is the furnace of love, and the fire of God in
Sion, as Esai says. For Christ is borne unto us, and not only that, but also
given unto us. Wherefore his resurrection is mine, and all things that he has
wrought thereby. And as the Apostle most notably glories Romans 8: How shall he
not with him give us all things? But what has he wrought by rising again?
He has destroyed sin, set up righteousness, swallowed up death, and restored
life: overcome hell, and purchased eternal glory. These things are
inestimable, so that the mind of man dare scarce believe, that they are given
unto him: as Jacob Genesis 45, when he heard that his son Joseph was alive and
governor over the land of Egypt, as it were awaking out of a deep sleep, he
did not believe them that told him, until they telling unto him all the
words of Joseph, which he had said unto them, showed him also all the
charretts, which Joseph had sent to carry him. So surely it is hard to believe
that so great good things are in Christ bestowed upon bs that are unworthy,
unless in many words he declare the same unto us, and as he made him self
manifest to his Disciples by often appearing unto them, so he teach us so to
believe, as it were by charrets, that is, by use and experience. It is a most
goodly and pleasant charret, that of God he is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, as the Apostle says 1. Cor. 1.
For I am a sinner, but I am carried in his righteousness, which is given unto me:
I am unclean, but his holiness is my sanctification, wherein I am sweetly
carried: I am foolish, but his wisdom carries me: I am damnable, but his
liberty is my redemption: so that a Christian which believes may glory of the
merits of Christ, and of all his good things no otherwise then if he him self
had done them, so properly do they belong unto him, so that he dare now quietly
look for even ye judgment of God, which notwithstanding is intolerable. So
great a thing is faith, so great good things does it obtain for us, so
glorious sons of God does it make us. For we can not be sons, unless we
inherit the good things of our father. A Christian therefore may boldly say:
Death, where is thy victory? death, where is thy stinge, that is, sin? for
the stinge of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks
be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: that
is, the law makes us sinners, sin makes us guilty of death. Who has
overcome these two? Our own righteousness? our own life? No surely, but Jesus
Christ raised from death, who has condemned sin and death, has imparted his
righteousness unto us, has given us his merits, has laid his hand upon us,
so that we are in good case, and do fulfill the law, and overcome sin and
death, for which honor, praise and thanks be to God for ever, Amen.

This therefore is the last consideration, whereby we are now lifted up not
only above our own evils, but also above our own good things, and do now
enjoy the good things of an other, gotten by an others labor, who before were
oppressed with the evils caused by the sin of an other, and increased by our
own: We enjoy I say the righteousness of Christ, whereby he him self is
righteous, because we cleave unto it, by which he pleases God, and makes
intercession for us, and makes him self wholly ours, being our most gracious
Priest and Patron. As impossible therefore as it is that Christ in his
righteousness should not please, so impossible is it yt we should not please by
our faith whereby we cleave to his righteousness. Whereby it comes to pass
that a Christian is omnipotent, Lord of all, possessing all things, doing all
things, A Christian is said to be without sin, not in respect of the action
of sin, but inasmuch as sin is not imputed to him for Christ's sake.
wholly without any sin. And although it so be that he have sins, yet can it
not be yt they should hurt him, but they are remitted because of ye invincible
righteousness of Christ which swalloweth up all sins, whereunto our faith
trusts, firmly believing that Christ is such a one unto us, as we say. For
he that does not believe that, hears in vain, acknowledges not Christ,
neither knows whereunto he profits or serves.

Wherefore even this one consideration, if there were no other, may minister
unto us so much comfort, if it be well and duly had, that we may not only not
be grieved at our evils, but also rejoice in tribulations, scarce feeling them
by reason of the joy which we have in Christ. Of which joy our Christ our Lord
and God blessed for ever make us partakers, Amen.

By these my cogitations most famous Prince, The conchision.
witnessing after a sort the duty of my small ability, I commend me to your
most noble grace, being ready to perform greater things, if the power of my
spirit were according to my desire. For I will always be a dettour both to
every of my neighbors, but especially to your most noble Grace, whom our Lord
Jesus Christ by his gracious goodness long preserve among us, and at the last
bring to him self by a blessed and happy end, Amen.

Your Graces most humble and obedient subject MARTIN LVTHER.


