A FAITHFVL ADmonition of a certain true Pastor and Prophet, sent unto the
Germans at such time as certain great princes went about to bring Alienes into
Germany, and to restore the papacy, the kingdom of Antichrist. etc Now
translated into English for a like admonicion unto all true English hearts,
whereby they may learn and know how to consider and receive the procedinges of
the English Magistrates and Bishops.

With a Preface of M. Philip Melancthon.

Take heed and beware of the ^euen of the popysh Phariseis.

Take heed and beware of the pestilent poison of the cursed Papists.

Take heed and beware in time of these godles Alienes and brutish Spaniardes,
which mind to co^quer your nation, and to subuerte the whole state thereof*

The Preface of the Translator.
Eusebius Pamphilus, the Translator of this following treatise, unto the
Christen Reader.
THe grace and merci of our heaue^lye father, with the true knowledge of his
son Jesus Christ. which the devil and his members now labor with toth and
nail* to blemish and subvert through Antichrist the Pope and his generation, be
daily multiplied and confyrmed in the* most Christian Reader. This following
treatise, as it was first written of as worthy Prophet as has been since the
Apostles time, for a warning unto his dear country men: Even so the state of
m^ natural country of England, over which God threatens now his terrible
plages, standing in the like danger, I thought that my natural duty toward
my country required so much service of me as to translate the same into the
English tongue, if paraduenture God will work in the hearts of the Readers
thereof by following the council ministered therein, to prevent that subversion
and extreme inconvenience which at this present ha^geth over their hea^es. And
though the Papists shall paradue^ture frown and fume thereat; I care not much
therefore, for seeing the devil has so bewitched the^, that they care not what
destruction they work toward their country, so that their kingdom may
flourish again, I am well assured yt nothing proceeding of the spirit of God, can
content or please the^. And to say ye truth, for as much as they defyle the^
selves with idolatry, supersticio^, false religion, and with persecuting of ye
true professors of the Gospel, they are not worthy that am good thing should
delight or content the^, o^ that any godly aduertiseme^t should synke into
their heads. But such as have the true fear of God in their hearts, let them
take it as a profitable admonition unto the^, with thanks giving unto almighty
God, that he has styrred up such instruments endued with such a grace and
spirit, whereby they may be warned and advertised how to avoid such imminent
dangers as their sins and unthankfulness have not only worthily deserved, but
also in manner, brought upon their necks. If such warnings as have proceeded of
the like spirit as this present aduertisme^t was written* had been regarded in
time, paraduenture God would have spared us our late Josias, noble king Edward
of famous memori, a little longer. O England, England, that thy sins,
unthankfulness and security were such yt they provoked God to take from thee such
a prince through who^ thou might so quietly and religiously have been
governed, and to send ^he such now as go about to bring the in thraldom and
subjection unto Alienes, and to conquer the with tyranny, and seduce the with
false religion. O England, England, thy Nobles were preached unto, and told
plainly enough by Gods prophets, that Gods wrath was at hand, if they would not
redres their enormities, but they could not be hard, yea those to who^ they
preached made a mock an^ a jest at their earnest crieng and calling upon the^,
asking them who made the^ so much of Gods counsel. It would never sink into
their heads that God would so dea^e with the^, as the Preachers ou^ of the
spirit of God threatened the^. They thought paradue^ture that it was enough for
the to pretend Gods true religion, how little soever they framed their lives
thereafter. But god has now mete ^^wel taught some of the^ the price of
pretensed religion, even as he taught the Jews in the old Testament, how little
he regarded their prete^se of relygion, crieng: The Temple of the Lord, The
temple of the Lord, and showing in their lives nothing but dissolutenes,
securiti, and (...). God grant that the penance which they that be latelye
taken away, have felt for their contempt and dissembling with God, may be an
occasion to those that are yet left behind to consider with themselves, and to
call to remembrance how good God is yet unto them, to call the^ still to the
crediting of the godly Preachers doctrine (I mean not of ye Papists,
Antichrists messengers which now fill al Pulpits full, with most shameful lies
and most detestable blasphemies) seeing God has showed in some of the^ the
ensamples of such punishments as they told the^ before of. Which is a most
infallyble token that they were Gods true prophets, and that it was his true
religion which they preached. And therefore has God taken some of them away,
that the punishment of them, might be a warning unto the rest, to repent their
negligence and contempt of his word, when they had it truly and faythfullye
preached unto them, and to endeavor them selves to beware hereafter how they
contemn Gods word at the mouth of his Preachers and prophets again: least if
they neglect this further warning, more then their fellows had, God may give
them also a further and a sharper penance. This should my Lords and the
Nobles do whereby the true fear of God might appear to be in their hearts, and
not to fall from contempt of Gods holy word to the utter renouncing and denieng
of it, and to seem to fear more a weak creature (as Peter did the Girl) then
the mighty God, which has the hearts of al creatures in his hands. Truly,
truly, this is not the way to pacify Gods wrath, for to deny his true
religion, and to consent to abominable idolatri, but rather to kindle it more
feruentlye against us. Ye have paraduenture policies, fetches and diuises in
your heads, but take heed least they deceive you. Think not ye god is bound
to your policies and drifts. I never saw, nor heard yet that ever any policy
or fetch against the will of God, came to any good end and effect at length.
As I could rehearse many examples even in our time.

Thus much be spoken to ye Nobles for their aduertisment: whose insolency and
supine dissolutenes without dout has been a great cause of this plage that is
now come upon us. Notwithstanding I mean not thereby to clear and excuse the
inferior or mean sort* as though their part were not therein also. How
unthankful have they ben^ also in receiving, and how slack in following the
earnest aduertismentes that were daily given them. I mean not only of the
blind Papists which waited and gaped daily for the restoring of their wicked
Mass, and other damnable idolatry (wherewith the devil has now filled their
mouths full) thinking that al should be well, if they might once have that
again. Now they may se what it has brou^ght, and what it is like to bring,
name^ly the subversion of the whole state of the realm, the ouerronnyng
thereof with a strange nation and such a nation as is the most vile and
godless^ nation upon earth, the utter destru^tion of them selves and of their
posterity for ever. Let the^ now make much of papistry that list, they se what
fru^tes it has brought with it, and wha^ it is like to bring more, if they
wyl^ needs have it. I mean not (I sai) only of them, but eue^ also of those
which have known and professed Gods religion. That the same may well be said
onto us al, and to the whole Realm generally, which Christ spoke unto
Ie^usale^ in the.xix. of Luke, that all these plages are come upon us because
we did not acknowledge the time of our visitacion. Let us al therefore repent
our former negligence. Let us all amend ^ur former fautes, and also let us al
be true folowers of the Gospel in deed, as we have long been professors thereof
in word, and tha^ doutles God shall cease and withdraw his plage wherewith he
had minded to scourge ^s, he shall drive the Papists and the alienes (which they
go about to bring in, to maintain their kingdom, and to make them selves
strong against God) out of our country, that where they sought but one way to
come in, they shall seek ^en to fly out of it again. Let us not contemn such
warnings and admonicions as this conceived in the treatise following. And
speaciallye let no man misconstrue it, but read it with judgment as an
instruction not to stir any man to unlawful rebellion (as I dout not but the
Papists gods sworn adversaries will be ready to say, where as they and no
other are the authors of al mischief, as may most manifestlye appear to any
that has but half his right wit) but only as an aduertisment that no man
minister any aid or obedience to such Tirannes as bend the^ selves against God
and his word, and to the subuersio^ of their natural country. In which case it
is not only unlawful to obey them or in any wise to consent unto the^, but also
most lawful to stand in the defense of gods religion, and of the lawdable and
ancient state of their country, against such uncircumcised Tyra^nes (they shall
never be called Magistrates of me, Nay, until they have a more lauful
commission.
till they show them selves worthy of that name) as go about such devilish
enterprises. The God of heaven with his mighty hand confound them.

Thus have thou most gentle reder, both the scope of this admonition, and also
partlye the occasion that moved me to translate it. Put now thy endeavor (if
thou be a true Christian, and have any true natural love to thy country, to
thy self or to thy posteriti) yt it be neither of ye first author written, nor
of me translated in vain. And herewith let my yonker Papists which now are
in their ruff, triumph above the Moon, crieng: Crucifige upon ye gospel, and
the poor professors thereof* take their aduertisment also, that when God has
used them as his scourge and rod to that that his divine council has
determined, than can he find the^ out well enough, and give them their penance,
from the which their mass idol (make they never so much of it) shall as little
save and deliver them, as Baal saved the wicked false Priests and other that
worshypped him and took him for their God.

God be merciful to his Church and flock of England, and deliver the same from
the violence of unmerciful Tyrau^tes, and vngracous papists.

The Preface of Master Philip Melancton.
AS our savior Jesus Christ ye son of God offered up himself upon the cross
unto his eternal father for our sins (Marye and John standing next unto him)
immediatli before his death* he gave to John a special charge over his mother
Mari* whereby he signified that he would al men, and specially Rulers and
governors to have the care and charge of his pore church, The chief charge of
officers.
which suffers in the world contempt, slander, and affliction: wherefore al men
upon earth and specially the true members of Christ's true church, from ye
beginning of the world unto the end, ought to consider with them selves, and
standing under the cross of Christ, there to behold and ponder this marvelous
work that the son of God should bear and suffer such terrible wrath of his
eternal father for us, and embrace the syngular grace and mercy purchased
thereby unto us: and we al to show our selves thankful therefore: knowing yt our
hole life and death also ought to be directed unto this end, specially, that
God may be praised: and above all, that ye true doctrine of this great and
singular wor^ might be preserved. And again yt we ought to be thankful for
this wonderful benifite of god. And therefore to maintain and preserve that
church of his which does preach, teach and embrace this true and sicere
doctrine, and calls upon the very true God in the knolege of Christ,
according unto ye saying of our savior Christ unto Peter wha^ thou art
converted, confirm and strengthen thy brethren. Whereunto al men do apply and
endeavor them selves (if they be not altogether rude and godles, but have any
sparkle of godly knowledge and of the true faith in their hearts) namely
that mankind should not live like a brute beast, sekyng only an easy life for
himself, but always to labor, how the knoledge of God may best be furthered,
and the true religion best maintained and preserved. And this is my ernest
desire, that all christian hearts inspired with the fear of God, would a^
this present, consider and remember, what duty and allegeaunce they owe unto
God in these dangerous and troblesome days, and in this heavy time. For in
as much as it is most evident that the pope (the sworn enemies (...) al true
Christians) does all that he ca^ possibly, to the intent to suppress the true
doctrine, and Religion, which has been preached, and maintained these certain
years, and to stablish and set up again his Idlatrous service and
supersticious errors. It is he that seduceth kings and princes. And using the
crafty conueiaunce of wicked byshopes and priests, moves them to murder and
shedding of blood, which by bringyng Aliens and strangers sworn unto him,
into all Realms* means at length to subvert, and abolyshe the ancient
laws, and whole state of noble and godly common welthes, and so to work a
general destruction for ever.

Now what every honest and true heart ought to do in such case, al godl^ men
endued with any godly understanding, may easly perseiue and consider

And first thus much are al men bound unto God, All men bou^de^ to give no
aid to the mayntenaunce of idola^rye.
that they minister no manner of aid nor assistau^ce whereby Idolatry or false
religion might ^ strengthened or maintained, accor^^g as it is written. Thou
shall not ma^e thy self parta^er of other men's sines

Item ii. Cori. vi. Ye shall not help the unfaithful, or the unbelievers
(understand) to confyrme or stablyshe Idolatry. For how can Christ and be^ial
agree to gether? And what a comlye thing is it, for the temple of God to be
stuffed with Idols? Now are ye the temple of the living God, as God says, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God and they shall be my
people. Wherefore depart and separate your selves a way from them, says the
Lord.

Every Christian ought to open his faith to others.
Secondarely, every one that does not vtterli contemn and despise God, is this
much also bound unto him, yt he mind and desire to have his faith and belief
in God, known unto other. For thereunto is mankind specially created, that we
should know and praise God, and also witness and testify unto other of hi^. And
our savior Christ himself says, he that denies me before men, him will I
deny again before my heavenly father. And this confession must be made
according to every man's calling, state, and degree. Such as be preachers and
ministers, must confess him, by preaching of true doctrine. Such as be rulers
and governors, must confess him, by abolishing, and subuertynge of Idolatry
and supersticion, and by maintaining of true doctrine and religion. And all
that can help, by any manner of means, either with body or goods, to ye
maintenance of the same, ought to endeavor the^ selves earnestly thereunto,
according to the saying of S. John i. John. iii. Hereby do we know the true
love, that, like as Christ bestowed his life for us, even so should we bestow
our lives for the brethren. Let every one consider, and ponder these and
such like aduertisementes by them selves, and having always an eye, and
respect unto the same, let them than read, and mark this treatise following
with diligence.

And specially for as much as al men are not of one mind, but some take and
esteem the true honor of God, the true invocation, religion, and doctrine for
the most special and most necessary thing to be sought, and some not. And
again some are more fervent and constant in the same than some other. Least
through the evil persuasions of ye worst sort, mani other which know not the
matter, nor the danger thereof, might be seduced and led amysse, this
admonition and aduertisemente therefore, shall be very necessari and profitable.
For let the enemies of God and of our country pretend what they will, that they
mean not to be of council, nor to subvert our old ancient laws: wha^ they
have once their purpose, we shall se that that was their special drifte. Fair
words ar trappes to catch foles (...).
For all their fair words, and flatteryng persuasions are nothing else, but
traps to deceive ye simple sort with, till they have wrought their feate.

Some of them pretend, and say: tha^ they mind nothing less, than to
establish the Supremacy of Antichrist the B. of Rome, but if it were well sought
it would appear, that most of their practices and fetches come from Rome. And
that a great part of these proceadinges have not been wroughte, nor practiced
without his advise. What if virtuous and godly princes, which have set them
selves against his kingdom, have been betrayed and destroyed, by the subtle
practices of such impes of his, as have borne swing by their dissimulation
about such virtuous princes. O how many subtilties has Satan, to assault
Christ's kingdom with? I warrant you it has cost the b. of Rome mani a
nights watch, yea, many a pound, before these practices were brought to this
pass, which are now abrewyng. Yet has god left some holes open, whereby such
as have any understanding, may spy their driftes. For why do they hold
godly, virtuous, learned and most worthy councelours in prison, but only
because they fear, least they would hinder, and withstand some of their
enterprises and procedings? Let al those therefore that bear true hearts
toward their country, suffer them selves to be admonished in time.

For if the Spanyardes do once enter into our country, What the coming in of
Spanyardes will grow to.
and may be suffered to nestle them selves there, they will not only at length
crepe into the chief Dukedomes, Erledomes and lordships, and deal the same
among them selves, but also will establishe the Idol of Rome, and the whole
cursed Papaci again: which al our country shall repent and rewe for ever.
Priests care not what become of ye Realm, so that their hooryshe kingdom
floryshe.
And yet that is the chief thing, that the spiritual prelates (in geuyng their
aid and council thereunto) do seek. They care not what become of this whole
noble nation, nor what villainy be use^ therein (as the Spaneyardes are most
vile and beastly people given to vice and brutishnes) so that they may uphold
and mayntaine their kingdom of Idolatry and supersticion, and may reign
again. The Lord of heaven disapoynt and subvert their enterprises* For
whatsoever they can allege, or pretend, to charge those with, which have
embraced, and setfurth the true religion, as many as have any indifferent
knowledge and understanding (if they will not speak against their own
conscience) must needs acknowledge and confess, that diverse high points, and
necessary articles of christen religion, have been sincerely and purely taught,
and declared by them. And diverse notable errors have by them been disclosed,
which before were taught, and preached openly in Pulpets, whereby the people
were pitefully seduced. And now such as have truly and faithfully labored, The
reward of true preachers.
and traueled, to setfurth the truth to abandon such Idolatry, and
supersticion, as the people has been extremelye blinded with, to plant true,
necessary and wholesome doctrine, and to root out al falshod and hypocrisy,
they are rewarded for their labor with imprisonment, deprivation of their
livings and goods, and with such like rewards. Other causes may well be
pretended of the persecutors, and common cutthrotes, as we may hear, but these
are the very causes in deed. How long God (which is just in all his works) will
suffer and use them as his scourges (as David says the wicked manne is a
scourge of the Lord) that let the^ look unto. For where they pretend, that much
disorder, dissension, negligence, security, and offense did reign among the
professors of the true religion, without redress or reformation, etc. It
cannot be denied, nor they them selves will not deny but yt all this is true in
deed. And more over that they are laden with diverse infyrmities and sins, as
well private and secret, as open and manifest also, and that there have been
many weeds among them (as evermore have been in the true church of God) which
have always waxen, and sprung up among good corn. As with David* Nathan and
other true members of gods church in those days, sprang up Absalon,
Achitophel, and other unprofitable wedes. But what than? Should the people of
God, by reason of such offenses, or because of their own or of other men's
infyrmities, vtterli have denied, and rejected the true doctrine and religion,
and yield to Idolatry and supersticion: as our (yea rather Christ's)
adversaries would have us now to do? Why do not ye higher powers, the Ioly
prelates, and the faut spiers labor to redress, and refourme such offenses,
as they se in any of the^, that have professed the sincere Religion? Or why at
the least did they not labor to restore the true discipline of ye gospel, that
thereby such offense giuers, might have been redressed, and brought to an open
Christian penance, for the wealth of their own souls, and a good example unto
mani other* Why did they not this I say? ^hy? Mary because some of them feared,
least they them selves might paraduenture, be the first, upon whom the true
discipline ought to be exercised. Let them first examyne their own
consciences, and then tell me, whether I have said any thing* ^ut the truth
or no? No, no, the true discipline (if it might have been freely restored) would
not have suffered such offenses to have reigned, neither in high nor in low,
neither in the spiritual nor yet in the lay sort, as the adversaries have
found fault with, and pretended for the only causes, which have kept them from
the same profession. The godly preachers have testified sufficiently in their
open exhortations, that such disorder, dissolutenes of life, slau^derous
examples, mispe^ding of y^ time, with ungodly and unprofitable pastymes, as
have been used of the gentlemen disars, and the lady cardeplaiers (as well in
the Court as in the country) were not agreeable to the profession of Christ's
gospel. What could they do more, but openly rebuke such enormities, seeing they
would never suffer them, to exercice the true order of discipline, upon any
transgressors? If this discipline (which has long been earnestly called for)
might have been optained, a nombre of vnpreachyng prelates, of idle belly
bishops, should not have been suffered, to loiter as they did, and to spend the
patrimony of the Church unprofitably. But now we may se, that they played the
disse^bling lurkers, gapyng, workyng and practisyng for a Day, wherein they
might show them selves, as they were, and as they now appear, where as the right
order of discipline would have brought them to the true profession of sincere
Religion, and also to the practice thereof, in their vocation. And so would it
have done also my Lords, and ge^tlemen, scrap^alls, which used the Gospel for
a cloak of their couetuousnes. In summa, we lacked nothing but discipline, to
have reformed all the enormities with, whatsoever they have been that our
adversaries have found fau^ with, in the profession of our true Religion. But
let them lay all the faults, infirmities, and offenses, which they have marked,
and espied in ye professors of the gospel upon one heap, they al together (if
there were a thousand mo of them) are far inferior, and incomparabli less,
then the manifold errors, impiety, and Idolatry of the Mass, of the latin
service, of the invocation of saints, of the filthy and abominable pretensed
chastity, that is of ye Sodomitical single life of priests, and of such other
hypocrisy and supersticion* as our adversaries go about with fire and faggot,
with tooth and nail, to maintain, and to set up for the service of god.

For notwithstanding that among the members of the true church, and among the
professors of the true religion, there reign mani and diverse infyrmities and
enormities, which they epsy daily in them selves, yet the true godly sort do
conceive true and hearty repentance, for their weakness, and they remain nor
continue not therein, as the spiritual professors of single life do, in their
hordome and filthy abomination. And what soever infyrmities they have
otherwise. Yet this horrible vice have they not, (thanks be to God) to
maintain Idolatry, wyttingli to persecute ye truth, nor to murder the godly
professors of the gospel. These detestable vices, murder, blasphemy and
Idolatry, which are the most true and infallible tokens of the papists and
adversaries of Christ are not to be found among them. For these works are the
special works of the devil, which he practices and works in his members,
whereby he declares and speweth out his poyso^ malice, and hatred against God,
Ihon. viii
as it is written, Ye are of the devil, which is a liar and a murderer.

These are sins, which all men ought specially to ^lee, and daily to pray
earnestly unto God, that he will preserve them, that they fall not into any of
these abominations.

And he that looks upon the life of the professors of the Gospel, and also of
the papists, And by reason of the infirmities, which he seith in both their
lives, stands in dout to which of the^ he may join himself, he ought to
remember and to consider this, that he ought in no wise to take part with them
which are Idolators, maintayners of blasphemies, persecutors, and murderers of
the true members of Christ. And though they should venture their lives thereupon,
and goo the same way that Abell went. Yet have they this notable comfort, that
God hears their prayers, and will be merciful unto them. For all other sins
shall be forgiven: but the manifest blaspheming of God by idolatry, that is to
say, he that either mainteineth, or helps to maintain idolatry or false
religion, and is a persecutor and a murderer of the true professors, or a
fautor of such murderers, shall never be forgeuen. And God knows many of
the contrary part, which do refrain from persecuting of the true doctrine, for
non other cause, but to the intent to avoid these.ii. points (blaspheming of
God and murder) for Gods honor, and for their own saluations sake. And it is
manifest enough, yt diverse of the^ (thanks be to god) have sought neither
pleasure nor money, nor dignity, nor yet any other thing, that the world
estemeth, but rather have suffered much sorrow, misery and opprobrye. Now if
such should spend their lives as Abel did, and suffer death thervpo^, such a
death should be more acceptable unto them, then all the life and pleasure of
Cain, then all the pomp and riches of the Cardinals and bishops. For all me^
are detters unto death not withstanding. But this must every one of us always
consider, how we may stand (after this life) before the judgment of God, and
of his whole church, at the latter day euerlastinglye. And as we have before
our eyes the ensamples of Abel, Jeremy, John the Baptist, Christ him self,
Paul and other of the Apostles, how they al were murdered of tyrannes, eue^ so
let the^ be sufficient witnesses unto us, that after this life, another
everlasting judgment shall be holden and kept. And therefore let al men take it
for an high honor, and for a singular grace to put their lives in ieopardy, for
the confession of the true faith and religion of God: as Christ says: Fear not
the^ which can do nothing but slay the body, as for the soul they cannot slay.
etc. And for as much as it may well appear that this is the scope and end of al
practices of the Lords and Bishops by their procedings, to bring in the bishop
of Rome again, and to establish his idolatry and errors, wherbi they may
reign, and abuse the people again, as they have done in times past, and to
bring our country to a perpetual destruction. Note well.
it is most certain, that al honest and true hearts, may laufullye refuse to
obey them, and ought in any wise refuse to help or to aid them. And where as
they will object, and say that subjects ought to obey al commandments, and
procedynges of their magistrates, although it may be briefly answered unto
the^, Bishops are not magistrates.
that the Bishops and Prelates, which are the chief workers of this miserye,
are not the Magistrates, whom the inferior people are bound to obey, yet let
this answer stay al men's consciences, that the regiment of the common welthe,
The Magistrate may not pass his bounds.
is such an ordinance of God, wherein the magistrate has his appointed bounds,
as well as the subject. And for as much as God is the highest Lord, if the
worldly magistrate attempteth, any thing against him, the inferior sort may
laufully refuse to obey him, Inferiors may in this case laufullye disobey.
Abdias. iii. re. xviii
alleging for the^ selves, that they cannot, nor may not disobey God, to obey
and to serve the^. As for an example: Abdias did very well in keeping the
prophets privily in dens, and secret places, contrary to the commandment
of his king which commanded the^ all to be slain. And in like manner the
Armenia^s did well, and nothing but rightfully, in dete^ding their church and
their country against their Emperor Maximiane. Victorinus was a great prince,
which in ye time of Gallienus, had ye Emperors authority, in ye government at
Coley, and did govern there very laudabli, yet was he laufulli slain of his
own secretary, which found him abusing his wife. Marius also a noble prince,
did pardon a young soldier, and set a crown upon his head, because he s^ew his
captain (which captain, notwithstanding was Marius high friend) because he did
it in his own defe^se. Such factes in Christen me^ ar right and lauful, and do
please God well. Yea they are special testimonies of ye judgment of God,
against unlawful violence, and intolerable pride, and presumpcion of Tyrannes.

And what is it else but tyranny, to go about to set up manifest idolatry, to
separate godly me^ from their lawful wives, to bring in strangers, which shall
subvert the state of the commonwealth and such like? For it is easy to
perceive, that if the Spaniardes, and their train, may once bear rule in the
Cities, Dukedomes, and Lordshyps of our country (which God of his mercy
forbid that ever they should do) where as hitherto, through gods merciful
providence, the ancient laws and good ordinances of our common wealth, have
been preserved, they will go about to abolish and to subvert the^* and at
length bread much inconvenience and misery in our nation. Against the which
inconveniences all godly parents, householders with their wives, children, and
families, ought with most hearty sighinges call and cry unto god, that for the
furtherance of his knowledge, and for the glory of his own name, he will
preserve his true religion among them, and that he will not suffer these
churches and nations* wherein his truth has been confessed and preached, to
decay nor to be subverted. And that such prayers may be made the more
earnestly, and with out let or hindrau^ce, we al ought to amend our lives, in
the fear of God, in true faith, and in all other virtues, remembryng the saying
of the Lord in the prophet: Turn unto me, Iere. xiii.
and I will turn unto you. Doutles the matter is weighty, and (end how it
will) there is like to be a wonderful alteracion in ye common wealth, and also
in religion, We feel i^ already.
that is most sure. And I wonder much, that wise me^, which know and se well
enough, what will be the end of such procedynges, Note well*
will notwythstanding seem to be workers, and furtherers of such matters, as
they do not allow in their consciences. But surely it is no man's devise nor
working, but it is the diuils in hell, which rage and rave, because they would
gladly work an universal destruction and miserye, in all Christendom. Wherefore
it were best for such as be in authority, and of any power, not to be hasty in
following and satisfieng ye lusts of princes, and the practices of wicked
bishops and Prelates, Antichrists impes. For seeing the malice and spite of the
Devil; and of the idolatrous sort, is so fervent and great, it will minister
occasion to a wonderful alteracion; which paradue^ture they them selves shall
repent. But I beseech al godly hearts, that they will earnestly pray unto God,
that he will graciously preserve the co^monwelth, and ancient laws of our
country, and specially his own church, that his true word and religion may
continually sound therein.

Last of al let al Christen hearts bear this well in rememberaunce, that every
one in his degree, and to the vtterof his power, is bound to apply his
uttermost endeavor, toward the preservation of Christ's true religion, and
likewise toward the defense of their country, and the ancient priuilegies of
their nacio^. That is the special end of our life in this world, and no better
thing can we do in this life. And forasmuch as the state of our tym^ now, is
much like unto the state of the Machabes, and eue^ the like practices and
subtelties now pretended, and attempted, as were than: every one may take good
and profitable instructions out of the same books and story. Our Lord Jesus,
our only true shepherd, and head captain, defend his Church against assaults
which ye devil, Antichrist and his impes now devise, and practice there
against Amen.

A faithful aduertisme^t of a certain true Pastor, to his dear countrymen the
Germans, Translated into English for a like advertisement to the English
nation.
MOst earnest supplication and intercession has been made to the high
Potentates, both of the Spiritual and of the lay sort, that they would not
bend them selves so earnestlye, against the true Religion and doctrine of
Christ* but would show them selves more equal and moderate, and suffer the
Gospel freely to be preached. And again that they would not consent to bring
strange princes into our country, to bear any Rule, or to have any government
therein. The which thing, both I and many other godly hearts, have most heartily
prayed, and sighed unto god for. But forasmuch as nether our most faithful
prayers unto God, neither yet the earnest intercession made unto them, could
any thing prevail with them, it is easy inoughe to perceive, what it
betokens: nameli, eue^ ^hys, that being perverse, obstinate, blinded, and
given over of God, as such as have ever thirsted for innocent blod, and bent
them selves to maintain the blasphemyng of Gods name, and all abominations,
God thinks them not worthy to be inspired, so much as with one good thought,
or that they should give ear to any faithful advertisement or profitable
intercession. And it stands with them, even as it stood with ye Jews in
Ieremies time, wha^ as God said unto Jeremy these words, If Moses or Samuel
should stand up, and make intercession for this people, Yet have I no heart
unto them: drive them from me, and let them depart. etc. Iere. vii*
Thou shall not pray for this people, nor bring no manner of lamentation, nor
supplication before me for them, Neither make any intercession at al for
them: For I will not hear the. Even the like answer, may al those which have
made intercession, as is before said, unto the potentates and prayed unto God
for them, think to have made unto them. Forasmuch as God shows euidente and
manifest tokens, yt he will not hear any man's prayers for them, but that he will
suffer them, to go headlynges forward, and after the example of Pharao, to
sin against the holy ghost, even so long til there be no more hope of
repentance, nor of any ame^dement in the^. For if either prayers unto God for
the^ or else any ernest intercession unto the^ would any thing have helped,
they would never have gone so far as they have done. And therefore seeing no
prayer unto God, nor yet any faithful intercession unto them, will take place,
let us no more pray for them, but suffer them (like blind and obstinate
Pharaos) to go forward with their practices, til at length the red sea
overtake them, and make an end of them. And as for the prayers, No good prayer
lost
that have been made for them, although they have done the^ no good, yet have
they not been unprofitable, unto those that have made them. For they cannot
be unprofitable, that is most certain. But as christ says, if the salutation
and peace of the Apostles, can find no place in such houses, as they are
wished unto, than shall their peace return again unto them selves: Even so
shall it happen unto us. Seeing all our prayers that we have made for them, have
done them no good: they shall return again unto us, and they for whom they were
made in the stead of prayer, shall have their fyl of curses, and in the stead
of peace shall have their fill of strife and debate, whereof God send them plenti*
Amen. And forasmuch as they are altogether bent to force, and will bring all
their procedings to pass perforce, as well against ye manifest truth of gods
word, as against the lauful and ancient privileges of their natural country,
like unnatural men, let no man fear them but be of good comfort, and take good
hearts, against such ragyng enemies of God. For they never prai nor call upon
God, nether can they pray, by reason of their evil consciences, and wiked
proceadinges, presumynge and bea^yng them selves, bold upon flesh, as though
they had no need of God toward their enterprises, Yea as though they need
not, once to axe god, whether he be pleased with their deuyses or no. And
therefore God must needs have great pleasure and delight in the^, and must
needs be highly pleased with such presumption, and contempt of his grace and
goodness, and he uses to give very great success and victori, to such
presumptuous bosters and braggers: And that shall be this, that they al shall be
destroyed, and not one of them left a live. For this are we sure of, that their
ragyng enterprises are not in their own power to accomplish, but stand al in
Gods hand. And they shall not so easelye bring their purpose to pass. God will
be master, and bear ye stroke among them, in spite of their beards (as he
has ever yet done) and that shall they well feel.

But let us vaynely imagine (as it were in a slombre) that there were no God to
let them, but that their practices and proceadynges might go forward even by
force, as they would have them. One of these two things are like to bread
thereof, either an vprour of certain, or else a general war of the whole
nation against them, where in a multitude both of their sort and of ours also,
may fortune to com short home. For if they think in this case, that the
Protestants being diligently taught by our preachers the danger of sedicion,
Rebellion and defense ar ii. things.
for conscience sake dare not stir against the^ in this case they may
fortune to be deceived: For the preachers have done well in so teachi^g
generally. But if our adversaries will admit one article of our doctrine, that
makes for their purpose, and refuse all the rest, peradventure our men will
think also, that they may borow one point with them, seeing they know, it is
another thing to be a Rebel, than to be one of those, which stand in the
defense of Gods true religion, and of their natural country.

And if it so come to pass (as it is to be feared, that Gods wrath is so
kindled, that he will punysh us with some notable scourge) let our Potentates
thank the Papists, and their own^ Bishops, and Prelates, and those whose
affections they have served. Therefore they shall not say, these are the fruits
of the gospel, or of the new learning (as it pleases them to term it) but
they and all the world shall say, these are the fruits of the stinkyng Papistry,
and of the cankard Papists, and of their pestilent Prelates, and blin^ Bishops,
which to blemish the light of Gods word, and to stablysh their Antichrists
kingdom, have been the workers and practisers of such procedinges, as al true
and godly hearts, that have any sparkle of understanding do abhor. They
therefore shall be gilty before God, of all the bloodshed that shall bread thereof,
and not our doctrine. And I trust that God and our Lord Jesus Christ shall
preserve and deliver us, even as he preserved and delivered Loath in Sodo^e. And
if it happen any of us to dye among the multitude, we must thank our Lord god,
and think, that we have lived long enough, and well deserved otherwise to dye.
And yet shall we dye with better consciences, then they. For where we have with the
gospel taught peace and unity, they with their papistry have bred such
dissension and division, as those that are yet unborn shall rewe, it they
should have their purposes. And this yet shall be a comfort unto us, that where
they and we shall go on pylgrimage together, we shall take our leave honestly one
of a another, and depart a sonder, they with their lies and blood shedding to
the pyt of hell and to the devil (whom they have served) and we to our Lord
Jesus Christ whom we have faithfullye served, in professing and preaching his
truth and peace. For this is easy to reken, that he that kills me, or any of
my companions in such an assembli, the same shall not much spare the Papystes.
Wherefore let us go together, they in all devils names unto hell, and I with my
brethren and fellows, in Gods name unto heaven. As for mine own person, I am
well assured, that no man can hurt me, no more tha^ I desire to hurt any other.
And they shall not work so much displeasure against me one way, but I shall
work more against them another way. They shall not have so hard heads in their
naughty procedinges, but I shall have as hard an head, in my lawful and godly
enterprises, although not only Emperor Charles but also the Turkish Emperor
should take part with the^. They shall never fear me, nor make me to shrink,
but I will make them fear and shrink. So far have they ouersene them selves
already, that I and such things as I have enterprised, and attempted, shall
prosper, wha^ they with their procedinges shall decay, and be confounded. For my
life shall be their hang man, and my death shall be their devil. That and none
other let them trust unto, for they shall be sure thereof, for all their laughing
and triumphing that they make now. An evil conscience can not prai faithfully.
And if the Papists should begin any war, we should not need greatly to fear
them, for they cannot proceed in their enterprises in the name of God, nor can
not with good consciences pray^ unto God, for any success. They can not pray
from their hearts, so much as thus: O God help us in our procedings. For their
own consciences do accuse the^ selves, yt their procedinges are naught and
ungodly. And for ye christen religion, yt has been preached by us, and set
forth by authoriti of our princes (which they now go about to suppress) diverse
of their own best Clerks (as for the blind asses, we do not regard) have
confessed and said, yt none of our doctrine is against any Article of the
faith, nor against the scripture, but only against certain ordinances of their
own church, and certain decres of ye pope. Therefore it is easi to perceive, with
what conscience they can attempt any thing against our doctrine. And as for
brynging Aliens into our nacio^, Papists do against nature for their kingdo^s
sake.
to have ye government among us, and to subvert ye ancient priuilegies of
their own natural country, I dare say, their own conscience tells the^ that
it is against nature. Now if they should begin any battayl, it must needs be for
one of these two causes, which being both ill in their own judgment, how can
they pray unto god, for any good success? And therefore we may well speak this
benediction over them: As ye seek Gods honor, and as good as your quarrel and
procedings are: even such success and victory God send you, Amen. And again,
God can stir up a Judas Machabeus, to be the captain of his flock, which shall
beat the^ down, and teach the^ to be authors of wars, when they may have
peace. And wha^ soever they shall lie in the field, for mainteining of these
procedinges of theyrs. I and my brethren shall cry and call unto God must
earnestlye, with true and faithful prayer, that he will give them a fearful,
faint, cowardly and desparate heart, that here one, and there one, they may be
pricked in their own consciences, The papists procedings are both against god
and their natural country.
that they shall be forced to say: Alas Alas, why am I here for the maintenance
of an ill quarrel, which is both against God, and his word, and also against our
own country. And when they se a true faithful and natural heart, of Machabees
host, coming against the^, that they may take their feet, and ru^ne away from
him, as fast an chafe flies from the wind. Think (...) not that God ca^ the
same science still that he speaks of in a certain place, where he says: I will
give the a faint and a weak heart, that when thou shalt^ go out to war
against thy enemies one way, thou shall seek.vii. ways to ru^ne back again
from them, and the very noise of a leaf shall make thee afraid? Verily thus
did he unto the obstinate hard hearted Egipcians, in the red sea, which were as
stout and as secure as the autors of these procedings be (namely the papish
bishops and Prelates, and their adherentes) and had as good a quarrel also, as
they have any. And yet when their hou^ once came, that their own conscience did
pri^ the^, they cried out and said: Alas, alas* let us run away, and give over,
our quarrel is naught, god is against us. He yt knoeth not what it is to go to
war with an ill conscience, let him take part with the Papists, when they
shall attempt any war, for the maintena^c^ of the procedings above rehearsed,
and so shall he well learn what it is. And the prayer that I and al Christen
and natural hearts with me, shall pray against the^, shall be no secret thing,
but a common prayer, nameli the.vii. Psalm of David, which he prayed wha^ he
defended him self against Absolon, and at one slaughter (which was also the
first) al Israel was beaten, and a thousand men slain with Absolon, of a very
small armi. And yet Absolo^ and his army had ordinance, and puluer, and harnes
enough.

Now if the matter should come to a battle, as it is very like (which god ye^
forfend, if it be his will) I will not that such as should stand in defense of
gods true religion, and of their natural country, against the authors of the
procedings above me^cioned, Resistyng of popery is no rebellion, nor unlawful
disobedyence.
and against the murderers, and bludthirsty Papists, which have been ye chief
workers of al these mischiefs, should be taken for rebels, nor I will not
grant, that such defense of the common sort, should be taken for an unlawful
disobedience, but rather for a necessari and a lauful act. And that can I prove
by the Law, and the Lawyers cannot deny it. For in such case, when such
murderers and bloudhoundes will attempt and murder, for such unlawful causes
as these, without dout it can in no wise be ryghtly named any vprour, for any
man to set and defend himself against the^. And every right Christian knows
^el inoughe, what to do in such case, and how to yield unto god, yt that is dew
to God* And also to Caesar, Note this Mat. xxii.
what is ^ewe to Caesar: But not to yield to tirannous bloudsuppers, that that
is not due unto them. Wherefore to make the matter more plain, that the blood
suppers may not ^ost nor brag, as though they should war against rebels,
and so might pretend both before God and the world, that they had an honest
and a lauful cause to war* I will teach and declare, that there is a great
difference between unlawful vprours or rebellion, and necessary defense for
lawful considerations. For in case they should set, and defend the^ selves,
against the bloudsuppers, and practisers of such unlawful procedi^gs, Keeping
out or resistyng of the Spaniards is no rebellion.
I would not that their conscience^ should be burdened, and pricked with the
danger and perel of vprour or rebellion, as though their defense in such
case, were sedicious or rebellious. For it were a great prejudice, and to sore
so to name them, in such case. There is a another and a better name for them,
which ye Lawyers know well enough.

We must not suffer every thing to be called vprour and rebellion, which ye
bloody bochers, Antichrists sworn champions, the practisers of all mischeife,
do so falsely name. For that is one of their practices also, Note, note
under the pretense and color of vprour, and rebellion, to stop and to bind
al men's mouths and hands, that no man^e should reprove their doings by
spekyng, nor yet with their hands defend them selves against their wicked
procedynges. And they in the mea^e season, to have both their mouths and hands
at liberty, to work almis^hief. And so to fear and trappe al other, under
pretense and color of vprour and rebellion, and to comfort them selves, and
pretend to the world, their procedinges to be lawful. But they shall not so
blear men's eyes. We shall so define and declare the matter, that that subtlety
shall not serve them. It is not always vproure, nor rebellion, Mark well.
to do against every law, for the every transgression against any law should
be rebellion. What a rebel is.
But that man may be called a rebel, or a mayntainer of vprour which will
suffer no maiestrate to rule nor no law to take place, but will rise against the
maiestrate, to deprive him to the intent to be ruler and Maiestrate himself,
and to make what laws him lusts, as the head Capitain of the Anabaptists
did at Monster in Westphalia. To wythstande the b. of rome is no rebelion, but
a keeping of our oath and most bounden duty.
Such one may well be called a mai^tainer of vprour, and a rebel. For, Aliud est
inuasor, aliud defensor. For a rebel and a defendor are two things. So that it
can be no vprour nor rebellion, for a man to defend himself against the wiked
practices, and unlawful proceadyngs of bloudsuppers Papists. But they them
selves, that will begin wars to mai^tain by force their wicked procedings
against God and against their natural cou^trei, they may well be called rebels
and traitors to God and their countrei: The Papists are traitors both to
God, the Realm, and to nature.
Yea there are no greater traitors nor rebels tha^ the Papists and the
bloudthyrsty bishops and prelates and such as take part with them. For they like
very abominable murderers and traitors, of very mischife and spite, do work
both against God and also against nature. And that may easily be proved. For
first concerning the doctrine and religion which they would sub^^^t, they them
selves know well enough, that it is the very true religion of God. For at the
great counsel of the Empire that was holden at Augspurge, Cardinal Nicolas, The
Bishop of Augspurge.
ye bishop of Augspurge, said: that he could well be content that the same
religion that was at Witte^berg, should be received generally, sauying that he
could not abide that it should begin and spring, in such a corner of no
reputation, as Wittemberge is. How like ye this gere? Are not these Ioly words
to come out of a bishops mouth? Campegius.
And in like manner Cardinal Campegius, the Popes Legate, did confess at the
same council, that he could consent that that religion should be suffered in
Germany, but that it would be a great ensample for other nations to require the
same also, and for yt cause it were in no wise to be granted. And a another
great bishop of theyrs said these words, concerning their disputers and
learned men: The Papists own confession*
Our learned men do defend us pretely, for they confess them selves, that our
faith which we have followed these many years, has no ground upon the
scripture, but only upon the Decrees and determinations of the counsels. All this to be true diverse noble men, yt heard it, can testify. And besides, one
Wynchestre a bishop in England, Wynche^ster a wethercocke and a Jack of both
sides.
otherwise a very obstinate peruers and crafty Papist, has written a book
against ye supremacye of ye Pope, wherein also he writes against pardons and
vows, although he be a maintainer of the fylthy and abominable single life of
priesses himself. And in certain sermons that he has made before the king of
England has inueighed against Monks and Friars, and confessed also that there
ar diverse abuses in the Mass, worthi to be reformed. Read winchesters oracion
of true obedience.
And yet he himself is a great massemonger, and would feign mai^tain as much of
it as he could. And the like have other bishops of England also done, which are
notwithstanding no enemies to ye pope. For although they would have him to be
their supreme head, yet have they proved in their boltes, that he cannot
challenge any supremacy, by the scriptures and word of God. So that the very
papists them selves know that our religion and doctrine is no false doctrine
but grounded upon the scripturs and the word of God. And yet of very malice and
spite, they would condemn and rote out our religion by very force and
violence, contrary to al right and reason. And where it was required in the
general Parliament or council, that no ^et should pass against our doctrine and
religion, before it were heard in open disputacion, what the learned men of our
side could say, for the defense and maintenance thereof: that could not nor
might not be granted, that christ's saying might be verified, he that does
evil, hates ye light, Poperye may not abide the light. Truth loves the light.
and refuses the light, that his doyngs should not be reproved and disclosed.
But he that does the truth, comes to ye light, that his works may be openly
known because they are done in God. There is never an Article of our doctrine
and religion, but we are able and redye to prove it by the manifest word of
God. Thus much concerning our religion. And as concerning the other point yt
they would so fayn bring to pass, that strangers and Alianes should have the
government of our nation, if they would speak according to their own hearts
and consciences, I would desire none other judges but eue^ the^ selves.
Wherefore it is they that are the authors of vprour, and very traitors,
rebels, which will attempt wars for the maintenau^ce of their tyranny and
wicked practices. And to show my self a true Pastor and prophet, and to bear
a true heart unto my native country* I will give my dear country me^ a
faifhful warning and instruction how to behave them selves, Do after this
counsel.
that they ru^ne not into any peril and danger of soul, in obeing the
procedings of the bloody Papists, against God and their natural country. The
danger whereof doutles is very great. And this will I do, to the intent that no
man hereafter may excuse him self and say: Non putasse^, I would never have
thought that the danger had been so great. Now he that will follow my council,
let him take it, and he that will not, let him leave it, but no man shall say,
but that he was warned.

And my true and faithful aduertisment is this, that if the Emperor or any
other prince should go about, to maintain the procedinges above specified by
force of arms, and should command al men to prepare the^ selves, and to be
in a redines to aid him* that ye my dear country men, do in no wise harken to
any such commandment, nor in any wise obey him. For in such case no man
ought to obei nether King nor Keiser, but should offend and disobey God, and
should cast both his body and soul into perpetual peril and danger, if he
should obei. For the Emperor or any other prince (what so ever he were) in so
doing, should do manifestly against god, This is not man's advise, but Gods
co^ma^deme^t.
and against all right. And that no man should think, that this counsel
spryngeth of mine own brain and fansye, I will show the such strong reasons
and arguments, that thou shall feel at thy fingers ends, that it is not only
my council, but Gods own earnest and most straight commandment, whose heavy
displeasure al men ought to fear and to tremble thereat, as they must do at
lenght.

The first cause why no man ought to obey Emperor nor king in such case
(specially in the cause of religion) ^s this. The first cause why no man
ought to obey to ye mayntenaunce of popery.
Every particular man has promised and vowed in his baptism ^euen as well as
the Kayser him self) to keep and maintain the Gospel of Christ, and not to
persecute it or to work any thing there against. Wherefore to the commandment
of the Emperor or of thy prince (whatsoever he be) you may make this answer:
Answer to the magistrate.
Most noble Emperor or prince, if you did keep your oath or vow which you
made in your Baptism, you should be my most dear and liege Lord, and I would
obey you with all my heart* But if you will not keep your promise and christian
covenant made with Christ in your Baptism, but persecute ye same obey who
will, I will not blaspheme my Lord, nor be one of them that shall help to
persecute his word, and so run and cast my self headlonges into the pit of
hell with you, for your pleasure.

He that mainteyneth poperye, fyghteth against god and ^l his creatures.
This is the first cause, which comprehe^deth in it many other great and
weighty causes. For whosoever fights or draws his sword against the
Gospel: the same does fight and draw his sword against God himself, against
Jesus Christ, our only savior against the holy ghost, against the precious
blood of Christ, against his death, against Gods word, against all the Articles
of the Christian faith, against ye true ministracio^ of all the Sacraments
against all the Doctrine and Religion which is given, confyrmed and approved
through ye gospel. And to be short against al Angels and saints, against
heaven and earth, and against al creatures. For he yt strives against God,
must needs also strive against all that belongs unto God or holds of him
And against al these shall thy obedience minister aid and help, and so shalt
thou begiltie before God of all these things before rehearsed. And therefore
what reward thou shall have therefore of God at length, thou may easily
gather thy self. And this makes also the matter ye more grievous, forasmuch as
you shall do al these things wittingly, and against thine own concie^ce* And in
this case thou shalt do worse, than al Turks and Tartarians, Jews and
Panimes. For where they do obaye their heads in persecuting the Gospel, they
do it of ignorance and know not what they do, so do no^ thou. Wherefore thou
must needs be much worse, and suffer ten times more grievous damnation, them
any Turk or Paname.

Now although it be an heavy and a miserable thing to consider that the matter
is come to this point among Christen men, that they should have any need of
any such aduertisment as this. And though they the^ selfs knew not, what a
terrible and heavy thing it is to resist against gods word: or to show any
obedience or token of obedience, in such things as are contrary, repugnant and
injurious to the same (for it is a manifest token yt even in Christe^dom among
Christians, there ar worser Turks tha^ are either in Turkey or in hell) Yet such
as be true Christians in deed (although there be few of them) do know well
enough the^ selves what to do in such case, The great Turk him self is not so
mad as to rage and rave against his own Mahomet and Al^ora^ as our devils ye
Papists do against ye gospel yt they were professed unto, in their baptism:
wherefore ye Turks may be angels in respect of ye Papists, and the papists
very Devils in respect of the turks.
and have no need of any such admonicion as this: But the papists, which bear
the name and shine of Christians (and yet are ten times worse than Turks) must
be admonished and warned. If it will do the^ any good, it is well, if not, yet
shall they have ye less to excuse them selves with, and must look for the more
grievous damnacion. Now to the second cause.

The second cause why men ought not to obey in such case, is this: Though our
doctrine were not right (as it is most right and true) yet ought this to fear
men from showing them selves obedient in such case, for as much as by such
obedience, they should make them selves giltye and partakers before God of all
the abomination that is al ready committed, or shall hereafter be committed in
the whole Papistri. This cause co^prehendeth infinite abhomynacions, al
wickedness, sin, and danger ye a man in manner can reken. In su^ma, in this
cause is hell it self with all the sins that are therein, whereof thou should
make thy self partaker if you should obei either Keiser or King in such case.
And to the intent that you may more plainly see what they be, I will here
rehearse some of the^. For the papists pretend such an holiness as though
they were angels, and they will not hear of any of these abhominacions, and so
they never repent for the^, nor never amend the^. The Papists sit up, but they
amend not.

Horedo^e.


First you shall make thy self partaker of al their filthi liui^g* yt they have
led, and yet lead. For they never purpose to amend any part thereof. And al yt
should thou help to defend and maintain by thy obedience. And by that means
should light upon thy neck all the whordom and filthiness, that is used in their
Colleges and cathedral churches. A sort of holy gentlemen.
And thy conscience should have this to rejoice and to triumph of, that thy
obedience has helped to maintain the most abominable whormo^gers and villanes
upon earth, and to defend the most abominable living that can be thought. Yea,
and if the Emperor or any other prince should attempt any war for the matter,
if thou should take part with him, thou should ve^ter thy life and blood
for such abominable wretches. Oh this were a goodly thing for thy conscience
to triumph of. Buggeri.
Furthermore thou must make thy self also partaker of the chastity of the
Pope, and of his Cardinals, which is a wonderful chastity above al other
Ecclesiastical chastity, which they call in the Italian tongue Puseronen, that
is such chastity as ye Sodomites and Gomorrhianes did use. For so suffers
god his arch enemies the Pope and his Cardinals to be blinded above other, that
they can not be content only to offend with woman kind, but according to their
well deserved reward, they defyle the^ selves and their own bodies one with
another most beastli, and ar so depely drowned in yt horrible vice, and so
blinded in their hardened hearts, yt they count that abhominacion for no sin
at al, but make a jesting and a laughing matter of it, as though there were no
more peril nor danger therein, tha^ in a game at tables or cards. Go thy wai
now and defend and maintain with thy obedience these beasts past al shame and
repe^ta^ce, which make but a jest and a christmas game of such an horrible
vice* And it is no lie that I write here in this matter, for such as have been
at Rome do know well enough that more abomination is there used than any man
ca^ rehearse or believe. When the general counsel called consilium Laterane^se
was holden at Rome, in the time of Leo the.x. among other decrees that were
there concluded upon and determined to have been setfurth, Two decrees of ye
pope. Mark them. The Spanyardes and papystes use three small sins, Simonia,
Buggeria ^ no^ creed re in Deu^. The Cardinals were stinted, but ye Pope
might keep sans ^omber.
this was one also which should have been setfurth as a decree of yt counsel, yt
men should believe the soul of man to be immortal. Whereby every man may judge,
that they made than at Rome but a very sport and mock of everlasting life.
For it is an evident testimony, that their common belefe was there, that there
was no everlasting life. And therefore they would teach them the contrary with a
Bull, and decree of their council. And yet besides that, there was set another
pretty decree also in the same bull, which was this: That from thence forth the
Cardinals should not keep so many male stews as they used to do. But pope
Leo commanded that to be stricken out, least all the world should suspect (as
they might well do) and have knowledge how openly and without al shame the Pope
and his cardinals did maintain Sodom, even at Rome. And there is no Pope,
cardinal, bishop doctor, priest, nor religious man, that ^uer went about to
punish or reform this abomination, but color it, yea laugh and jest it out:
and moreover do b^witch, provoke and set on, kings, and princes, to defend
and mayntain them, to practice their filthy and deuilish living still, freely
without repe^tau^ce or reformation. And to the maintenance of all this, shall
thy obedience serve and help, and so shall thou procure al these horrible
sins upon thy neck, whosoever thou art that shalt obey either Emperor, king
or prince in these proceadinges, and be an occasion that the terrible use of
such, more than beastly vices, shall come into thy country, for the punishment
whereof than, we must daily look and wait, that the earth shall sink under us,
and swallowe us up. The virtue of the spaniards
Let them once bring in ye pope again (as doutles the Spaneyardes will labor to
the uttermost to do) and tha^ shall thou se how these horrible blasphemous
vices shall reign in thy natural countrei: And shall not then thy obedience be
well spent* to help to bring such gear into thy country* The wealth of the
popyshe Church rose by lyeng and stealyng. Pardons. Purgatory,
And yet moreover you shalt^ also make thy self partaker of all the theft and
robberye of the whole papacy. The infinite treasure which they have falsely and
deceiuably gotten with their pardons, is it not very abominable theft and robbry
throughout al christendom? That innumerable money that they have procured and
gotten, through their stinkyng fained purgatory, is it not very theft and
robbry thorowout the whole world? The infinite treasure yt they have gotten with
Masses, Masses.
mounthmyndes, trentals, and such other massmarcha^dyse, is it not abominable
theft and robbri throughout the whole world? The wonderful riches that they
have gotten with bulls for whitemeate, with pilgrimages, Images, and an infinite
swarm of such gear, is it not very abominable theft and robbri throughout the
whole world? How have y^ pope* cardinals, bishop^ colleges* etc. come by their
lands, lordships and manors, that they are equal to the mightiest Emperors
and princes? Is it not altogether unmeasurable abominable theft and robbri?
Papists ar thieves and robbers
What are they now elce* than the greatest robbers and thieves upon earth? And
yet there is no repentance nor ame^dment in them: No, there is not so much good
blood in their bodies, as to do but some part of their office, whereby they
might seem to enjoy such revenues under some shine or pretense of honesty.
But they do rather the contrary, and condemn, blaspheme and persecute the
name, word, and working of God. Now come thy way, such manifest thieves and
robbers shalt thou defend and maintain with thy obedience, that they may not
only continue and go forward in their wickedness without repentance or
reformacion, but also that they be stre^gthened and encouraged to continue
therein. Se now, what danger thou shall cast thy self into by such obedience.
For of all this robbry and theft shalt thou be guilty of, and a partaker before
God, if thou do obey these proceadinges, which tend to the setting up and
restoring again (as all men may e^selye perceive) of the popes authority and
jurisdiction. To maintain poperye, is to be gilti of al innocent blod shed
And so besides all this also, thou shalt charge thy self with all the innocent
blood that the pope has hitherto or shall hearafter shed through his
practices, and also with all the sorrow and heaviness* yt he has wrought or shall
hearafter work in this nation to mayntain his kingdom. How many thousands
have been murdered by his tyranny, and are like hearafter to be murdered, if
he may o^tain his usurped jurisdiction, which doubtless the godles Spanieyardes,
will labor to restore out of hand? Alas how will thou be able to bear upon thy
neck so much innocent blood (whereof thou shall make thy self partaker by
thy obedyence) seeing it is an intolerable thing, to be gyltie of one man's
blood I will not here rehearse other abominations of the papists, what poison,
treason, malice and spite they use and practice daily. I thyncke no tongue upon
earth can rehearse all the abhominacions of the papistry, but by these points
now rehearsed and by the daily ensamples that they practice, we may easly
gather the rest. The pope is Antichrist.
And if it were not that the Pope must needs be the very Antichrist and his
adherentes Antichrists impes, which in all things must evermore be contrary
to Christ, men might meruel and wondre how they could so continually use so
much abomination. But seeing it is so, The life, and doctrine of Christ and ye
pope are contrari ye one to the other.
and can no notherwyse be, it must needs consequently follow, that like as
Christ did lead and teach a most pure, sincere excellent, chaste, sobre, holy,
and godly life: Even so contrary wise must this Antichrist the pope and his
adhere^ts, lead, teach and maintain, a most shameful, blasphemous, filthi,
curssed, beastli abominable, hellish life: how could he else in all points
declare himself to be the enemy of Christ and the very right Antichrist? And
yet al their abhominacio^s might the better be born if they did not so
earnestli defend the^, and would make all the world believe (perforce) yt they did
nothing but well and right in all their doings. And yet not withstanding all this, if al these abhominacio^s that I have rehearsed, were tolerable and to be
wyncked at (as they in no wise be) yet to condemn ye pure and sincere doctrine
and word of God, and to exalt and set the^ selves above god (as they go about
to do) no right Christian heart ought to suffer it, much less to minister any
manner of aid or assistance by his obedience, or otherwise thereunto. Yea, eueri
true Christian ought rather to spend his blood, life, goods, and al together
in the confession and defense of the true honor and religion of God, tha^ for
the keeping of them, to indaunger both bodi and soul with eternal destruction,
through following and obeing their doctrine: The infinite abhominacio^s and
errors whereof (which they defend and maintain as right, true and lauful,
never intending to refourme or alter one jot thereof) I am not able to
rehearse* All the danger whereof shall thou procure upon thy neck (whosoever ever
thou art) that shall obey or help to assist the procedynges of the Emperor,
and such princes and bishops as are confederate with him, to maintain and
bring in the B. of Rome.

And to rehearse some of their intolerable errors, how will thou (whosoever
thou art) bear in thy conscience, the false and shameful deceit of the B. of
Romes pardons, wherewith so mani thousand souls have been so miserably seduced
and deceived, and shamefully begyled of their money, and so like to be again,
if they may obtain their purpose? And although they them selves do know that
it is nothing but very knauerye that they have wroughte with their pardons,
Papists past repe^^taunce.
yet show they no repentance nor token of reformacion thereof. They have
taught the people to put their trust and affiaunce in pardons, even at ye very
hour of death, which is so heinous an terrible a thing, that if they were
otherwise as innocent and holy, as S, John ye Baptist, yet were they most
worthy to be damned in the very pit of hell, for this one point only, and had
well deserved, that neither the earth should bear them, nor the Sun shine
upon them: much less that any man should help to assist and strengthen them
or venture his blood for them.

For consider a little, the wiked knavery and abomination of their pardons. The
virtue of ye popes pardons.
Who so ever did put his whole trust and affians in their pardons, and so died
in the same hope and trust, the same did utterly renounce, forsake, and forget
Christ, and could have no hope nor trust at al in him. For whosoever sets
his trust in any other thing (whatsoever it be) saving in Christ only, the
same can have no trust at al in Christ. Now do we and al me^ know this, that
the papists (who^ thou must help to strengthen by thy obedience) have taught
most earnestly, that men should build their salvation upon pardons, ^l^e would
not men have esteemed them so much, nor bought them so fast as they did. And
like very messengers of Satan, yea, like very incarnat devils, they made no
word no^ mention in the mean time* of any faith or hope in Christ. For he that
knows, that his faith and hope of salvation ought to rest in Christ, the
same cannot suffer nor abide, no faith nor hope to rest in any oher thing
besides christ. Now if they were not more then mad, and utterly robbed of their
wits, they would be ashamed, once to desire such shameless doings to be
maintained or difended. But we may perceive, that it is ^o true that a certain
bishop said unto master Philip. Melancthon at ye (...) holde^ at Augspurg*
whose words were these. Alas Master Philip, Popyshe Prests never good.
what would ye refourme in us pristes? for we were yet never good. As who should
say, it were an heard thing now to make them good. And it was one of their own
pillars that spoke these words, which had experience of the rest by him
self. Well to let pardons pass, and to come to purgatory, The pick^ purse
purgatory.
that has piked many a pursse, how wylt thou (whatsoever thou art, that
shalt obey or assist the Emperor and his confederates, in these procedinges,
yt are before me^cioned) be able to bear in thy conscience, all the falsehead
that they have used with this purgatory* whereof thou must be partaker? How
traiterousli have they bleared and bewitched all the world, and brought all the
world in manner into a foles paradise? And with such lies and theft, have gotten
al their goods and possessions in manner. By the means whereof they have
utterly excluded and banished the only true comfort and trust in Christ, and
have taught the people in stead of Christ* to gape upon their own works,
and to trust to be saved by the same. And who so ever so does, ye same must
needs exclude Christ; and utterly forget him. And so if God had not
wonderfully hitherto preserved his, all must^ have died in a false belefe, as
ye Jews and Turks, and so have perished in the pit of hell, through the default
of such teachers. Oh, what soul murderers are they? No heart of man shall be
able to co^prend (as long as the world endures) what murder they have
committed, against the souls of men with their fained Purgatory. Much less
shall they be able to comprehend, what injury and blasphemye they have done
thereby, against the true faith and confydence that is dew unto Christ. And
yet there is no repentance nor amendment in the^, but they rather labor and
studi, how they may be defended and maintained, in these naughty procedinges.

And yet more, who so ever shall obey either Emperor, King or prince in this
case, shall also make him self gilty and partaker of al ye abhominacion and
blasphemy, The virtue of the holy mas, cursed might it be.
that is contained in the wicked and detestable Mass and of the infinite
idolatry and blasphemi, that is therein committed, against ye true use of the
holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood. As first of the fained sacrifice,
prete^ding to offer up daily unto God, his own dear so^n, as though they were
better and holier then the son of God. And so they are not content, ye holy
sacrament to be an ordinance of God, which me^ should receive in faith, but
they make a sacrifice and an oblacio^ of it, where with they will reconsile the^
selves and other unto God, and will make also a salve of it, for every sore.
Yea, for every saint, there is a peculiar Mass, and for every disease and
adventure what so ever it be, a peculiar Mass. in all their books and doctrine,
a man shall not find one word of faith, but all is full of the Mass, the
Mass, what a sacrifice, and what an holy thing yt mass is, where as there is no
ceremoni, where in faith is so much required and exercised, as in the true
institucion and celebracio^ of the Sacrament, being rightli administered,
forasmuch as Christ him self did institute it, for a remembrance and memorial
of himself, that al men in the celebration thereof, should preach of him,
remember him, and believe in him. But instead of that, they preach and set
forth their oblacion and sacrifice, and their own inuencion, and most
abhominably bye and sell therwyth. Here I ouerpasse the idolatry that is
committed at the eleuacion of their false Mass god, Stoop a ^ore.
and in the adoration thereof: O Lord who is able to rehearse all the
blasphemies that are committed only in the Mass? If they had brought up no
another error nor abuse of the holy sacrament* but only to make a gaping and a
gasyng stock of it, as they use to do at their high feastful days, and
specially upon their church holy days, carieng it about in their processio^s,
and making (as it were) a Christmas game with it, only that the priests (at
such times) may fyl their bellies, and get monye of the simple people for their
labor. This abuse and prophanacion of the Sacrament, were more the^ horrible
enough. But yet this is nothing to this most grievous abuse, that they will make
of the common Sacrament, Greased and anoi^ted.
a private work and a peculiar oblacion, to be made only of certain appointed
parsons. This is such an high blasphemi, that it abhors me to remember it,
yea, it might well kyl a man to remember it, if he did thoroughly wey and
consider it. Their faces to the wall like an Horse in ye mau^ger.


And yet this augmenteth the blasphemy somewhat the more also, that they
conceal and keep secret the words and faith of the sacrament, murmuring then
secretly to them selves, contrary to the manifest doctrine of Saint Paul,
sayng as often as ye shall do this, ye shall preach and show fourth (and not
keep close, and murmr secretli) the death of the Lord. S. Paul says: Ye
shall preach and show forth* etc. And they do clean contrary. But the abuses of
the papistry ar so many, that no tongue can reprove or paint the^ out
sufficiently. Every abhominacion is set forth by one devil at least, but ye
mas was made and set forth by ye full consent of all the hole chapter house of
devils.
Other abhominatio^s have every one a peculiar and a particular devil workyng
in them, but I take ye Mass to be a work of all the deuyls in hell together,
wheru^to they al have cast and laid al their heads, al their hands, all their
diuises, yea all their knavery and wikednes together, and so finished this
detestable abhominacion. And this may appear by the false deceiuable spirits,
which (under the color of dead men's souls) appear in diverse places, crieng
for Soulmasses, where as we never herd of any of the^, that ever cried or called
for Christ, nor for any help of him, but al for masses. Which is a very strong
proof and evident token, that the devil lives in no one thing so effectuously,
The devil lives in nothing so effectousli as in the mas, and mas priests.
as he does in the Mass and in the mass marcha^ts which through their
abominable filthy life, covetousness, blasphemies and other abominations* do
most shamfully maintain and entertain him. And doubtless it is the highest and
last uengeaunce and wrath of God upon earth, that shall appear before the
latter day. For there can be no greater. These are ye virtues, which thou
shall help to maintain, by thy obedience to their procedyngs. Now if any man
peradventure be offended with me, for vsyng so sharp and taunting words
against them, I would desire them to take this for a sufficient answer unto
the^: Though they be knaves by their order, yet they are ge^telmen by their
misorder and idleness*
That my sharpenes is nothing in respect of their wickedness and knavery. For
what tauntyng is it to call the devil a murderer, a thief, a betraier, a
blasphemer, a liar? It is even as much to him, as if one did puff at him with
the breath of his mouth. And what are the maintainers of papistry other tha^
very incarnate diuils, which have no sparkle of repentance in the^ but have
^^^ate hardened hearts, ^ent to defend and maintain these abhominacions* which
they them selves know to be naught, and yet they would have thine and mine
obedience, to help to maintain them* Let any man taunt a cankard Papist never
so much, it is eue^ as much unto him, as if a Goose did hiss at him* ^or his
obstinate peruersenes is grown so far, yt nothing is able to call him back.
The greatest taunt that thou can taunt him with, is to call him a Papist. For
with that name, thou co^prehendest al together. As for all other tauntes
besides, they are no more, than if a man would beat a Bear with a straw, or
strike upon an hard stone with a Fether. And again, they them selves have
given the occasion inoughe, to taunt them sharply, if I could. For some of them
have said, that they would rather suffer them selves to be torn in pieces, tha^
they would consent, that any part of ye Mass should be altered or abolyshed.
Prestes were never good.
And again a another of the^ said: Priests were never good* and that we should
suffer the^ unreformed. And both these that thus said, were bishops, and
special pillars of theyrs. And as their co^nsciences and words are: eue^ such
(doutles) are the consciences and words of the rest. Seeing therefore they bear
witnesses of them selves, that they be such desperate wretches, and will so
continue, and will rather be torn, than cease from their blasphemies, I should
do them great wrong, both before God, and the world, if I should name the^
otherwise, than they name the^ selves. Therefore if I should call them most holy,
most honorable, Yea, but they love and look to be so mocked.
reverend or worshipful Fathers, no man should know whom I meant: Nor they the^
selves should not know, of who^ I did speak, because they know no such names.
Therefore my taunting is no tauntyng at all, no more tha^ when I call a Pear, a
Pear, or an Apple, an Apple. And to make an end of these horrible mass
marter^, Honori^g of saints
how will any man be able to bear upon his neck, the detestable idolatry, of
honoring and worshippyng of saints, not content to praise God in them, but
they make very Gods of them. And the most noble virgin Mary, the mother of
Christ, they set even in Christ's place, imagining Christ to be a severe judge,
and making the siple and weak consciences believe, Christ to be a tyrau^t, so
that they have vtterli plucked al trust and affiaunce from Christ. Can any man
deny this to be true? have we not al proved and tried it to be true? And if
any man would deny it, are not the books of the lowsi friar obseruants, and of
the black Friars also to be seen* which are stuffed full of such Idolatry? As
the books of our Ladies Psalters, of Stellaries, Rosaries, Coronaries; and such
like deuilish trash. And here I will rehearse a storye, that happened at
Augspurg, that al men may se, Papists agree not in doctrine.
upon what ground they build their idolatri and supersticion. In the discourse
of the Article of invocation of saints, ^. Eckius alleged a text out of the
xlviii. chapi. of Genesis Where the Lord speaking of Jacob, Ephraim and Manasses,
says thus: And my name shall be inuocated over these children. And after many
words of Master Philip Melanctho^, master John Brentius happened to say, that
there was not one word in all the scripture to be found, of the invocation of
saints, Than stepte Cochleus forth (like a profou^d clarke) to help the
matter and said* that there was nothing in the old testament, to prove the
invocation of saints, because there were no saynctes in heaven, when the old
testament was written: but they were al at that time in Limbo Patrum. With ye
Ioha^nes Friderich Duke Elector of Sa^on, which heard al their reasoning,
said thus unto Eckius: There has Cochleus answered your text, yt you aledged
out of the old testament so sure ar these noble doctors of their doctrine, and
so well do they agree the other, that one of them says there is no thing in the old
testament to prove the invocation of saints with. And a another alegeth authority
out of ye old testament to prove it: As though we knew not, yt god wrought all the miracles, which were done in the Old testament for Abraha^s, Isaackes and
Jacobs sake (as he him self, often times does testify) and not for any saints
sake in the new Testament. And from whence do they fetch their profes to prove
their doctrine trow ye? out of noble authors I warrant you, even out of old
barbrous Do^ses. I red once in a book of theirs, which was a book of
Moralizacions, how the Virgin Marye ought to be worshipped with offerings and
gifts. And why? Mary, for this cause: There was once a thief which was one that
robbed by the high way, A great miracle of our ladi of Ca^delmas
which never did good al his life long, saving that he happened once by chance
to come into a Church upon Candlemas day* where, seeing the people offering money
and candels upon the altar, he offered there also as other did. After that the
same thief was taken for robbry, and hanged. When he was dead, the diuils would
have had his soul to hell. But there was a good angel, yt wythstode the^, saying
unto the devils, whi would ye take this man away, seeing ye have nothing to do
with him, nor no power over him? The diuils made answer again and said: He
has done much evil and mischief, and never did good in all his life. Dyuels
stand before gods judgment seat among ye Angels, and tha^ ye i. Psalm is not
true neque pecatores in concilio in storum. Godyles soles have hands.
So they went together before the judgment seat of god, and there the devils
accused the thief, that he had never don any good. The^ the good angel brought
forth ye cross penny, together with the candle, which he had offered upon the
altar. Upon ye the judge gave sentence, that the these should defend him self
against the devils. And ye angel gave him this counsel, that he should take the
penny in the left hand, in the stead of a bu^le^, and the candle in the right
hand, in the stead of a sword, and so to fight with the Dyuels, and to strike
nothing but cross s^^okes at them. And so he did, and by that means chased
away the devils. After that, the soul came to the body again, and was taken
from the gallows, and the man lived afterward very honestly. Hec ille.

Who would ever have believed, that they had had, such strong reasons to prove
their doctrine with, if we had not their books for witnesses? Yea, the Monks,
friars and priests have stuffed their books full of such begerly fables, to
blear and blind al christendom with. And there was never yet any Pope, Bishop,
nor doctor that ever found faut with such gear. But now that men preach
Christ to be the only savior of al mankind, they rage and rave, as though they
were besides them selves. When me^ preached that A candle or a peney offered
unto our Lady, was of such force that it could deliver an unrepentant wretch
and murderer, both Christ and faith set a part, and could chase away the
devil: When me^ thus preached (I say) Blasphemynge, and (as it were) treading
under their feet the passion and merits of Christ, tha^ were al sermons good
and catholyke, Pestilent catholic.
and than were no heritickes in the world. etc. Does not this well verifye the
Bishops saying* That priests were never yet good?

Well let us yet rehearse somewhat more of their stuff: How will any man be able
to bear upon his conscience, y^ intolerable violence and force, which they
have wrought unto all the world, with their ear confession, wherewith they have
brought infinite souls to desperation, Auricule^ confession.
and have robbed and spoiled many sorrowful hearts, of al christen comfort? For
like very traitors, and abominable wretches, they made no manner of mencio^,
nor spoke never a word, of the true virtue and power of the keys, nor of
faith, but forced only upon tedious and intolerable torment of particular
nombring and rehearsyng of sins, and of doi^g just penance, and impossible
satisfaction therefore. And unto such enumeration and satisfaction (as a work
of their own) they ascribed the purchasing of Gods savor, and of everlasting
salvation: so that Christ might go play him, as one that had nothing to do with
that matter. And thus they led and kept men quite from Christ, and taught them
to put their trust in them selves, and in their own and other men's works and
deserts.

And in all their Doctrine, there is not one Syllable, be it never so little,
nor one title never so small, wherein Christ is not denied and blasphemed, and
the true faith in him most shamefully s^a^dered and assaulted, and the weak
hearts and consciences of simple people forced to impossible things and to
desperacion. Antichrist
And so, and no notherwyse, should the right Antichrist do, that according to
his name, he might teach and live manifestly enough, contrary to Christ, and
to exalt him self above God and his word. Which thing we see to be more
manifestly and apparantlye verifyed in the papacye, that is in the Popes
government, than any man can comprehend. And yet there is no repentance for all
this gear, but they rather defend and ^^^intaine that confession of theyrs*
(...) would besides, y^ every simple subject should (by his obedience and aid)
be pertaker of the sorrow, miserye, and desperacion, that the same confession
brinketh with it.

And yet this is not al, but who so ever thou beist, that shall aid or obey
them in their procedinges, thou shall make thy self partaker of ye grievous
misery, The Popes curse* cursed be he, and all his coue^t.
and detestable abuse of their Curse and Excommunicacio^. Which abuse only (if
there were no more but that) has worthily deserved, that all men should wysh
the papacy to synk and to perish, much less to show any obedience, or to
minister any aid, whereby it might be maintained. How has the Pope ruffled (and
played Rex Regum) with that thounderbolt of his curse and excommunication,
against Emperors, Kings, and against all the world? Yea against God himself
and his holy word. For what so ever the dyuel had put in his mind, that must
go forward, and be accepted as right and lauful. What wars and effusion of
blood has he caused therethorow in the world: Yea, who is able to rehearse all the abomination, that it has bredde? What so ever the Pope would have to be
sin, or to be called syn, that must needs so be. And what so ever pleased him
to be named good and godly, that must needs so be, so that he must be a most
dredful Lord over the whole world, over body and soul, lands and goods, over
purgatory, over hell, over the devil, over heaven, over angels, over God, and
over altogether. Heaven was open, or shut, to who^ soever it pleased him: And
so was hell like wise. Who^ soever it had pleased him, should have kept or lost
his body* goods, estimacion, lands, heritage* wife, children, house, money
and al such things. Yea, if this abuse of the keys had not been, what had the
papacye been? And all this have they done of very wilfulnes and force (against
all right and reason) even for very pomp, and for their bellies sake, misusing
(most wretchedly) the holy name of god, for the maintenance thereof. For under
the name and pretense of God, have they wrought al their detestable mischief
and tirannye. For the which they never once mind to repent, but (like
obstinate beasts) continue still in their wickedness, defending and mainteinyng
it, what so ever any man has said or written never so truly there against. It
were little wonder, if heaven and earth should open or utterly burst, for such
abhominacion, or that God would suffer such continual wretchedness, spite, and
misbehauour any longer vnreue^ged. I think that if the great Turk knew him
self to be so wiked, and such a wretch, as the Papists know them selves to be
desperate caitiues, he would not be so obstinate, nor so desperately and
spitefully defi god with his abhominacio^. And I think also yt the great Turk
would never say: The Pastes boast of them selves.
We Tukes were never good: as ye papists shame not to make their boast, sayi^g:
We Priests were yet never good. But it is the very devil that possesses them,
The pope follows the devil*
who knows his works to be naught, and therefore defends the^ the more
ernestly. And so does the Pope and his adherentes. Were it not well done now of
thee (what soever thou beist, if thou have any Christen blood in thy heart) to
help with thy obedyence, to aid or maintain such arrant soul murderers.

And what shall I say of their damnable, devilish, Relickes. Pilgrimages.
lieng and false Relikes and pilgrimages? Lord god what deuilish craft have
they used therewith? Dead^ bones and rotten rags have they made the people
believe, to be the bones and vestures of holy saints. And with such deuylyshe
subtlety have they seduced the si^ple souls and persuaded them ^o run hither
and thither to viset and to kiss their rotten relikes. And this gere is
maintained of ye pope, bishops priests, monks, and Friars, to be godly and
holy, and al with craft to pike men's pursses, to rob and spoil the^ of their
monye and goods, under a cloak of holiness, to maintain their idle bellies
their with. And it might the better have been borne, if they had not there with
ledd the people utterly from Christ, and taught them to putt and fyxe their
trust, and to build their salvation in such works of their own inuencion. For
there was none that ever sought any relike, or pilgrimage but that did put his
trust and affians of salvation therein, conte^nyng Christ and the true faith in
him, as a thing of no importau^ce. And this contempt and utter renouncyng of
Christ, and of the true faith in him, have the Papistical bishops and
priests not only never spoken against, but also they had a pleasure and
delight therein, and procured pardon for such as did believe in such beggary, and
so pilled and polled all the world, to feed and pamper the^ selves in idleness.

Christ speaks of an abhominatio^ in the holy place, If the papaci be not
such an abomination, let every man judge, that has indifferent judgment. Not
only for vsyng of such abominations as I have rehearsed, but specially for
mayntainyng of them and contineuing in them so desperately. For by that means,
they do not only sin in very deed against them selves, but also they confyrme
that sin of theirs with vnrepentaunce, whereby it becomes a sin against
the holy ghost, which is the most highest and most grievous and heavy sin
that can be. The sin of ye papists and of the diuyll are like.
For the devil himself can commyt no higher nor more grievous sin. Now se,
these are the Ioly rutterkyns, that will be lords and controllers over gods
word, ^ shameless Hipocrites.
and which dare attempt to move us to reca^t and revoke our doctrine, and to
reverence and receive all these abhominacio^s for the words and works of God?
and as for them selves, to remain unreformed, what else? And in no wise to admit
any new alteracion, beware of that how so ever they do. They speak and prate
much of styrryng up of sedicion and vprour, The papists and non other ar ye
styrrers up of vprour and sedicion. The papists ar the occasion of all plages
and of all misery in the world
but if this doing of theirs be not the next way to stir up sedicion and
vpror I cannot tell what ca^ more stir up sedicion and vpror. Yea, what can more
provoke ye pestilence, extreme dearth, the inuasio^ of ye Turk, wars,
murder, and all the plages and vengeance of God upon our necks than these
mis^heuous abhominacions that I have reckened? I say and will abide thereby, that
nothing so much. Here must I leave vnrehersed, for auoidyng of tediousnes, a
number of abhominacio^s which I have not yet spoken of, as vows to
pilgrimages, brotherhods* byeng and selling of their works* and of their
cowles and such like.

Now to the third and last cause* why no man ought to aid or obey Emperor,
King or Prince in this case, which is this: If thou should obey or aid the
Emperor, thy King* thy Queen, Prince, or Magistrate in such case, forasmuch as
they mind by such procedinges of theirs to stablish Antichrists kingdom, thou
shall not only (by thy obedience and aid) make thy self partaker of al these
abhominacions before rehearsed; but thy obedience and aid also, shall serve and
help, to subvert and to root out all the good* that has been done or wrought
by ye gospel. For these archecaitiues are not content to maintain these
abhominacions, but also they labor (all that they can) utterly to abolysh and
to root out for ever all the goodness, which the doctrine of the Gospel, or the
Preachers and professors thereof have taught wrought, or brought to pass.

This cause co^prehe^deth much matter in it, and is a very weighti cause. For
the doctrine of the gospel which has been ernestly preached and taught by us*
has wrought much good, thanks be unto God before. What good has been done by
ye preaching of the gospel
For before the doctrine thereof was preached and taught by our brethren, no
man knew what the gospel meant. No man knew what Christ was. No man knew what
Baptism or penance was. No man knew what faith or good works were. No man
knew what a sacrament was. No man knew what flesh or spirit was. No man knew,
what the.X. commandments, what the Lords prayer, or what the Creed meant. No
man knew what prayer was. No man knew how to bear the cross, or how to
take afflicion, nor yet how to comfort himself in any adversity. No man knew
before what y^ true office of a Maiestrat was Nor no man knew, what the state
of holy Matrimony was. No man knew what was the office of parents toward
their children, of Masters and mistresses toward their servants* and
maids, nor yet of Children, servants and maids toward their parents,
masters and dames. No man knew before, what the devil or what the world was:
What life or death was. No man knew rightly, what was Sin, or what was
Virtue, nor yet what forgeuenes of sins was, no^ where to be sought* No man
knew what God was. No man knew what it was to be a bishop, or what it was to be
a pastor, and to have charge of soul. No man knew also rightly, what ye church
was, nor what authority it had. No nor no man knew* what it was to be a
christian. Shall I say altogether in few words? No man knew any thing at
all, that every true Christian ought to have known. For the pope and papistical
asses, had blinded all the world and oppressed al men with ignorance. I may well
call them asses* for they are very gross and unlearned asseheades in all matters
of Christian religion, in ^ede. For they know, or at the least they will know
nothing elce, but that the salvation of Men and women depends, upon monks
and friars and such like, and upon their works and merits, and not upon
Christ at al. Where as the doctrine which we have ^aught, has brought to pass,
that diverse men, women, and children (thanks be unto God) know the principles
of Christian religion; and how al men ought to believe, how to pray, how to
take the cross, how to live, and how to die. The true understanding of these
and many other articles has been opened through the diligence of our
preachers. The true use also of the lords table, Yea, but now farewell truth
seeing our pore preachers are chopped up.
and of the Font, wherein all people are consecrated unto God through Baptism,
has by our preachers and teachers been brought to light, so yt al men (thanks
be to God) may se in their order the very right form of a Christian church.
All this shalt thou help, through thy obedience, to subvert and to condemn,
whosoever thou are, that shall obey them in their proceadyngs. And furthermore
also thy aid and obedience shall serve, and help to burn and destroy the old
and new Testament in our in other tongue, the holy Psalter and other books of
godly prayers in our mother tongue, and al other good books and most godly and
necessary works* which our preachers and teachers have written, as the
papists them selves cannot deni. And thy obedience shall also serve an^ help
to this, that no man from hence forth shall know the X. Commandments, the
Articles of the Christian faith, The Lords prayer. (For so was it before the
doctrine that we profess was preached.) And thy obed^e^ce shall serve likewise,
that no man shall hereafter learn any good instructions of baptism, of the
Lords supper, of faith, of the Gospel, of the true christian liberty, nor of
any other godly article.

Item, thy obedience shall serve and help, that no man may put his trust and
affiaunce rightly upon Christ. And yet more than this, it shall also serve and
help, that men shall put that trust and confidence that is due unto Christ
only, in the works and merits of monks, friars and priests, and that they
shall bye their merits and cowles at ye hour of their death. Thou shall hel^
there with also, yt in the place of holy Matrimony. thy nation shall be filled with
the hordom and fornication and other filthy and unnatural sins of pristes and
votaries. And yet further by helping with thy aid and obedience, to maintain
their abominable marcha^dise which they make with their idolatrous mass
sacrifice, thou shall make thy self partaker of all the covetousness, robbry and
theft, wherewith they have gotten al their possessions. And what shall I say
more? Thou shall help therewith utterly to subuerte Christ's word and whole
kingdom, and to restore, and maintain the deuyls kingdom. For that thing do
the mischeuous captives the Papists, and the authors of these proceadings mind
to do. They are Antichrists ministers, and therefore they can mind nor do
nothing but that which is contrary to Christ, Specialli in the chief article of
our salvation, which is this, that our heart, comfort, and affians of
salvation should rest only upon Christ, and not in any worckes of our own,
that is to say, that we should believe to be saved and to be delivered from our
si^nes, and to be made righteous only through true faith as it is written in
the.^. to the (...) maines: with the heart do we believe, unto righteousness.
This article I say will they in no wise suffer. And we ca^ in no wise forbear
it. For take this article away, and than take away the church. For without
this Article, no error can be resisted. For as much as without this article,
Christ will not, nor cannot be with us. For this is the article that must
declare and open christ unto us. For this articles sake, has ye world often
been plaged, through the sin flood, through great tempests, through wars
and diverse other kinds of plages. For this articles sake, was Abel murdered
and many other martyrs. And yet it remains and shall remayn, let the
adversaries do, and practice what they will this Article shall remain, when they
shall go to wrake and perish in the pit of hell.

Now let al men well consider with them selves, and look well about them selves,
If their aid and obedience shall help and serve to restore all the
abominations of the papistrye, they shall make them selves partakers of al the
blood that has been shed through the papists from the death of Abel till this
day, or that hereafter shall be shedd by them. And moreover, if their obedience
and aid shall serve to the roting out and subversion of Christ's Gospel and of
his whole kingdom, and to the setting up and maintainyng of ye devils kingdom,
let them take hed^ what will be the end thereof at length* Note well.
and with what consciences they will stand before god at his judgment seat

And besides all this to make an end whosoever shall aid and obey them, his
aid and obedience shall serve to bring in Aalianes, Thy obedience shall work
the shame. Are not ye Spaniardes worthy to be welcome?
which shall ouerrunne his natural country, most shamefully defyle and abuse
honest wives, widows and virgyns even before the faces of their husbands,
parents and frindes. They shall also rob and spoil men of their goods, lands
and heritage, and divide and bestow them at their pleasure. No tongue is able to
rehearse the hundred part^ of the miserye, that shall happen, if the papists
and the maiestrates that are le^ by the^ may bring their proceadyngs to pass,
both the nobility, ye yemanry and the whole co^minaltie shall be destroyed for
ever, their lawful heirs and posterity disinherited, and Alianes shall
possess the lands and inheritance of our auncetors. The ancient laws of our
nation shall be subverted, and new laws established. All this and more than I
can rehearse, shall thou begiltie of, before God and the world, that al thy
posterity shall rue the day that over they were borne, whosoever thou art yt
shall obey or and the proceadings that are now attempted. Well, let no man say
but that he had warnyng enough, in no wise to obey or to aid, nether Kaiser nor
King, Lady nor Lord in such case. If they will take and follow such warning
and admonicion it is good: If they will not, the more peril, danger and shame
shall be theirs. Thus much has my duty to my natural country bounden me to
write unto my dear country men, for a faithful admonicio^ and counsel for
them, not to stir o^ to provoke them to any unlawful vprour or sedicion, but
to instruct them, that they ought in no wise to obey nor to aid the sworn
adversaries of the son of God and of their natural country (borne to work
mischief) in such proceadyngs, as they go about. And if they should be forced
by violence, to the obedience of such unlawful things, that they may by all
laws defend the^ selves against such maiestrates, even as against most violent
tyrannes and bloudhoundes.

And now to you (ye papists) for a conclusion, If ye ca^ with truth reprove
or deny any thing that I have written in this Admonicion, let me hear it, and
I shall make further proof thereof, if need shall require. And let the people
freely read this my admonicion, and than let the blindest of them be judge
between you and me. But if I have herein written nothing but truth, tha^ forbid
all men to read or to have in in their hands this Admonishion, that all the
world may know, that ye are the very same, of who^ I have spoken therein, and
that ye are afraid yt your works should come to light. But if ye forbid
this, doubt ye not* but you shall have another more earnest, wherein your
detestable abomination and your deuylish Practices, shall be a little better
discribed and painted.

Forbid it if ye will.

A prayer to be said of all t^^e Christians against the Pope and all the
enemies of Christ and his Gospel.
O Lord, almighty god and heavenly father, we have verelye well deserved that
thou should punish and correct us. But we beseech the most gracious father,
that thou will punish and correct us thy self favorably and with mercy, and
not in thy fury and indignation. It is better for us, O Lord, to submyt our
selves under thy rod and correction, and to yield our selves into thy hands,
tha^ into the hands of men, or of our enemies. For great is thy mercy. Against
the (O Lord) have we sinned, we have not kept thy word and commandments, we
have done evil in thy sight. But we have done nothing, for the which the devil
or the Pope and his ministers ought iustlye to correct us, neither have they
any authority to correct or punish us. But thou may use them as thy
terrible rods against us, forasmuch as we have sinned against thee, and
therewith worthelye deserved most grievous punishment. No Lord, we have done no
offense* for the which they ought ius^ly to punish us. But this is their
seeking that we should most blasphemously sin and offend against thee as
they do. That we should disobey thee for their pleasures, and blaspheme thee,
and commit idolatrye and supersticion, and believe in fables and false
doctrine and religion as they do. And so that we would so do, they care not
what whoredom, murder, theft, filthynes or what other abhominacion so ever we
did otherwise. But this is all the sin which we have done against them, that
we profess and confess thee, which art our God and Father, with thy Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost* to be the only true God.

For if we would forsake, and deny the and thy word, which thou have reveled
unto us, both the dyuel and the Pope with al their ministers would let us alone,
and suffer us to live in rest.

Wherefore thou merciful father, and most ernest judge over our enemies, cast
thine eyes upon us. For they are thy enemies, more the^ they be our enemies.
And in that they persecute and vex us, they persecute and vex thee. For that
word which we do profess and believe, is not ours but thine: and al together is
the working of thy holy Ghost in us. Which thing the Devil and the Pope with
such other enemies of thine can not abide. But they would be our God in thy
place, and instead of thy word, they would establish lies. For the Pope instead of the most pre^ious sacrifice and oblacion of thy son Jesus Christ,
would stablysh and set up ye fained sacrifice of his own inu^ncion, the
detestable and abominable mass, and other false and wicked articles contrary
to ye true doctrine of thy word. Wherefore awake and arise, O gracious Lord
God, and sa^ctifie thy name in us, which they do most abhominabli blaspheme and
dishonor. Strengthen and increase the kingdom in us, which they go about to
subvert. And work thy will in v^, which they resist, and will not suffer. But
thou (O Lord) suffer us not to be trode^ under foot, and to have an overthrow
of them, which seek not to punyshe or correct us for our sins, but rather that
thy name, thy word and works should not be had in remembrance among us, but
vtterli quenched, that thou should no more be a God, nor no more have any
flock or people to praise, profess and confess the. For they cast a way thy
word, and set up their own inuencions. They subvert the true use of thy
sacraments, and set up idolatrous ceremonies. They banish and keep in prison
the true preachers of thy word* and send abroad false teachers, bellye Gods and
shameless Hipocrites. They mind utterly to subvert thy truth, and al godliness,
and to plant al hipocrisye and abhominacio^. Wherefore good Lord (of thy mercy)
abate thou their pride, assuage thou their malice, confou^d and disapoint thou
al their devises and practices, deliver thy Turtle dove, thine elect, out of
their hands: that they and we al being preserved through thy defense from al
such perils and dangers as they practice and devise against us, may glorify
thy name which art the only preserver of al y^ trust in the, through thy dear
son Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Lord arise, help and deliver thy people of England for thy names sake.

O Lord defend thy elect people of England from the hands and force of thy
enemies the Papists.

O Lord graciously look upon the affliccions, sorrows, and necessities of
those that do truli profess and believe thy word. Amen.

Imprinted at Grenewych by Co^rad Freeman, in the month of May. M.D.Liiii.

With the most gracious license and privilege of god almighty, King of heaven
and earth.

FINIS.

