A Frutfull sermon of the most Evangelical writer M. Luther / made of the
Angels upon the.xviii. chapi. of Matthew translated out of laten into
English.

Prynted at London in Paul's church yerde / at the syngne of saint Augustyne
by Hugh Syngleton.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To his Christen friend and brother Henry Ruoche the translator wyssheth
abundaunce of grace.
I Culde wyshe either all me^ to be learned in the understanding of laten, or
else learned men more diligent in translatyng to the vulgar tongue such
things as our ignoraunte brethren do not perceive, both for the reading of
many other excellent books in this tongue written, and namely of Marte^ Luther,
whose books I judge very expedyent and also necessary in Christ's church,
both for the most sweet consolations in them contained, and farther for
opening of many mysteryes, much conuenyent to be known of every christen
man. Amongst which other this little book or sermon made of the Angels I
(...) ^ked out and translate for you (gentle Henry) with what dexterite I can
not say, truly of a good purpose and a studiouse mind toward you, to do you
good, to thentent not only yt should be a testimonial of my heart I bear unto
you, but also and much rather an occasion whereby to encourage and styrevp this
propensite and forwardnes of yours so happily begone, and godly continuyng / I
will not say this author in all points to stand up right and absolutely, as in
the sacraments, but what humane writer has there ever been but some defaute
he has left behynd him. Also Peter was not with out his reprehension. In every
thing the best is to be taken. Verily in this matter I doubt not, you will like
hi^ well as he is worthy. Christ's grace with you. Amen.

At Stepney. Yours I. Fox.

An homely of doctor Marten Luther made of the Angels on Mychaelmasday upon
the gospel of Mathewe xviii.
IN the gospel this day we hear Christ make mention of Angels, for whom
this present feast of saynct Michaell was istituted, and not so much for this
angel only saynct Michaell, nor the other Angels, but chefely for the honor
of our lord god the maker of all the angels. And that not without a great
consideration. because it is very necessary in Christ's church a right
knowllege and doctrine of the Angels to be a mo^gst christen me^. Which thing
is also very profitable and bryngyth no small consolation to know what is
their office and duty, no less then it is to know what is the office of a
father, of a mother, of a servant, of a maid or any other such like. For if so
be it the office of every person be not known precisly whereto he is called,
and to what he is ordenid, one shall meddle with ones office and an other shall
meddle with an others, none knowing his propre fu^ctione what he has to do,
thus must needs be that all run in hepes, in tumultes, and in confusion to
gether. Wherefore it is necessary that we know what the propre office and
fu^ctione is of Angels, to do. The ignorance whereof, bryngith in many absurd
cogitationes and fond fables amongste christen people, as we see planly i^ this
feast, which has been a feast now many years full of Idolatry bysydes ye
vain fables and feyned miracles which have been brought in of the hill
Sargarus, that is called saynct michaels mount. And of saynet michals letteres,
with such like manifest foolyshe and tryflynge lies spread through all the
world, by reason whereof we have fallen from the worship of god the maker of
all, to ye worshyppyng of Angels, which he has created. Therefore we do not
keep this feast but only for this cause, to learn and know what the Angels
do, wherabout they goo, and what is the charge where unto they be assigned of
god, to the intent that after we shall be certefyed and instructed in the
matter, we shall begin to render thanks to god for his Angels, so as we do
thank his majesty for making of the sun and moan, for sendyng us peace, for
gyuyng us concord, for setting us laws, officers, and for all our other
benefits which he sendyth to us and preseruyth, not that we do worship ye
sun or the moon, with such other, but that we do mark and consider the
wonderful work and or dinau^ce of almyghtie god therein, and so in the sun
praise him that made the sun, glorify him and worship him. And so I say
likewise of ye Angels, that we must learn and know their office, their
dewtie, and function whereunto they serve, that in consyderyng and markyng of
this, we shall give thanks to god, ascribyng all this benefit whole to god,
so that all ye honor and glory hereof may redou^de unto him, to who^ it is only
dew.

Therefore first of all we must know and be suered that there be Angels, not
only good angels but also badde. There have been christen me^ that have
thought as the saduceys did, another Angels nor spirits to be. And I my self
have herd some to play the saduces, which have not been ashamed to blaspheme
and to deny and think neither Angels nor sprits to be. But a true christian
man ought not to doubt but that Satan the devil is naturally an Angel made,
even as saynct Mychaell is created an Angel. But their office and doyngs be
much diverse, for like as a noughty tirant has autorrite and power as well as a
good prince, but the one abusith his power to oppress his subjects, ye other
uses it as he shulddo to the preservation and co^modite of his realm. So is
it betwixt ye devil and the good Angelle. Besides these men that think there
be no deuylles. There be also other which not wtstandyng they believe there be
deuylles, yet do not think they be so neyghe, nor so sore against us, but when
they here any speaking of the deuylle, they imagine him an hundredth or a
thousand miles of from us. And so by reason we do not know nor consider how
nyghe and ready the devil is against us at all times, ne can not perceive so
well ye great benefits which god shewyth to us by his Angels. Like as he
which never felt death nor tasted the bytternes thereof, cannot tell how
precious and sweet is life. And as he which never felt hunger, ca^ not judge
how good and precious a thing is bredde, nor cannot esteem the valow thereof, so
ye man which ever thynkyth the devil so far absent from him, does not
greatly regard the daily preservation of the holy Angels of god, nor can not
esteem it accordyngly. But every good christen man must thus think with him
self that he sytteth in the myddest of the deuylles, which with a great
multitude enclose him and besege hi^ round about. And that Satan is more nere
him than his coote, than his shirte, yea than his skyn and his own flesh,
evermore he is about us, for us to feyght with and to strive against. That the
devil is so nygh and ready about us, that our germayne proverb does show
and testifey, whose me nyng is this. Yt nedyth not to paynt the devil upon the
door, menyng thereby yt the devil is neygh enough our house, though he be not
painted at the door. Therefore first of all we must know this and so persuade
our selves, that there be deuylles, and that they be more neghe unto us tha^
our shyrt is to our body. And this saynct Peter does well testefye which is no
liar sayng, in the v. ca. Pet. 5.
Be you sober and be ware, for your aduer sarie the devil goes about like a
roryng lion whom he may devour. These words were not spoken of no dronkerd,
nor is no fools bolte, as we be wont to say, but they were spoken of Peter's
own mouth by ye holy ghost, nether in geest nor in sport, but in ernest as
ernestly as he culde speak the^. Be sober and beware says he, as though he
would say, do not so imagine with your selves, as though your enemy were
far from you. Your enemy is a strong and a perpetual adversary evermore
against you, with all hatred and malice he can, whose porpose is nothing else but
to dystroy you both body and soul. Where is he than wylt thou say. Peter
tellyth the. He runnyth about the, says he / what doyth he, what ente^dyth he
runnynge about us? Peter shewyth the, he sekyth / says Peter, whom he may
devour. Here you have the devil painted in his colors. Ye hard before that
there is a devil, here you see what a thing he is, how malicious, how
pestilent, and vexed against us, which every day does no thing else but
studieth how to devour us and to dystroy us, this is all his intent and
purpose, to work our dystruction, evermore ru^nyng about us, with such hatred
and malice that no man can express yt, even like a roryng lion he ragyth
about, yt is to say / what soever thou do, whether thou thi^kyst or
speakyst, or what so ever thou settyst upon to do, other to begin a thing or
to fynysh any work, the devil is ever present sekyng all means and occasion
to stop to troble the, and to let the. But few me^ believe it, for if they
did, they would not live so securely and so carles as they do. And this is the
cause that we see all the world so full of stryffe, debate, hatred, enuey,
pride, covetousness lusts, and such other vices. And yet how securely and how
negligently men live, as though they had clean devoured and consumed the
devil. And here is to be understand that there be two sorts of men possessed
with the devil. Sum be possessed bodily in who^ we may planly perceive the
good will of the devil toward us, as in Matthe. viii. Mat. 8.
What pleasure it was to him in punyshyng the poor miser not only with one
devil, but with an whole host of deuylles. This is the good will he beryth
toward us. Is not this a poisoned and exceeding malice that the wyked find
beryth to mankind, in that we see him so vex this one sylly soul with so
many thousand of deuylles. Forthermore we may se also sufficiently, what mind
he beryth toward us, by such possessed persons that ley in their monume^tes.
These with such other exsa^ples do well declare the myscheuous fury and the
byrning hatered of the wicked spirit against us, which has no other desire
nor pleasure yt he delyteth in, but only in our destruction, so that he may
dystroy our bodies, and bring our souls to everlasting peril. Secondarly
there is also an other sort, of me^ which be pryuely and spiritually possessed
of ye devil, as these which be enta^gled with couitousnes with hatred, with
enuey, with lusts, and fylthy desyers, with other like vices, and yet for all
that live in such securite and so recheles as though the devil were a
thousand leges of, and had nothing adoo with them. If any external grefe or
seknes should chance to our bodies, we ru^ne straight to the physician for his
cu^sell and succore. But to seek any remedy against our inward deseases,
against our couitusnes, our malice, our envy and such other mo, to seek
remedy I say against these that we may learn to refrain our sinful living,
hereof we pass not a butte^, nor ons do mind any such thing. And why so?
because no man will believe that the devil is so nigh and ever about us.
Therefore let us learn as I said, and consider dyligently what manner a thing
the devil is, how fears, how malicious, how mighty, how suttell and crafty
he is, what power he has to hurt both body and soul. He brings in to our
souls false and erroneus doctrine, desperatio^ fylthy desires with other like,
and all to pluck away our faith from us, and to cast us in to infidelite and
waueryng, or else to put in to our minds cold fylthy, and vain cogitations,
that by that means he may cast us in to securite and necligens. I know yt
and dare speak it by experience, for oftymes I do sensibly feale the devil
stoppyng and lettyng my cogitations my purpose, and my labors. I cannot do and
fynish all things so as I would, by the reason he stoppyth me and hyndreth me.
Many times yt is my mind to do things with more fervent study with more head
and diligence than I do, but by the reason of his impedime^tes and stoppes of
the devil I cannot employ my matters so always with such perfection as I
would: So than after that he has thus possessed the spiritual inynde of a
man, than after he does also infest and does noy the body other with
pestilence, with famyn, with war, with slawghter, or with su^ calamite or
other, which he has an infinite sort. All these myschyues does the deull
styre up, he is only the worker of all these euyls. One brekyth his leg, an
other is drowned, an other does murder an other commits aduoutre, and so
forth. Who is the doer of all these, who is the motioner and ye leder to all
these? Who but only the devil? And this all we percetue, we see yt with our
eyes, we feel yt with our hands, and yet neeligently, how secuerly with out
head or dread we live? And what is ye cause of this? Truly nothing else but as I
said, because we imagine the devil to be far from us. But we far deceive
our selves. Forsothe he is hard by the, and is over thy head, and is about
the, and about all men. And this god wyllyth and does suffer it to be, by this
means to keep us in fear, that we beware and take heed to our selves, and
that through necescite of such greart perils we should be driven to flee to
our lord god for succoure. if there were no deuylles, truly we should be cold,
necligent, slack, secure omisse without all care and fear. And yet for all
this, for all these wicked spirittes about us, for all these calamites and
vexationes, for the wret chednes and miseries, for all these euyls and
displeasures that we have God can skarsly drive us to call upon him, to flee
unto him, and to cry for succoure. O father of heaven, Come help us, and
deliver us, than what would we do if there were no deuylle at all? Therefore
principally and first of all we must understand and know that we sit not here
in the myddle of roses, or in a garden that is saffe and suer from all perilles
and deceytes of our ennemies. If the devil did seduce Adam and Eve in
paradise, also if he trobled so many other good men and children of god.
Moreover if he did not spare to tempte Christ himself both god and the son
of god, think not thy self so suer nor so well defensed, that he will be
affrayd of the. Therefore let us pray unto god diligently and fervently that
he will give us grace to be ware and to take heed of our selves against the
crafty assaltes and suggestion of the devil, yt he cast us not in disperation
or incredulite. At the general counsel kept in the cetie Angusta how he went
about all that he might possiblely, to with draw us again from our true faith,
and to bring us again in to our old errors. So and if his purpose had
prospered and gone forward, he would also have wrought more myscheyf in styrring
up battaylles, and bloodshed, and tumultes among ye people. But we must know
this moreover yt though there be never so many evil spirittes against us
that work us sorrow, yet be there many moo good Angels again which stop and
let the purpose of these wicked fyndes, keeping and defending us against
them. The wicked spirits do another sleep night nor day, ever watchynge and
studyenge how to bring in Idolatry, and so to cast our souls into
perpetual distruccion, and then after to do sum vylany to our bodies, to our
goods, or good name: So unless that God again had other rulers, and an other
kingdom, in the which were other more valiant spirits than these, truly the
devil would neither leave us wife, children nor house standing, not the
momente of an hour, but would dystroye, would ouerturne, confou^de, and
abolishe all together: such malice and hatred he has against mankind, that
by his good will thou should not have one foot of ground to stand upon. And
it greueth hi^ evil that thou haste thine eyes, thine arms, thy legs, and
other of thy lymmes / yt if he might have his will and God would so permytte
him, he would denumme the of al, yea and not leave the one cow, or an ox, or a
horse to help the with, finally if that he were suffered to work his pleasure
he would not suffer not so much as a stafe to stand in his place, neither any
man to continue his life the space of half an hour. Therefore where as these
things do not so com to pass, and where as thou see kingdoms, and common
wealths to remain and stand whole in their right form and state with out
any such perturbacion, where as thou see any cattle, sheep, or oxen to
live, or any such thing which does service to man (which thing greueth the
devil sore for he ca^ not abide any thing to be safe that perteyneth to man)
be that may thou well perceive that there is a more strong and more valiant a
power ordained of God, for to preserve and defend us against so wicked and
furious maladies of our enmies. Also where thou see any good man to live in
faith and fear of God which fauer and love the gospel, by that thou may
well perceive and know that there is an other power ordained and set up of God
against the devil to withstand and resist and to bring to naught his works
and his subtylties. For mark well the words of saint Peter / he calls him
our adversary so infuse and vexed against us seeking about like a roryng lion
whom he may devour. Then how can he with his good will suffer any thing to
remain whole or safe? Wherefore seeing the devil is so promt and so ready to
hurt us by all the means and occasions he can, and yet is put so often beside
his purpose (by reason that God does so stop him through his holy Angels)
thou ought therefore ever to gyne thanks to God, that thy wife and children
do live and that thine house is not plucked over thine head. For our defense,
our strength were nothing to the devil. If there were nothing in him but only
his malice and his will to hurt us, yet were not we able to resist the same.
But now bysyds this malicious and set will against us, in this also he
preualyth and passyth us, in wit, craft policy, and subtilte, wherei all ye
saynctes be nothing to be compared with him. He has the scriptures at his
fyngars end. He knowyth all the bible better than all Paris or Colonie.
Whosoever does enter in disputation with him is quycly overcome, there is none
in ye world able to hold argume^tation with him. Besides this such is his
might and power, that all might of men and power of all the world is nothing in
co^paryson. Set all the turks, all the emperors, all the rulers, kings, and
princes, in all the whole world to gether, he is able to distroy them and blow
them down with turnynge of an hand. The cause now why he does not so, yt he
does not dystroy all things after his mind and will, yt is through the
benefyte and the preservation of good Angels which do resist and withstand
him that he can not so exercise his tyranny as he would. And so for this purpose
be the Angels ordened to withstand the devil and to keep him short. Even
like as a good prince has his officers under him, such whom as he apoyntyth
and settyth over his countres and cities, against thieves and murderers. And
yet though the same officers take never so much head over the kings
subjects, yet can they not chose, do best they ca^, but su^me thief or other
will come in, and do some robry / whereby we may well perceive, that the thieves
mind and good will is to do more, if he might be suffered. And so is it here in
like manner. God some times does give some permission to evil spirittes, but
yet he has his good Angels again, for to keep us and defend us against
fury and violence. Thus every prince, every citesyn, every householder, brefuely
every christen man has his good Angels assined unto him, for to save him
and to preserve him, as Christ testyfyeth in the gospel saying. Their
Angels in heaven do see the face of my father which is in heaven. These
words verily do well declare the great and marvelous regard, love, and
tenderness that god has upon us. And these words should diligently be showed
and betten in to children, that they might learn and know the office of
Angels, and accept their benefit, and give god thanks therefore. The devil
is a great enemy to all children, and yt greuyth him much wha^ he seyth them
be borne in to the world, to grow up and to prosper. And for this cause does
he many times frey women great with child and does cast them in to fear. How
be yt good Angels be present and ready to succore and keep them that they take
no harm. These things be preuie and preuely done that we can not see them with
our eyes. In like manner as he possessyth men preuely and after asecret fashyon,
as wha^ he bryngyth a man's mind to couytusnes, he puts in to his heart this
persuasion yt he makyth him believe he does it for an honest purpose, for the
necessyte of his life, to provide for him self and for his household, and so
thynkyth he does very well, and ye devil to be far from him. Thus does the
devil possess these couytus persons so preuely, that they can scarsly
perceive him in their mind, much les can they see him with their bodily eyes.
And so does he also blind and wyche our princes hearts, puttyng in to them
this persuasion and thought, that they wage battle against other princes,
another for hatred, nor envy nor for any reue^gans or hastynes of their mind,
but only for a right quarrel, for Justice and peace. This is their pretense
where with they cloak their tyranny and grefe or grouge of their mind. And these
suggestions of the devil, yet seem to them to be honest and very Just
quarelles. They think nothig les the^ these cogitations to come of the devil.
And like as the evil spirit does preuely and inwardly possess a man. so do
the good Angels also preuely and secretly minister their help and succore.
And like as the evil spirit castyth in his furye darts preuely in to the heart
of man, so likewise have the good Angels again their good and holsum darts
to cu^fort us with. And when so ever the evil angel does tempt us, they be
ever ready to stope him, and defend us speaking thus unto us in our hearts. Not
so. Not so. Much like as if a man should fall in to a deep water, and be in
the ioperdy of drouni^g, a other should run to take by the hand and to draw
him out of the water. Eue^ so do good Angels to us, pluckyng us bake, and
calling us agay^, sayng thus inwardly in our hearts. Thou must take heed of
that. In no casse thou must do so. It is not meet nor laufull so to do. And
thus do the good Angels help us, and stope the devil, that he take not our
faith from us, nor have his purpose of us. Therefore we use to say, and it is
well said. Thou haddyst a good and a trusty Angel to keep ye this day / where
by is sygnified, that no wytt nor power of man could turn away that evil and
myschefe, unless the good Angels had been ready with their aid and custody /
unless that they had espied out and thrown down the ingyns, deceytes, and
crafts of the devil, thou should other peryshe miserable, or else should
be brought in to sum great calamite. And this is that we mean wha^ we say:
Thou was blessed this day and kept of a good Angel: and so it is true: for
unless ye good Angels should preserve us, all ki^des of wretchedness in the
world should light upon us, throught the procurement of the devil: wherefore let
us learn to know, and thankfully to accept, this hye office and benefytt of
the holly Angels. Also let us learn this, that the wicked angels do work
and go about nothing else, but only how to hurt us to vex us, and to bring us
in to all trobles he can. But like as these evil angels be allways ready to
harm us, so be ye good Angels again ever ready to help us, that we forsake
not the truyth, but constantly stycke to yt, and that we have and keep our
lives, our bodies, our wyffes, and children, breuely, all that we have, sayffe
and whole, from the hurtyng of the devil. Thus the cause then why all the
world is not set on fyere, all is not cast in heepes, that any cities, any
common weithes, any realms, any vyllages, be not destroyed, cast down and
over thrown, all this comyth through the help and keeping of ye holly Angels.
These good Angels be much more prudent, polityke, and witty tha^ the, wicked
spirittes be: by reason that they have a glass to look in, which ye wicked
spirits have not. This glass is the face and the fruition of the father
almyghtie. Forthermore the good Angels be much more of power tha^ other
angels be. For they be ever in presence and in service with hi^ that is
almyghtie. Wherefore let us give everlasting thanks unto God for these tutors,
such ministers, and potestates which he has ordened for us, to keep us, and
to preserve us in all places, which thing they do both diligently and gladly.

Furthermore we must understand also, that these angels be not to be
worshypped, nor must we put our trust in them as we have done in times
paste, for we find in scryptures that they never would suffer them selves to
be worshypped, but evermore have given that honor only to God, They praise
and laud God and thancke him that they were made for us. For as I said they
be spirits made and created of God on ly for this to serve us and to help us:
Like the same manner we praise and thank God, that he made this comfortable
sun for us, the moon, wine, bread, and all other manner of things. Even
likewise ought we to offer up to him immortal thanks for his good Angels,
and sumtymes among to brust out with some such prayer / thanks and praise to
the, heavenly father, for that thou do defend us, keep us, and govern us so
diligently through thy holly angels, and that thou hayst ordened such pouers
and so myghtie princes over us. and.c. So when thou gyuyst god thankys after
this manner I think thou doyst praise and worshipe the Angels sufficiently.
Now to prove that the Angels be such manner of spirittes as we have showed,
it is euede^t in many places of the scripture as in Luc. the xii. where ye
Angels apering to the shepperds and showing them the birth of Christ, did
sing the goodly song Gloria in excelsis deo et in terra pax hominibus bona
voluntas. That is glory be to God above, peace in earth, good will among men.
It is a proverb amongst us. As the heart thynkyth, so the tongue speakyth. And
so here, the Angels speak and desire the honor and praise of god: then that
we may see their heart and good will to us ward, they pray next that peace be in
earth: for yt greuyth them nothing more when they see such wars, and
battayles among men, when they se any calamite or destruction among us, when
they see any house brenne, or a man's ox dye: For their nature and heart is
nothing else but peace, and therefore all their wysshe and prayer is to have
peace, quyetnes, health, and goodness to all men: the deuylles nature is this,
and this is all his endeuer to pluck men from god. Contrariwise the good
Angels do ever seek and couitte that we should honor god and love him. The
devil is our adversary, and therefore nothing does grieve him more, then when he
seyth us be in peace. Again ye a^gelles do wish and rejoice in nothing more,
then when they see the world bent to peace and concord: other else if there be
no concord, yt is our own faut we ca^ blame none but our selves. For god can
no otherwise debate and restrain our wantonness, hedynes, and our malicious
nature.

The third thing that the Angels wyshe for among men, is good will, that
is to say, that they will take well in worth what soever God sends other good
or badde: And that they will humbly submit them selves to the will of God, and
every man be content with his state and fortune, taking his cross patiently
what soever God sends. Here in these scriptures you se the Angels descrybed
unto you of an other forte, tha^ the sophisters and scoole men have taught you
in times past. As where I have showed you how. S. Peter has descrybed the
devil, where as he first calls him our adversary, and afterward paynteth
him in his colors, notefieng him to walk about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour. By these words of S. Peter, you may se him much more
plainly and lively painted unto you, than if I should dyspute and muse with my
self never so long, what an head or nose he has, or whether he has such
claws or not as we paynt him to have. And if thou wylt se the true and plain
figure of the devil, Imagyne with thy self such a manner of a man that is all
wicked, all given to noughtines, malicious and full of ra^kore, of a mischeuous
mind and stomach, crafty, sottyll, deceytefull, all set to hurt and noye
men. And so shall thou se the true proporcion and fisnamie of the devil. On
the contrary side the good angels is nothi^ge else, but a mind or an heart which
is perfytly good and loving. As if thou couldyst find or woldyst imagine with
thy self such a person, which were all nothing else but swetenes, goodness,
cumlynes, and fryndlynes, whose mind and stomach were most meek most gentle,
most hertie, and kind, simple with out all fraud or gyle, of most supreme
wisdom and knowledge. And so shall thou have the very shape and image of a good
Angel. Wherefore have they their name given to them: for this word angel in
greek is that which we call in english a messenger or an embassadore, because
they be sent of God. The scripture does not give them their name, of their
nature or substance whereof they be made (save only that it callyth them
spirits) but it gyuyth them their names of their office and ministry. And
therefore we call them angels, not as concerning their substance or nature
whereof they be created, but as concerning their office which they be appointed
to. Wherefore we ought to love this name Angel, and to make much of it. Truly I
am greatly delyted with it, I can not tell what other me^ be, and do embrace it
with all my heart. Now if they be the messyngers and ambassadors of our lord
god, then what thing do they, or wherefore does god send them: answer thou
again. They do govern us, they keep us and preserve us: for that cause be they
sent, and that is their office to do, to acco^plesse the commandment of god
that is given them to do: that is: to stop the works of the devil, to turn
away evil chanses, that houses or streets be set on fire, that our catell be
not devoured of wyld bestes, that me^ eschape drownynge with such like things.
Also the evil spirit has his name, and is called the devil, that is,
acousar or a damner: for that is ye nature and all the study of him, to accuse,
to blame to damn or pervert, to make the worste of every thing that we do. He
is called also an Angel that is a messynger: but an ill messynger and a
wicked. And well the grecyans have given him this name Calumniator, that is to
say in our engleshe tongue a deprauer of every thing, for a deprauer properly
is he which does slaunderusly accuse, drepraue, and fautye that thing that is
faucles: wherein this wicked spirit passes and excellyth all, such things as
god does teach and command us thoo things he corruptyth, deprauyth and
expoundyth them other wise the^ they be. And this feyt he first practiced in
paradise, in the first creation when god commanded we should not touch nor
taste of the tree that grew in the myddest of paradise. How craftly and
peruersly he expounded the word of god. Do you think, said he, that god did
forbid you to eat this. No you shall not dye: thus he turned the truth in to a
lie, and made god a devil: the same thing also he practices daily in our
consciences when he crepeth in and hardenyth our hearts, he makes them so
secure with out all remorse and fear as though they had never sinned in all
their life: the same he practiced also at the general counsel in the city
Angusta, in his bysshoppes and princes. But then most chefly he plays ye part
of a devil, and a deprauer, when he recyteth up to good men all their sins,
and makyth them much more grievous than they be. In this point he can so deprave
and fauty all thy doctrine and all thy living that he will make the aborre thy
self, and bewail that ever thou couldyst letter in the book. This is the very
point and practice of the devil: this is the work and the only studdy of that
wicked spirit: to peruerte and corrupt things though they be never so good.
Contrary wise again the good Angels, do take all things to the best,
expoundyng every thing in the honest part, do comfort us, do provide for us,
do aid us, do defend us, and teach us. These things ought we to consider and
to give god thanks therefore with all diligence, and every day that we rise,
to make some such prayer unto god, as this. O father of heaven, I beseech the,
that thy good angel may be with me this day to keep me, to gyde me, to govern
me, to preserve me and teach me et c.

Of the great diligence and mind of the angels toward us and our health, we
have a goodly example in the book of kings, where as Elezeus the prophet did
show to his minister great fyery hills which were set full of charettes and
horsemen, by the which sight he perceived that his enemis were not to be fered
when there were many moo Angels and much stronger than his enemies were.
Truth it is yt the good Angels be much more ready and glad to help and further
us the^ the wicked spyrites be to hurt and hyndre us. Besyds that there be many
moo good Angels than there be ill: the good Angels be ever suer and
diligent to do that which is commanded them, that is, they keep and defend us
both truly and carefully: wherefore though the devil be never so sert to hurt
or to destroy us, and though he rore never so sore against us, yet be the good
angels much more diligent to assiste and defend us, breuely, be ever more
tender and careful over us, with their ready service to do us good. This we
ought to learn and know / for that shall cause us that we shall not be so
secure and so slogyshe in our selves, but be more circumspect and better look
about us and that we shall learn the better to believe and trust in god, when we
know that we have many moo good Angels of our side the^ deuylles against us,
and be always of good chere and comfort in all our affayers, in all our
afflictions, trobles, and aduersytes, sayng with the prophet Elezeus: we have
many mo warryers on our part, than enemies against us. And so shall we overcome
the devil, as Elezeus did overcome his enemies, being blided in the darkness of
their mind, and we having our eyes seyght shall bring in our sowdiers in to
the city of their aduersaris / as we read that Elezeus did in the same
chapter. These examples be written for us, yt we should praise god and give him
thanks, for that, that he has so appointed for us such an host and an army
of his holly angels for our defense and saffete, so that if one angel be
not enough, there should thowsands be ready by and by, so as we se here in
Elizeus, for whose only cause so many thousands of holy angels did show
themselfes and did mustre before him, ready at all times to succor him when
need should be. The very same thing wese in Luke where first one angel came
and showed the birth of Christ, but sone after there was a multitude of the
army of angels, syngyng with that one angel. et. c. Such a multitude and a
whole army of good Angels there be that God has appointed for our soccoure
and sauegarde.

Wherefore if we use to thank god for temporal peace, for good magistrates,
and officers, and for such other worldly comodites. Than how much more ought
we to give god praise and thanks for his good angels which he sendyth to
help us, not only in bodily and external thiges, but also in all our spiritual
affairs. For why they do both confirm our faith in god, and also keep us in
ye fear of god: so their keeping and goodness it is, that where we see one man
dysstroyed by the craft and temptation of the devil, we see a thousand and a
thousand sayued again. Truly moo men there be always that live, then that
dye. Therefore where thou see any City, any town, any house sayffe or
sta^dig, there may thou perceive, ye good angels be there to stop the
evil spirits that they distroy them not. Thus allways we see and prove by
experience, more goodness, tha^ euylls to be sent unto us: As we see in a
bryghte day / the son to shynne much more clear and lyghtsome, tha^ the
blackenes of the night time is dark. Thus does god make us to see his
benefytes and good turns, which he bestowyth upon us through his holly
angels, for to comfort us and confyrme us with all, that we may understand
by that means the wondrous deceyts, subteltes, and damages of the devil, to
the intent that we all ways should stand in fear, and awe, and never to be
secure and negligent in our selves. Therefore let us learn this well, and bett
in also to our children, that they may learn thus to comfort and strenghthen
them selves with the aid of their good a^gelles, and so that they may learn to
fear the devil. And in this manner they owght to be brought up with like
information as this, or such other like. My child thou must not take the name
af thy lord in vayn: thou must not backbytte thy neyg boure: thou must not name
the devil, nor much have him in thy mouth, for he is at hand in every
place, and is hard by, and about the where soever thou go, unless thou take heed, and fear god, and employ thy self to goodness and virtue, he will
other cast the in the water to drown the, or else he will be suer to do the sum
great myscheffe or other. And again lest they should be brought in to to much
fear of him or to weakharted in them selves thereby. These wicked spirits, My
son, as I told the, be allways about the, and greattly desirous to noy the
some way or other, but our lord god has ordened good angels again an
infinite nu^bre, and they be ever ready at hand, if thou be a good and an
obidient child, to keep the and preserve the. what so ever the devil goyth
about, other to cast the in the water to drounde the, or to fray the in thy
sleep, or to break thy neck, et c.

Moreover in so much as we must feyght and war with the devil, it is
requisyt that we should know first what he is and how mighty he is. No man can
camp well with the emnye whom he knowyth not. Now what manner and sort he is of
I have showed you, before. Also I have showed you, how he is a spirit which
never restyth nor ceasyth, whose labor and study is nothing else but to
disturb ye peace of the world, to bring in bataylles, to styre up
insurrections, stryf and seditions, to make tumultes, and confusion amongste
men: he can not rest nether can he will well to no man. It greuyth him I dare
say that I make this sermon now, and sore it goes to his heart, nothing more,
yea it greuyth him yt my life induryth a quarter of an ower: he has conspired
and leyed wait for my death, and at le^ghth will dyspatche me. But what should
I do? Truly nothing else but stycke only to the word of god and pray. O father
of heaven, thou seyst and perceiuyste what the devil goes about, send down
thy good Angel, to stop his wicked purpose yt he have no power in any thing
to hurt any body, but to the health and everlasting salvation to my soul.
Amen. Thas ought we in like manner to co^me^d our selves to god every day: thus
we ought also to inform our children, yt they may lykwise learn to commend
them selves to god after the same manner. And so when we do instruct our
children thus still accustomyng them to the same, they may turn to good men,
and learn to fear god. Lykwise as children do hang of their parents,
subtectes of their magistrates, having all their succoure and prouydyng by
them: so do we hang of the angels, to whom god has appointed all the
promision and costody over us. And so by that reason yt god has so appointed
his angels, to see to us and succoure us, we may well understand that we have
a perilous enemy about us, ever ready and laboryng to distroy us. For else what
need we ye aid and costodie of so many Angels, unless we were in great
danger of strong and myghtie adversaries? wherefore it is our pertes evermore
to give thanks to god, and to say. O heavenly father the father of all
gentylnes, thanks, praise, and glory be to the, for that, yt through the
stre^ght and succor of thy Angels I am able to withstand all the wicked
spirits, which notwithstanding of mine own power, am not able to withstand
the weykest one of them, no though I had an hundredth thousand me^ mo to help
me. Also that notwythstandynge mine enemy is so passing crafty and subtle,
that I have not one drope of craft where yt he has a whole seefull: yet
through the protection and custody of thy holy angels, he has no power to
do me any wrong or vilany. My poor wisdom, though it yet but very small,
and simple, does confound the hye and great wisdom of his, and all through
thy mere grace and the help of thy holy Angels, my Lord God Amen. And so this
is the glory of our Lord God, that he declaryth and settyth forth his glory,
his wisdom, his power, in our unableness, in our foolyshnes, and infirmite.
This honor is only dew to him, that he is a god of might, power, of heygh
wisdom, and infinite goodness. And that thing he well declaryth, in that,
that he sendyth us his help and defense by his holy Angels, so that we be
able to stand agynst all the main host and army, all the proud guard of the
wicked Angels above, to overcome them, to overthrow them and gloriously to
triumph upon them. Christ Jesus voutch save evermore to be with us al with his
help and power. Amen.

Praise be to God for ever Amen.

