A very excellent and sweet exposition upon the XXII. Psalm of David called in
Latin:

Dominus regit me, etc. Translated out of Hye Almayne into English by Miles
Couerdale.

Anno MDXXXVIII.

The.xxii. psalm of David called in Latin Dominus regit me, et nihil
i The LORD is my shepeherde, I shall lack nothing.

ii He fedeth me in a grene pasture, and leads me to the fresh water.

iii He quyckeneth my soul, and brings me forth in the way of
righteousness, for his names sake.

iiii Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, yet fear I no
evil, for thou art with me: Thy staff and thy shepehooke do comfort me

v Thou preparest a table before me against mine enemies, thou anoynteste my
head with oil, and fyllest my cup full.

vi Oh let thy loving kyndnesse and mercy follow me all the days of my
life, that I may dwell in the house of the LORD for ever.

An exposition upon the.xxii. Psalm.
The effect of this Psalm
IN this Psalm does David and every christen heart give thanks and praise unto
God for his most principal benefit, namely, for the preaching of his dear and
holy word, whereby we are called, accepted, and no^bred among the multitude,
which is the congregation or church of God: where only (and in no place else)
the pure doctrine, the true knowledge of Gods will, and the right service of God
is found and had.

But this same noble treasure does holy David praise and extol maruaylous
excellently with goodly, sweet, fair, and pure words, ye and that with
lykenesses, borrowed out of the Gods service of the old Testament.

First, he lykeneth himself to a sheep, whom God himself (as a faithful
diligent shepherde) does wondrous well take heed unto, A sheep
fedeth him in a pleasant grene pasture, which sto^deth full of good thick
grass, where there is abundaunce also of fresh water, and no scarceness. Item
he lykeneth God also unto such a shepherde, The shepherde
as with his staf leads and brings the sheep the plain right way, that it
ca^ not go amysse, and defe^deth his flock so with the shepehooke, that the
woolfe can not break in. After this does he make himself a geste, A geste
for whom God prepares a table, where he fyndeth both strength and comfort,
refreshynge and joy, and that plenteously.

And thus the Prophet gives ye word of God diverse names, The word of God
has many names.
calls it goodly pleasant grene grass, fresh water, the right way, a
staff, a shephooke, a table, balm or pleasant oil, and a cup that is
always full. And this he does not without a cause: for the power of Gods word
is many fold For why? Like as a sheep in a fair pleasant medowe, beside the
grene grass and fresh water in the presence of his shepherde (which leads
it with the staff or rod, so that it can not go astraye: and defends it so
with the shepehoke that no harm can happen unto it) has his food and
pleasure in all safegarde. Or like as a man lacks nothing yt sytteth at a
table, where there is plenty of meat and drink, and al manner of comfort and
gladness: So much more, they that be ye sheep of this shepherd (whereof this
psalm syngeth) lack no good thing, are rychely provided for, not only in
soul but also in body. As Christ says in the sixte of Matthew: Seek first ye
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, so shall all these things be
mynistred unto you. For as they yt want bodily food live in great
straytnesse and pensyfnesse, not being able to fulfill the bodies request in
this behalf: even so also those yt want this wholesome and necessary word of
god, can not rejoice nor be pacyfyed inwardly. Ye even as bread and wine
refresh a man's fleshy heart, and make him joyful: even so the word of God
quyckeneth and refressheth a man's soul inwardly.

The preaching of gods wod brings prosperity
For when the word of God is truly and syncerely preached, look how many
diverse names the prophet gives it here, so many commodyties and fruits does
it bring. Unto them that are diligent and earnest to hear it (whom our LORD
God knows only for his own sheep) it is a pleasant grene grass, a fresh
water, wherewith they are satisfied and refreshed. It keeps them also in the
right way, and preserves the^, that no mysfortune nor harm happen unto
them. Moreover, it is unto the^ a continual wealth, where there is abu^daunce
of meat and drink, and all manner of joy and pleasure. That is, they are not
only instruct and gyded, refresshed, strengthed and comforted by the word of
God, but ever more and more preserved in the right way, defended in all manner
of trouble both of body and soul. And finally they have ye victory and
prevail against all temptacyons and troubles, whereof they must abide right
many, as the fourth verse does specifye. Shortly, they live in all manner of
safegarde, as they, unto whom no mysfortune can happen, for as much as their
shepherde does feed them and preserve them.

The doctrine to be taken of this psalm.
Therefore should we take instruccion out of this Psalm, not to despise ye word
of God, but gladlye to hear, and learn the same, to love it, and to make
much of it, and to resort unto ye little flock, where we may have it. And
again on ye other side, to fly and eschew those that do blaspheme and
persecute it. For where this blessed light does not shine, there is another
prosperity nor health, another strength, nor comfort, either in body or soul,
but utter dysquietnesse, terroure and despair, specially when trouble,
dystresse, and paynfull death is at hand. How be it the ungodly (as ye
prophet says) have never rest, Esaye. 57.
whether they be in wealth or woe. For if they be in prosperity, tha^ are they
presumptuous, proud, and high minded, forget our LORD god utterly, boaste,
and crake only of their own power, riches, wisdom, etc. And take thought
beside, how they may maynteyn and increace the same, and how they may
persecute and oppress other men that lie in their ways. But if the leaf
turn about with the^, as doutlesse it must needs do at the last: (For that
sweet virgin Marye is a very sure prophetisse, Deposuit pote^tes de sede, and
diuites dimisit inanes.
which yet has not failed in her song) the^ are they of all the most
miserable and careful lest people, which immediately fall to despair and
mistrust. What ayleth them? They know not where nor how they shall seek
comfort, seeing they have not ye word of God, which only teaches ye right
way how to be pacient, and to have a good hope, even in aduersite. Roma.xv.
This thing ought to warn us and move us, that we esteem nothing more
excellent nor worthy upon earth, than this benefyte, An ensample for us.
namely to have yt dear blessed word, and that we can be in a place, where it
may be frelye preached, and professed openly. A Christen man therefore yt
belongs unto a church, wherein the word of god is taught, as often as he goes
in, should think upon this Psalm, and out of a joyful heart with the prophet
to give God thanks for his vnoutspeakable grace, that he has set him (as his
own sheep) in a pleasant grene medowe, where there is plentye of good grass
and fresh water. That is, that he may be in a place where he may hear and
learn the word of God, and conceive rich comfort therout, both in body,
and soul.

This blessed David did well understand, how worthy a treasure it is, when it
may so be had, therefore can he boast and singe so well of it, and magnifyethys
benefit above all that is in onye estymacion or worship upon earth. At him
ought we to learn this science, What we ought to learn here of David.
and (according to his ensample) not only to be thankful unto God our
loving and faithful shepherde, and to magni fie his vnout speakeable gift,
which he of very loving kyndnesse has given us (as David does here in the
first five verses,) but also earnestly to desire and pray him (as he does in
the last verses,) that we may abide by this riches, and never to fall away from
his holy Christen church.

And such a prayer is exceadynge necessary: For we are very weak, and (as the
Apostle saint Paul says) we carye this treasure about in earthen vessels.
2. Cor. 4.
The deuell also our adversary bears deadly hate unto us for this treasures
sake. Therefore does he not rest, but goes about as a roarynge Lion, and
seeks how he may devour us. Beside all this he has a quarrel unto us,
because of our old sack which we carye yet upon our necks, wherein there be
yet also diverse concupiscences and sins. More over, the dear flock of
Christ is spotted and fyled with so many horrible offenses (or sklau^ders)
that because of the same there do many fall away from the^. Therefore (I say)
it is necessary that we pray, and put this vncorrupt doctrine still in
practice, and defend our selves therewith against all sklau^ders, that we may
continue unto ye e^de and be saved.

This mad and blind world knows utterly nothing of this treasure and
precious stone, The blindness of ye world.
but ymagyneth only (even as a swyne or unreasonable beast) how they may here
fill the belly: Or else (when it comes to the point) they follow lies and
ypocrisye: As for the truth and faith, they set it pass. Therefore do they
sing no Psalm unto God for his holy word, but rather (when he offreth it
unto them) they blasphe me it, and condemn it for heresye. And as for those
that teach it, or will be known of it, the world persecuteth them, and
puts the^ to death, like as if they were deceauers, and the most ungracious
wretches yt are in the world. It shall be good therefore for this small flock to
knowledge such a benefyte, and with the prophet to sing a Psalm or song of
thankesgeuyng unto God for it.

Of them ye would, and can not have the word of God.
But what say ye of them that can not have ye preaching of Gods word? As
namely, they that dwell here and there among tyrauntes and enemies of the
truth? No doubt, where as the word of God is preached, there can it not pass
away without fruit, as Esaias says in the.lv. Chap. The good christen people
also of the same place have one vauntage, which in deed is dear unto them. For
they that be Christen men, count it a very great thing, that they may be in a
place where ye word of God is freely and openly taught and knowleged, and the
sacraments mynistred after Christ's institucion. But as for these, they be
sowe^ very thynne. The false christen are always mo then the good. The great
multitude cares nothing for Gods word, another do they knowledge it for a
benefyte, that they may hear it without al harm and parel. Ye they are soon
filled and weery of it, and esteem it but a pain to hear it, and to receive
the holy sacrament.

Again, they yt suffer under tyrauntes, complain day and night, and long
greatly for it. And if a small morsel of our bread that Christ has given us
so rychely does come unto them, they receive it with great joy and
thankfulness, and do them selves much good withal, Men ware weery of ye
word of God.
where as our swyne in the mean season having ye worthy bread them selves so
rychely, and many whole baskettes full thereof, ca^ not reach unto it, they are
so weery of it. Ye they cast it down, walowe them selves therein, tread it
under their fete, and run over it.

Therefore goes it eue^ after ye proverb. Wha^ a thing begins to be
comune, it is no more set by, but despised, be it never so precious. And such
Proverbs are specially found true in ye word of God. Where men have it,
there will they not away withal. Again, where men have it not, there would
they be gsad to have it. Where men have a church at their doors wherein ye word
of God is taught, there go they up and down in the market in the preaching
time, and lurcke about the graves. Where they be ten or twentye mile from it,
there would they be glad to go with the multitude, and to pass over with them
unto the house of God with ioyfulnesse, and thankesgeuynge, as it is in
the.xli. Psalm.

Of them ye dwelvnder tyrauntes.
Therefore shortelye this is mine answer unto the question, concerning the^ that
dwell under tyrau^tes: Blessed be they which are now scattered abroad under the
Turk or Pope, being desritute of Gods word, and would yet be glad with all
their hearts to have it, and in the mean season receive with thankesgeuynge
such morsels as they can get, till the meal be better. Now if they be not
far from the place where the word of God is preached, and the blessed
sacrament mynyfired according unto Christ's institucion, they may well go
thither, and enjoy the same treasure, like as many do, and are therefore
punyshed of their wicked rulers, both in body, and goods. But if they dwell
far from such places, yet do they not cease at ye leest to sighe thereafter.
No doubt Christ our LORD will hear their sighynge, and in process of time
will he turn back their captyuyte. Again, unhappy, ye and unhappy agayna
are they, that have this treasure plenteouslye at their doors, and yet care not
for it. On them shall the word of Christ be fulfilled where he says. Mathei. 8
Many shall come from the east, and west, and shall sit with Abraham, Isaar,
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, but the children of the kingdom shall be
cast out. etc. Let this be said for an introduccion. Now will we shortly go
over the Psalm.

The LORD is my shepherde, I shall lack nothing.
First of all the prophet and every faithful heart, calls God his shepherde.
Now though ye scripture gives God many loving names, Yet this which the
Prophet gives here unto God, is a much more sweet and gracyous name, where he
calls him a shepherde, and says: A swet^ name.
The LORD is my shepherde. It is very comfortable when the scripture calls
God our hope, our strength, our stonye rock, our castle, our shield, our
comfort, our deliverer, our king. etc. For verily he declares the thing so
still in deed unto his own, that he is even so as ye scripture describes him.
But exceeding comfortable is it that he is called here (and many times else in
the scripture) a shepeherde. For in this only word Sheep herd, is almost all
comprehended together, what good and comfortable thing so ever is spoken of
God.

The cause ye mo^ed ye prophet to call God his shey herds.
Therefore does the prophet speak this word with a joyful and sorowlesse
heart, which is full of faith, and for very great gladness and comfort,
exceadeth. And says not: The LORD is my strength, castle. etc. Which were a
maruaylous comfortable saying: But the LORD is my shepherde As if he would
say: If the LORD be my shepherde, and I his sheep, then am I wonde rous well
provided for, both in body and soul, he shall get me a competent living, he
shall defend me and keep me fro mysfortune, he shall care for me, he shall
help me out of all trou ble, he shall confort me, he shall strength me. etc.
Summa, he shall do for me what so ever a good shepherde ought to do. All these
benefits and mo does he co^prehe^de in this only word Shepherde, as he
expounds it himself immediately, where he says: I shall lack nothing.
Besides this some of the other names which ye scripture ascribe unto God,
sound partly to glorious and to hye, and bring in a manner a fear with them,
wha^ men hear the^ to be named. As wha^ ye scripture calls God our LORD,
King, Maker. etc. Of such a nature is not this word Shepherde, but sounds
very friendly, and unto the^ ye be godly, it brings in a manner a confidence,
comfort and trust with it wha^ they read or hear it, like as this word
Father, and other mo, wha^ they be appropriated unto God.

A v^^^y co^forta^ le similit^de.
Therefore is this one of ye most loving and comfortable similitudes (and yet
very co^me^) in the scripture, that it lykeneth ye majesty of god, to
avertuous, faithful, or (as Christ says) a good shepherde: and us poor,
weak, and wretched sinners to a sheep.

Now can not this comfortable and loving similitude be better understand,
tha^ to go into the creatures themselves (wherout the prophets took this and
such other like similitudes,) and to learn diligently thereby, what the
condition and property of a natural sheep is, and the office, labor and
diligence of a good shepherde. Who so takes good head thereunto, may not only
with ease understand this and other similitudes in the scripture concerning
the shepherde and the sheep: but also they shall be unto him exceadynge sweet and
comfortable.

A sheep must live only by the help, de fence and diligence of his shepherde:
The condition of a sheep.
as soon as it leseth him, it is compassed about with all manner of parell, and
must needs perysh: for it can not help it self. For why, it is a poor, weak
and innocent beast, that can another feed nor gyde it self, nor find the right
way, nor keep it self against any unhappiness or misfortune. Saving this
that of nature it is fearful, flies and goes astraye. And if it go but a
little out of the way, and come from his shepherde, it is not possible for it
self to find him again, but runs ever farther and farther from him And
though it come to other shepherdes and sheep, yet is it nothing helped
therewith. For it knows not ye voice of strange shepherdes, therefore flies
it from them, and runs so long astraye, till the wolf rauysh it, or till
it perysh some other ways.

Nevertheless as weak a beast as it is, yet has it this condition, The
property of a sheep.
that with all diligence it bydeth with his own shepherde, and seeks comfort
at his help and defense: And how or whether so ever he leads it, it
follows. And if it can but be with him, it cares for no more, another fears
it any man, but is careless and merry, for it lacks nothing. It has also
this good virtue in it, which is well to be marked: (for Christ does specially
praise the same in his sheep) this virtue, I say, it has, that it will be
earnest and sure to hear and know the voice of his shepherde, and ordreth it
self thereafter, and will for nothing go from it, but follows straight the
same. Again, it regards no strange shepherdes voice. And though they call
and whistle upon it never so friendly, yet cares not it therefore: much less
does it follow them.

Again, The office of a shepherde.
this is y^ office of a good shepherde, that he does not only provide for his
sheep pasture, and other mo things that belong thereto, but defends them
also that no harm chance unto them. Besides this he takes diligent head that
he lefe none. If any go astraye, he runs after it, seeks it, and fetches
it again. As for such as be young, feeble, and sick, he deals gently with
them, keeps them, holds them up, and caryeth the^, till they be old,
strong and whole. etc.

Even thus goes it also in ye spiritual shepfolde, that is to say, How it
goes in ye shep fold of Christ.
in the flock of Christ. Look how little a natural sheep can keep, gyde, rule,
save or defend it self against danger and mysfortune (for it is a feeble and
wapenlesse beast:) So little ca^ we poor, weak, and miserable people keep and
rule our selves spiritually, walk and endure in the right way, or of our own
strength to defend us against all euel, and to get us help and comfort in
trouble and distress.

For how should he have skyll to gyde him self after a godly fashion, The
misery of our nature.
yt knows nothing of God, that is conceived and borne in sin (as we all
are), and of nature the child of wrath, and the enemy of God? How should we
find the right way and continue therein, seeing that (as ye prophet Esaias
says) we can do nothing but go astray. How is it possible that we should
defend our selves from the dyuell (which is a prince and lord of this world,
whose presoners also we be every one,) seeing that with all our power and
might, we can not do so much as to hinder a small leaf to hurt us, or a
poor flee from greuynge us? Why will we poor wretched people boaste so much
of great comfort, help, and counsel against ye judgment of God, against
Gods wrath, and everlasting death, scyng that by our selves and other, we have
experience daily and hourly, how we can another counsel, nor comfort our
selves in small bodily necessityes?

Therefore conclude thus hardely: I plain comparison.
As little as a natural sheep can help it self in the things that be leest of
all, but must look for all benefits at his shepherdes hand: much less can a
man rule, comfort, help or give counsel unto himself in things belonging
to salvation, but must look for all such at ye only hand of God his shepherd,
with to fulfill any thing for his sheep that is to be done, is a thousand times
more willing and diligent, then any other virtuous shepherde in the world.

As for this shepherde of whom ye prophet had spoken so long before, Christ
is our shepherde.
it is even Christ our loving master, which is far an other manner of
shepherde then Moses, which is hard and extreme unto his sheep, and. dryueth
them back in to the wilderness, where they find another pasture, nor water,
but playnescarcenesse, Exodusiii. But Christ is the gracyous and loving
shepherde, which runs after the famy shed and lost sheep in the wilderness,
and seeks it there: And wha^ he finds it, he takes it up gladly upon his
shulders. Luc.xv. Ye and geneth his life also for his sheep. Io.x. This must
needs be a loving shepeherde. Who would not be glad then to be a sheep of his?

This shepherdes voice wherewith he speaks and calls unto his sheep, The
shepherdes voice.
is the holy gospel, whereby we be taught that we obtain grace, remission of
sins and everlasting salvation, not by Moses law (where through he puts us
in ye more fear, dread and despair, which were to fearful, to sore afraid
and dispayred to much before,) but by Christ, which is the shepherde and
bishop of our souls.i. Pet. it which has sought us miserable and lost
sheep, and fetched us out of the wyldernes, that is to say, from the law, from
sin, from death, from the power of the deuell, from everlasting damnacion:
And in that he gave his life for us, optayned he us grace, remission of sins,
comfort, help and strength against the deuell and all mysfortune, ye and
everlasting life also. This is now unto the sheep of Christ, a loving sweet
voice, which they are heartily glad to hear, which they know right well, and
order them selves thereafter. As for a strange voice that sounds otherwise,
they another know it, nor harken unto it, but avoid and fly away from it.
etc. Ioh. x.

The pasture wherewith Christ fedeth his sheep, The pasture.
is also the comfortable gospel, whereby the souls are fed and strengthed,
kept from error, comforted in all temptacions and troubles, defended
against the craft and power of the deuell, and finally delivered out of all
trouble. Nevertheless for as much as his sheep are not all alyke strong, but
some yet lost, and scattred here and there abroad, wounded, sick, young and
feeble, he does not therofre cast them away but has much more respect unto
them, and cares more dilyge^tly for them, then for the other, that have not
such need. For as the prophet Ezechiel says in ye.xxxiiii. Chap. He seeks
them that be lost, brings together them that be scattred abroad, byndeth up
such as be wounded, looks to them that be sick. And the weak lambs that be
but young at the first (says Esaye) he takes up into his arms, and bears
them, and such as be with young ones, does he drive forth fair and softly.
All this does our loving master Christ by the office of preaching and
distributynge of the holy sacrament, as it is often and with many words taught
in other places. For to set it forth here word by word as need should require,
it were to long. The prophet also him self will declare it afterward in the
Psalm.

We have been deceived.
By this then may we easily perceive, how shamefully we have been seduced under
the papacy. For Christ was not so louyngly set forth unto us, as the dearly
deloued prophets, Apostles, and Christ him self does: but so fear fully was
he described unto us, that we have been more afraid of him, then of Moses, ye
we thought Moses doctrine much more lyghter, and to have much more swetnesse
in it, then the doctrine of Christ. And so we knew nothing else, but that
Christ had been a wrothfull judge, whose displeasure we might have reconcyled
with our good works and with our holiness, and whose pardon we might have
optayned through the merytes and intercessions of saints. This is not only a
shameful lesynge, and a miserable deceauyng of poor consciences, but also the
highest blasphemy of the grace of god, a denyenge of the death, resurreccion,
and ascension of Christ. etc. and of all his vnoutspeakeable benefytes,
sclaunderynge and condemnynge of his holy gospel, a destroyenge of faith, and
(in stead thereof) a setting up of utter abhomynacions, lies, and errors, etc.

If this be not darkness, then can not I tell what darkness is. Blyndnesse.
Yet could no man in a manner perceive it, but every man took it for ye plain
verite, and yet unto this day will our papystes needs take it for ye right way,
and shed much innocent blood for ye same. Go to then, if we can keep and gide
our selves, if we can preserve our selves from error, if we can obtain grace
and remission of sins, resyst the deuell and all misfortune, overcome sin
and death by our own merytes: Then must all the scripture be false, which
testifyeth of us, how that of our selves we are but lost, scattred abroad,
wounded, weak, and feeble sheep. And so should we have no need of Christ to be
shepherde, to seek us, to bring us together, to gyde us, to bind us up, to
look unto us, and to strength us against the deuell. And so has he also given
his life for us in vain: For if we ca^brynge all this to pass, and obtain it
through our own strength and goodness, then have we no need of Christ's help.

this well.
But here thou hear the contrary: namely that thou art but a lost sheep, and
of thy self can not come to the shepherd again, but to go astraye only that
can thou well do. And if Christ thy shepherd did not seek and fetch the
again, thou must needs be a pray unto the wolf. But now he comes, seeks,
fyndeth, and brings the unto his fold, that is to say, into his Christen
congregation, through the word and sacrament, gives his life for the, and
holds the still by the right hand, lest thou should fall in to any error.
There hear thou nothing of thine own strength, of thine own good works
and merytes, except thou wylt call it strength, a good work and merit to go
astray, to be feeble and lost. Christ works, deserves, and shows here his
power only. It is he that seeks, bears and gydeth the. He through his death
deserves life for the. He only is strong, and defends the lest thou
should perysshe and be taken away out of his hands. Ioh. x. Unto all this
can thou do nothing, save apply thine ears to hear, and with
thankesgeuynge to reccaue such an vnoutspeakeable treasure, and to learn to
know well the voice of thy shepherde, to follow him, and to eschew the voice
of strangers.

Wherefore if thou wylt be rychely provided for, Take heed to thy shepherdes
voice.
both in body and soul, above all things take good head than to the voice of
this shepherde, harken well what he says unto the, let him feed the, rule
the, gyde the, defend the, comfort the. etc. That is to say, keep the unto
his word, be glad to hear it and to learn it, and so no doubt thou shall be
well provided for, both in body and soul.

By this that has been spoken of hither to, I think it but easy to understand
these words: The LORD is my shepherde. Ye and all the whole Psalm beside.
They are but few words: The LORD is my shepherde, but of a great weight and
pyth. The world makes great boastynge and crakynge of honor, power, riches,
favor, of men etc. But the prophet makes his boast of none of these: for
they be all uncertain and transytory. He speaks but few words and good: The
LORD is my shepherde. Thus speaks a sure and constant faith, which turns
her back upon every thing that is temporal and transitory, how hye and
precious so ever it be, and turns ye face and heart straight unto the LORD,
which is only and altogether and does it him self alone. Even he, and else
none whether he be King or Emperor (says he) is my shepherde. Therefore
goes he forward in all quietness and says. I shall lack nothing.

A genera^^ sentence.
This does he speak in general of all the benefytes bodily and goostly, that
we receive by the office of preaching. As though he would say: If the LORD
be my shepherde, then doutles I shall lack nothing. I shall have abundau^ce
of meat drink, clothing, alyuynge, defense, peace, and all manner of
necessaryes what so ever serves for the sustentacion of this life.

For I have a rich shepherde, which shall not suffer me to lack. Nevertheless
he does speak most specyasly of the spiritual goods and gifts that the
word of God brings with it, and says: For as much as ye LORD has taken
me among his flock, and prouydeth for me with his own pasture. that is: for
as much as he has rychely given me his holy word, he shall not suffer me to
have scarceness in any thing. He shall give his blessing unto the word, that
it may have strength, and bring forth fruit in me. He shall likewise give me
his sprete to stand by me, and to comfort me in all temtacions and troubles,
to make my heart also sure and certain, and that I doubt not therein, but that
I am one of my shepherdes dear sheep. And he my faithful shepherde, which
will deal gently with me, as with a poor weak sheep, and will strength my
faith, endue me also with other spiritual gifts, comfort me in all
troubles, hear me when I call upon him, defend me from the wolf, that is
from the deuell, so that he shall not be able to do me harm. And finally
deliver me from all mysfortune. This means he when he says: I shall lack
nothing.

Thou wylt say: An objection
Ye but whereby shall I perceive that the LORD is my shepherde? I can not
perceive that he deals so louyngly with me, as the Psalm speaks, ye the
contrary do I well perceive. David was an holy prophet, and a man dearly be
loved unto God, therefore could he easily talk of the matter, and believe well
as he said. As for me, I shall not be able to do it after him, for I am a poor
sinner.

An answer
I have declared above, that a sheep has this good co^dicio^ and proper virtue
in it, that it knows well the voice of his shepherde, and ordreth it self
rather after the ears, then after the eyes. The same virtue does Christ
praise also in his sheep, when he says Ioh. x. My sheep know my voice. Now
his voice sounds after this manner: I am a good shepherde, and give my life
for my sheep. And I give them everlasting life, and they shall never peryshe,
and no man shall pluck them out of my hand. Take good head now unto this
voice, and order thy self thereafter. If thou so do, then be sure that thou art
one of Christ's sheep, and he thy shepeherde, which knows the right well, and
can call the by name. Now if thou have him for thy shepeherde, then shall thou
verily lack nothing, ye thou have already that thou should have, even
everlasting life. Item thou shall never perysshe, another shall there be any
power so great and mighty, as to be able to pluck ye out of his hand. Only
be thou sure of this. For doutles this shepherdes voice shall never fail the.
What wylt thou more?

Leave not the voice of thy shepherde.
But if thou let this voice go, and ordrest thy self after the sight of the
eyes, and after the feeling of that old Adam, the^ lesest thou the faith and
confidence, which thou as a sheep should have unto him as to thy shepeherde.
And so falls there upon the now one ymaginacion, now another, so that thou
can not be in quyete, but disputest by thy self and say: If the LORD be
my shepherde, why suffers he then the world to plage me and persecute me so
my serably, contrary to all my deseruynge? I sit among wolves, and am not
sure of my life the twinkelynge of an eye, but I se no shepherde that will
defend me. Item, why gives he the deuell license to do me so much harm, with
fear and despair? Besides this, I find my self all unapt, feeble,
impatient, and laden yet with many sins: I find no certaynte, but
doutfulnesse, no consolacion, but fearfulness and quakynge for the wrath of
God. When begins he to declare in me, that he is my shepherde?

what good follows when one rieueth fast to gods word.
Such and many other mo wonderful cogitacions shall thou have, if thou let his
voice and word pass. But if thou cleue still fast unto it, then suffrest thou
another the deceatfulnesse of the deuell, the displeasure and madness of the
world, another thyn own infyrmite and unworthiness to over come the by
temptacion: but go on boldly, and say: Whether the deuell, ye world, or
mine own conscience do take part against me never so fearfly, yet will not I
therefore take overmuch thought. It must and shall be thus, that who so ever is a
sheep of the LORD, he can not remain vntempted. Let it go with me as it may,
ye whether they sees me, or roast me, yet is this my comfort, that my
shepherde has given his life for me. Besides this, he has also a sweet and
loving voice, wherewith he comfort and says: I shall never perysh another
shall there any man pluck me out of his hand, but I shall have everlasting
life. This promise will he faithfully keep with me, what so ever become upon me.
And though sometime there chance a sin or other impediment by the reason of
mine in fyrmite, yet will he not therefore cast me away, for he is a loving
shepherde, which looks to the weak sheep, byndeth up their wounds, and
heals them. And to the intent that I should be the surer of this, and not to
doubt thereon, he has left me here the holy Sacrament for a token that it is
so in deed.

Even thus has the prophet done. He was not merry always, another could he at
al hours singe: The lord is my shepherd, I shall lack nothing. He has been
sometime at many a great exige^t, ye al to many: so yt he another felt ye
righteousness, comfort, nor help of god, but plain sin, the wrath of God,
fearfulness, despair, the pains of hell etc. as he complayneth himself in
many Psalms. Nevertheless he turns him from his own feeling, and takes
hold of God by his promise concerning Messiah that then was for to come, and
casts this in his mind: How so ever it stand with me, yet is this the
comfort of my heart, that I have a gracyous and merciful LORD, which is my
shepeherde, whose word and promise does strength and comfort me, therefore
shall I lack nothing. And even therefore has he written this and other
Psalms, to the intent that we should be sure, that in very temptacyons there
is else where no counsel nor comfort to be found. And that this is the only
golden science, namely, to cleue unto the word and promise of God, and to
judge after the same, and not aster the feeling of the heart.

And so (no doubt) there shall follow help and comfort, and not fail in any
thing.

Now follows the second verse.
He fedeth me in a grene pasture, and leads me to the fresh water.

In the first verse has the Prophet shortly comprehended the meaning of
the whole psalm, namely that who so ever has the LORD for his shepherd, shall
lack nothing. More than this does not he teach in this Psalm, but only
sets forth the same more at larg with goodly ornate words and similytudes
how it chances that they which are ye lords sheep, lack nothing, and says:
He fedeth me. etc. But almoost through out the whole Psalm (as his manner is often
times to do) he uses words, which signifye somewhat else than they sound. As
when he makes mention of the shepherde, of the fedyng, of ye grene pasture, of
the fresh water, the staf, the sheep hook etc. it is easy to perceive that he
will have somewhat else understand thereby, then we men use to speak thereof.
Such manner of speaking is very common in the scripture, and therefore should
men take diligent head thereunto, that they may be accostumed wythall, and
learn to understand it.

But se how well fauouredlye he can speak. I am (says he) a sheep of the
lords, which fedeth me in a grene pasture. etc. A natural sheep can not be
better, the^ wha^ the shepherde fedeth it in a pleasant grene pasture, and
beside fresshe water. If it can have this, it thinks no man upon earth is
more rich or happyer then it. For there it fyndeth every thing that it can
desire. A goodly thyck plentyfull grass, whereof it waxes strong and fat: A
fresshe water, wherewyth it can refresshe, and quycken it self. There has it
pleasure and joy: Even so will David say herelyke wise, that God never showed
him a greater grace and benefyte upon earth, then this, that he might be in the
place and among the people, where the word and dwelling of God, and the right
Gods service was. For where that treasure is, there goes it well both in the
spirytuall and wordlye regiment. As if he would say: All the nations and
kingdoms upon earth are nothing. They are (in deed) rycher, myghtyer, and
more glorious then we Jews, and make great boastynge thereof. They boast also
of their wisdom and holiness, for they have gods also whom they serve: yet
with all their pomp and glory, they are but even a plain wilderness and
desert. For there is another shepherde nor pasture, therefore must the sheep
needs straye, be famyshed and perysh: As for us, though we have many
wyldernesses about us, yet sit we here at rest, safe, and merry in paradyse,
and in a pleasant grene pasture, where there is plentye of grass and fresshe
water, and have with us our shepherde, which fedeth us, leads us to the
drink, defends us etc. Thefore can we lack nothing.

The chefest good upon earth is to have gods word
This man had goostly eyes, and therefore saw he ryghtwell, what is the best and
noblest good upon earth. He makes no boast of his kynglye worship and power,
he knowlegeth well that such goods are also the gifts of God: another runs
he from the^ and lets the^ lie: but uses them unto the honor of god, and
gives him thanks therefore. But of this makes he specially his boast,
namelye, that the LORD is his shepherde, and he in his pasture and fedynge:
That is, that he has Gods word. This benefyte can he never forgette, but
speaks thereof maruaylous excellentlye, and with great joy, and prayseth it
far above all the goods upon earth. And this he does in many Psalms, as in
the.cxviii. where he says. The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me then
thousands of gold and silver. Item I love thy commanndementes above gold and
precious stone. O how sweet are thy words unto my throat? Ye morethen honey
unto my mouth.

What we ought here to learn.
This science should we learn also, namelye, to let the world boast of their
great riches, honor, power, etc. For it is lowse, uncertain and transytory
ware, which God casts into the dou^geon. It is a small matter for him to
give an ungracious person (that blasphemeth and dyshonoureth him again for
his reward) a kingdom, a dukedom, or any other worship, and good upon
earth. These worldly goods are his draff and swillynges, wherwyth he fylleth
the hogs bellyes, that he is disposed to kill. But unto his children (as
David speaks here thereof) he gives the right treasure. Therefore should we as
the dear children and heirs of God, another boaste our selves of our
wisdom, strength nor riches: but of this, that we have the precious pearl:
even yt worthy word, whereby we know God our loving father and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent. The word of God is our treasure.
This is our treasure and inheritance, which is sure and everlasting, and
better then al ye good of the world. Who so has this, let him suffer other
men to gather money together, to live voluptuously, to be proud, and hye
minded. But though he himself be despised and poor in the sight of the
world, yet let not that tempte him, but let him thank God for his
vnoutspeakeable gift; and pray that he may abide thereby. It makes no matter
how rych and glorious we be here upon earth. If we keep this treasure, we have
plentye of riches and honor. Saint Paul was a man of little reputacion, and
poor upon earth, having the deuell and the world very fearce against him:
But in the syghte of God he was a man right dear and greatly set by. Besides
this he was so poor, that he was feign to get his living with the labor of
his hands. And yet for all ye great pouertye, he was rycher then the emperor
of Rome: having nevertheless none other riches, but the knowledge of Christ.
For the which (says he Phil. 3.) I count all things (nothing upon earth
except,) very loss and dounge.

The God of mercy grant us grace, yt we also after ye ensample of David, Paul
and other holy men, may count our treasure (which is eue^ the same yt they
had) as great and magnify it above al ye goods upon earth. and hartelye to
give God thanks therefore that he has wetesafed it upon us, God has done more
for us, the^ for many other.
before many thousands of other. He might have suffered us to go astraye as well
as ye Turks, Egypcians, Jews, and other ydolatrers, which know not of that
treasure. Or else he might have suffered us still to be hard hearted, as are the
Papystes, that blaspheme and condemn this treasure of ours. Where as he has
set us now in his own grene medowe, and provided us so rychely with good
pasture and fresshe water. It comes even of his grace, therefore have we the
more to thank him for.

The medowe.
As for the people of God or the holy congregation of Christ, the prophet
calls it a grene medowe. For it is Gods pleasant garden, garnysshed and
bewtyfyed with all manner of spiritual gifts. The grass
The pasture or grass therein, is the word of God, whereby the consciences are
strengthed and refresshed. In the same grene medowe does our LORD God gather
his sheep together fedeth them therein with good grass, and refressheth them
with fresshe water. That is, he commits unto the holy Christen church the
shepherdes office, delivers and gives her the holy gospel, and the
Sacraments, to take charge and look to his sheep therewith, that they may be
rychely provided for, with doctrine, with comfort, with strength, what they be
that feed sheep in the wilderness.
and with defense against al evil, etc. As for those that preach the law of
Moses or the commandments of me^ they feed not the sheep in a grene pasture,
but in the wilderness (where they famysh) and lead them to foul stynkynge
waters, whereof they perysh and dye.

By this allegorye of the grene pasture, will the the prophet declare the
great abundaunce and riches of the holy gospel and of the knowledge of Christ
among the faithful. The great riches of such as believe.
For like as the grass in a grene medowe stands goodly thycke and full, and
ever grows more and more: Eue^ so have the faithful not only Gods word
with all ple^teousnesse, but also the more they use it, and meddle withal, the
more it increases and grows among them. Therefore sets he the words
maruaylous plainly. He says not: he brings me once or often into a grene
pasture, but fedeth me still therein, that I may lie, take my rest, and dwell
even in the mids of the grass, and need never to suffer hunger or any
scarceness beside. For the word that he here uses, may be called lyenge or
resting, as a beast lies and rests upon his four fete. After the same
manner does Solomon speak also in the.lxxi. Psalm, where he prophecyeth of the
kingdom of Christ and the gospel, yt it should myghtely go through and come
in to all places, and says: There shall be an heap of corn in the earth hye
upon ye hills. etc. and shall be grene in the city like grass upon the earth.
That David also in this Psalm speaks likewise of the gospel, he declares
himself afterward, where he says: He quyckeneth my soul. Ice^ Thy staff
and thy shepehooke do comfort me.

The first fruit of Gods word.
This is now the first fruit of ye word of God, that the christian are so
instruct thereby, that they increace in faith and hope, learn to committee all
their doings unto God, and what so ever they have need of, either in soul or
body, to look for it at his hand, etc. And leads me to the fresshe water.
The second fruit of Gods word.


This is the second fruit of gods word It is unto the faithful not only
pasture and grass, whereby they are filled and strengthed in faith. But it is
also unto them a goodly cold fresshe water, where by they take refresshynge
and comfort. Therefore leaves he not there where he said: He fedeth me in a
grene pasture, but adds this also unto it: And leads me to the fresh water.
As if he would say: In the great heat when the Son does sore burn. Psalm.
c. xx. and I can have no shadow, then leads he me to the fresh water,
gives me drink, and refressheth me, that is: in all manner of troubles,
anguishes, and necessities, goostly and bodily, when I know not else where to
find help or comfort, I hold me unto the word of grace. There only and no
where else do I find the right co^solacion and refreshynge, and that
plenteously. Now whereas he speaks here of this comfort with garnysshed words,
he talks of it in another place with plain and manifest words, Psalm. 118.
and says: If thy word were not my comfort and delight, I should perysshe in
my trouble. I will never forget thy word, for in my trouble it is my
consolacion, yet thy word quyckeneth me.

Why the scripture rehearses so often this similitude.
Nevertheless continues still in the similitude of the shepherde and of the
sheep. And (no doubt) it is co^mun in all the prophets. For of the sheep and
other cattle had ye Jews their best living, and were co^munly shepeherdes,
as was David and the Patriarchs. Therefore is this similitude oftymes spoken of
in the scripture. But David speaks of this matter after the nature of the
contry. For the land of promise is an whote dry, sandye, and stony land,
which has many wyldernesses and little water. Therefore in the first book of
Moses it was more the^ once declared, how that ye heythen shepherdes strove with
the shepeherdes of the Patriarchs because of water. For ye which cause in the
same contry they took it for a special treasur, if they might have water for
their cattle (In our contryes we know not thereof, for there is water enough
every where.) Of this did David se, and he rehearses it for a special
benefyte, to be under the custodye of the LORD, which should not only feed
him in a grene pasture, but also in the heat, bringing him to ye fresh water,
etc.

Shortly, his meaning is to declare, ye as little as a man can come to the
knowledge of God and the truth and to the right faith without the word of God:
So little can there any comfort and peace of conscience be found without the
same. Without gods word ca^ no ma^s conscience be at rest.
The worldly have also their comfort and joy, how be it yt endures but the
twinkelynge of an eye. When trouble and anguysh comes (and specially the last
hour) it goes away. As Solomon says: Pro. 14.
After laughter, comes sorrow: and after joy, comes heaviness. But as for
them that drink of this fresshe and living water, they may well suffer
trouble and disease in the world, but they shall never lack the true
consolacion. And specially when it comes to the point, the leaf turns over
with them, which is as much to say, as: After short weeping comes
everlasting laughter: and after a little sorrow, comes excellent joy. ii.
Cor. iiii. For they shall not weep and mourn both here and there, but as
Christ says: Blessed are you that weep here, for ye shall laugh. Luce. vi.

He quyckeneth my soul and brings me forth in the way of righteousness
for his names sake.

Spiritual pasture (...) water.
Here does the prophet declare himself of what manner of pasture and fresh water
he spoke: namely, even of the same ye strengtheth and quyckeneth the soul.
This can be nothing else but Gods word. But for as much as our LORD God has
two manner of words, the law, and the gospel, the prophet when he says: He
quyckeneth my soul gives suffycienlty to understand that he speaks not
here of the law, but of the gospel. The law
The law can not quycken the soul, for it is a word that requires and
commands us to love God with all our hearts, etc. and our neighbor as our
selves. Who so does not this, him it condempneth, and speaks this sentence
over him: Cursed be every man which does not all that is written in the book of
ye law. Deuteronomy. 27. Galat. 3. Now is it certain that no man upon earth does
this: therefore comes the law with his judgment, fearyng and vexynge the
consciences. And if there be no help, it goes through, so that they must needs
fall into despair, and be condemned for ever. Of this occasion does S. Paul
say: Rmo. 3.
By the law comes but the knowledge of sin. Item, the law causes but
wrath. Rmo. 4.


As for the gospel, it is a blessed word. It requires none such of us, The
gospel.
but brings us tidings of all good, namely, that God has given us poor
sinners his only son to be our shepherde, to seek again us famished and
dispersed sheep, and to give his life for us, that he might so deliver us from
sin, from everlasting death, and from the power of ye deuel. This is ye
grene grass and the fresh water, where with the LORD quyckeneth our souls.
And thus are we made lowse from evil consciences and heavy thoughts. Of this
shall we speak more in the.iiii. verse. He brings me forth in the way of
righteousness.

Here (says he) does not the LORD my faithful shepherde leave, yt he fedeth
me in a grene medowe, and leads me to the fresh water, and so quickens my
soul, but he brings me forth also in the right way, that I depart not
aside, go astraye, and so perysshe. That is, he holds me fast to the pure
doctrine, that I be not deceived by false spretes, To be led in ye right way
what it is.
and that I fall not away by any other temptacion or offense. Item, that I
may know, how I ought to lead mine outward conversation and life, and that I
suffer not my self to be persuaded by the holiness and strayte life of
ypocrites. Item, what is the true doctrine, faith and service of God, etc.

An excellent virtue of Gods word.
This is now again a goodly fruit and virtue of ye word of God, that they
which cleue fast there unto, do not only receive strength and comfort of ye
soul thereby, but are preserved also from untrue doctrine and false holiness.
Many me^ obtain this treasure, but they can not keep it. For as soon as a man
is to bold and presumptuous, and thinks himself sure of ye matter, it is
done with him. Or ever he can look about him, he is deceived. For the deuell
also can pretend holiness, and transform himself into an angel of light,
as saint Paul says: And even so likewise can his minysters show themselves,
as though they were ye preachers of righteousness, and come i^ shepes clothyng
among the flock of Christ, but inwardly are they rauenynge wolves. Therefore
is it good here to watch and pray (as the prophet does in ye last verse) that
our shepherd may keep us by this treasure which he has given us. They yt do
not this, certainly they shall lose it. And the end of that man (as Christ
says) shall be worse then the beginning. Luce. 11.
For they shall afterward become ye most poysened enemies of Christ's flock,
and do more harm with their false doctrine, then the tyrauntes with the swearde.
This had saint Paul well proved by the false Apostles, that made the
Corinthians and Galathians to err so soon, and afterward made division in
all Asia. We se it our felues also this day by the Anabaptists and other
false spretes. For his names sake.

The name of God.
The name of God is the preaching of God, whereby he is magnifyed and known to
be gracyous, merciful, long sufferyng, true, faithful, etc. which
(notwithsta^dynge that we be the children of wrath, and gyltye of everlasting
death) forgeueth us all our sins, and takes us for his own children and
inheritours. This is his name, this does he cause to be proclaimed by his word.
Thus will he be known, magnifyed, and honored. And (according unto the
first commandment) he will even thus declare himself toward us, as he has
caused it to be preached of him. Like as he does still, strengtheth and
quyckeneth our souls spiritually, and keeps us that we fall not in to
error, hetteth us living for our body, and preserves us from all misfortune.

This honor yt he so is as we have now said, is given him only of them that
cleue fast unto his word, these believe and confess plainly, that all the
gifts and goods which they have goostly and bodily, they receive them of
God, even of his mere grace and goodness. That is to say: For his names sake,
not for their own works and deservings. For this do they give thanks unto
him, and declare the same unto other. This honor can not be given unto God, of
any presumptuous iusticiaryes, as heretics and false spretes, or enemies and
blasphemers of Gods word, for they magnifye not his name, but their own.

And though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, yet fear I no evil,
for thou art with me. Thy staff and thy shephooke do comfort me.

Hitherto has the prophet declared, that they which have and love ye word
of God, ca^ lack nothing. For the LORD is their shepherde, which does not
only feed the^ in a grene pasture, and leads the^ to the fresh water, yt
they may be fat, strong, and refreshed both bodily and goostly: but also
takes such care for the^, yt they be not weery of the good pasture and fresh
water, leauyng ye grene medowe, and depart again from the right way into the
wilderness. This is ye first part of this Psalm. Now teaches he farther
how that they which are the sheep of this shepeherde, What the prophet
teaches in this verse
be compassed about with many ieopardyes and misfortunes. Nevertheless that
LORD (says he) not only defends the^, but delivered them also out of al
te^ptacions and troubles. For he is among the^. Now after what manner he is with
them, he declares likewise well fauouredly.

Here thou seyft yt as soon as ye word of God goes forth, and as soon as
there be any yt receive it, and abide by it, immediately ye deuell and all his
angels step forth and move the world with all ye power thereof against it, to
put it down, and utterly to destroy them yt have it and knowledge it.
Persecucion.
For look what our LORD god speaks or does, it must be tried and go through ye
fire. This is very nedfull for christen men to know, else might they fail and
think thus in their minds: How stondeth this together: The prophet says
before: The LORD is my shepherd, I shall lack nothing. And here he says
contrary, namely, that he must walk in the dark valley. And in the next
verse followynge he confesses that he has enemies? Where by he gives
sufficiently to understand that he lacks many, ye all things. For he that
has enemies and lies in a dark valley, seyth no light, that is to say, he
has another comfort nor hope, but is forsaken of every man, and every thing
is black and dark before his eyes, ye eue^ the fair clear Son. How is
this true then that he should lack nothing?

We may not order our selves after yt our ward sight.
Here must thou not order thy self after thine own eyes, and follow natural
reason, as does the world, unto whom it is impossible to se this rich and
glorious comfort of Christen men, that they should lack nothing. Ye
certainly they hold that the contrary is true, namely, that there are no people
upon earth more poor, more miserable, and more unhappy then christen men: Ye
with all their diligence and courage help they thereto, that they may be most
abhominably persecuted, ba^nyshed, shamed, and put to death. And in so doing,
they think they do God service therein. It appears therefore outwardly as
though christen men were but sheep driven away and forsaken of God, and given
over already in to the wolves mouths, and to be even such, as lack nothing
but altogether.

The servants of Ma^mon.
Again, they that serve that great God Mammon or the belly, appear in the
world, to be those good sheep which (as the Psalm says) lack nothing:
being rychely provided for of God, comforted and preserved from all parell and
mysfortune. For they have their own hearts desire, honor, good, joy,
pleasure, every man's fanoure, etc. Another need they be afraid to be persecuted
or put to death for yt faythes sake. For as long as they put not their trust
in Christ the only true shepherd, nor knowledge him, whether they believe on the
deuell or his da^me, or do what so ever they will beside with covetousness.
etc. they are taken not only for well doers therein, but also for the living
saints, which bide still by the old faith, and will not be deceived through
heresye, which is (as David teaches here) that the LORD only is the
shepeherde. So abominable and greueous mortal sin is it to believe on this
shepeherde and to knowledge him, The pope will not forgive him, that puts his
whole trust in Christ.
that there came never such a sin upon earth. For even the Popes holiness which
else can dispense with all sins and forgive them, can not remytte this only
crime.

Therefore (I say) in this thing do not thou follow the world and thine own
reason, which while they judge after the outward appearaunce, become
foolysshe, and hold the prophet but for a liar in that he says: I shall
lack nothing. But (as I said before) hold thou the fast unto the word and
promyses of God, harken unto thy shepherde, how and what he says unto the,
and order thy self according unto his voice, not according to that which the
eye seyth or ye heart feleth. And so haste thou the victory. Thus does the
prophere: He confesses that he walks in the valley of the shadow of death.
How the Prophet behaueth himself in tentacion and trouble.
That is, that he is compassed about with trouble, heaviness, anguysshe,
necessite, etc. as thou may se more at large in his stories, and other
Psalms. Item, that he has need of comfort, whereby it is sufficiently
declared that he is in heaviness. Item, that he has enemies. And yet he
says: Though my tentacions were mo and great, and though I were in a worse
case: Ye though I were in deaths mouth already, yet do not I fear onye
mysfortune. Not that I am able to help my self through mine own prouysion,
travail, labor or succurre. Another do I trust to mine own wisdom, virtue,
kynglye power, and riches: For in this matter, the help, counsel, comfort,
and power of all men is far to little.

But this is it that does it, even that the LORD is with me. As if he would
say: Certainly of mine own behalf I am feeble, in heaviness, vexed, and
compassed about with al manner of parell and misfortune. My heart also and
conscience is not quyete, because of my sins. I feel an horrible fearfulness
of death, and hell, so that I might in a manner despair. But though all the
world, ye and the gates of hell be set against me, yet will I therefore not be
dyscoraged. Ye I will not be afraid for all the mysfortune and pain that
they are able to say upon me. For the LORD is with me. The LORD (I say)
which made heaven and earth and all that therein is, unto whom al creatures,
angels, deuels, men, sin, death, etc. are subject. Summa, he that has all
things in his own power is my counselgeuer, my comforter, my defender, and
helper. Therefore am I afraid of no mysfortune.

After this manner does Asaph speak also in the.lxxii. Isaph
Psalm, where he comfort the Christen against that great stomblynge block,
that the ungodly have such prosperyte upon earth: And that the beloved saints
of God on the other side are ever plaged, etc. and says: If I have but the o
LORD, I pass not upon heaven nor earth. Though both body and soul should
perysshe. Yet thou o God, art the comfort of my heart and my portion. Now
after what manner the LORD is with him, he shows farther more, and says,

Thy staf and thy shepehooke do comfort me.

How the LORD is present with many faithful men,
The LORD (says he) is with me, but not bodily, that I may se or hear him.
This presence of the LORD whereof I speak, is not comprehended with the five
wits. Only faith seyth it. The same is sure, that the LORD is nyer unto us,
then we are to oureselues. Whereby? even by the word. Therefore says he: Thy
staf and thy shepehooke comfort me: As if he would say: In all my troubles and
necessityes I find nothing upon earth, whereby I may be helped to be at
rest. Only the word of God is my staf and shepehooke where by I hold me, and
stand up again. And sure I am likewise by it, that the LORD is with me, and
does not only strength and comfort me by the same word in all troubles and
tentacions: but also delyuereth me from all mine enemies, spyte of the deuell,
and the world. With these words: Thy staf and thy shepehooke do comfort me.
comes he again unto ye similitude of ye shepherde and the sheep, The
similitude of ye shepherd
and will say thus much: Like as a bodily shepherde rules his sheep with the
staf or shepehooke, and leads them to ye pasture and to fresh water, where
they find meat and drink, and defends them with the shepehooke against all
parell: Even so does the LORD the true shepeherde, gyde and rule me with his
staf. That is to say, with his word: to the intent that in his sight I should
walk with a good belefe and a merry conscience, and know to beware of untrue
doctrine and false holiness. Beside this, he defends me also against al
ieopardy and mysfortune, bodily and goofily, and delivers me from all mine
enemies with his staf, that is to say, with the same word does he strength and
comfort me so rychelye, that there is no mysfortune so great, whether it be
bodily or goofilye, but I am able to come out of it, and to overcome it.

this goes spiritually to work.
By this thou seyste that the prophet speaks here of no help, defense, or
comfort of man. Another draws he out any swearde. etc. It goes here all
secretly and preuelye to work, even by the word. So that no man can spy
this defense and comfort, but only they that believe. And here does David
write a general rule for all Christen men, which is well to be noted:
Namelye, that there is none other mean way upon earth for onye man to be
delivered out of all tentations, save only to cast all his burden upon God,
and to hold him fast by his word of grace, to cleue surely unto it, and in
no wise to suffer it to be taken from him. Who so does this, can be content,
whether he be in prosperity or aduersyte, whether he live or dye. And finally
he can endure, and must needs prosper against all deuels, the world, and
mysfortune. This me think is a great praise of the good word of God, and a
greater power is ascrybed here unto it, then is the power of all angels and
men. Thus does S. Paul praise it also Romans i. The Gospel (says he) is the
power of God, for the salvation of all them that believe thereon.

The office of preahige
And with this does the prophet touch the office of preaching, for by the
mouthly preaching of the word which goes in at the ears, and that the
heart takes hold upon thy faith, and by ye holy sacraments does our LORD
God bring ass this to pass in his Christen congregation, namely, to the
intent that the people may have faith, be strenthed in belefe, and preserved
in the true doctrine. Item, that they may finally endure against all
temptacions of the deuell and the world. For sense the beginning of the
world has God dealte thus with all his saints by his word, and beside the
same has he given the^ outward tokens of grace. This I say because that no
man should take upon him without these means to meddle with God, or to chose him
self a peculyar way unto heaven, else shall he fall and break his neck, as
the pope and his has done. And as the Anabaptists and other sedicious spretes
do yet this day.

And with these words: Thy staff and thy shepehooke do comfort me will the
prophet show some special thing. As if he would say: Moses is ashepherde
lykwyse, and has also a staff and a shephooke: nevertheless he does nothing
else but compel and punysshe his sheep, and ouerladeth the^ with an
intolerable burden, Act. xv. Esaias. ix. Therefore is he a fearful and a
terrible shepeherde, of who^ the sheep are afraid, and fly from him.
Neuerthesesse you LORD with thy staff and shephooke, compellest not thy sheep,
another make them afraid, nor ouerchargest them, but geuest them comfort.

Therefore speaks he here of the office of preaching the new Testament,
whereby tydynge is brought unto the world, that Christ came upon earth to
save sinners: and thereby has optayned them such a salvation, that he has
given his life for them. All they that believe this shall not peryshe: but have
everlasting life. Ioh. iii. This is the staf and shephooke, whereby the souls
take refreshynge, The staf and ye shephoke.
comfort, and joy. Wherefore in the spirytuall shepefolde, that is to say, in
the kingdom of Christ, there ought none other saw to be preached, but the
Gospel, which the prophet with ornate words calls the staf and shephooke of
comfort, whereby they be strengthed in faith, refresshed in their hearts, and
receive consolacion in all manner of troubles, and even at the point of death.

what they be thatlede Christ's sheep in a grene medowe
They that so preach, use the spirytuall shepherdes office aryght, feed the
sheep of Christ in a grene medowe, lead them to the fresh water, refresh their
souls, keep them that they be not deceived, and comfort them with the staf
and shephooke of Christ, etc. And where thou hear such one, be sure thou
hear Christ himself. Such men also ought to be taken for true shepherdes:
that is to say, for the mynysters of Christ, and the stewardes of God. Another
ought it to be regarded, that the world cries out upon them, and calls
them heretics and deceauers. Again, they yt teach any thing else contrary to
the Gospel, causynge men to trust to their own works, merits, and to their
own feigned holiness, these no doubt, though they boast the^ never so much to
be the successors of the Apostles, and deck them selves with the name and
title of the Christen stenchurch, yeethough they raised up dead men, yet are
they wolves and murderers: which spare not the flock of Christ, scatter them
abroad, torment them, and kill the^ not only spiritually, but bodily also, as
me^ mayese now before their eyes.

The names that the word of God has in this Psalm.
Like as the prophet here before does call Gods word or the gospel, grass,
water, the right way, a staff, and a shephooke: Even so afterward in the
fyfth verse he calls it, a table prepared, an ointment, and a full cup. And
this simslitude of the table, oyntme^t, and cup does he take out of the old
testament from the Gods service of the Jews, and says even in a manner the
same that he had said before, namely, yt they which have the word of God, are
rychely provided for in all points, both concerning the soul, and body, save
only ye he speaks it here with other fygures and allegoryes. First brings
he in the similitude of the table, A table.
where upon the shewebreads lay contynually. Exodus xxv. xl. And then declares
he what the same did sygnifyeth, and says:

Thou preparest a table before me against mine enemies, thou anoyntest mine
head with oil, and fyllest my cup full.

Here does he knowledge plainly, that he has enemies. But he says he keeps
him from them, and dryueth them back, by this means, namely, because the
LORD has prepared a table before him against those his enemies. Is not this a
wonderful defender? I would have thought he should have prepared before him a
strong wall, a mighty hulworke, deep dyches, armor, and other harness and
weapens, where by he might be sure from his enemies, and discomfite them. And
now comes he and prepares before him a table, to eat and drink on, and so
to smite his enemies.

There could I be content to fight also, if the enemies might be overcome
without any teopardye, care, travail and labor. And I to do nothyngeels but
to sit at a table, to eat and drink and be merry.

With these words: Thou preparest a table before me against mine enemies, will
ye prophet declare, ye great excellent, The great power of Gods word.
and wonderful power of the word of God. As if he would say: Thou offrest me
such kyndnesse (OLORDE) and fedest me so well and rychely at thy table, which
thou have prepared for me, that is: Thou enduest me so psenteously with the
exceadynge knowledge of thy good word, so that through the same I have not only
plenteous consolacion in wardly in my heart: against mine own evil
conscience, against fear and dread of death, and ye wrath and judgment of
Godt but outwardly also through ye same word I am become so valeaunt and so
invincible a giaunt, yt al mine enemies can bring nothing to pass against me.
The more wroth, mad, and unreasonable they are against me, the less I
regard it. Yet I am so much the more quyete in my self, glad and content. And
that of none other occasion, save only yt I have thy word. The same gives me
such power and courage against all mine enemies: So that when they rage fearsly
and are most mad of all, I am better content in my mind, then if I satte at
a table where I might have all that my heart could desire, meat, drink,
myrthe, pleasure, mynstrelsye, etc.

An hye co^mendacio^ of Gods word.
There hear thou again, how hyghly this holy David magnifyeth and prayseth
the good word of God, namely: how that by the same, they that believe, overcome
and win the victory, against the deuell, the world, the flesh, sin, a
man's own conscience, and against death. For if a man have the word, and take
sure hold of it by faith, then must all these enemies (which else are
invincible) be feign to give back, and to yield them selves. And it is a
maruaylous victory and power, ye and a very stout boastynge of such as
believe, yt they subdue and overcome all these horrible (ye and in manner
almyghtye) enemies, not with ragynge, not with bytynge, not with resystynge, not
with strykyng again, not with taking of vengeance, not with seeking of
counsel and help here and there: but with eating, drinking, pleasure,
sitting, being merry and taking of rest. Which things (as it is said before)
come all to pass through the word. To eat and drink what it is
For to eat and drink is called in the scripture, to believe, to take sure
hold on Gods word, wherout there follows, peace, joy, comfort, strength,
etc.

The natural reason of man.
Natural reason can give no judgment in this wonderful victory of the
faithful, for here comes the matter to pass clean contrary to the
outward senses of man. The world does always persecute and slaye the
Christen, as the most hurtful people upon earth. Now when natural reason
seyth this, it can not think otherwise but that the Christen lie under: and
again, that their enemies prevail and have the victory. Thus did the Jews
entreat Christ, the Apostles, and the faithful, and put the^ ever to
execucion. When they had slain them, or at the leest banished the^, then cried
they: Now have we ye victory: these fellows that have hurt us, shall now
trouble us no more: Now shall we handle every thing as we will. But when they
thought them selves to have been surest of all, our LORD God sent upon them
the Romans, which dealte so horriblye with them, that it is a terrible
thing to hear. Then after certain hundredth years, as for the Romans
(which through out all the empire of Rome had slain many thousand martyrs)
God rewarded them afterward, and suffered the city of Rome in few years to be
four times spoiled by ye Gothies and Vandalyes, and finally to be brent,
destroyed, and the empire to decay. Who had now ye victory? The Jews and
Romans that shed the blood of saints, like water? or the poor Christen,
that suffered them selves to be ordered like slaughter sheep, and had none other
harness and weapen, but the good word of God?

How it goes with the multitude of the^ that believe in Christ.
Thus does David declare with these words, how it goes with the holy Christen
congregation, (For he speaks not here of his own person only) sets her
forth in her colors, and descrybeth her well fauouredly, Namely: how that in
the syghts of God, she is even as a pleasant grene medowe, which has plentye
of grass and fresshe water. That is to say, that she is the paradyse and
pleasant garden of God, garnysshhed with all his gifts, and has his
vnoutspeakeable treasure, the holy Sacraments, and that good word, wherewyth
he instructs, gydeth, refreshes, and comforts his flock. But in the sight
of ye world has this congregation a far other appearaunce, eue^ as though
she were a black dark valleye, where a man can se another pleasure, nor joy:
but trouble, sorrow, and aduersyte. For the deuell with al his power sets
him self against it, for this treasures sake. Inwardly plageth he the
congregation of God with his venymous fyrye darts: Outwardly treads he her
down by sects and offenses. Then kyndleth he also his brande upon her, even
the world, which mynystreth unto her all sorrow and heaviness of heart, with
persecutynge, sklaundrynge, blasphemynge, condemnynge, and murthurynge: In so
much that it were no wonder that dear flock of Christ were utterly destroyed
in the twyncklynge of an eye, by such great soltytye and might, both of the
deuell, and of the world. For she ca^ not keep her self from her enemies,
they are far to strong, to deceatfull and to mighty for her. She is even as
the prophet does here descrybe her: An innocent, simple, and wapenlesse lamb,
which another will nor can do any man harm, but is always ready not only to
do good, but also to take evil for good. How happens it then that the
congregation of Christ in such weakness, How the flock of Christ wins.
can escape the craftiness and tyranny of the deuell and the world? The LORD
is her shepeherde, therefore lacks she nothing. He fedeth and refressheth
her, goostlye and bodily, he keeps her in the right way, he gives her also
his staf and shephooke in stead of a swearde, which she bears not in the
hand, but in the mouth. And not only comfort the sorrowful therwyth, but
dryueth away the deuell also and all his Apostels, be they never so sotyll and
spiteful. Besides this, the LORD has prepared for her also a table, and
Easter lamb. When her enemies are very wrothfull, gnasshe their tethe
together over her, are mad, unreasonable, in a rage, and out of their wits,
and take all their sotyltye, power, and might to help them, for to destroy
her utterly: Then does the beloved bryde of Christ set her down at her
LORDS table, eats the Easter-lambe, drinks of the fresh water, is merry,
and syngeth: The LORD is my shepherde, I shall lack nothing. These are her
weapens and go^nes wherewith she has hitherto smytten and overcome all her
enemies, and after the same manner shall she have the victory still unto domes
day.

The more also that the deuell and ye world does hurt and vex her, ye better
is it with her. For her edifyenge and increace stondeth in persecucion,
affliction, and death. Out of this occasion did one of the old fathers say:
The blood of martyrs is a sede, A notable saying
where one is cast, there rise an hundredth up again. Of this wonderful
victory sing certain Psalms, as the.ix. x. etc. After this same manner have I
also (through the grace of God) behaved my self this eyghtene year: The
author of this book
I have ever suffered mine enemies to be wroth, to threate^, to blaspheme and
condemn me, to cast their heads still against me, to ymagin many evil ways,
and to use diverse vnthryftye points. I have suffered them to take wondrous
great thought how they might destroy me and mine (ye gods) doctrine.
Morouer I have been glad and merye (but more at one time then at another,) and
not greatly regarded their ragynge, and madness, but have holden me by the
staf of comfort, and had recourse unto the LORDS table. That is: I have
committed ye cause unto God, wherein he has so led me, yt I have optayned all
my will and mind. And in the mean time have I done little or nothing, but
spoken unto him a pater noster, or some little Psalm. This is al my harness,
wherewith I have defended me hitherto, not only against mine enemies. but also
through the grace of god, brought so much to pass, that when I look behind me,
and call to remembrance how it has stond in ye Papistrye, I do eue^ wonder yt
ye matter is come so far. I would never have thought yt the tenth part should
have come to pass as it is now before our eyes. He that has begone it, shall
bring it well to an end. Ye though nine helles and worlds were set on an
heap together against it. Let every Christen man therefore learn this science,
namely, yt he hold him by this staf and shepehooke, and resort unto this table,
when heaviness, or any other mysfortune is at hand. And so shall he (doutles)
receive strength and comfort against every thing that oppresses him.

The ointment.
The second similitude is of ye oyntme^t, whereof there is me^cio^ made ofttymes
in the holy scripture. It was some precious oil, as Balm, or else some other
sweet smellinge water, and the use was to anoynte the kings and prestes
withal. When the Jews also held their solemn feasts, and were disposed to be
merry, they did anoynte or sprenkle them selves with such precious oyntme^t, as
Christ declared likewise in the sixte of Mathewe, where he says: when thou
fastest, anoynte thine head, and wash thy face, etc. The use then of this
oyntme^t was had among those people, when they were disposed to be merry and
glad. Like as ye Magdalene also thought to make the LORD merry, when she poured
upon his head the precious water of Nardus, for she saw that he was heavy.

The full cup.
The third similitude is of the cup, which they brought in their Gods
service, when they offered drink offerynges, and were merye before the LORD.
With these words then: Thou anoyntest my head with oil, The rich comfort of
christian me^
and fillest my cup full will the prophet descrybe the great rich comfort
which they that are faithful have by ye word of God, so that their
consciences are quyete, glad, and at rest in the mids of all tentacions and
troubles. Ye even of death. As if he would say: doutlesse the LORD makes me
a maruaylous man of war, and harnesseth me wonderously against mine enemies.
I thought he should have put material harness upon me, set an helmet upon
mine head, given me asweard in my hand, and have warned me to be
circu^specte, and to take diligent head to my matter, lest mine enemies should
overtake me.

Now comes he and sets me down at a table, and prepares me a goodly
banquet, anoynteth mine head with precious Balm. Or (after the manner of our
contry) sets a garlande upon mine head, as if I should go to some pastyme
or dau^synge, and not fight with mine enemies. And to ye intent that there
should be no scarceness, he fylleth my cup full, yt I may drink, make,
good chere, and be dronken. The table the^ prepared is my harness, the
precious oyntme^t is my helmet, and the full cup is my sweard, With these do I
overcome all mine enemies. Is not this a maruailous preparyng to war, and yet
a more wonderful victory? Thus will he say: LORD, thy gestes. which, sit at
thy table, that is to say, the faithful shall not only be strong and
valeaunt giauntes against al their enemies, but they shall be merry also and
dronken. Spiritual dro^ke^nesse
For why? thou make them good chere, as a rich hooft uses to do to his
gestes: thou fedest them well, thou make them lusty and glad, thou fyllest
into them so much, that they must needs be dronke^. This is al done by the
word of grace. For by the same does the LORD our shepherde feed and strength
so the hearts of his faithful, that they dare defye al their enemies, and say
with the prophet: I am not afraid for thousands of the people that compass me
roundeaboute. Psalm. iii. And here before in the fourth verse: I fear no evil,
for thou LORD art with me. With this (ye even through the same) word, does he
give them also the holy ghost, which makes them not only to take good
stomachs unto them, and to be of good courage, but so quiet also in the^ selves
and merry, that for the same great exceadynge joy, they are even dronken.

This must be spiritually understand.
He speaks here then of a spirytuall strength, of a spiritual mirth, and of a
spiritual dronke^nes, which is a godly strength Romans i. A joy (as saint Paul
calls it) in the holy ghost. Romans xiiii. And a blessed drunkenness, when
people are not full of wine, (wherout follows inconvenience,) but full of the
holy ghost. Ephe. v. This is the harness and the weapens, wherewith our LORD
God prepares his faithful against the deuell and the world, namely, in their
mouth gives he them his word, and in their heart he gives courage, that is to
say, the holy gooste. With such ordinance put they from them all fear, and
with gladness bukle they with all their enemies, smite them, and overcome them
with all their might, wisdom, and holiness.

Such souldyers were the Apostels on whitsondaye, when they went up to
Jerusalem against the commandment of the Emperor and the hye prestes (and
ordered the^ selves, as if they had been very gods, and all the other but
greshoppers) and went even through with all power and joy, as if they had been
dronken. In so much ye some had them in derision therefore, and said: They were
full of sweet wine. Nevertheless S. Peter declared out of the prophet Joel,
that they were not full of sweet wine, but full of the holy ghost. And so he
smote about him with his swearde, that is: he opened his mouth, and preached
the word of God, and felled down three thousand souls at once from the power
of the deuell. Actu. ii.

This strength, joy, and blessed drunkenness does not only show it self in
the faithful, when they be in prosperity and have peace, but also when they
suffer and dye.

As when the counsel at Jerusalem caused the Apostles to be beaten, they were
glad of it, that they were worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ,
Actu. v. And in the v. to the Romans does saint Paul say: We rejoice also in
troubles. etc. Afterward were there many martyrs also, The steadfast and joyful
hearts of them ye have fusfred death for ye word of God.
which with merry heart and laughing mouths went unto their death, as if
they had gone to somepastyme or dance: Like as we read of saint Agnes, and
saint Agatha (which were virgins.xiii. or.xiiii. year old,) and of other mo,
which were of such inward courage and confydence, that they did not only
overcome the deuell and the world by their death, but also made good chere
even then with their hearts, as though they had been dronken of very joy. And
this greueth the deuell exceeding sore, namely, wha^ men are at such
quietness in them selves, that they despise his great might and gyle. In our
time also have there be many which for the knowledge of Christ have been glad to
suffer death. We se more over that there be many, which with perfect
understanding and faith dye upon their beds, and say with Simeon: LORD,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. that it is a joy to
behold the^, of whom I have seen many my self. And all this comes because
that (as the prophet says) they be anointed with the oil, which
the.xliiii. Psalm calls the oil of gladness, and because they have drunk
of the full cnppe which the LORD has filled.

Ye but thou wylt say: Objection
I feel not my self yet so apt, that I could be content to dye. etc. That
makes no matter. Answer.
David also (as it is said before) has not been sure of that science at all
hours, but sometime complained that he was cast out of gods sight. Other holy
men also have not always had an hartye confidence toward God, and a perpetual
delight and patience in their troubles and temptacions. Note this well.
Saint Paul sometime is so sure and certain in him self, and makes such
boast of Christ, that he cares not for the curse of ye law, for sin, death,
nor for the deuell. I live not now (says he. Galat. ii.) but Christ lives
in me. Item: I desire to be lowsed and to be with Christ. Phil i. Item: Who
shall separate us from the love of God, which spared not is own son, but
has given him for us all? How shall he not with him give us al things also?
Shall trouble, anguysh, persecucion, swearde, etc. separate us from him? To.
viii. There speaks he of death, of the deuell, and of all evil with such a
courage, as if he were the strongest and greatest of all saints, unto whom
death were but asporte. But incontinently in another place, he speaks as
though he were the weakest and greatest sinner upon earth. i. Cor. ii. I was
with you (says he,) in weakness, in fear, and in much trembling. I am
carnal, sold under sin, and taken presoner in the law of sin, which is
in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Roma. vii. And in the fyfth to the Galath. he teaches that in the
saints of God there is a continual strife of ye flesh against the sprete. etc.
Therefore ought thou not immediately to despair, though thou felest thy self
feeble and fayntharted, but pray diligently that thou may endure by ye
word, and increace in the faith and knowledge of Christ. As the prophet does
here, and teaches other men likewise so to do, and says:

Oh let thy loving kyndnesse and mercy follow me all the days of my life,
that I may dwell in the house of the LORD for ever.

For as much as the deuell never ceasseth to plage the faithful inwardly with
fear, outwardely with deceatfulnesse of false doctors or teachers, and with
the violence of tyrauntes: he prays here therefore at the end earnestly, that
God which has given him this treasure, will keep him fast by it also unto the
end. And says: O gracyous God show me such favor, that thy loving
kyndnesse and mercy may follow me all the days of my life. Why the prophet
makes this prayer.
And immediately he declares what he calls this loving kynonesse and mercy,
namely, that he may remain in the house of the LORD for ever. As if he would
say: Thou haste begone the matter, thou have given me thy holy word, and
accepted me among them that are thy people, which do knowledge, praise and
give thanks unto the, grant me therefore such grace from hence forth, that I
may continue still by the same word, and never to be separated more from thy
holy Christen flock. Thus does he pray also in the.xxvi. Psalm. One thing
(says he) have I desired of the LORD, which I would feign have: namely, yt
I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the
fair bewty of the LORD (that is to say, the true service of God) and to
vysite his temple.

A notable ensample.
The prophet then here by his ensample teaches and exhorts all such as put
their trust in God, yt they be not careless, proud, or presu^ptuous in them
selves, but to fear and give them selves unto prayer, that they lose not this
treasure. And doutlesse this earnest exhortacion should steare us up, and make
us fervent unto diligent prayer. For seeing that holy David which was a
prophet, so hyghly endued with all manner of godly wisdom and knowledge, and
with diverse great excellent gifts of God. Seeing he (I say) did pray so
often and with such great earnest, that he might abide by this treasure. Much
more shall it be mete for us (which are utterly nothing to be compared unto
him, We have most need to watch and pray.
and live also now at the end of the world, when as Christ and the Apostles
say, it shall be an horrible and peryllous time,) it shall be much more
convenient (I say) to watch and pray with all earnest and diligence, that we
may continue in the house of the LORD all the days of our life, namely,
that we may hear the word of God, and receive the manyfolde commodityes and
fruits that come of it, (as it reharsed before,) and continue in the same unto
the end. Which grant us Christ, our only shepherde and Saueoure.

AMEN.
How and whether a Christian man ought to fly the horrible plage of the
Pestilence.

A sermon out of the.xci. Psalm

Qui habitat in adiuto. By Andrewe Oslander.

Translated out of high Almayne into English.

A Sermon out of the Psalm, Qui habitat. etc. how and unto what place a
Christen man ought to fly the horrible plage of the pestilence.
FOr as much as Almighty God does vyset, handle, and punysshe the contry and
region with the horrible and fearful plage of the pestilence, and many folks
(after an unmannerly fashion) are so afraid thereof, that there be herd and seen
of them all manner of vncostumable words and works, which become not well a
Christen man: And seeing that all the deeds of charity which one Christen man
is bound to show unto another (no less the^ unto Christ him self,) are
perlously omytted, whereby then ryseth all manner of sklaunder to the weak, and
mysreporte unto ye holy Gospel: I thought it profitable and necessary to
bestow upon your charity in this case a short instruccion and comfort out
of the holy scripture, to the intent that the ignorant may be taught, the
weak strengthed, and every one counseled after his calling to serve his
neghbour. And I will take for me ye.xci. Psalm, which sounds after this
manner:

Who so sytteth under the defense of the highest, and abides under the shadow
of the Almyghtye,

He says unto the LORD: My hope, and my strong hold: my God on whom I
trust.

For he delyuereth me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noy some
pestilence.

He shall cover the with his feathers and thy trust shall be under his wings:
his truth is spear and shylde.

So that thou nedest not to fear for the horryblenesse of the night, for the
aro was that fly by day time.

For the pestilence that commenth preuely in the dark, for the syckenesse that
destroys in the noone day.

Though a thousa^de fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, yet
shall it not come nigh the.

Ye with thine eyesshalte thou se thy desire, and behold, howethe ungodly
shall be rewarded.

But before we come to the understanding of these comfortable words, your
charity shall first know that it is not my meaning to for bid or inhibite any
man to fly or to use phisycke, or to avoid dangerous and sick places in
these fearful airs, What cases retayn a man in dangerous places.
so far as a man does not therein against the belefe, nor Gods commandment,
nor against his calling, nor against ye love of his neighbor. For though some
will say: Such plage touches no man, but those that be ordained of God
thereunto, like as there be certain ensamples thereof found in the holy
scripture: Namely how ye Ezech. 9. and Apoca.vii. there was sent an angel, which
aforeha^de marked ye virtuous and elect, or ever it was charged and commanded
ye second angel to smite (with pestilence or other plages) those yt were not
marked. Nevertheless against that it might be said: Good sir, though it went
so at such a time in such places, who makes us sure yet now, that it shall
therefore chance so in all other deaths of the contry? Therefore will I now at
this time let all such things continue in their worthy nesse and fre, like as
other natural things, which be subject and committed unto our reason to
rule. But as for the Christen, which (by reason of office, or for pouerte
sake, or for other reasonable causes) can not, or be not minded to fly, I will
here withal show them their best and highest comfort that they have.

In like manner, I will not enter against them, that speak naturally thereof:
and say: The cause of pestilence and like diseases.
Such plage comes out of the influence of the stars, out of ye workynge of
the Cometes, out of ye vnseaasonable wether and altering of the air, out of
the Southe wyndes, out of stynkynge waters, or out of foul mystes of the
ground: For such wisdom of theyrs will we leave unto them vndespysed, and
not fight there against: But (as Christen men) we will hold us unto the word
of God, the same will we suffer to be our most hye wisdom, and give
crede^ce unto it, and follow it: and so shall we find much better and surer
instruccion: Namley, The chief causes of pestilence is Gods wrath.
that this horrible plage of the pestilence comes out of Gods wrath, because
of the despysyge and transgressynge of his godly commandments. For thus
says the holy prophet Moses in the fyft book, the.xxviii. Chapter.

If thou wylt not harken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and
keep all his commandments and ordinances which I command the, then shall
all these curses come upon the, etc. And it follows: The LORD shall cause
the pestilence to endure long with the: the LORD shall smite the with
swellynge, fever, heat, burning, blastynge, drouth, etc. and shall persecute
the till he utterly destroy the, and bring the to naught.

And certainly this is the plain truth and the very original of these plages.
No man ought to doubt thereon. For though the foresaid natural causes do somewhat
also thereto, yet is it sure and undoubted, that the same causes be sent and
steared up out of Gods wrath for our sin and vnthank fullness. And truly
that it is even so, the holy scripture declares, not wych bare words only,
but shows it also with notable ensamples. For in the fourth book of Moses the
fourtenth Chapter, when all the spies (except Joshua and Caleb) spoke evil of
the land of promise, and made the people vnpaciente and vprourysshe, so that
they chose them a captain, and thought to go again into Egypt, and to stone
Moses and Aaron, (which commanded them the contrary) we read thus: Then
appeared the glory of the LORD, and spoke unto Moses: How long does this
people blaspheme me? And how long will they not believe me, for all the tokens
that I have done upon them: therefore will I smytte and destroy them with
pestilence, and make of the a grater nation then this.

Likewise also when David caused the people to be nombred against Gods
commandment, he displeased the LORD God horibly therewith. Therefore laid he
the punishment upon him, so that he was feign to chose him self whether he had
rather have, seven years derth, or three months myschaunce in battayl, or
three days pestilence in the land. And when he chose the pestilence, there dyed
in three days seuentye thousand men, as it is written in the last Chapter of
the.ii. book of Samuel.

Seeing then that out of the word of God we know the very cause of this
horrible plage: Namely, that it is the defaute of our sins, as unbelief,
disobedience and unthankfulness: therefore before all things it shall be
necessary, that we refrain from the same, repent, and aniende our lives. If we
will else be preserved and delivered from this horrible plage. For if God punysh
us because of sin, it is good to consydre that we must first knowledge and
eschew our sins, in case that he shall withdraw and take awaychys wrath and
punishment from us. If we amend not God continues i^ puny shynge.
For if we continue in our evil, sinful, and culpable life, certainly he shall
not cease with the punishment, but go forth more and more, till he give and
recompense according to our works. But if we knowledge our sin, refrain
from it, repent, and axe grace, the^ shall he also take away his wrath. And
this horrible wrath (with other heavy burdens as war and derth that lie upon
our neck) shall he mercyfully take away from us again. As holy Paul
says.i. Cor. xi. If we judged our selves, we should not be judged: But when
we are judged, we be chastened of the LORD, that we should not be damned with
the world.

And out of all this may your charity well perceive, how unwisely and
vnchristenly they do, yt out of inordinate fear, of this plage leave their
calling and office, maliciously wythdrawyng the love, help, and
faythfulnesse, which they (out of gods commandment) are bound to show unto
their neghbours, and so do sin grievously against the commandment of God.
For certainly they do but steare up the wrath of God more earnestly against
themselves, that he may the sooner take hold upon them, and pluck them away
with this plage. For men may hear on every side, A pyteous case.
that some do shone and fly not only the syck, but also the whole: Ye (that
yet more foolyshe is) even the platters and candelstyches which come out of
strange houses, as though death did surely styck therein. And (out of such
fond chyldyshe fear) it comes, that not only some syck folks be suffered
to dye away with out all keeping, help, and comfort, but the women also
great with child be forsaken in their need, or else comes there utterly no
man unto them. Ye a man may hear also, that the children forsake their
fathers and mothers, and one household body keeps himself away from another,
and shows no soue unto him: Which nevertheless he would be glad to se showed
unto himself, if he lay in like necessite.

Howbeyt I suppose there come not many such chances to pass, nevertheless I
must speak thereof that it be done no more from henceforth. For certainly it is
unwisely and vnchristenly handled: and we need not think that the same is the
way to escape this plage, but rather an occasion that it raygne the more
myghtely over us. The more we fly the punishment, the farther danger we ru^ne
in
For seeing it is sure (as ye have herd before) that such plage is sent for
punishment of our sins, and Christ has given us a new commandment that
we should love one another (as he has loved us) it follows, that the farther
we depart from the love of our neighbor, the more we lade sin upon us, and
deserve this plage but the more. Again the more dilige^tlye that we take heed
unto the love of our neighbor, the surer shall we be from this plage: No man
needs to doubt thereof.

Noman ought to preasse in the danger without necessite.
But here wythall will I also counsel or compel no man, to any vnuedeful
danger, (that he is not bound unto by his calling, nor by love,) but only
warn those, which for fear leave that which they are bound to do before
God: To the intent that for such naked fears sake, they do not transgress
nor omytte the commandment of God, and hope by sin to escape this plage,
which nevertheless comes because of sin. For that were a foolysh unadvised
counsel, if one would go about to escape the wrath of God by transgression,
and by sin to avoid the punishment of sin.

Besides this, does experience show also that they which be so sore afraid,
do co^munly miscary. Again, they that wait upon their offices and serve their
neghbours, be delivered: As it is well seen in ye minysters of the church and
other mo, that shone not the syck, but must vyset and comfort them with Gods
word, and provide for them with the holy sacrament: For we se no where, that
they therefore must also be soon syck and must dye. Ye how must the higher
powers of the world do, which (by reason of their calling, and for the
common profyt and regimentes sake) abide also in the ioperdy, and must
mynystre because of love: Specially ye chefest, on one whereof there lies more,
the^ on a thousand of other? And yet does God co^munly preserve the^ also yt
they be delivered left still on live, and dye in a good quiet age.

Unbelief and mist rust in God is cause of flyenge
Therefore certainly such inordinate fear and flyenge against Gods commandment
is nothing else, but a declaryng of a great and sore unbelief, that men do not
believe and trust in God, that he can and will deliver. And thus is verifyed the
saying: The ungodly have no peace. Esaias. lvii. For if we will fear and fly
where no parell is, when will we then bestow our lives for our neghbours, as
Christ has done for us? and we also be bound to do likewise.i. Io. iii.

Who so now desires to escape ye wrath of God and this horrible plage, let him
not axe his own reason how he shall do, but believe and follow ye word of God:
which teaches him, not to fly evil air and infecte places (which he may
well do: nevertheless he remains yet uncertain wheter it helps or no) but
it teaches him to leave of from sin, as from the very original cause of
this plage and punishment, and (by true repentance and amendeme^t of living)
to walk again in the right way. For yt is the only sure and wholesome
flyenge in this dangerous time, whereby a man may escape this plage.

But whyther a man ought to fly, thereof will we hear the holy gooste by the
prophet in this psalm. He knows it much better then we can think, and
says after this manner:

Who so sytteth under the defense of the highest, and abides under the shado
we of the almyghtye. He says unto the LORD: My hope, and my strong hold:
My God on Whom I hope. For he delyuereth me from the snare of the hunter, and
from the noisome pestilence.

These words (my most dearly beloved) shall ye take to heart, and mark them
well with all diligence: For they be not the words of men which can lie and
deceive. Hewbeyt though they were men's words, and some old wise man spoke
them (or some well learned physician) ye would not yet despise them, but
receive and keep them. But now be they the very words of the hye majesty of
God, which the holy ghost speaks by the mouth of the prophet. And they teach
us whether we ought to fly for this plage, that we may be safe. And certainly
they must needs be the very truth: For heaven and earth must pass, but my
words shall not pass, says the LORD.

But that ye may understand them right and well, ye shall remember, that it
is the use of the holy scripture (specially in the psalms) to declare one
meaning with two manner of sayenges, as ye have often times herd. For so does
the prophet here and says: Who so sytteth under the defense of the highest,
and abides under the shadow of the almyghtye. To sit under the defense of the
highest
For to sit under the defense of the highest, is even as much to say, as to
abide under ye shadow of ye almyghtie. And with these words means ye holy
prophet nothing else, but: who so puts his trust in God with aryght sure
Christian belefe, and gives himself over into his proteccion and defense, (For
such people does God receive to grace) the^ holds he for his own dear
children, (and even so they be) and gives them his holy sprete, which works
in them very salvation and godly works.

Therefore remains he also upon them, and all things must serve for their
wealth, as Paul says Romans viii. Such proteccion also and defense of God, is
set forth unto us every where in the scripture, as an ouershadowyng and
coueryng with wings. For like as ye two Cherubins spread out their wings over
the Arc: Exodus xxxvii. Even so does God sprede out the wings of his
protection over his elect. Therefore says Moses Deuter. xxxii. Like as an
Aegle steareth up his nest, and flies over his young ones: so spredde he out
his feathers, and bare his people upon his wings. After this manner spoke the
holy angel Gabriell also unto the most blessed and pure virgyn Mary, wha^
she should be the mother of God: The holy ghost shall come upon the, and the
power of the highest shall ouershadowe the Luc. i. In like manner spoke Christ
also unto Jerusale^: How often would I have gathered thy children together, as an
hen gathers her chekens under her wings, and ye would not? Mat. xxiii. For
though a true beseuyng man be in deed the temple of God, and God dwells in
him: yet uses the scripture often to speak thereof, as though he did fly above
us (in as much as he does ouershadow, cover, and defend us:) and that because
ye heaven and the heaven of all heavens (as Solomon says) can not comprehend
nor conteyn him.iii. Reg. iii. But though he dwells in us, yet flies he
wide, hye and low, not only on the outsyde of us, but also on the outsyde and
over all creatures. And so in all these words there is nothing else said, but:
who so ever is a right beleuynge Christen.

Mark now then that he says not: Who so is wise, strong, rich, whole, or
well frended. Another says he also: who so keeps him self thence, or flies
thither, holds him self well, or uses good phisycke: but who so puts his
trust in God. Not that the foresaid good things be evil, or may not be had
or used with profit: But that they (where faith is not) may even as soon do
harm as good, are in no wise able to deliver from the wrath of God. But what
does the beleuer: He says unto ye LORD my hope. They that misuse Gods
creatures, commit spiritual whordome.
But this do not the ungodly and unbelievers, but set their hope in the foresaid
points, put their trust in them, and boast thereon, and so commyt spiritual
whoredom therewith, and make ydols thereof. But to God do not they lift up their
eyes, another think they upon him, nor fear him. And when he comes then with
his wrath, and ouertaketh them with a plage, so yt of necessite they must needs
think upon him: than fear they, and be afraid of him, fly away, and know
not where to abide. Then vanysheth away their hope and boastynge, which they
(in time of prosperity) had unto the creatures. Horrible is the death and end
of the unrighteous.
And so comes it to pass, yt their wisdom has been plain foolyshnesse:
their strength, their own mysfortune: their riches, their own destruction:
their health, their own harm: their fre^des, their own ypocrytes and
traitors. Sapie. iii. Jo. viii, a Psalm. i. b Pro. x. a. and. xi. a Eccls. v, b
Jacob. i. b
And all that which they trusted unto, can not help the^. When they would
hyde themselves on the backsyde thereof, it is even as much as when one hydeth
him behind a ladder. And when they would seek help thereby, it is even like
as if a wolf should defend a sheep or a goose.

But thus goes it not with the beleuer: for who so puts his trust in ye
LORD, shall not be confounded. Therefore says he not only that ye LORD is his
hope, but also his strong hold, which he may fly unto, in the which he
may shut himself close, and be delivered therein. As Solomon says in
the.xviii. chapter of the Proverbs: The name of the LORD is a strong castle,
the ryghteous flies unto it, and shall be defended. For ye unbelievers have their
hope even in their goods, but in necessyte they find not refuge, as ye
faithful has a strong hold and hye castle in God the LORD.

Extrema gaudii luctus occupat.
And though the unbelievers have their whole will all their life long, yet has
it an evil end, as it had with the rych man, which was buried in the hell.
Luce. xvi. For who so believes not, shall be damned. Again, though the faithful
be plaged and persecuted all his life long, so that he can not se how he may
be delivered, yet has he this comforce, that ye LORD is his God: that is,
that he can help and deliver him as an almighty LORD, ye after such a
fashion and way, as another he himself, nor any man's reason can think or
deuyse. And though he do it not, yet does not the faithful despair, but
lets ye LORD be his God, on whom he hops: that is, at whose hand he
looks for all good in the life for to come and everlasting. For hope seyth and
looks on that which is to come, which as yet is hyd. As Paul says Roma.
the.viii. Chapter. Hope yt is seen, is no hope for how can a man hope yt which
is seen. But if we hope that which we se not, we look for it by patience.

And so is this meaning: The unbelievers have their hope in the creatures, and
are afraid of God. The faithful is lord of all creatures.
The faithful has his hope to God, and is lord over the creatures. The
unbelievers myscary, and by the creatures find they no help in need. The
faithful myscary not, but God is unto the^ a strong hold. The unbelievers
may well have their wylles as long as they live, but at the last (through
their despair) there follows everlasting dastinacion. The faithful may
their life long have disquyetnesse and tentacion, but at the last (through
their hope) there follows everlasting life.

Such hope should they have, and they have it in deed, that though they must
lie under as long as they live, yet after death they shall enherete
everlasting life.. But certainly it comes not to pass, that they must
always lie under: For God is faithful, and suffers not his to be temted above
their strength, but makes the temtacion so to have an end, that we may bear
it.i. Cor. x. Therefore says the prophet moreover:

For he delyuereth me from the snare of the hu^ter, and from the noisome
pestilence. And in these words does he shortly show unto us, that almighty
God can and will deliver his own from all misfortune yet even in this life.
Two manner of myschaunces.
For all the myschaunces that we be troubled wythall in this temporal life, are
of two sorts: Some come out of ye wicked deuyce of the deuell and of me^, as
shame and persecucion. Some plainly of nature and out of the ordinance of God,
as tempest and pestilence. The faithful now believes and makes his boast,
that these myschaunces can not be so great and mighty, but God shall deliver
him there from.

And it is a goodly natural similitude, that he lykeneth the evil and wicked
deuyce of the ungodly against the faithful, The similitude of the wicked unto
a hunter.
to a net or snare of the hunter. For like as an hunter proves the kind and
nature of every wild beast, comes pryuely after him, seeks out ye course
and habitacion thereof, and afterward sets the net, yt he may drive it
therein: Even so do the ungodly also unto the ryghteous. First, they look how
they be minded. If any one be fre of langage, then set they him on fire that he
may speak somewhat sharply, as saint Steven did. Actu. the.vii. Chapter. If he
be gentle and friendly, then ymagen they some foolyshe thing upon him, and
flatter away his heart from him, as Dalila did unto Samson. Iudi. xvi.
If he seek the salvation of the people, then sklaunder they him, Math, xi.
as ye Jews blasphemed Christ to be a wine supper and a companion of
publica^s. If he be simple, Psalm. cxxxix.
then lie they upon him behind his back, or ever he be ware thereof: Then
follow they upon him, cry, lie, and complain, that the virtuous Christian man
woteth not what point to be at, or how he has deserved it. Nevertheless they
think the bell is so cast, yt at the last it must ring as they will, but it
fails them.

For the LORD on whom we believe, which is our hope, ^. Cor. x. ^i. Pet. ii.
refuge, and God, can not only preserve us from their snares that we fall not
therein: but also when we fall into them, and they think we be their captives,
he can and will deliver us yet therout. In like manner does God the LORD
preserve his faithful, not only from the noisome sycknesse of the pestilence,
but also when they be taken therwyth and infecte already, he delyuereth them
from it, and makes the^ whole again. But how that comes to pass, and how
we shall understand it, it shall follow here after more clearly.

Why the pestilence is a noisome syckenesse.
This is now well to be marked also, that the pestilence is a noisome
sycknesse, not because it brings death: (for that do al other mortal
sycknesses likewise, and death is no loss unto the faithful, but auau^tage,
as Paul says, Philip. the first Chapter) but because that it takes away
the people very suddenly, unlooked for, and unawares: Wherout the^ there follows,
strife, lawyng, or business among sinners, and of the comune wealth, as every
man by himself can lyghtely perceive and understand. Therefore is it also an
horrible punishment over the sin of the world, Pestilence is an horrible
punishment.
which concerns both them that dye, and them that are left alive, as here
after it shall follow.

Where as is now such a faith as gives credence unto God, he shall preserve
him from all wicked ymaginacions of me^, likewise from all noisome syckenesses.
And at the last shall he save him, that continues not without fruit, but
breaks out with right love and faythfulnesse toward his neighbor, and
desires also to bring him unto that point, that he may believe and be
partaker of all such goods and benefits of God. Therefore does the prophet
turn his words now also unto his neighbor, and says farthermore:

He shall cover the with his feathers, and thine hope shall be under his wings.
That is: If thou also wylt put thy trust in him, thou shalt find it so
likewise. For he shows such his benefytes unto all and every one that put
their trust in him. As for the covering of his feathers, and hope under his
wings, your charity has herd enough before what it is.

Now though all faithful look for such help at God, and it happens unto
them, yet is it not done without a special battayll of faith. For such help
does he promise us in his holy word, that we should believe it. And if we
believe it, it happens unto us according to our faith. Therefore says the
prophet more over: his truth is spear and shylde That is his godly promyses,
The veapens, of faith
which are sure and true, and notherlye nor deceive: Those be our weapens
wherwyth we fight, and overcome all aduersyte. But like as spear and shylde
are not profitable unto him that can not use them, nor will: Even so also do
not the promyses of God profit him, that can not fight therwyth, and will not
believe thereon. For that is the right science in this battayll when mysfortune,
The science of the war of faith
aduersite or tentacion comes, that we look about us according unto Gods
word: Namely; what comfort and promise he has made unto us in such a case,
and with a right belefe to take hold of the same as of a shylde; and to
comfort and defend our selves there with, so can there no mischau^ce do us
harm, as the holy Saint Paul in the last chapter of his Epistle to ye
Ephesians teaches and says: Before all things take ye shylde of faith,
wherwyth ye may quench all the fyrye darts of the wicked, etc.

Against the same (namelye against Satan our head enemy) is such word of
God, even ye right spear, wherewith we wound and overcome him. Nothing
hurts the Deuell so sore as the word of God.
For no bodily wapen hurts and hyndreth men so sore, as the word of God
stops and hyndreth Satan if it be thrust under his nose against his
venymous dealing and temtacion. For if a servant (that deals wrongeously
and vnthriftely in his masters goods and busynesses) be afraid, vexed, and
persed through the heart, when a simple man says unto him: Thou unthrift why
do thou so? that is not thy masters will and meaning, he did not so
command the. How much more goes it through Satan's heart, when a virtuous
Christen man holds the word of God under his eyes; and brings witness
over him, that he as a wicked creature ha^dleth against his maker, and against
his chosen children? Therefore does holy saint Paul call Gods word also the
swearde of the sprete: Mat. iiii.
And the LORD Christ defends himself only with the same against all
temtacions of Satan in the wilderness.

How when thou take hold thus of Gods promyses through faith, and use the^
for spear and shylde to defend thy self, and to smite Satan, then out of the
same it follows as the prophet says farther:

That thou nedest not to fear for the horryblenesse of the night,

For the arowes that fly in the day time.

For the pestilence that comes pryuely in the dark,

For syckenesse that destroys in the noone day.

For these four aduersites set forward and shorten the life of the
unbelievers: But the faithful has such consolacion and promise, The
horriblenesse of the night.
that he needs not to be afraid. First for the horryblenesse of the night.
That is, for all manner of tentacion and deceate, that happen unto men by night
in the darkness. For this we all perceive, that in the night and in the
darkness, we are weaker minded, of more despair, and more afraid then in the
light. The blood runs to our hearts, and the heeres stand vpryght, and
all the body waxes cold for fear. Out of this comes it the^, that we
think we se, hear and perceive somewhat, which in very deed is not so. Then
goes there one astray, another leseth his color, ye third falls sick, ye
fourth is become crocked, the fyfthe goes out of his wit. And so men think,
that the deuell has done it, where as it is yet a plain natural workynge of
ye exceadynge great fear, which would destroy a man even by day time, if it
were so great. The devil is cause. of horryblenesse.
Howbeyt true it is that ye deuell causes such fear, and prynteth it in, yt
he may begile and destroy us by fear, as by a natural workynge: Yet is it
nothing but a fear. For the prophet calls it not an euel or good sprete,
but planely the horryblenesse of the night. Another is it any thing else also
but an horror and fear. and continues an horror and fear.

Therefore where a right belefe is, there is no fear. Where no fearfulness is,
there is also no horror, nor fa^tasye of spretes, or deceatfulnesse of the
night, The cause of lygtenynges and such like,
but plain courage and boldness. If onye thing else be seen (as fire or
light,) they be but natural things, out of the heat of the ground, like as
lyghtenynges, draggons, fallyngestarres and cometes be in the air and in the
heaven. But here wythall will not I speak against the wouderfull visions and
tokens, which god sends for a warnyng be for great myschaunces to come.

The arowes in the day time
Secondarely, is the faithful sure for the arowes that fly in the day time.
That is, all manner of myschaunces which overtake a man openly in the day: and
yet so suddenly and unawares, that he can not escape them. As when a tyle falls
from the roof of an house, when a wicked beast does evil, or when an
ungracious person does hurt in body, name, or good. For such misfortunes
come for the most perte so suddenly, yt a man can not preuente them, but must
let them hit as with an arowe, and afterward restore and heal the harm with
great travail and labor. But now will God preserve his faithful from such
misfortune, if they have his promyses before their eyes, believe thereon, and
order their lives thereafter.

The pestilence.
Thyrdly, a faithful person needs not also to be afraid for the pestilence,
that slyppeth in preuely in the dark. This is verily a comfortable promise in
this dangerous time, for the which we should by right put our trust in God,
and thank him therefore, for as much as it is one of the most perlous and
horrible plages, wherwyth he visyteth and punyssheth the sin of the world.
For it takes hold of life unawares, and plucketh a man away in two or three
days, (or ever he can order his business and house, and make his testament)
crepeth in preuely in ye dark, so that no man knows what it is, or whence it
comes, or whyther it goes: therefore can no man keep himself surely from it.

For if it were in meat or drink, it might be eschued: If it were an evil
tayst, it might be expelled with a sweet sauoure: If it were an euel wind, the
chamber might with diligence be made close therefore: If it were a cloud or
mist, it might be seen, and avoided. If it were a rain, a man might cover him
self for it. But now is it a secret mysfortune, that crepeth in preuely, so
that it can another be seen nor herd, another smelled nor taysted till it have
done the harm.

The more dangerous the pestilence is, the more excellent is the promise.
Therefore the more dangerous and noisome that the plage is, the better and more
excellent is the promise, that no man should have cause to despair: For how
might God make us a more excellent and fayrer promise, then that he promyseth
to deliver from the pestilence, us that be his children, and that we need not
to be afraid thereof, though a thousand dye of the same at our left side, and
ten thousa^de at our right side? Yet shall it not reach unto us, if we do but
believe this promise, and let it be our spear and shylde? For if we so do,
then shall such poisoned arowes either not hytte us at all, or else not wound
us to death.

The sycknesse that destroys in the noone day.
Fourthly, God will also preserve his children from the sycknesse that
destroys in the noone day: For the noone day (when the Son is at the
strongest) is cause of much heat and feuerous sycknesse, specially in those
contryes, where the Son ryseth hye, and comes nigh over men's heads. For
great heat brings much sweat, consumes and alters the blood, causes
inordinate drinking, and makes that the people are glad to cool the^
selves again foolyshly: Wherout then arise all manner of perlous diseases,
which be not very unlike the sycknesse of the pestilence.

Now whether it be fear of the night, or arowe of the day: whether it be
pestilence or sycknesse, that commetht by the euel South: wind, or what plage
it will that lies upon the world because of their sins, God the LORD will
preserve his faithful there from, or deliver them from it: and that shall come
to pass so certainly and so wonderfully, that (as the Prophet says) though
a thousand fall at thy left side, and ten thousa^de at thy right side, yet
shall it not touch the. This is doutlesse a loving, merciful, comfortable,
and fair promise, whereon our heart by reason should trust, and chefely
rejoice in the same. For he that speaks it, is Almighty and true: therefore
should we by reason give exedence unto him. For we can do God no greater
dyshonoure, then to dyspayre in his holy word. We ought therefore to be much
more afraid of the inordinate fear, then of death it self: for death can not
hurt us, in as much as we (through baptyme) are grafted and buried unto like
death with Christ. Fearfulness does most hurt
But fearfulness (which is nothing else but an unbelief) may harm us, and
bring us into imprudence. Wherefore my most dearly beloved, take these
promyses to heart, strength your heart, mind, and understanding therewyth,
and be not fayntharted. So shall ye prove by experience, that God is true, and
faithfully perfourmeth that which he promyseth.

And that ye may the more easily believe it, I will declare it unto your
charity by a symilytude how it comes to pass, and whence it spryngeth, that
a right faithful Christen man can be so safe and fre from all these plages:
For it is good to understand, and comfortable to know.

A similitude of the darckenesse of the night.
Your charity seyth and proves daily by experience, how mighty and horrible
thing the darkness of the night is. For when it falls, it covers all ye
whole world, darkeneth the color and fashion of all creatures, captiuateth
all men and beasts living, that they must be still and rest, ye and makes
them fayntharted and fearful, and so of all things it is a mighty invincible
tyrant, whom no man may withsta^de. Nevertheless it is not yet so mighty,
that it can darken, ouerwhelme, and quench the least light that is found in
the world. For we se, that the darker the night is, the clearer do the stars
shine: The candle light overcomes darkness.
Ye the leest candle light that is lyghted, withstandeth ye whole night, and
suffers not only the darkness not to cover or oppress it, but gives light
eue^ in the mids of the darkness, and smyteth it back a certain space on
every side: and thither as it is borne, must darkness depart, and give place
unto the light: all the power and fearfulness thereof, can not help against
it.

And though a light be so weak, that it gives not light far about it,
another can smite the darkness abacke (as the spark of an whotecole) yet can
not the darkness cover it, much less to quench it: but it gives light it
self alone, so that it may be seen a far of in the darkness, and remains
vnouercome of the same, though it ca^ not help other things, nor give light
unto them.

Ye (that yet more wonderful is) a rotten shynynge piece of wood, which
nevertheless has the fayntest light that can be found, remains invincible
of all the power of darcknesse: and the more it is compassed about with
darcknesse, the clearer light it gives, so little can darcknesse over come or
hold down any light: but it rules vanquysheth, and expels the darkness,
which else ouerwhelmeth, snareth, and puts all things in fear.

A similitude of a spring of a well
Even so likewise does a well spring also, for there may we se, how a little
vain of water breaks out of the ground, somewhere scarce so great as a
finger. And when it is closed in round about that the water may gather
together, and must needs be a dych or a pyt, yet spryngeth it nevertheless.
And though the water be certain hundreds weight above the spring, yet may
not it drive the spring back, but the spring dryueth the whole burden of
the water back, and above it self, and spryngeth still more and more, till
the pole flow over. And if the other water be foul and unclean, it ca^ not
myxte it self under the fresh clear water of the spring, but it remains
clear till it come farther abroad from the first head thereof, as it may all
be seen with eyes, and also be proved by daily experience.

If a natural light then be so mighty against the darkness of the night,
and an earthen well spring so strong in stryuynge against all standing
waters: how much more does it then the true everlasting and heavenly light,
and the only inuyncible spring of all life, namely, God the LORD our maker
and Savior?

God is a (...) light
That God is ye true, everlasting and heavenly light, witnesses Ihon the eua^g
elist in the first Chapter, and says: God was the word, in him was the life,
and the life was the light of men. Likewise also in his Canonical epistle in
ye first Chapter: God is light, and in him is no darkness.

God is a quick spring.
In like manner, That he is the only inuincyble spring of all life, witnesses
the prophet Jeremy in the second chapter For there says the LORD: My
people commytteth a dubble sin, they forsake me the living spring of life,
and make them selves fair wells, which nevertheless give no water. And
David says in the.xxxv. Psalm: With the is the spring of life, and in thy
light se we light.

If God the LORD the^ be ye true light, it follows, that all they which put
their trust in him, be as a burning candle: for by faith does God dwell in our
hearts, and we are the living temple of God, as Paul to the Corinthians does
witness more the^ once. Therefore says Christ of his disciples. Math. v. Ye
are the light of the world And of Ihon the Baptyste: He was a burning and
shynynge light. Ioh. v. Likewise if God be the everlasting and living
fountain, it follows, that the faithful be even flowynge sprynges. Therefore
says Christ also, Ioh. vii. Who so believes on me as the scripture says,
out of his body shall flow streams of living water: But this he said of the
sprete, which they that believe on him should receive.

Like as the darkness of the night now can hurt no earthly or wordly light,
but must give place and fly from ye light: Even so Satan also which is a
prince of spirytuall darkness, can do no harm to a true right beleuyng
Christen man, but must fear and fly from him: For God, which is the
everlasting light, dwells and shyneth in his heart, and dryueth and
expels far from him all the works of darkness. And like as no heap of
water can drive bache any fountain of ye ground, and hinder the quycke
spring thereof, and like as no uncleanness can make it foul: even so also can
no aduersyte of this world take away or shorten any Christen man's life. For
God which is the fountain of all life, dwells and lives in his heart, and
dryueth all hurtful poison and mortal sycknesse far away from thence, so
ye not only it can not harm him, but he also helps other people, and
delyuereth them by his presence: even as a light that shyneth far about it,
and as a spring ye always flows, runs and makes the ground moist an
fruitful.

And this is it that the LORD says in the Gospel, in the last of Mark: The
tokens that shall follow them which believe, are these: In my name shall they
cast out deuels, speak with new tunges, drive away serpents: and if they
drink any deadlye thing, it shall not hurt them: They shall lay hands upon
the sick, and they shall recover. So is it red also in the Acts of the
Apostles the.v. Chapter, that the sick were made whole only of saint Peter's
shadow. So utterly must vanyshe every thing that is contrary and against the
everlasting light, and spring of life, where a right Christen man is, in
whom God dwells by a true belefe, and out of whom the holy ghost shyneth and
flows.

Let Satan then preasse in here with all his darkness and with all his
hurtful infection, Satan is driven back by faith
yet shall ye se in belefe, that he can not take nor destroy any Christen man
therwyth if he continue in faith, and keep God in his heart: But he shall be
smytten back and driven away by force, as ye wonderful works of Christ and
of all saints do manyfestly declare. Therefore is it a great shame for a
Christen man to be so afraid for the plage of the pestilence, It is a great
shame for a Christen man to fear the pestilence
as to fly from them whom he is bound to serve by Gods commandment. For by
reason he should without al fear make haiste unto them, not only to fulfill
Gods commandment, but also by his presence to help them, if their faith do
else work with all. But if it come not to pass, yet is he sure, for as much as
God dwells in him, and he walks and goes in Gods commandment. For
certainly this promise shall not fail him:

Though a thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right side, yet
shall it not touch the.

But with faith must these words be taken hold upon, for natural reason does
not comprehend them, in as much as in deed it appears far otherwise. And
no man needs to think nor judge, that they which dye of this plage, be all
unchristian and faythlesse: but we ought not to doubt but that there dye thereof
many virtuous me^, and leave many ungodly.

Natural death happens two ways
This is done, because that death may happen to a man two manner of ways. One
way, after the commune course of nature, according as every man's death is
appointed him of God, and we have consented unto it in baptyme. Of this says
the prophet Job in the.xiiii. Chapter. A man has his appointed time, the
no^bre of his months stands with the: thou have appointed him his bounds,
which he shall not ouerpasse.

Another way may death happen to a man before the time, by reason of his
great and grievous sins: As ye LORD has threatened by Moses, that if his
commandment be not kept, he will cause pestilence to reygne. Wherout it is
certain, that when they be kept, ye plage abides out. Likewise says he in
the commandments: Honor father and mother that thou may lyuelonge, etc.
Out of the which it is certain, that his life which does them not, His life
that keeps not Gods commandments shall be shortened.
shall be shortened. In like manner says David in the.lv. Psalm. The blood
thyrsty shall not bring their life to the half nombre. Wherout it is sure that
they should live much longer, if they shed not innocent blood. Likewise says
Christ Luce. xii. If ye do not repent, ye shall all peryshe, as they that the
tower in Siloa fell upon. Where by it is certain, that who so repents not,
may look for all mysfortune.

And of this untimely death only speaks this Psalm, and promyseth the
faithful Christen men, that they shall be fre from it. For from the right
appointed death into the which we have consented in baptyme, we can nor shall be
delivered. Wherefore if a virtuous right Christen man dye of this plage, it is
certainly his very hour appointed unto him of God, which he can not preuente.
But doutlesse there dye of it many sinners also beside, which might well live
longer if they repented. And though some be taken because of their sins, yet
be they not therefore damned: but if they axe forgiveness of sins and believe,
they shall be saved. As Paul says: When we be judged, we are chastened of ye
LORD, that we should not be condemned with the world.

Thus goes it then together, that just men dye their own right death, but ye
wicked dye an untimely death, and therwyth does God punyshe the world sorest
of all because of their sins, but spares his own for their faythes sake.
Therefore should they not be fearful nor fayntharted, but (as ye prophet
says) they should look and behold, how the ungodly are recompensed: For
whether the wicked dye before the time, or the just in ye right season, yet
is it done both for the punyshement and plage of the ungodly. God punysheth men
by the death of other.
If virtuous fathers and mothers dye from wicked dysobedient children, then be
the children plaged, for they are afterward evil nurtoured, hanged or slain.
If young children dye from wicked fathers and mothers, then be the children
delivered, and the fathers and mothers punyshed, in that they have gathered
their goods for those that they wyshe them not unto. If tyrau^tes dye, then
bethey punyshed, and the persecuted Christen delivered. If good rulers dye,
which with their wisdom have maynteyned peace and good governance, then be
they in peace: And so the ungodly which are left alive, raise up war and
sedicion, and be always punyshed worse and worse. Shortly who so has eyes of
faith, seyth yt true beleuers dye in a right season, Good me^ dye or live for
their wealth, but ye wicked for their punishment.
but ye ungodly before the time. Wherefore whether good me^ dye or live, it is
done for their welthe. But whether the wicked dye or live, it is done for their
punishment, and by all ways shall they be plaged, and their wickedness shall
be rewarded them.

Wherefore my most derely beloved, take ye such doctrine and comfort to heart,
and follow ye same. Fly in good earnest (by true repentance and amendment)
from sin, where with the world has deserved this horrible plage: And fly by
a true vpryght faith unto Gods word, wherein is the fountain of life and ye
light of men: Then shall ye be whole and safe from this and other plages, (...)
so live to the honor of God and wealth of your neghbour, till the appointed
time come, wherein God the father (in the death of Christ that we be baptized
in) shall send for us out of this miserable life to his own everlasting
kingdom: Which God grant unto us all. Amen.

How they ought to be comforted that are in bodyly sycknesse or trouble.
DEarly beloved brother I trust ye believe that all things, whether it be
sycknesse, anguyshe, or what misfortune so ever it be, it comes all from
almyghtye God. For if he be your faithful father, Romans viii All things serve
for the best unto the^ that love God.
tha^ does he it to your furtheraunce that he takes hold on your old Adam,
and leads him presoner with this bond of your sycknesse, and helps you to
tame and to mortyfy him, that so ye may yield your self the better unto your
LORD God, and hang on the cross with Christ. For this cause is such
sycknesse of yours a fatherly chastenynge: For whom God loves, Heb. xii.
him does he chasten. And of his fatherly mercy takes he thus hold upon you
with very truth and love. Happily he seyth that your old Adam will be to
wanton and rash for you, and waxes to strong and fearce for you. And for this
cause puts the LORD a bridle into his mouth, whereby he be not hurtful
vnts your noble soul and myscary her. Flesh and blood is stronger in you tha^
the sprete, therefore helps he your sprete to fight. Perchance if ye were
whole, it might entyce you to sin against God, whereby his holy name might
be blasphemed, and so were your soul the more cursed for ye fylthynesse of
manyfolde sins. But now does he avoid all that from you through fatherly
mercy, and turns away your flesh and blood that always rages against the
sprete, Romans vii.
and leads it captive, so that it has no more rowme nor occasion to covet
all manner of sins.

Seeing than that his fatherly will is such, and that such things do happen
unto you to good, therefore do I earnestly admonysh you that by no means ye do
wythstande his fatherly will, but pray heartily, that his will be done and
fulfilled in you unto his praise. And humbly beseke to grant you his mercy,
tha tie may bear this cross of his patiently: Romans v.
For patience brings experience, experience brings hope, but hope lets
us not come to confusion. Thus have ye now occasion to be paciente, and
wyllyngly to suffer al manner of thing that God sends unto you, for so much
as ye perceive in your heart, that he means the thing in very deed, and this
comes by tryenge. For without ye assaye it with the deed how good it is so to
retain the LORD, (as David says: Psalm. c. xviii. i.
It is good to my that I have been in trouble, yt I may learn thy
ryghteousnesses) ye can not hope and trust in him: In so much as ye have not
assayed that such fatherly love is hyd under this rod.

But when ye have perceived such a thing, than are ye bold in all
sufferynge, and take hope unto you, the longer the more: seeing God does so
truly assiste you. And though he do let you syncke a little while and styck
fast, yet does he draw you forth again, though it be long. He suffers you
a little to swymme and to douke, but not to drown. Whereby ye may perceive that
he will never forsake you, which has so often and many times aided you. If he
does bring you sometime in great anguyshe, Dan. xiiii.
so that ye might think it all to be done with you, yet forsake him not, but
let your trust and hope remain fast and sure in him: for ye have heretofore
learned well enough the propertye and nature home he goes about with his: ye
know also that it is not done of anger or hate, but of pure and entier love.
Abide therefore for the LORD in all your sufferynge, and trust wholly and
inceassau^tly in his mercy and help, how long so ever he wythdraweth himself
and taryeth: And be fully persuaded that this your sycknesse, (or such other
grefe) is not unto death, Ioh. ix. xi.
but for the honor of God, and your profit and salvation. For who so darre
trust so in God, and believe his promyses steadfastly, the same shall never dye,
as Christ himself says: Ye and byndeth it also with an oath that it be so
in deed, Ioh. viii
saying: Verily verily I say unto you: If any man keep my word, he shall
never se death. And in another place says Christ: Ioh. xi
I am the resurrection and the life. He that believes on me, shall live, though
he were dead already: and who so ever lives and believes on me, shall never
dye.

Keep and hold sure this comfort, and be bold there upon. For who so
believes in Christ, shall not tayste of death, but is already passed from
death to life. Even as he witnesses of himself, where he says: Who so
believes on me, Ioh. v
has everlasting life. But this is the life everlasting: Ioh. xvi^
that they know the, that thou only art the true God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. The life everlasting begins here in this life, and
e^dureth ever. For who so has Christ, the same truly has very life: for he
him self is the life. Ioh. xv. He is also the truth. What so ever he promyseth
you, that shall be ye, and not nay. He will abide fast by his promise, even as
he says himself: I will not take away my kyndnesse from him, Psalm. lxxxviii.
nor suffer my truth to fail. I will not break my conuenaunte not disanulle
the thing that is gone out of my lyppes.

How wife children and other friends shall be comforted, the husbonde being
dead.
Seeing now that God has called your husbonde, father or other good friend
out of this mysery into everlasting joy, therefore shall ye receive it
wyllyngly: for it is his work. Repyne not therefore at his work, another weep
against his will, commit ye cause unto him, take it of his hand as a fatherly
proving, and say with Iobe God has given us him, and has taken him again,
the name of LORD be blessed: as it was the LORDS will, so is it happened.

God almighty will prove you as be did Job how ye will behave your self as he
takes out of your sight the thing yt ye love. He will admytte well enough yt
ye be sorye. For it is seldom seen but a man (be he never so vile, There is no
membre of the body but it has his proper gift.
or of so little reputacion) has ever a sondery gift wherewt he served and
profyted other. And ye same gifts were not greatly regarded in a man while he
lived: for co^munely we regard little such things as are present: but as
soon as ye man is gone, so soon as yt vessel is spilte, tha^ begin we to
want the gifts yt were contained therein. Therefore is it no maruayle that we be
sorry for such a gift of God, if it be taken out of our syghte.

God is displeased with mysvsynge of his gifts
As long as we use men and the gifts according as they be ordained of God for
our necessite, than do we well, and that can God suffer well enough: But that
we misuse the^, and make an ydost of them, yt can not God suffer. For when we
put our trust and comfort in man, or any other creature, than do we wro^gge,
and misuse ye same, and the curse comes upon us whereof it is written Ierem.
xvii. Cursed is the man that puts his trust in man.

For all man's help is to be suffered only wha^ they be present, and that we
have need of them: but as soon as they are gone, than must we look for other
help, namely: God, lettynge go it that passes away, thynkyng it to be
temporal, faydynge at the twynklynge of an eye, and vanyte that is in this
world. We have here no abiding thing, but must look about for the thing to
come that endures for ever.

God can not abide that we make much of creatures
For this cause does God draw and pull us so from the creatures. And seeing he
is our true father, bridegroom and husbo^de, he can not (for he is strong and
gelous) abide yt we set our hope, love, or trust upon any creatur. This is the
cause then that he does take us from the^, and caryeth us upon him self. For
look on what creature we have most hope, love, and affection, that will he
soonest take out of sight, if he does love us. And when he has such gelousy
upon us, than does he most chefely declare his love toward us.

We ought to call noman father vy^ earth.
By this also it comes that Christ Mathe.xviii. forbyddeth us to call any man
father upon earth, for we have only one father in heaven, namely God, which
will nor can suffer us to call or to have any man upon earth father: and that
because we should depend and hang only upon him, lokyng for all good of him.
For he will be ye same that we may hardely trust unto: seeing he can not, nor
will fail us, and that because he is no earthly but an heavenly father. For
this cause than is that man blessed and happy, that puts his trust, hope,
and confidence in the LORD, as the prophet says. Psalm. xxxiii.

Finally if when nature fulfylleth her course, Job. xiii
man has but continual trauayl and mysery, and after that this course of
nature is ended and at rest, man is eased of so great trauayl: we seem to hate
rather tha^ to love them that be departed if we would wish the^ to be in this
wretched world again. Moreover in making so much of our friends departed,
and setting so great affection upon them, wysh ynge Gods work not to be
fulfilled upon them, we blame God in his will and workynge: as though he knew
not better what were best both for them and us, than we.

Let us therefore set our will in Gods will, and suffer him to work at his
pleasur. For he knows best what is both our friends and our souls health.

FINIS.
Printed in Southwarke by me James Nicolson.


