A Commentary or Exposition upon the two Epistles general of Saint Peter,
and that of Saint JVDE. First faithfully gathered out of the Lectures and
Preachinges of that worthy Instrumente in Gods Church, Doctor Martine
Luther. And now out of Latin, for the singular benefit and comfort of the
Godly, familiarlie translated into English by Thomas Newton.

Imprinted at London for Abraham Veale dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the La^be. 1581.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Thomas Bromeley Knight, one of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, and Lord Chauncelor of England.
THE translation of these godly and comfortable Commentaries of Master Luther
upon the Epistles general of the blessed Apostles Peter and Jude, being
fully finished and brought to an end, it was the easiest matter of many,
where to bethink me of a fit Patron, under whom to shield the labors of so
worthy an Organe in the Church of God, and mine own travails therein (such
as they be) from the rancorous rout of such bawlyng Baalites and arrogant
Apistes, as with open Jaws will be ready to bark at the sound doctrine of
Faith and Manners, by him herein with a most bold spirit, maintained and
uttered. I was (I say, soon resolved with my self, to settle my choice in
your Lordshippe: of whose cheerful acceptaunce (such is your Godly zeal) J
could not any whitte doubt: And of whose courteous construction of my honest
and harmless meaning herein (such is your honorable inclination) J deemed
it almost heinous, to put any diffidence, or to harbor within me so much as
a spark or Mite of the least suspicion. None so wilfully blind, nor so
witleslie be sotted, but has both seen and known, what a general benefit
it pleased the Lord in mercy, to show unto the world, being almost
wholly whelmed in the Suddes of Superstition, and desperately drowned in the
Dregs of Jdolatrie, by the ministry of this one man: opposyng himself (in
defense of the glorious Gospel of GOD) against all the Pedlarie of Pope and
Popelynges, and against all the rabble of Cozenyng Caterpillars in the Kingdom
of Darkness, characterized and brended with the mark of the Beast. The
triflyng trashe and ridiculous rifferaffe of which Cacolike Synagogue (for so
is it much rather to be termed then Catholic) this man with so vehement and
zealous a spirit, has so thoroughly anatomized and unripped, ^) by such
inevitable reasons out of the infallible Word of God, overthrown and
confuted, that the rotten rags thereof can not possibly be eft soones
peeced: The crackte credit of such Motheaten stuff never again salued: nor
the totteryng walls of such a roistyng and ruffianly reign, ever any more
after the former galantise be reared up and reestablished. In so much that it
may be thought, that our merciful God, pitiyng the miserable thraldom
wherein his people under that Romish Pharao had long lain captiued, and in his
Justice, meaning at length to rid the world of those dead Flies (which did
nothing else but corrupt and tainte sweet Ointmentes) and as it were to lance
those Botches and Biles, that so long had festured in the body of the Common
wealth of Jsraell, appointed and raised up this man, to be as the Malle that
should knock that blasphemous Goliath in the pate, and the Leeche that should
apply unto him and his greazed generation such a strong Pill, which they
should never be able to swallowe. His life also and conversation being so
unblameable, that the starkest Balaamite and spightfullest Rabbine among them
(of which stamp there never wants stoare) could never justly reprove him
of faults, other then such, as generally follow the infirmity of Man. Jn so
much as that reverend and renoumed Clerk Erasmus (whose testimony herein
may stand for many, and the rather for that he somewhat to much (the more
pity) for private respects, bolstered and plastered the deformities and
blottes of the Romish Clergy) pleasauntly by way of answer to a question,
moved unto him by the good Duke of Saxony, said: that the only reason why
poor Luther was so deadly hated, was for none other cause, but for that, by
his preaching and writing, he had taken away the Croune from the Pope and
Bishops, and the Beallie from the Monks: and that otherwise he was both a
Godly, a learned, a virtuous, and a modest man. Jn the compassyng and
atchieuyng whereof, little marvel was it, though in his Style and manner of
writing, he seemed to some to be over crabbed, severe, sharp, and bityng: For
(said he) to remove sharp and gross diseases, God has sent in this last
age of the World, a sharp and austere Physician. And as we read of the
Repairers of Battered Jerusalem, that with the one hand they builte the
Wales, and with the other held their sweard, to be ready to encounter the
enemy: So may we say of Luther, that he with the one half of his study,
combated and conflicted with the Adversaries of Gods truth, and with the other
half, generally benefited the Church, by pennyng and writing sundry notable
enarrations upon the Sacred Scriptures, and Catholic Religion. How
valiantly also he played the Christian Champion against Meritemongers, and
all Clouters up of their Salvation with the Figgeleaues of their own wretched
Works and condignitie; and what an undaunted Hercules he showed himself, in
choppyng of still those succreasyng heads of that Jtalian Hydra, sundry his
learned Books plentifully and at large declare, and this Work among many
others does sufficiently attestifie. The which with all humility J here
offer and exhibit unto your lordship: assuring my self, that for your approved
wisdom, you will not only allow of it, but also for the high Authority
wherein you are worthily placed, you will accordyngly countenance it. The
Lord from heaven bless and strengthen you with his Spirit of zeal,
fortitude and boldness, to be a Buttresse and Proppe for the propagation,
passage, and continuance of his glorious Gospel among us, your poor
Countreimen of this noble Realm of England, to the encoragement of all true
Professors of the same, and to the utter terror, extirpation, and weedyng out
of all cancarde adversaries and malicious Grinnagods, being not only pricks
in the feet, and Thorns in the eyes, but even splintes in the hands, and
Daggers at the hearts of all the godly: That by the prudent policy, and
careful vigilancie of your Honor, with others her Majesty's most Noble and
zealous Counselors, all dolledrenche Drones may be espied, and cast out of
the Hiue of the Common wealth, and either be converted, least utterly they
perish, or spedily confounded, least they procure and breed more treacherous
annoiance. From Butley in Chesshire, this first of October 1581.

Your L. most humble, Thomas Newton.

The argument of this first Epistle of S. Peter, by M. Luther.
Before we fall in hand with the interpretation of this Epistle, it shall be
very requisite, first to lay down unto the Reader some brief admonition,
whereby he may know, both how it is to be esteemed, and also how to attain
to the certain knowledge thereof.

FIrst of all is to be noted, that all the Apostles do handle one and the
self same doctrine, and therefore is it not well done of some, in that they say
there be only four Evangelists, and four Gospels, whereas all is one
Gospel, what so ever the Apostles have left in writing.

Now, the Gospel signifies nothing else then the preaching and publishing of
the grace and mercy of God through Christ our Lord, purchased for us by his
death. And to take it properly, it is not that which is contained in books
and comprehended in letters, but rather the vocal preaching, and the lively
word and voice, which sounds in the whole world, and is so openly uttered,
that it may every where be heard. Neither is it a book that contains the
Law, wherein are many points of good doctrine, as it has bin hitherto
commonly believed. For it draws us from all confidence and hope of any work
of our own, whereby to become righteous: and declares unto us the rich
graces of God, freely and without any our own merit given unto us: teaching
us also Christ, who having by his intercession appeased ye wrath of God, and
satisfied for our sins, has quite abolished and blotted out our iniquities
and by his works, justified and made us righteous.

Now, whosoever either preaches or writes these things, he teaches the true
Gospel in deed, which all the Apostles, but especially S Paul and S. Peter
have done in their Epistles, Whatsoever then is preached or published
concerning Christ, is one Gospel, although one handle it after one sorce, and
in one kind of words, an other after an other sorce, and in an other kind.
For a thing may be handled either in many words or in few and may be
described either briefly or at large. Howbeit seeing all tends unto no other
end but to teach us that Christ is our Savior, and that we through faith in
him, without any our own works, are justified and saved, it is al one Word,
and one Gospel, as there is one only faith, and one Baptism in the whole
Church of Christ.

Thou read then nothing written by any of the Apostles, which is not also
contained in the writings of others that were as it were penners of the
Scripture: but they that have handled this point especially and with greater
endeavor and study then the rest, namely that only faith in Christ does
justify, even they are the best Evangelists of all. Hereupon thou may more
rightly call the Epistles of Paul the Gospel, then those things which
Matthewe, Mark, and Luke have written. For they describe not much beside the
History concerning the doings and miracles of Christ: as for the grace
which Christ has purchased for us, none does more fully and fitly entreat
thereof then S. Paul, especially in his Epistle to the Romans. Now, seeing the
Word is of more importance then the actions and doings of Christ, and that if
we should want the one of them, it were far better to be with out the deeds
and History, then the Words and Doctrine, it follows that those books are
most highly to be esteemed, which entreat especially of the doctrine and
words of our Lord Jesus Christ. For as much as if there were no miracles of
Christ, and that we were altogether ignorant of them, yet were his words
sufficient for us, and without which we can not so much as live.

Hereupon therefore it follows, that this Epistle of S. Peter is to be
accounted among the most excellent books of the new Testament, and is the
true and pure Gospel, in as much as the Apostle herein teaches nothing else,
then that which Paul and the rest of the Evangelists do: namely sincere
faith, and that Christ is freely given unto us, who having taken away our
sins, is our only Savior, as in the process of this Epistle we shall see.
By this that is here said, we may likewise judge of all books and
doctrines, what is the Gospel, and what is not. For whatsoever is not either
preached or written after this sort, and to this end, that may we boldly
judge not to be the Gospel, have it never so fair and goodly a show. This
power to judge have al Christians, and not the Pope or Councels alone, which
face and crake that they and none but they have authority to judge of
doctrines. And thus much may suffize for the argument: let us now hear the
Epistle.

The first Epistle general of Saint Peter.
The first Chapter. PEter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers that
dwell here and there throughout Po^tus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,













with joy unspeakable and glorious:




































The first Chapter.





THis is both an inscription and subscription. Thou see here in the very
beginning, that that which is here written, is the Gospel. He says that he
is an Apostle, which signifies a Legate or Messenger, that does by word of
mouth the business which he has received in charge: which name, being so
englished of the Greek word (...), because it is now commonly known, what it
signifies, I have not thought it good by any other phraze or term, to
express and translate it. Howbeeit properly it signifies him, that declares
something by word of mouth: not a mere carier of letters, but a messenger that
with lively voice delivers his errand, and by words utters his commission
and charge: and such in Latin we call Oratores, that is, Orators. Whereas
the^ he calls himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ, it is as much as if he had
said: I have charge from Jesus Christ, to preach of this same Jesus Christ
unto you. Mark here how at the first they are excluded and debarred whatsouer
they be, yt preach any of the dreggie and doatyng doctrines of seely foolish
and vain men: for he is a messenger of Jesus Christ, which does that which
Christ has commanded him: If he preach any other thing, he is not Christ's
messenger, and therefore in no wise to be heard. But if he preach that which
Christ has enjoined him, then is he to be heard: and to hear him is as
much as to hear Christ himself being present.



THe Apostle wrote this Epistle to those Countries that are here mentioned.
They were in time paste Christian, but are now in miserable subjection and
slavery unto the Turk, among whom thou may perhaps even at this day find
some that faithfully believe in Christ. Pontus is a great and large country
bordering upon the sea: next unto it is Cappadocia, the borders and limits of
which two countries are almost conjoined. On the hinder part is Galatia, on
the former toward the Sea Asia, and Bithynia, all situate toward the East,
great and large Countries. Paul preached personally in Galatia and Asia,
whether he did ye same also in Bithynia, I do not certainly know: But in the
furthermost two, it is certain that he did not preach. Strangers are they
whom we call Forreiners, namely such as come from some other place, and not
borne in the Country wherein we are. Now the Apostle calls them so, because
they had been Gentiles. Neither is it to be thought strange, that Peter being
the Apostle of the Jews, did nevertheless write also unto the Gentiles. The
Jews call those Proselites, (that is, admitted to the state of the Jews) who
being not lineallie of their stock, and of the blood of Abraham, had
notwithstanding embraced Iudaisme, and submitted them selves to the
observation of their law. To these therefore the Apostle writes, who before
had been Gentiles, and therefore no members of the common wealth of Israel,
but being now converted to the faith, had adjoined them selves to the
faithful Jews. Wherefore he calls them Strangers Elect, whom undoubtedly
he none otherwise reputeth then true Christians, and to these alone he
writes. Which manner of calling them, contains in it no common doctrine, as
we shall hereafter more at large hear.



HE calls the^ Elect, but how? Surely not of them selves, but according to
the ordinance of GOD. For it lies not in our own powers, to bring our selves
unto heaven, nor to have faith when we list: neither will God receive into
heaven all whom so ever: Naie, he will very diligently and circumspectly
sifte, examine, and try all them that be his. Away therefore with all man's
doctrine of free will, and of all strength in our selves: this thing depends
not of our, but of Gods good will and election.



God has predestinate us to be holy, and that spirituallie. These words,
holy and spiritual, the Belligods of the Romish Clergy, have shamelessly
taken from the true professors of the Gospel, and entailed the same unto their
Maumetishe Monkerie, which state they do now call holy and spiritual. Even
as they have done by this name Church, so that they will have none but the
Pope and his mitred Bishops, to be the Church, saying, that the Church has
commanded this and that: whereas they in the mean time at their pleasures,
do and determine what they list. Holiness consists in nothing less then
in this, that one be a Monk, a Freere, or a Nun, or to be a Shauelyng and
wear a Coule, or some peltyng religious habit.

The word, Spirit, signifies that we should be holy in heart, inwardly and in
spirit before God. And this is said especially for this cause, to show that
nothing is holy, but that which God makes holy in us. For at that time the
Jews had many outward sanctifications, but the true sanctification they had
not. This then is the meaning of saint Peter: God has predestinate you to
this end, that now at the last ye should be holy in deed, according as
saint Paul says in the fourth to the Ephesians: In righteousness and true
holiness, that is in holiness which is sincere, and altogether entire. For
such outward holiness as the Jews had, is nothing esteemed nor regarded
before God. After this sort does the Scripture call us, holy and Saints,
when we believe, being as yet living here on earth. But our Rabbines the
Papists, have taken this name from us, saying that we are not Holy, but that
they only are Holy, which are in heaven. We must therefore repossesse, and
again take this notable name unto us. Thou must needs be Holy, yet must thou
not think that thou haste this holiness of thy self, or by thine own merit,
but that thou art therefore Holy for that thou haste the word of GOD: for
that the kingdom of heaven is thine, and for that thou art become entirely
righteous and holy through Christ. These things must thou confess, if thou
will be a Christian. For this were extreme ignominy, and blasphemy to the
name of Christ, if we should so deny this honor to his blood, as not to
believe that by it only our sins are clean washed away, and we
sanctified. Thou must believe therefore and confess, that thou art holy, yet
by the blood of Christ, not by thine own righteousness: and this thou must
do with such certainty and constancy, that in this cause thou may not
stick (if need be) to spend even thy life, and boldly to abide and look for
whatsoever may hereupon come unto thee.



AFter this sort says the Apostle, comes it to pass that we be holy,
when we believe and obey the Word of Christ, and are sprinkled with his
blood. And here saint Peter has used somewhat an other manner of speech then
saint Paul: Yet is it in effect as much as when S. Paul says, we are
saved through Faith in Christ: because it is Faith which makes that we
be attentive, and obediente to Christ and his holy Word. Wherefore to obey
the Word of God, is as much as to be subject to Christ, to be sprinkled
with his blood and to believe. For it is very grievous to Nature, to be so
wholly subject to Christ, as altogether to forslowe and cease from our own
matters, altogether to neglect our own causes, and to count all that we do
to be sins: Nature therefore stoutly resists, and strives against this
doctrine, and yet nevertheless it must at the last stoop and yield it self
thereunto.

Of Sprincklyng we read in the 51. Psalm. Sprinckle me with Hysop, O Lord,
and I shall be clean. He alludeth to the Law of Moses, from whence saint
Peter took this kind of speech, thereby to reuele Moses unto us, and as it
were to bring us into the kings highwaie of rightly understanding the
Scriptures. For when Moses had builded the Tabernacle, he took the blood of
Goats, and therewith sprinkled both the Tabernacle and all the people. Now
this sprincklyng did not inwardly sanctify in spirit, but only outwardly
and in external things, and therefore is there need of a Spiritual
clensyng, forasmuch as that sanctification was outward and carnal, whereof
there is no regard before God: yet did God thereby as it were, by a Type or
figure, signify this spiritual sanctification. That then which S. Peter here
says is thus much in effect: The Jews please them selves in outward
holiness, whereby they are thought righteous, and of a good life before men,
but they count you among the reprobate: howbeit you have a sprincklyng far
better, for ye are sprinkled in spirit, and are cleansed inwardly. The Jews
sprinckle them selves with the blood of Goats outwardly, but ye are
sprinkled in your consciences inwardly, so that your heart is clean and
therefore herein you have great cause to rejoice.

Hereof it is that the Gentiles be no more Gentiles: even as those righteous
Jews are no more righteous by their sprincklyng, for these things are now
changed and altered. None other sprinklyng is required, but that which may
convert us, and make us Spiritual. Now to sprinkle after this sort, is nothing
else then to preach, that Christ has for this cause shed his blood, only to
make intercession for us unto his Father, and to say: Most dear Father, thou
see here my blood, which I have shed for this sinner. Here, if thou do
believe, thou art truly sprinkled. And thus thou see what is the true manner
of sprinklyng. Now if all the Popes, Monks, and sacrificyng Priests should at
once iumble together and bring all their trashe, rifferaffe and baggage, they
are not able either to teach, or do so much as S. Peter does here in these
few words. And this is the subscription of the Epistle, wherein he declares
his office, what that is which he preaches. Wherefore that which is here
taught, is the only Gospel: all other kinds of doctrine (if men accoumpt
them any way necessary to salvation) which sound not after this sort, are
to be trodden under our feet, rejected, forsaken, refused, and abandoned: Yea
all those books are to be loathed, and misliked, which having gaie titles of
good Works, Prayers, Indulgences, Pardons and such like, are not plainly,
directly, and soundly grounded upon this foundation.



HEre S. Peter observes that manner which the Apostle Paul in his salutyng
uses, although not in every respect. And that which he says is in effect thus
much: Ye have now peace and grace, but not perfectly, therefore must ye
continually profit, until that old Adam be wholly killed and mortified in
you. Grace is the favor of God: here has it his beginning in us, but
needful and requisite is it that it always become daily more and more
effectual in us, and take increase even till our diyng day. He that
acknowledges, believes and is fully persuaded in his conscience, that God is
favorable unto him, is assuredly possessed of this grace: and his heart
comfortably enjoys peace, so that he fears neither the world nor Deuilles.
For he knows that God, who has power over al things, is favorable and
merciful unto him, and that he will deliver him from death, hell, and al
incommodities whatsoever: hereupon his conscience is at peace within it self
and is joyful and glad. This does Saint Peter here wish unto the faithful,
which is a true Christian salutation, wherewith all Christians ought to salute
one an other. Thus have we the inscription with the salutation, and now
begins he the matter of his Epistle.















IN this Induction or Preface we see the words and nature of a true
Apostolical Pastor: such a beginning (I say) wherein we may plainly
perceive and note that to be true, which was said before: namely that this
Epistle among all the rest is of most singular excellency. For, in the very
entrance he begins to declare what Christ is, and what benefit we
receive by him, when as he says, that we are begotten again of God unto a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Also that all gifts are
bestowed upon us of the Father, of his mere mercy without any our deserte.
These are in deed true and right Evangelical phrazes, these are comfortable
speeches most meet to be published and preached. But (alas) what small
stoare of such kind of preaching is there to be found in the Books, even
of them that are accou^pted the best. The written works even of Hierome and
Augustine, what small consonancie and agreement have they with these words?
And yet must Jesus Christ be thus preached, that he died and rose again, and
why he died and did rise again: that men being thoroughly moved with this
kind of preaching, may believe in him, and beleeuyng may obtain salvation.
This it is to preach the true Gospel in deed. Whatsoever is not preached
after this sort, is not the Gospel, whosoever he be that preaches it.

The very sum then and effect of these words is this: that Christ by his
resurrection has brought us to his father, and hereby also Saint Peter goes
about even by our Lord Jesus Christ to bring us to the Father, and to set him
a mediator between GOD and us. It has bin hitherto preached that we must
call upon Saints, to be our intercessors with God. Hereupon we have run to
the holy Virgin Marie, and have made her our Mediator, leauyng Christ in the
mean season as an angry Judge. So does not the Scripture, it comes and
approaches nerer: it gives this glory to Christ our Lord, that he is our
only mediator, by whom alone we must come unto the Father. O inestimable
treasure which is given us by Christ, namely that we may go to the Father
and ask the inheritance whereof Saint Peter here speaks.

These words do moreover plainly show what mind the Apostle had, why that
so earnestly and with such vehement ardencie he began to praise the Father, and
will have us also to praise and bless him, for the incomparable riches which
he has given unto us, in that he has begotten us again, and that before we
could even so much as think thereof, much less prevent him, so that here is
nothing remaining to preach and praise, but the only mercy of God. And
therefore can we boaste of no works at all, but must confess that we have all
through his only mercy, whatsoever we have. Here is now no more Law, no
wrath as in time past there was, when it made the Jews to flee, being stricken
with terror, so that they durst not go unto the Mount. God does not now still
urge and strike us, but handles us as favorably as may be, fashionyng and
making us anewe: neither gives he us grace to do one good work or two,
but frames in us a new creature and a new life, so that we be now an other
thing then we were before when we were the sons of Adam: namely we are
translated from the inheritance of Adam to the inheritance of God, that he
may be our Father, and we his children, and therein his heirs even of all
good things that he has. See what excellent things are in the Scripture
handled concerning this matter. Now inasmuche as we are regenerate, and the
sons and heirs of God, we are equal in dignity and honor with Saint
Paul, Saint Peter, the holy Virgin Marie, and all the Saints. For we have
the same treasure from God, and all good things as largely as they. They were
no otherwise regenerate then we, wherefore they have no more then all other
Christians.



OUr life here upon the earth, is for none other cause, but that we should help
others, otherwise it were best that God should even straight after our
baptism, and the receiuyng of faith, end our days, and suffer us to dye.
Howbeit he permits us to live here to this end, that we may bring others
also unto the faith, which he him self has done to us before. Now while we
live here on the earth, we live in hope. For albeit we be certain that
through faith we have all the good things of God (for faith as it assuredly
brings with it regeneration, so does it bring also adoption and inheritance)
howbeit we see not this as yet, and therefore does it as yet consist in hope,
being somewhat removed from our sight that we can not see and behold it. Now
this the Apostle calls the hope of life: which is an Hebrewe kind of
speech, as is this, The man of sin. We call that a lively hope, whereby we
certainly hope and assuredly look for eternal life, which is now hid as it
were with a veil, that it can not be seen, neither is it presently perceived
but in the heart through faith, as John in his first Epistle Chap. 3. writes:
Now are we the sons of God, and yet does it not appear what we shall be:
but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see
him as he is.

Because the life present, and the life to come can not be together, neither
can it be that we should eat, drink, sleep, watch, and do other works
of Nature which this life brings with it, and be therewith also blessed:
therefore can we not attain unto this, to live for ever, unless we first
dye, and forgo this present life. Wherefore while we here live, we must
still stand in hope until it please God to call us hence to behold and see,
those good things which we now hope after. And how may we come unto this
lively hope? By the resurrection, (says the Apostle of Jesus Christ) from the
dead. I have oftentimes said, that none can rightly believe in God, and come
unto him without a mean, for as much as we are all the children of wrath,
and of our selves can do nothing that is acceptable before God: we have
therefore need of an other, by whom we may appear before him, who may make
intercession for us, and reconcile us unto him. Now there is none other
mediator then the Lord Christ, who is the Son of God. It is therefore no true
faith which the Turks and Jews have, who say and believe that GOD is the
maker both of heaven and earth: for thus does the Devil also believe, and
yet does this belief nothing at all profit him. They presume to come into
the sight of God without Christ the mediator. Thus says Saint Paul in the
fifth to the Romans: We have access unto God through faith, (not by our
selves, but) by Christ. Wherefore we must have Christ with us, we must come
with him, we must satisfy God by him, and do all things with God by him and
in his name. The same is this in effect which Saint Peter says in this
place: for it is as much as if he had said: we certainly look for eternal
life although we live here on the earth: yet no otherwise then by the
resurrection of Christ, that is to say, even therefore, because he is risen
again, ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of his Father. For
this cause did he ascend, that he might give unto us his spirit, whereby
being regenerate we might be bold to go to the Father and say: Behold I
come before thee O merciful father, and pray unto thee, not that I put any
trust or confidence in any prayer of mine own, but for that my Lord Christ
does make intercession for me, and is mine Advocate. All these words carry an
ardent efficacy and fiery force, where there is a heart that believes: where
the heart believes not, there all such words are cold, neither does the
conscience feel any comfort thereby.

We may here also judge and know, which is sincere doctrine and true
Christian preaching and which is not. For, he that is a Preacher of the
Gospel, must most zelously and diligently preach forth the resurrection of
Christ: which he that does not, is no Apostle. For this is the Sum of our
faith. And those Books of all other are the best and the excellentest, which
teach and treat upon this poincte principally and chiefly, as before has
been declared. This article of our Faith is of most weighty importance. For
if Christ had not risen again, all our comfort and hope were in vain: and
all whatsoever Christ has either done or suffered, should be to us in no
steed. And therefore this manner of teaching is most requisite. Behold,
Christ has dyed for us, and taken upon him to satisfy for us to the justice
of his Father, against Sin, Death and Hell, with whom he had a most sharp
and bitter encountrie, yet could none of them overcome him, but were by him all
conquered and subdued, for that he was the stronger. He rose again (mawgre the
forces of them all) and brought them in subjection to himself, and that for
none other cause, but to set us free and at liberty, out of the danger and
thraldom of them. This if we steadfastly believe, we have a perfect
assurance and full possession of all these benefits: which being each way
impossible to be brought to pass by our selves or any strength that is in us,
it behooved that Christ should perform the same. Otherwise, there had been no
cause, why he should have descended from heaven hither among us, vile wretched
and sinful men.

And therefore when men in preaching attribute any of these things to our
works, they do nothing else but cause that these so necessary points of
doctrine cannot afterward take any place in the hearts of the hearers, nor be
rightly understood of them. O, how well ought these things to be known to us
Christians? how thoroughly ought this Epistle to be understood of us?



WE hope not for such a substance and inheritance, as is not present: but
we live in hope of an inheritance which is present in deed, and is
immortal, is also undefiled, and fades not away. This inheritance we have
perpetually, and without end: howbeit we do not as yet ^ee the same. These
are words forcible, and of wonderful efficacy: and he in whose mind they
are firmly fixed, will be (as I think) little moved with desire of riches,
and pleasures of this world. For how can it be, that one should so set his
mind upon these transitory riches and delights, if he believe those things,
which be here spoken? For when worldly wealth, and terrene treasures be
compared to these things, it appears straight, how those things of the
world endure but a small time, and do sone pass away: but these things
continue for ever, and do never fail nor fade. Moreover, all the things of
the world are vnpure, and do defile us, for there is no man here so godly,
but in one respect or other he is carried away, and defiled with the vanities
and pleasant things of this life: but this inheritance is undefiled and
pure, and he that possesses the same, remains for ever immaculate. Finally,
this inheritance does not fade, does not decaie, neither is ever subject to
any corruption: but every yearthly thing, although it be as hard as Iron and
Stones, is nevertheless changed, and continues not still. As soon as man
also becomes old, his beauty is gone, and he becomes loathsome and
vnamiable. Howbeit, this inheritance is far from mutation or change, it
always remains, it is always fresh and floorishyng. There is no pleasure
so great on the earth, which will not by continuance become loathsome and
tedious, as we see there is at the last a tediousness in all things: but our
good things here spoken of, are otherwise, whereof there is not sacietie for
ever. All which we obtain in Christ, through the mercy of GOD, when we
firmly believe, that they are freely given unto us. For how should we
miserable men by our own works merit those so great good things, which no
reason or understanding of man is able so much as to comprehend, or by
imagination of heart once to conceive?



THis inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that fades not away is
undoubtedly ours: it is only for a little while removed and kept from our
sight, until these eyes be closed up, and this mortal life ended: Then
shall we certainly find and see the same, unless we be vnbeleeuyng. And
because we should not doubt of the certainty thereof, the Apostle here
adds that this inheritance, whereunto no corruption can cleave, is reserved
for us in heaven.



WE in hope (says the Apostle) look for this excellent inheritance,
whereunto we come by faith. For these do in this sort follow one an other:
By the Word is wrought in us Faith: by faith that new birth, and by this
new birthe we come unto hope, so that we certainly look for these things,
and are thoroughly assured thereof. Wherefore saint Peter fitly here says
that these things must be done by faith, and not by our works.

The Apostle here expressly says: Ye are by the power of God kept unto
salvation. There are many who having heard the Gospel, how that faith only
does justify without works, do by and by burst forth and say: We also
do believe: thinkyng that that bare opinion, which they feine unto them
selves, is right faith. We have already taught, and that out of the
Scriptures, that it is not in our power to do even the least good work that
is, without the especial assistaunce of Gods Spirit, how then shall we by
our own strength arrogate that, which of all other is most excellent, namely
to believe? These cogitations therefore are a mere dream, and things vain
and fond: Gods power must be present to work in us, as Saint Paul
writes, Ephesians. 1.17. God give unto you the Spirit of wisdom, that ye may
know what is the exceadyng greatness of his power to us ward which believe,
according to the woorkyng of his mighty power. etc. For it is not only by the
will of God, but also by a certain Power of his, that we do believe: whereby
we are to learn, that it is no less matter to make faith in one, then it is
to create again heaven and earth.

We may evidently perceive therefore, that they little know what they say,
which use such words as these: how can only faith do all, seeing many
believe which do no good works at all? For they think their own
imagination to be faith, and that faith also may be without good works.
But we say with saint Peter, that faith is the power of GOD: In whom
soever God woorketh thus, the same is a regenerate and a newborn creature, so
that then of faith there can not but naturally follow good works. Wherefore,
it shall be needelesse to say to a Christian: do this or do that good work:
forasmuch as of his own accord, unbidden, he works nothing but good
works. Howbeit he is to be hereof admonished, that he do not deceive him
self with any false, counterfaite, and supposed faith. Do not therefore take
any regard to those vain talkers, that can prattle much of these things,
whose words notwithstanding, are but as wind and me^e trifles. Of such,
Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 4. I will come unto you, and will know, not the words
of them that are puffed up, but spiritual power. For the kingdom of GOD
consists not in words, but in power. Where this power of GOD is not, there
is neither true faith, nor good works. Wherefore they undoubtedly are liers,
which boaste themselves of the name and faith of Christ, and do
(notwithstanding) lead a leude and wicked life. For assuredly if the power of
God be present, they can not but become other manner of men then such.

But what means that, whereas S. Peter says: By the power of God ye are
kept unto salvation: surely even this: Faith (which the power of God being
in us, and wherewith we are replenished) does work in us, is a thing so
noble and excellent, that by it we have certain and manifest knowledge of
all things, that pertain to salvation: being now able to judge, and freely
pronounce of all things, which are in the earth, as for example: This
doctrine is sincere, and sound, that is corrupt and false: this life is good,
that is evil: this was well dooen, that otherwise. And what soever such a man
does define, and determine, is so in deed. For he can not be deceived, but
is preserved and kept by the power of God, and remains judge of all
doctrines. Contrariwise, where faith and the power of God is not, there is
nothing but error and blindness: there reason is carried away hither and
thither, from one work to an other, in as much as it strives by her own
works to come unto heaven, and therefore always thinks: Behold, this will
bring me to heaven, let me work this, and I shall be partaker of eternal
felicity and blessedness. Hereupon have ouerspread the world such rabbles
and swarms of Monasteries, Altars, sacrificyng Priests, Monks, Friars, and
Votaries. Into such great blindness does God suffer them to fall, which do
not believe: but to us that believe he preserves and affords a right
understanding in all things, that we may not be condemned through this
blindness, but through his mercy attain salvation.



THat is, the inheritance whereunto ye are appoincted, is already purchased,
and from the beginning of the world prepared, but now it is hid, it is as yet
covered, and as it were closed and sealed up: but after a while it shall in a
moment be opened and reueiled, that we may plainly see it.



IF thou be a Christian, and look for this inheritance or salvation, thou
must needs wholly depend upon it, and utterly conteinne all earthly things:
thou must also confess, and openly affirm, that all the understanding,
wisdom, and holiness of this world is altogether nothing. Wherefore thou
must look for no other, but that the world will condemn and persecute thee:
And therefore has Saint Peter rightly joined together these three, Faith,
Hope, and the cross or affliction, for as much as one of these proceeds out
of an other. Howbeit, he gives no small comfort to them that suffer
persecution: for his words do sound thus: This heaviness shall endure but
a little while, afterward ye shall for ever rejoice. For salvation is already
prepared for you, wherefore be in the mean season pacient in afflictions,
which ye suffer. This is a right and Christian consolation, not as the
doctrines of men do comfort, which have relation no further but to be rid
and delivered from outward discommodities. The Apostle speaks not here of any
such corporal comfort. It is no discommoditie, if outward troubles come: with
a good courage sustain and suffer ye the^: think not how ye may shake them
of, and be deliuerd from them, but rather think thus with your selves: Mine
inheritance is already prepared, these afflictions shall shortly cease. So
shall that temporal comfort be taken away, and that eternal consolation
which we have in God, supply the place thereof. Moreover these words are
diligently to be noted, which the Apostle adds, when he says (If need
require) which in effect he utters also afterward Chapter 3. in these
words: If the will of God be so. There be many men which (as it were), with
a certain force strive to come unto heaven, and even by and by to chruste in:
and therefore lay upon them selves a cross, and an affliction according to
their own opinion and judgment: so fondly is reason given to extol her own
works. But God utterly disalloweth all such dealyng. For our own works
which we make choice of, are not of any force before him, we must look what
he will lay upon us, and what he will send unto us: that we may walk and
follow whither he does lead and guide us. Wherefore there is no need why
thou should seek or procure to thy self affliction: If need so require,
that is, if it be the will of God that thou shalt suffer, then chearefullie
take the Cross upon thee, and comfort thy self with hope, and expectation of
that salvation, which is not temporal, but eternal.



THis is the effect of the cross and of those manifold affictions which we
suffer in this life, that sincere faith may be known from that which is
false and counterfeit. And for this cause does the Lord so afflict us, that
our faith may be tried, exercysed and made manifest to the world, that others
also may be invited and won to the same faith by our example, and we at
the last may attain unto glory. For as we praise God: so will he again
also praise, glorify, and honor us: when as those counterfeit and liyng
Hipocrites, who have contemned the right way, shall be subject to shame and
confusion. The Scripture does often compare the cross unto fire: so here
Saint Peter compares gold which is tried with fire, to the trial of faith
which is made by the cross and afflictions. The fire does not diminishe
Gold, but cleanses and purifieth it, that whatsoever drossie substance is
mixed with it, may be separated from it. After the same sort lays God the
cross upon all Christians, whereby they may be (as it were) scoured and
polished. And it was well said of the Apostle: That the trial of your faith
etc. That is your faith must be tried and purified, even as the Word is pure,
whereunto alone ye must stick, and trust unto nothing else. Now, this purging,
scouryng and polishyng of us by the cross, is daily very necessary for us,
because otherwise that old and dull Adam would still to much hang upon us,
and dull the spirit, and make our faith vnpure.

Such then is the life of a true Christian, that it continually becomes
better and purer. For when through the word of the Gospel we do believe,
we are justified and begin to be purged: yet as long as we are in the
flesh, we can not be altogether clean and pure. And therefore does God cast
us into the midst of the fire, that is, into affliction, ignominy and
trouble, whereby we are daily more and more purged, until such time as we
dye. This purging we can attain unto by no works of our own: for how should
the outward work purify the heart within? Now, when faith is after this
sort tried, whatsoever was mixed with it, or was feined and counterfeit, must
needs be removed and separated from it. Hereupon at the last when Christ
shall appear, shall follow magnificent honor, praise, and glory.





THE Apostle says they have unspeakable and glorious gladness and joy,
because it brings with it honor and glory, when as the world has such
joy, whereof comes ignominy and shame. Saint Peter speaks here of true
spiritual joy more plainly then thou shall read almost in the whole
Scripture: yet could he not fully utter and declare the same. Now, these things
which have bin said are part of the preface, wherein the Apostle shows both
what faith in Christ is, and also how the same must be proved and purged by
adversities and afflictions which God does send. It now follows that this
faith is contained and promised in the Scriptures.





things which are now showed unto you by the^ which have preached unto you
the Gospel by the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, the which things the
Angels desire to behold.

HEre Saint Peter calls us to the Scriptures, wherein we may see that God
of his only grace, and by no merit of ours performs those things which he
has before promised. For hereunto tends the whole Scripture, that
withdrawyng us from al confidence in our own works, it may bring us to faith:
and very needful it is that we he very diligent in learning the Scriptures,
whereby we may be certain and thoroughly confirmed in faith. After the same
sort does Saint Paul also call us to the Scriptures, when as in the first
Chapter to the Romans, he says that God had promised his Gospel before by his
Prophets in the holy Scriptures. Also when as he says Romans 3. that the faith
whereby we are justified, was witnessed before in the Law and the Prophets.
We read also in the 17. of the Acts that he did the same when he preached of
faith to them of Thessalonica, who^ he called to the Scriptures and expounded
the same unto the^: who also on the other side searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so or no which saint Paul did teach. This it
behooves us to do also, that those things which we read in the new
Testament, we may learn to confirm out of the old. Wherein we shall see
those promises concerning Christ, whereof Christ himself also has admonished
us John. 5. Search, says he, the Scriptures, for they bear witness of me.
And again: If ye did believe Moses ye would also believe me, for he wrote of
me. Those vain ianglers therefore are not to be regarded, which contemn
the old Testament, and presumptuously say that we have no more need
thereof: when as notwithstanding out of it alone must be taken the foundation
and ground of our faith. For to this end God sent his Prophets to the Jews,
that they might testify unto them of Christ that was to come. Wherefore the
Apostles did every where convince and refell the Jews out of their own
Scriptures, prouyng Jesus to be Christ. And for this cause the books of Moses
and the Prophets are Gospels, forasmuch as in them we read the same things
foretold concerning Christ, which afterward being doeu and accomplished,
the Apostles did preach and write. This difference only there is, that
whereas the books of both were committed to writing, yet is it (not
withstanding) not so much requisite that the Gospel or new Testament should be
contained in writing, as preached by the voice, which may openly publishe and
sound it forth, that it may be heard every where in the world. Now, whereas
it was also written, that was more then necessary. For whereas the old
Testament does speak only of Christ to come, the Gospel is that lively word
and vocal preaching of Christ who is already come. Between the books of
the old Testament, moreover this difference there is: first the five books of
Moses are the sum of the whole Scripture, and are peculiarly called the old
Testament. Then are there Histories also and Books, wherein are described the
deeds and diverse examples of them which observed Moses law, and also of them
which transgressed the same. Lastly there are Prophets, which have plain
relation to the writyngs of Moses, and have more largely and in plainer words
expressed the same. Howbeit there is one and the same meaning both of Moses and
of all the Prophets. Now, whereas it is wont to be said that the old
Testament is abrogated and rejected, it is thus to be understood. First, this
difference there is between the old and new Testament, as we have said,
that the old signifies Christ to come, and the new does perform and
exhibit present, those things which in the old were promised and by figures
shadowed forth and signified. Wherefore those types or figures do now cease,
forasmuch as that is accomplished and performed which they did signify, and
that fulfilled which they did promise. Neither ought there to be observed
hereafter any choice of meats, apparel, places, and times: they are all in
and by Christ (to whom they were referred) made of an indifferent use. For
these obseruaunces did not save the Jews, neither were they given them to this
end, that they should thereby be justified: but that they should by them (as
it were) set forth Christ, who was to come.

Furthermore, in the old Testament God had a double rule or gouermente: the one
inward, the other outward: For he governed his people both inwardly in heart,
and outwardly in body and external affairs. Therefore did he give unto them
so many Laws, and so mingled one with an other. As where the househande might
give a bill of diuorcement to the wife, if he would not keep her, but put her
away from him, it pertained to outward rule or regiment. But it belonged to
Spiritual government, whereas God commanded them to love their neighbor as
themselves. Howbeit, now he rules only Spiritually over us by Christ:
corporally and outwardly by the civil Magistrate. Wherefore, when Christ was
come, that external or outward government was taken away: he does not
command us to put any more difference between the outward persons, times,
or places, but does so govern us spiritually by his word, that we are
Lords of all things that are without us, and are bound and tied to no
corporal things. But those things which pertain to spiritual
administration or government, are not taken away, but are still in force, as
are those things which thou read in Moses, concerning the love of God and
thy neighbor. These GOD will have duly observed: for by the Law he will
condemn all those that do not believe. The figures also have their place and
sense Spiritually, that is, they were Spiritual things which were signified
by these outward figures: Which outward things are now taken away* as where
the housebande did refuse his wife for adulteries sake, and put her away from
him: which was a figure, and had a certain spiritual signification, which
was afterward spiritually fulfilled. For God did after the same sort refuse
the obstinate Jews, which would not believe in Christ, and chose the
Gentiles, which he does even yet also: prouidyng that when any refuses to
live in the faith, he be cast out of the Church of Christ, that he may
repent. After the same sort is that constitution also, wherein it was
ordained, that a woman should be married to the brother of her housebande being
dead, and to bring forth children by him, who must be called by the name of
him that was dead, and possess his substance. Albeeit this be now
abolished, yet is it nevertheless a figure, which signifies somethyng
concerning Christ. For he is our brother, who has died for us, and before his
Ascension into heaven commanded us, that we should by the Gospel make souls
(which are his spouses) as it were pregnant and fruitful: hereuppon we
retain his name, and are named of him, to whose most excellent riches we
succeed. Yet must we not boaste and say, that we have converted and won
men: for all such effects must be only attributed unto Christ. The same may
be said also of other figures of the old Testament, which it were too long
and tedious severally to rehearse.

Whatsoever then in the old Testament, is not external or outward, is yet in
force and efficacy, as are all the sayings of the Prophets, concerning
Faith and Love. Which Christ confirms, Matthew. 7. Where he says:
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them: for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Moreover Moses and the Prophets are
witnesses of Christ being to come: So that if I at any time preach of Christ,
that he is our only Savior, I shall do very conveniently, if taking that
place which is in the 22. Chapter of Genesis, namely: In thy seed shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed, I do therevppon with a lively voice
infer, that by Christ, who is that seed of Abraham, all men must be
blessed. Hereof now it follows, that in Adam we are all cursed and damnable,
and that therefore it is necessary, if we desire to be delivered from
damnation, that we believe in that Seed. Upon such seiynges as these, we
must ground our Faith, wherefore we ought duly to regard, and reverently
to esteem them, in as much as they testify and bear witness of Christ, so
that our Faith may be established and confirmed by them. And this is that
which S. Peter does in the words followyng.



AFter the same sort saint Paul also speaks in the last Chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans By the revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began, but now is opened and published among all
Nations, by the Scriptures of the Prophets: Many sayings thou may read in
the new Testament, taken out of the Prophets, whereby the Apostles have
proved, that all things were so dooen and accomplished, as thet were foretold
by the Prophets. For Christ Matthew 11. rehearses that saying out of Esaie:
The blind see, the halt go, etc. None otherwise, then if he would say: Those
things which ye there read written, ye see here truly dooen, and in very
deed performed. The same we read also of saint Paul, Acts 9. and of Apolios
Act. 18. How they co^uinced the Jews, and preued by the Scriptures that Jesus
was Christ: in whom whatsoever the Prophets had foretold, was now
accomplished and fulfilled. More evil Acts 15. the Apostles did after the
same sort show, that the Gospel must be preached to the Gentiles, that they
also might be brought to the Faith. Be assured that all these things, were
therefore dooen by the common endeavor of all, that the Jews might be
convinced, and as it were compelled to acknowledge, that all things were then
so dooen, as they read them foretold in the Scriptures.



THe meaning of saint Peter is this: Albeit the Prophets did not plainly
know any certain and definite time, yet generally they did all signify the
circumstances, both of time and place, as how Christ should suffer, what
death he should dye, and how the Gentiles should believe in him, so that by the
signs which they foretold, it might be certainly known, that the same time
was come. The Prophet Daniel came very nere the matter, nevertheless, he
spoke thereof obscurely and darckly, namely at what time Christ should suffer
and dye, and when this or that thing should come to pass. So they had an
undoubted Prophecy, that the Kingdom of the Jews should cease before
Christ did come, but the day and certain time, when the same should be
fulfilled, was not expressed, forasmuch as it was sufficient to know, that
when that time was come, the coming of Christ was not then far of. So Joel
in the second Chapter of his Prophecy, fore showed the time, when the holy
Ghost should come: In the last days I will power out my Spirit upon all
flesh. Which Prophecy Saint Peter in the second Chapter of the Acts
rehearses, and thereby proves, that it was foretold of that his time, and
those his brethren which then lived.

Hereby thou see with what diligence, always the Apostles rendered reasons
of those things, which they preached and taught, approving the^ same by the
Scriptures: but Councils and the Pope would do all things with us, without
the Scriptures, co^maundyng us by the obedience of the Church and under pain
of excommunication to believe the^. The Apostles were replenished with the holy
Ghost, and were certain both that they were sent of Christ, and also that
they did preach the true and undoubted Gospel: yet did they humble and submit
them selves thus far, that they required to be believed in nothing, which
they did not prove soundly out of the Scriptures, to be so as they affirmed:
that the mouths of Infidels might be stopped, and be able to say nothing
against the^ with reason. And shall we believe these gross and unlearned
Lubbers, which neither preach the Word of God, neither can do any thing
but iangle and prate, bauie and revile? It could not be yt the Fathers should
thus err, so long is it since it was so concluded, wherefore of these things
there ought now, no reason to be given to any man. We are able to prove
certainly out of the Scriptures, that none shall be saved, but he that believes
in Christ, so that these men are not able to speak any thing there against.
And also they shall never be able to prove unto us their childishe trifles by
the Scriptures: as namely, that he is in a damnable ease, which fasteth not
this or that day, and such like: wherefore it is not meet, neither ought we
at any hand to believe them. Sainete Peter now says moreover.



That which is here spoken of the Apostle, may be understood both of the
afflictions which Christ him self suffered, and also of those which we
Christians being his members do suffer. For saint Paul calls that the
sufferyng of Christ, which every Christian does suffer. As the affiance,
name, word and works of Christ are mine (forasmuch as I firmly believe in
him) so are my afflictions also his, in as much as I am afflicted for his sake.
Wherefore the afflictions of Christ are daily accomplished in Christians, even
unto the end of the world. This now is no small comfort unto us, that
howsoever things fall out, we are certain, that all our afflictions are so
common together with Christ and us, that he counts them no otherwise then
his own. This also may not a little increase our comfort, that glory shall
undoubtedly follow these afflictions. Howbeit we must know this also, that
as Christ came not unto glory before he had suffered, so we also must first
bear the cross with him, that we may afterward rejoice together with him.
All things therefore, says the Apostle in effect, which we dode now
preach, the Prophets have long since manifestly declared and foretold that
they should come to pass, the holy Ghost reuellyng the same unto them. Now
whereas we do so little understand the Prophets, the cause is for that we
are ignorant of the tongue wherein they did write: for they have written very
plainly and manifestly. Wherefore to them that are skillful of the tongue and
have the Spirit of God, which undoubtedly all that believe have, it is not
hard to understand them, for as much as they know where unto the whole
Scripture tends. But where both the tongue is not understood, and the
spirit is wantyng, it appears no otherwise then if the Prophets were mad
or dronken. Howbeit, if we should want either of these, it were far better
to have the Spirit without the tongue, then the tongue without the Spirit. The
Prophets spoke after an other sort then did the Apostles; yet did they
signify the same things which afterward the Apostles preached. For both
show many things of the afflictions as well of Christ as of those that
believe in his, and also of the glory that follows the same* So David, Psalm.
22. when he speaks of Christ in this sort: I am a wo^^e and no man, (...)
does he else declare but his exceeding debasing and (...) which in his passion
he suffered? Also Psalm. 44. he writes of the afflictions of Christians, sayng
We are counted as sheep appoincted to be slain etc.



IT was sufficient for the Prophets that they knew these things, but in that
they left the same behind them in writing, it was for out sakes, making
themselves herein as it were Ministers, to (...) as to the (...), and
understanding hereof, and that we might learn the same of them as of our
masters. And thus have we a sure help and strengthenyng of our faith for
our further and better instruction, whereby we may be able to defend our
selves against all false doctrines.



SO great things have the Apostles delared unto us by the holy Ghost, which
came down upon them from heaven, that even the very Angels do desire to
behold and see them. Here we must with great attention shut our eyes, and
see what the Gospel is, wherein surely we can not but have exceedyng delight,
joy and consolation. We can not yet see these things with our bodily eyes,
but we must believe, that we are made partakers of righteousness, truth,
salvation, and of all good things which God has. For inasmuche as he has
given unto us Christ his only begotten Son, the fountain and head of all
good things, how should he not through and with him give us also all his good
things, riches and treasures, whereat the Angels in heaven do take merueilous
joy and delight? All these things are offered unto us by the Gospel: so that
if we believe, we must needs likewise take merueilous delight and pleasure
therein: howbeit, our delight and pleasure while we live on the earth, ca^ not
be so perfect as that of the Angels is. For here it begins in us, so that by
faith we have a certain feelyng thereof: but in heaven it shall be so great,
that the heart of man is not able to comprehend it, yet shall we enjoy the
same when we come thither. Thus thou see how Saint Peter teaches us to
arm and prepare our selves by the Scriptures. For hitherto has he described
what it is to preach the Gospel: and how it was foretold by the Prophets,
that it should be after this sort preached and taught. Now he proceeds and
hereafter exhorts us by faith to embrace, and by love to follow such
preaching of the Gospel, saying:









THis is an exhortation to faith, the meaning whereof is this: Forasmuch then
as so great things are preached and given unto you by the Gospel, which
even the Angels do desire with pleasure to behold, see that ye faithfully
cleave unto them, and with an assured trust and affiance repose your hope
therein, that your faith may be sincere and sound, and not any fained
opinion or dream.



Saint Peter speaks here of the spiritual girdyng of the mind, like as if
a man should corporally girde a sword upon his loins. Of which girdyng
Christ makes mention Luke 12. where he says Let your loins be girded about.
In some places of the Scripture, Loins signify carnal lust or concupiscence.
But saint Peter speaks here of Spiritual Loins. Whereas the Scripture
speaks of the body, and calls that part the Loins, from whence from the
Father proceeds natural generation, according as we read Genesis 46. that
Christ should spring out of the Loins of Judah. Wherefore corporally to girde
the Loins signifies nothing else then chastity, as it is in Esaias Chap. 11.
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his Loins, and faithfulness the girdle
of his reins: that is, by only faith, filthy and unlawful lust is
restrained and brideled. But the spiritual girdyng whereof the Apostle here
speaks, is after this sort. As a Virgin is in body chaste and entire, so the
mind through faith whereby it is espoused to Christ, is spiritually sound
and sincere Howbeit, as soon as it reuolteth from faith to false and erroneous
doctrine, it is violate and corrupted, whereupon the Scripture commonly
calls Infidelity and Idolatry, by the names of adultery and fornication,
namely when the mind sticks to the doctrines of me^, and forsakes faith in
Christ. From this Saint Peter here dehorteth, when he bids to Girde up the
loins of the mind, which in effect is as much as if he should say: Ye have
now heard the Gospel, and attained unto faith: see then that ye persist
therein, and suffer not your selves to be defiled and corrupted with false
doctrine, waueryng in uncertainty, now this way, now that way. The Apostle
saint Peter uses here a certain peculiar and proper kind of speech, (not
such as saint Paul uses) when he says: Gird up the loins of your mind.
He calls that the Mind which we otherwise call the thought: as when I say,
I think thus, that this is right, and as saint Paul says, so do we
think, such is our opinion, so it seems unto us. And by this means does
the Apostle here most properly signify Faith, meaning thus much in effect: Ye
have now attained to a true thought, and are settled in a right persuasion, that
we are justified by faith only: persist strongly herein, girde it fast unto
you and valiauntly stick thereunto, let no man pull these sound opinions out
of your hearts, and then shall ye prosperously persener and stand.

There will many false teachers arise, who will forge doctrines of men, thereby
to corrupt your mind, and looze this girdle of Faith, wherefore in heart
receive this admonition, which I give you aforehande, that the Doctrine of
Truth may be well fixed in your mind, and that you may valiauntly persiste
therein. Those Hypocrites which trust to their works, and live an honest
and virtuous life, as it appears outwardly, do verily think, and are fully
persuaded, that God must needs receive them into heaven, because of their
works. This makes them proud, presumptuous and glorious in their own
conceiptes: As that Pharisey mentioned in the 18. of Luke, and whereof also
Marie makes mention in her song, commonly called Magnificat, where she uses
the same word, which thou read here in Saint Peter: He has scattered
the proud in the imagination of their hearts, that is, he has overthrown and
brought them to confusion, in the devises of their own minds and thoughts.



THis Sobriety pertains outwardly to the body, and is an especial work
of Faith. For although manne be justified, yet is he not free from evil
desires. In deed Faith has begone to restrain and bridle the flesh,
notwithstanding the same does continually strive against it, and assaulteth it
with sondrie sorts of desires, which go about according to the
concupiscence thereof, again to burst forth and prevail. Wherefore the
Spirit has daiely much ado, to bridle and restrain them: and it must
therefore without intermission, have continual fight with them, and always
take great heed of the flesh, least that at any time, (such is the
craftiness thereof) it undermine and supplant Faith. By the premises it
appears, how far they deceive them selves, which boste that they have
Faith, and coumpt that sufficient: living in the mean season, according to
their own lusts and desires. For where true Faith is, there must needs be
an earnest endeavor to keep the body under, and to hold it as it were with a
bridle from outragyng and doing what it lists: hereupon it is that saint
Peter here exhorts us to be sober. Howbeit, he bids us not as it were to
destroy our body, or to weaken it more then is meet, as some have done
which have made them selves mad by over much fasting, yea some have quite
pined and consumed themselves a way. In this fond error for a time was saint
Bernard, although he was otherwise an holy man. For he afflicted his body with
so great abstinence, that by reason of noisome breathe which he got thereby,
no man could abide to stand near him, or be in his company. But he was at
length delivered from this error, and willed his brethren that they should not
too much pine and pinche their bodies. For he well saw that by that undue
abstinence, he had made himself unfit to serve his brethren. Wherefore Saint
Peter requires no more, then that we be sober, that is, that we do so much
and so far restrain the flesh, as we feel the wantonness and unruliness
thereof to require. He appoints no certain time, as the Pope has done, how
long we must fast, but leaves it to every ones judgment, so to fast that
he be always sober, that he do not so surcharge his body with ouermuche
eating and drinking, but that he may have the perfect use of reason, and know
how to use his senses aright, and how to live profitably and beneficially to
others in his vocation. For it is a very preposterous, absurd, and
unprofitable thing, to give a general precept hereof unto the whole people, or
to the Church: for as much as we are unlike among our selves, one has a
strong body, another a weak, so that it is needful for one to abstain
much, for an other to abstain little, that the body may nevertheless
remain in health, and be fit to do good works.

Again, there be some that deal clean contrarily, and think they do very
well in fasting nothing at all: supposyng that they may without respect of
time, eat what they will. But herein they do not well, for albeit they have
somewhat tasted of the Gospel, yet have they profited little or nothing, like
unto the former. For they have profited no further, but only to contemn the
Laws of the Pope: They will not girde up their mind and senses, as Peter here
bids, neither do they bridle the desires of their body, that the
sluggishnesse and lasciviousness thereof may be repressed. It is good to
fast, howbeit the right Fast in deed is, to give the body no more
nourishmente, then is needful to preserve it in health: also to exercise it
with labors and watchynges, least this old Ass of ours, become more wanton
and lascivious then is meet. Let him be restrained and bridled, and obedient
to the Spirit, which Saint Peter calls here to be sober. Not as some are
wont to fast, who so excessiuely engorge and pamper them selves with fish,
and the best sorts of wine at one diner, that they make their beallies like a
Taber or Drum, with stuffyng and crammyng them so full.



SVche is Christian Faith, that with all affiaunce it wholly trusts to the
word of God, quietly commits it self unto it, and confidently attempteth
whatsoever it teaches. Whereupon S. Peter says, then are the loins of the
mind girded up, then is your faith sincere and sound, when ye do quietly and
confidently commit your selves to the Word of God, and be bold upon trust
therein: having no regard whatsoever thing of yours comes into peril,
whether it be riches or good name, body or even the life it self. Excellently
therefore has he in these words described a sincere and unfeigned Faith. For
Faith must not be sluggishe and sleepie, which is rather a dream then a
Faith, but it must be lively and effectual, so that one would with all
confidence offer him self to all afflictions and troubles whatsoever, and
depend wholly on the Word, esteemyng indifferently whatsoever state God
sends, that we may patiently sustain adversity, as well as enjoy
prosperity. As for examples sake: when I must dye, I must confidently commit
my self to Christ, I must quietly offer my life for his sake, and trustyng to
the Word which can not deceive, I must boldly and courageously triumphed
over mine adversaries. It is needful moreover that Faith should pass through,
without declinyng any way, and that it suffer it self to be hindered and
terrified by no means, that it remove from the eyes whatsoever it sees,
hears or feels. Such a faith does Saint Peter require, which
consists not in thinkyng and words, but in mighty power, and effectual
virtue.

Further says saint Peter: Trust perfectly on the grace that is brought
unto you, that is to say, You have not deserved this exceadyng great grace,
but it is even freely offered and brought unto you. For, the Gospel which
declares and publishes this grace unto us, we our selves have neither
devised nor found out, but the holy Ghost has sent it from heaven into the
world. And what thing is it that is brought unto us? Forsooth even the things
which we have before mentioned. Namely, that whosoever believes in Christ,
and cleaves fast unto his word, has together with him, all the benefits
and blessings which be his* in so much that he is thereby, even a Lord
over Sin, Death, Devil, and Hell: and is most certainly assured of
everlasting life. This so great a treasure is brought home to us, (as it were)
to our own doors, and laid up in our bosoms, without any our own help,
merit or deseruyng, yea, even unhoped and unlooked for, when we neither knew
of it, nor so much as once thought of any such matter* And therefore the
Apostle exhorts us, that we should boldly and undoubtedly look for this
Grace, because that God, which offers and bestows the same upon us, can
not in any wise lie.



GOD offers his Grace to none, but by Christ: and therefore without this
Mediator, let no man presume to come into his sight, as we have before
admonished. For he will hear no man, but him that brings with him Christ,
his most dear Son, to be his Advocate and Spokesman: as one, whom he only
has respect unto, and for his sake, to all those that by Faith cleave fast
unto him. And therefore he requires at our hands, that we acknowledge his
Son, as the person by whose blood we are at one with him, and now dare to
present our selves before him. For to this end, came our Lord Christ, who
taking flesh and blood unto him, joined himself with us, that he might obtain
pardon, and purchase Grace for us at yt hands of his Father. By this faith in
Christ were all the Prophets and Patriarchs saved. For it behooued all men
generally to believe this promise made unto Abraham: In thy seed shall all
Nations be blessed. And therefore the Jews, Turks, and all they that repose
any trust in their own works, hopyng thereby to win heaven, have no Faith
at all in them. And therefore does Peter say: Grace is brought to you, but
yet by the revelation of Jesus Christ, or (to speak it more plainly) by this,
that Jesus Christ is revealed unto you. In the Gospel it is showed unto us
what Christ is, that we may thoroughly know him, namely that he is our
Savior, that he takes away our Sins, that he delivers us out of all
miseries, that he reconcileth us unto his Father, and that without any our
works, he does justify and save us. Who soever does not thus acknowledge
Christ, is altogether deceived. For albeit thou know him to be the Son of
GOD, who died, rose again and sits now at the right hand of his Father,
yet have thou not thereby thoroughly known Christ, neither shall this knowing
of him any whitt avail thee: unless thou proceed a step further, and both
know and also believe, that he did all these things for thee, to help,
relieve and comfort thee. Vain therefore are al those things, which hitherto
have been obtruded, and preached unto us by the Schoolmen, insomuche as they
were without this knowledge of Christ: and entered commonly no further in
consideration thereof, but only to think how much sorrow and greef our
Lord Christ sustained in his passion: as though that now he sits idle in
heaven, taking no further care for us, but ioiyng with him self, whereby the
peoples hearts remain utterly dry, without the right use of that heavenly
dew, and water of their souls, so that no lively faith can grow or take
root in them. Now, Christ ought not thus to be preached, as that he lives
and reigns for him self, but that he is ours. For other wise, what need was
it for him to descend into the world, and to shed his precious blood? Since
then he was sent into the world, that by him the world might be saved, as be
himself in the third of Ihon declares, needful it was, that he should
accomplish and perform that selfsame thing, for the which he was sent of his
Father. For this word ( sent or coming) is not to be understood of the
divine Nature of Christ only, but rather of his human Nature, and office
which he bore and executed. Immediately after he was Baptized, he began to
deal in this his office, and to do that whereunto he was sent, and for which
he came into the world: Namely, to show and declare the truth unto men,
that as many as believed in him should be saved. After this sort therefore,
he openly published himself, woorkyng the means that he might be known, and
offering Grace by his own self unto us.



SO behave your selves, as becomes obedient children. Obedience in the
Scriptures, signifies Faith: but the Pope with his Doctorlie Schoolmen, and
Cloistered Divines, has with their Gloses mangled this word, and wrested it
to the maintenance of their lies and trifles, as they have dooen whatsoever
else is read in the Scriptures concerning this obedience. As namely, that
notable saying. 1. Reg. 15. Obedience is better then Sacrifice: after that they
saw, how highly Obedience was commended in the Scriptures, they haled and
forced the same, as proper unto them selves, thereby to blind the world, and
to bring men into this error, to think that the Obedience so greatly
commended in Scriptures, is nothing else, then to embrace and allow what soever
they should enjoin and lay upon them. And by this means do they draw us
from the Word of God, to their liyng Legendaries, and Deuelishe obedience.
Whereas in deed, he is the obedient child of God that hears the Gospel and
word of GOD, and with Faith embraces the same. Therefore whatsoever is not
the Word, give no ear unto it, but rather stamp and tread it under thy
feet.



BE not of those manners that you were of before, neither have you such
conversation as aforetyme you have had: let no man see that life in you, which
heretofore you have led and lived. Heretofore you were Idolaters, and lived
in lust, Surphette, Drunkenness Covetousness, Pride, Wrath, Envy and
Hatred, which was an evil and Heathennishe life, yea rather mere infidelity:
and in this desperate and forlorn conversation you walked, as blind and
ignorant, not wottyng what you did. Now therefore put ye away these evil
desires. Here thou see how he imputes all these mischeeues unto Ignorance,
as unto the Spring, out of whom they proceed and flow. For where perfect
faith and true knowledge of Christ is lackyng, there can be nothing else then
Error and blindness: so that men live utterly ignorant what is right or
what is wrong, and thereby run headlong without stop or stay, into all
mischeeues and inconveniences.

After this sort hitherto have we been dealt withal, when as Christ was
darkened, and almost abolished and banished out of the world: when in steed
of truth, we were nozzeled in Error, and in place of the sincere knowledge
of the Truth we were fast chained and clogged in Ignorance: in so much that
within a while this question was moved and debated all the world over, how
and by what means we might attain felicity. This was an infallible sign of
Blindness and ignorance, and that the sincere knowledge of Faith, was
extinct and taken away. Hereupon it grew that the world was pestered with
such a number of Sects, and all things torn a sonder and disordered, while
every manne framed after his own imagination, a peculier and several way for
himself to heaven. And out of this Evil (since we are not able any way to
help our selves) we can not choose but always be drowned deeper and deeper,
in the gapyng gulphe of utter blindness. And therefore saint Peter's words
here are, as if he should say: You have long enough walked in foolishness,
now cast the same away from you, as being wise, and having raught unto the
true knowledge.





HEre does Saint Peter allege a place out of the old Testament, in the 19.
of Leuitie: where the Lord says, Be ye holy, for I am holy: that is to
say: Because I am your Lord and God, and you my people, meet it is, that you
should be as I am. For he that rightly and thoroughly plaieth the part of a
Lord in deed, bends his care to make his people like unto himself,
dutifully in each respect to behave them selves toward him, and frame them
selves serviceable to his will. Hereupon it falls out, that as our Lord and
God is holy, so also should his people be holy, and that is, when we walk
in faith. Very little mention is made in the Scriptures, of any Saints or
holy men departed out of this life, but always in a manner it speaks of
those holy men, that as yet were alive: as the Prophet David pronounces
himself holy in the 86. Psalm, saying. Preserve thou my Soul Lord, for I am
holy.

But our smatteryng doctorlie Divines and Schoolmen have also misconstrued,
and perverted the true sense of this place saying: that the Prophet has a
peculier revelation, in that he calls himself Holy: Wherein they flatly
bewraie themselves both to lack Faith, and also to be utterly unacquainted
with this revelation of Christ: for if they had any, they might easily by the
effect feel in them selves the power thereof. For he that is a Christian, has
a feelyng of such revelation in his conscience: and he that has no feelyng of
it, the same is no Christian. For he that is a Christian, comes into a
Communion with Christ, and is partaker with him of all his goodness: and
therefore seeing that Christ is holy, his members must also needs be holy, or
else deny that Christ is holy. For if thou be Baptized, thou haste put on the
garment of holiness, which is Christ, as saint Paul testifies.

This word Holy, signifies that which is only proper unto God himself, and
to him only does it appertain, the which we commonly do call consecrated.
And therefore does saint Peter now say: You have consecrated your selves unto
God, and therefore it stands you upon so to look to it that ye suffer not
your selves to be carried away again into the vain lusts and desires of
this world, but give you place unto God, that he may reign, live and work
in you, and so shall ye be holy even as he is holy.

Thus has he hitherto described the Grace that is offered unto us by the
Gospel and preaching of Christ, and has taught us how again we ought to
behave our selves toward the same, namely to persist and continue in a pure and
sincere persuasion of Faith, being well assured that no work whatsoever, that
we either can do or devise, can any thing avail us toward our salvation: But
where this doctrine is preached, then straightwaies reason comes in and
infers thus: If the case so stand, what need have I to do any good work?
Then do these grosseheads enter into this fond opinion, or rather mere
madness, making of a right Christian life a carnal licentiousness, deemyng
it lawful for every man to do what him lists. With such manner of persons
does saint Peter here in this place meet withal, and by prevention takes
aforehande from them that their foolish imagination: teaching us that
Christian liberty, without dependyng upon any good works is to be used
toward GOD, because on him we are only to build our Faith without any
Works: for hereby we attribute unto him his due due honor, and acknowledge
him for our good God, who is both just, true and merciful. Such a Faith as
this delivers and offers us from our sins and all other mischeeues
whatsoever. Now, after that we have attributed this unto God, all the residue of
our lives that we have to live, we are to bestow to the benefit of our
neighbor, to serve and do good unto him. The very cheifest and principallest
work of all others proceeding and issuyng out of Faith is, with our mouths be
ready to confess Christ, and with our blood also to bear witness unto him,
and if the case so require to bestow our very lives also for his sake. And yet
has not God any need of this or any such work of ours: but therefore must
we do it, that our Faith being thereby thoroughly tried and manifested, may
also draw and allure others to the like. Furthermore, there be other Works,
which do generally also serve to this end, that we may thereby do good
unto our neighbors: all which notwithstanding, not we our selves but God is
he that must work and bring the same to pass in us. Thus have we nothing at
all in the world of our own, that we can ascribe in any respect unto our
selves.

Hereby now it evidently appears, how far of it is, that this preaching of
the Gospel does open any (yea never so little) a window to live carnally,
or that every man may lawfully do what he lists. And therefore says
Saint Peter furthermore.











THE meaning of saint Peter in this place is this: Ye are now by Faith come
to this poinct that ye are the Sons of God and he your Father. Ye have
attained an incorruptible inheritance, whereof has been spoken before: now
therefore there remains nothing behind, but that the veil being taken away,
that may be openly showed which erst was hidden. This must ye yet expect and
look for, till the time come that it be given you to see it. You therefore
are come to this good poinct, that you may with boldness and trust, invoke
and call upon God your Father, because he is (nevertheless) just, as he that
will render unto every one without respect of persons according to their
works. Let no man persuade him self, for that he is dignified and entitled
with this worthy name to be called a Christian or the Son of God, that
therefore God will spare him, if he live without his fear: and accoumpt it
enough because he has such an excellent name. The world in deed judges
according to respects of persons, not iudgyng all persons equally and
indifferently, but spares such as be their Friends, wealthy, rich, fair,
learned, wise, mighty, and in high authority. But God respects none of all
these, he deals in all things with indefferencie, be the persons never so
high of calling. So did he in Egypt slay the Child as well of the king, as of
the poorest Sheepeheard. Exodus 10. And therefore the Apostle here warns us
that we lookyng for the like judgment should stand in fear, and not so to
vasit our title because we are called Christians, that therefore we should
presume that God will any whitt more spare us then he will others. For this
vain persuasion long ago deceived the Jews, who bragged them selves to be
the Seed of Abraham, and the people of GOD. The Scripture makes no difference
according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. Very true it is that God
promised, that Christ should be borne of the seed of Abraham, and that out of
him should come an holy people: but it follows not thereupon, that all they
be the children of God which descended from the ligne of Abraham. He also
promised salvation to the Gentiles, but he said not, that he would save all
the Gentiles.

But here now arises a question. When we say that God does save us only by
faith without respect of good works, how happens it that Saint Peter does
here say, that he will not judge according to the person, but according to
every man's work? I answer. Whatsoever we have taught concerning faith, how
that it alone does justify us before God, is without al doubt very true:
forasmuch as the Scripture declares and witnesses the same more plainly then
that it can be denied. Now, whereas saint Peter does here say, that God
judges according to works, that also is as true. But this by the way must
undoubtedly be believed, that where Faith is not, there neither can any good
work be: and again, that there is no Faith where there be no good works.
Therefore thou must bring both thy Faith and thy good works into one, as
in the which being both together, is comprehended and contained the sum of a
true Christian life. As thou live therefore, so shall thou receive, and so
will God judge thee. And therefore although God judge us according to our
works, yet nevertheless, this remains also alike true, that good works
are only the fruictes of Faith, whereby it shall be easy to find and try
where Faith is, and where is Infidelity. And therefore will God judge thee
according to thy works, and will thereby lay it face to face to thy charge
whether thou have Faith or no. As no man can better confute a Liar then by his
own words: And yet nevertheless it is plain that by those words he is not
made a Lior, but he was a Liar before that he uttered any lie, because that a
lie must needs proceed from the heart into the mouth.

Take therefore these same words of Saint Peter in a most simple sense, and
in such sort that you understand works to be the fruictes and seals of
Faith, and that God does judge men according to these fruictes, which can not
but ensue and follow a true and sound Faith: to the intent it may
manifestly appear, where Faith remains in the heart, and also where
Infidelity lodges. God will not judge according to these interrogatories and
questions: whether thou be called a Christian or no: or whether thou be
baptized or not: but he will thus question with thee: Sirrah, if thou be a
Christian, where be thy fruictes, whereby thou art able to confirm and
approve thy faith.

And therefore says saint Peter, forasmuch as you have such a father,
which judges not according to any man's person, see that ye have your
conversation in the time of your dwelling here, in fear: that is to say:
Fear ye this Father, not in the fear of punishment and revenge (for so the
wicked reprobates and Deuilles do fear him) but fear ye him, least he
should forsake you, or withdraw his holy hand from you. Even as an honest
and good child stands in fear least he should offend his father or commit
any thing that should not be well liked of him. Such a fear does God
require at our hands whereby we may loathe and abhor sin, and diligently
study to help out neighbor so long as we have to live in this world.

That Christian that believes well, is possessed of all the goods and
benefits of God, and is the child of God, as we have heard before declared:
but the time that he here has to live, is nothing else then a kind of
Sequestration or Pilgrimage. For his Spirit by faith is already in heaven,
by the which he is even a Lord of all things. But God therefore suffers
him yet for a time to live in the flesh and to be conversant in body upon
the earth, purposelie that he should help others, and bring them with him to
heaven.

And therefore we ought no otherwise to use this world, nor to make any other
account thereof, but as Strangers or wayfaring men are wont to do: who
coming into their Lodgyng or Inn, make no further reckoning, but to have at
their Hosts hands, meat, drink and lodging for one night and no longer:
they do not challenge and lay claim unto their Hosts whole substance.

After the same sort ought every one to accoumpt of his wealth and richesse,
even as though they were none of his: to take thereof only so much as is
sufficient, for the maintenance and nourishment of his body, and with the rest
to relieve and help his needy neighbors. Therefore the life of a Christian
man is no otherwise but as a mansion for one night. For we have here no
permanent dwelling place, we must have our desire thither, where our Father
is, namely heaven. And therefore, we ought to abandon and lay aside all
lasciviousness and dissolute life, and to pass (as saint Peter says) the
time of our dwelling here in fear.





THis (says he) ought to provoke and stir you to employe your conversation
in the fear of God, considering how great a price your redemption cost.
Heretofore ye were Citezins of the world, living under the tyrannous rule of
the Devil: now has God delivered you from such lamentable and desperate
conversation, and has brought you into an other place, so that now you are
Citezens in heaven, and but Strangers and Pilgrims on earth. But mark ye well,
how much God has bestowed on you, and how invaluable and exceedyng great
that treasure is wherewith you are redeemed, and brought into that happy case
to become the children of God. Therefore pass your time and conversation in
fear, and take ye good heed least if ye should contemn and neglect these
things, ye loose this so excellent and precious a treasure.

And what treasure is that which is so excellent and precious, wherewith we
are redeemed? Not these corruptible things, Gold or Silver, but the most
precious blood of Christ the Son of God. This treasure is so excellent and
of price so inescimable, that no sense or reason of man is able to comprehend
it, insomuche that one small drop of this most innocent Blood, had been
fully sufficient for the sins of the whole world. But it pleased the
eternal Father so abundantly to pour out his Grace upon us, and with such a
price to procure and work our Salvation, that he would have his most dear
Son Christ to shed all his blood and to bestow and give unto us all his
treasures at once.

And therefore he requires us, that we do not (as it were) cast away into
the air or make small accoumpt of such a great Grace, but rather so to
esteem of it, that we may be stirred and moved unto fear: that living
therein, we may not deserve est sons to be deprived of this so surpassing a
treasure.

And this withal must diligently be noted and considered, how that saint
Peter here does say, that ye were redeemed from your vain conversation which
ye received by the traditions of the fathers.

For by this, he utterly throws down that persuasion that we are wont
most commonly to lean unto, thinkyng that all our dooinges ought to be
allowed and well liked of, because the same of an old custom have had lon^
continuance, and because our Ancestors and predecessors (a^^^ng whom there
have been many wise and good men) have so observed them.

For thus he says. Whatsoever our fathers have either enacted or done, all
was ill: and consequently, those things that you have learned of them
concerning the worship of God, are so corrupt and naught, that God must
bestow the blond of his own Son, to redeem and free men from the same:
Whatsoever now therefore is not washed away by his blood, is altogether by the
flesh infected and accused.

Whereupon it follows, that the more earnestly that any man strives to
attain to righteousness without Christ, the further of is he from true
righteousness, and the deeper is he plunged and drouned in the gulphie
dungeon of blindness and iniquity, making himself guilty of this most
precious blood.

Other gross external vices are in effect little to be made accoumpt of, in
comparison of this odious Sin, that teaches us to attain our justification
and righteousness by works, and which frames a worshipping of God according
to the imagination of man's idle brain and fantasy. For by this means that
most innocent blood of Christ is dishonored, and most shamefully blasphemed.

Even as the Gentiles and Heathen people did far more grievously sin in
honoring the Sun and Moon, which they thought to be the true worshipping
of God, then they did in committyng any other faults which they were out of
all doubt to be sinful and lewd. And therefore humane justification and
righteousness is nothing else but a mere blasphemy of GOD, and of all offenses
that man is able to commit, the most heinous. And so those things that now
the world embraces and accoumpteth for the right worship of God and for the
perfect way to justification, are accoumpted greater Sin in the face of God
then any other faults whatsoever. Of the which sort, are the professed orders
of religious Cloysterers and Munkes, and whatsoever else has any glorious
glitteryng show in the judgment of the world, and yet nevertheless are clean
without faith.

And therefore whosoever he be, that by any other way or mean, seeks the
grace of God, then by his Blood, better is were for him never to come in the
sight of GOD: as he that with his own beggarly righteousness, does more and
more displease and offend his divine Majesty.



Hereupon again does Saint Peter expound and interpret the Scriptures. For
this Epistle (although breef and short) is wonderful effectual, pithie, and
rich. So a little before, where he speaks of their vain conversation, in
pursuyng the traditions of their Fathers, he did (as it were) lightly touch
sundry places of the Prophets, as namely, that place in the xvj. of Jeremy:
The Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the world, and shall say,
Surely, our Fathers have inherited Lies and Vanity etc. As though he should
say, even the Prophets foretold that you should be redeemed from the
traditions of your Fathers.

After the same sort he here also leads us into the Scriptures, where as he
says: You were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled and without spotte. For here does he expound that which is read
in the Prophets and Moses: as that in the liij. of Esaie, He was brought as a
sheep to the slaughter: And the figure meante in the xij. of Exodus by the
Paschall Lamb. All these things does he here interpret, and says: This
Lamb is Christ, who as it behooued him to be without blemishe or spotte, so
also was he undefiled and without spotte, whose blood was shed for us.



WE have deserved nothing at all, ne yet so much as ever desired this thing,
that the precious blood of Christ should be shed for us: and therefore
there is no cause or matter herein, whereof we may lawfully of our selves
glory or make any brag. All glory apperteineth only to GOD: who without
any our ^^^ites, promised, ^eueiled, and manifested that, which from
everlasting (even before the foundation of the world was laid) he had
foreseen and foreordeined. And in the Prophets were these things promised,
but yet covertly, not plainly and openly, but now after the resurrection of
Christ, and sendyng of the holy Ghost, are openly preached, and plainly
published throughout the world.

This is now the last time, (as Saint Peter says) in which we are:
which from the time of Christ's Ascension, continues till the day of the
last Judgment. For so do the Apostles and Prophets call it, and Christ
himself terms it the last hour. Not that the day of Judgment shall
shortly approach and come anon after the Ascension of Christ, but because
that after this preaching of the Gospel of Christ, there should be none
other: And that we should not look for any further revelation, or more
manifestation of Grace, then is now already reueiled and manifested.
Heretofore, always one revelation was showed after an other: Whereupon in the
vj. of Exodus the Lord says: My name Adonai have I not reueiled unto them.
For albeit the Patriarchs knew GOD, yet had they not such a manifest
declaration and preaching of God, as afterward was published and set out by
Moses and the Prophets. Now, there was never any preaching heard of in all the
world, notabler or more manifest then the Gospel: wherefore it is also the
last, as the which (after the course of those former times expired) is in this
last age reueiled unto us.

Furthermore also, according to the accoumpte and computacion of time, the end
of the world is not far of, as S. Peter in his second Epistle and third
Chapter declares, saying: One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and
a thousand years as one day. For his meaning thereby is to call us away from
the earnall computation of this time, because we should esteem thereof,
according to the judgment of GOD. Wherein certainly the last time and final
end is fully come: For that small time that is left behind remainyng, is
with GOD as nothing. Salvation is now reueiled and thoroughly perfected: only
God suffers the world thus still to stand and continue, to the intent he
might be the more thoroughly honored and glorified: albeit as touching himself,
he is so perfectly reueiled, that it is not to be looked for, that he shall be
any perfectlyer manifested.



FOr your sakes (says he) is the Gospel reueiled. For God and his Christ had
no need thereof: it was done for our health and salvation, to the end that
we should believe in him: Neither have we of our owneselues strength and power
so to do, but through Christ who makes intercession unto his Father for us:
Who was raised from the dead, that he might reign over all things, in
somuche that he which believes in him, has all the good things that be
his: and by him ascends up to the Father. And by this means have we faith
in God, and through this faith, also hope. Only faith is it that must save
us, but yet a sure and firm faith in God. For unless God help thee, thou
shall be sure ever to remain helpless, and therefore it is to no purpose,
though all the men in the world do never so much favor thee. The favor of
God is only necessary, wherein thou may glory, that he is thy Father, and
thou his Son: in whom thou reposed greater confidence and trust then in thy
^^rnal father and mother and that he will in all thy necessity be ready to
help thee* even for Christ's sake our only Mediatoure and Savior. Such a
Faith as this comes not of any human power, but GOD planteth the same in
us: for that Christ with his Blood deserved and merited it, to whom therefore
be has given this glory, that being set on his right hand, he by his divine
power might settle and stay a sure faith in us.

Hitherto therefore we have heard, how saint Peter exhorts us first, to
girde up the loins of our mind, and also sincerely to walk in a perfect
faith. Then considering how dear a price this has co^te Christ, that we
should have our conversation in fear: not bearyng our selves hold upon this,
that we are named Christians, since God is such a judge as respects no
maintes person, one more then an other: but judges equally without any
parcialitie. Now proceeds he further, and ends this first Chapter, saying:









Saint Paul in the fifte to the Galath. rekoneth up the fruits that follow
faith. The fruits of the Spirit (says he) are Love, Joy, Peace long
suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith Meekness, Temperance. So also here
does saint Peter teach us, which be the fruietes of faith. To wit, to
purify our Souls in obeiyng the truth through the Spirit: For where true
Faith is, it brings the body under, and in subjection, and bridleth the
lusts of the flesh: and although it make not a clear riddaunce and dispatche
thereof, ye^ makers it the Body subject to the Spirit, and ^s with a bridle,
qualifieth the wild motions thereof. The same meaning also has saint Paul,
where he speaks of the fruictes of the Spirit. It is a great and busy
piece of work, to bring the Spirit to Master and bear rule over the Body,
and to repress the wilful affections, and fleshly desires naturally
engraffed in us from our parents. For it is not possible for us to live well,
no not in the state of Wedlock, without special Grace: I say nothing, what
we can do herein, being without Grace.

But why says he, Purify (or make chaste) your Souls, and not rather your
Bodies? Surely he full well knew, that the lusts and concupiscences of the
flesh, accompainie us to our Graves, and are never quenched in us (although
we be Baptized) till our diyng day. Now, it is not enough for a man to
contain himself from the act doing, and to be outwardly chaste and a virgin,
his heart in the mean while boilyng in filthy desires of fleshly lusts: but
we must earnestly endeavor our selves with all diligence, that our Souls may
be chaste, so that this chastity may proceed, and come from the heart, and
that the Soul may be at continual enemitie and war with all naughty
desires, and still fight against them, till it be clear delivered from them.

And it agrees very well that is here added, that we must purify our Souls
in obeiyng the truth through the Spirit. Much has been preached and spoken
of Chastity, and many Books have been written concerning it. The Aucthours
whereof have taught us, with long Fasting, abstinence from flesh, wine and
such like, to quench these filthy motions of concupiscence and lust. Which
although some what they helpen thereunto, yet could they not be sufficient,
neither could they beat down the inordinate desires of the flesh. Saint
Hierom writes of himself, that he so punished and pinched his Body, that he
was even like an Ethiopian* yet nevertheless, he so little therewith profited,
that he many times dreamed he was in Rome, in company of Gentle women and
fair Maiders. S. Bernard also so punished, and with such abstinence almost
so spoiled his body, yt it stonke loathsomely, as before I have declared. These
holy men were grievously tempted: for with those outward things they thought
they could restrain and quench their temptations: but because the remedies
which they used were external and outward, and were applied outwardly and
not inwardly (where in deed the disease was harbored) they could not serve as
sufficient and able to master and kill those desires of the mind, with which
they warred. But S. Peter in this place shows us a most true and Sovereign
remedy wherewith to cure this evil, to wit, Obedience to the truth through
the Spirit. Which the Scripture in other places also sets down, as in the
11. of Esaie: Faithfulness shall be the girdle of his reins. This is the true
Cataplasme, wherewith the Reins are to be girded: whose soundness must
proceed from the inner things to the outward, and not contrariwise from the
outward to the inner. For the Soar which we would cure lies, not outwardly
in the kerther, or clothes, but deeyng bredde inwardly, ragingly reigns and
lies in the Blood, Flesh, Marrowe and Veins. Therefore it is not the best
way, with outward things to go about to repress and quench fleshly
concupiscence: the body with fasting and labors may be brought into great
debility and weakness, and at length thereby be utterly marred, spoiled and
brought unto death, but to be cased from evil desires it can not. But Faith
is able to quench them, and so to keep them under, that they shall be
brought to give place and yield unto the Spirit.

So also speaks the Prophet Zachary in his 9. Chapter, of wine, whereof
Christ first drinks, which makes them maidens, to whom he drinks and
forecasteth. Then arare of other wine is wont to enkindle and stir up
naughty desires: but this wine, to wit, the Gospel, represseth the same and
makes the heart chaste. And this is it that S. Peter here means, when he
says, where Truth is bolden fast in the heart, and obedience thereunto given
through the spirit, that that and none but that, is the truest cure and
presentest remedy against this dangerous evil and mischief* beside which,
there is none other that can be found so able to drive away and qualify these
evil cogitations and vain thoughts. For when this remedy (the Gospel I
mean) is entered and taken possession within the heart, all naughty leude
motions do straightways give place and vanishe away. Let him that will, try
this matter, and he shall duly find it so to be, as all they that have made
trial thereof, do very well know. But the Devil does not easily suffer any
man to come to that poinct, as in heart so to embrace the Word of God, that he
may feel what a good taste and savor it has: because he knows full well,
what great power and mighty efficacy is in it, to subdue and beat down all
naughty desires and evil thoughts. Therefore, that which saint Peter here
speaks, is as though he should thus say: If you be desirous to remain and
continue chaste, it stands you in hand, to embrace and show your obedience
to the truth through the Spirit: that is to say, It necessarily behooves
you not only to read and hear the Word of God, but to embrace the same in
your hearts. And therefore, it is not enough, that the Gospel be once
preached or once heard, but thou must continually cleave unto it and follow
it. For, this grace has the Word, that the oftener a man tastes it, the
sweeter it still wareth, and the pleasaunter it relisheth. For albeit it
always teaches one and the same doctrine concerning Faith, yet can it never
be to the godly and well disposed minds sufficiently and enough heard. Now
adds the Apostle further.



TO what end now must we lead a chaste life? to the end thereby to attain
Salvation? No, forsooth. But to the end and purpose that we may serve and
do good to our neighbors. What shall I do that I may restrain and keep
under my Sins? I must dutifullie obey the truth in the Spirit, that is to
say, the Faith of the Word of God. And why do I bridle and keep under
subjection, my Sins? Forsoothe, that I may do good to others. For I must
first bridle and ouermaister my body and flesh through the Spirit, and then
shall I be able to profit and do good to others.



THe holy Apostles Peter and Paul do separate and make a difference between
brotherly Love and common Love: a brotherhood is yt bond, wherein all
Christians ought to be among themselves, even as brothers, without any respect
or difference: for why, we have all in common, one Christ, one Baptism, one
Faith and one Treasure: I can not be more worthy then thou: that which thou
haste, I also have: finally I am even as rich as thou. We have one and the
same treasure, saving that I peradventure receive it more worthily then thou
do, as if I should lay it up in Gold, and thou should keep it in some
filthy rag or vise cloute. Therefore, as we have the grace of Christ and all
spiritual blessings common together, so also ought we to have our bodies,
lives, wealth and dignities common one to an other, that one may serve an
others turn and necessity in all things.

Now, he very significantlie says, To love brotherly without fainyng, that
is: without any glosing, hypocrisy or dissimulation: which term and phraze
the Apostles gladly use, for that undoubtedly they foresawe, that we would
not stick to call one an other, Christian or Brother, and yet would falsely,
feinedly, dissemblyngly and altogether hypocritically undermine one an other.
We have erected in the world many Fraternities and Brotherhoodes, which in
very deed are nothing else then stark vanities and mere deceiptes: altogether
devised, invented and brought into the world by the Devil himself. All which
are wholly and altogether repugnaunt and contrary to the Faith and sincere
love of Brethren.

Christ is as well mine, as he is saint Barnardes: thine no less then he is
S. Francis. When thou hear any therefore say: I shall come to heaven, if I
be one of the Brotherhood of this or that order, answer thou thus: It is mere
paltrie and counterfaited hypocrisy that thou speak.

Christ can not abide any such trumperie, he can brook none other then a
common Brotherhood, which we have altogether: and will thou play the
notorious fool by breakyng of that, to erecte and make to thy self any new
vpstart and peculier Brotherhood?

This truly could I well abide, that thou should erecte one: but how? not
whereby to make any peculier help to thy Soul: but for a certain number to
come together, to contribute and gather some treasure, for the relief of them
that be in necessity.

Therefore all we Christians have one Brotherhood, which we took upon us in
our Baptism, of the which brotherhood there is no Saint that has any more
then thou or I. For look with how great a price he was redeemed, with so
great am I also bought and redeemed. GOD bestowed no less for my sake, then
for the greatest Saint that is: saving that he peradventure embraced this
treasure better then I do: That is to say, has a stedfaster and stronger
Faith then I.

Furthermore this word (Love) has a larger signification then
Brotherlinesse: because it reaches also unto our enemies, and those
especially which are not worthy of Love. For as Faith shows forth her
woorkyng where she sees nothing: so also ought Love to see nothing: and there
especially to exercise her operation, where there is in apparaunce nothing
worthy to be loved, but rather all things odious, and such as may breed
and procure loathsomeness. Where there is nothing that can well be liked of,
even there ought the effects of Love to show forth: yea, this ought also to
be done fervently (says Peter) and with the whole heart, even as God loved
us, at such time when we were in every respect most unworthy of his love.



Thirdly, al these things are therefore of you to be performed and done,
because ye are not now as you were before: but you are (says he) borne anewe,
and therefore new Men. This was not brought to pass through any your own
works, but you needed a new Birthe. For a new man can not be brought forth
by any power of his own into the world, but he must first be begotten and
borne. What Carpenter is able by his own Art to make a Tree, but the same
must needs of it self first grow out of the ground? Therefore ever. as we are
not made, but borne the Sons and children of Adam, and have naturally sucked
sin from our Parents: so neither shall we by our own industry and labor,
ever become the children of God, but it behooves us by a kind of new Birth
and regeneration so to be. This therefore is the meaning of the Apostle in this
place: Seeing therefore that you are a new Creature, it is very meet and
conueniente withal, that you demean your selves after an other order, and
practice a new kind of life. As heretofore ye lived in hatred, so now use
your conversation in Love, and let all things be transposed and turned after
an other sort. But how came this new Birthe to pass?



OF a kind of Seed we are regenerated and new borne: no otherwise then as
we see, all other things to be borne and generated of Seed in their kind.
If therefore the old birth proceeded and came of Seed, the new Birth also
must needs be of some Seed. But what Seed is this? Truly not flesh and
blood. What then? Nothing that is corruptible and mortal, but even the
eternal and living word. This is all that, whereby we live, whereby we are
nourished, and have our being, and whereby specially (as he here says) we are
regenerated.

But how and by what means is this wont to be dooen, and brought to pass?
God sends out this his Word, to (...), the Gospel, which casts seed
into the hearts of men* ^f this Seed abide and stick Fast in the heart,
then is there presently ready the holy Ghost, who fashioneth a new manne,
which becomneth altogether of an other fort their he was before, has other
devises, thoughts and cogitations, other words, and other works. And thus
is he wholly and altogether altered. Whatsoever thou aforetyme did est huc
and avoid, now thou pursuest and seek: what soever thou ^a^ste sought, thou
now fleest. The state of Corporal generation is such, that the Seed which
is in manne has his alteration, and remains not still Seed: But the Seed
of the Spirit can not be changed, but remains one for ever: so entirely
alteryng and chaungyng me, that I am transmitted and altered into it: and the
corruption and evil which naturally dwells in me, is quite abolished. And
therefore this is a wonderful kind of Birthe, and of a merueilous Seed.



THis place is taken out of the xl. Chap. of Esai^. Where a voice said unto
the Prophet, Cry. And he said, what shall I cry? To whom the voice said,
Cry thus* All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of the
feeld, The grass withers, and the flower fades a way: but the word of the
Lord stands for ever. These words has S. Peter here brought in and
alleged: For this Epistle is (as I said) both rich, and grounded upon the
authority of sondrie Scriptures. Now the meaning of the Scripture here
alleged, is this.

The word of the Lord endures for ever: But whatsoever is flesh and blood,
the same is as corruptible grass. Be a man of never so flourishyng and
gallant age, be he never so rich and mighty, never so wise and just, never
so brave, fresh and beautiful, all which appertain to the flower: yet does
the flower in the end wither away, and that which in gallante age and
beauty lately excelled, is waxed old, and become ill-favored: that which
erst was rich, is grown to be poor: and so forth also all other things
fade away, saving only the Word of God, Which Seed can never perish nor
decay.



AS though he should say: you need not to seek far, how to come to this
Word, for behold you have it even before your eyes. It is that Word which
we preach unto you: by this you may qualify and restrain all wicked
desires. Thou need not to seek far for it, only look to this, that thou
gladly embrace it, when it is preached unto thee. For it is so near unto thee,
that it may be heard. As Moses also says in the xxx. of Deuter. The word
which I command thee this day, is not far of from thee, that thou
should need to go far to seek it: as either to go up to heaven, or to
go over the Sea to fetch it, but it is very near unto thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart. It was straightwaies preached and heard, but when it
has feased and taken full possession of thy heart, it can not any more dye and
vanishe away, neither does it suffer thee to dye, but saves thee, so long
as thou stickest and cleauest fast unto it. As when I hear how that Jesus
Christ died for me, and bore all my sins, and purchased heaven for me, and
also how he, has given all that he has unto me, now do I hear the Gospel
and glad things, I mean, the Word of God being preached, which peradventure
quickly passes away, and is forgotten^ but if it be effectually received
with the heart, and that thou thoroughly embrace him in faith, then can not he
any more slip from thee, nor be forgotten. This truth no Creature whatsouer,
is able to overthrow, the Gates of hell shall never prevail against it. Yea
although I stick fast in the Jaws of the Devil, yet if I be able to take
hold upon, and to apprehende this Word, I must needs be bailed and
delivered thence, and shall remain where the Word remains. And therefore
it is not without good cause, that the Apostle here in effect says, that
there is none other Word to be looked for, then this which we have preached
unto you.

To this purpose tends that, which Paul in the first to the Romans
says: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God
unto salvation to all that believe. The Word is the Divine and eternal power
of God. For although the voice, sound, or speech, do quickly vanishe and
pass away, yet the kernel, that is to say, the knowledge and truth,
contained in that voice, remains still. As when I putt a Goblet or Judge of
wine to my mouth, I drink up the Wine, the Goblet or Judge remaining still
unspent: So also ye Word which being brought unto us by voice, descends into
the heart, and there begins to have life: the voice remainyng still without,
and vanishyng away. And therefore it is well termed the power of GOD, yea
rather God himself. For so he said unto Moses, Exodus iiij. I will be in thy
mouth. And in the lxxxj. Psalm: Open thy mouth wide: that is, show forth
boldly, speak out, be an hungered and I will fill it, I my self being present
with thee, will speak enough. So also Christ in the xiiij. of Ihon says: I
am the way, the truth and the life, he that cleaves thereunto, the same is
borne of God. Therefore this Seed is the Lord our God himself.

All which things serve to this end, to instruct and teach us that we can
not possibly be relieved and helped by works: and the Word (be it never so
small a thing in show, when it is uttered out of the mouth, and in apparaunce
seem nothing glorious and honorable) yet is there in it, a kind of such
incomparable virtue and force, as makes so many the children of God, as
faithfully cleave thereunto. John. 1. Upon such an excellent stay and
goodness, leans our salvation.

This is the first Chapter of this Epistle, wherein thou see with what
singular Art and cunnyng saint Peter handles and preaches Faith. Whereby
it manifestly appears that is Epistle is the very Gospel or glad Tidings it
self. Now follows next the second Chapter wherein he teaches us how we
ought to behave our selves in our works and dealinges toward our Neighbor.

The second Chapter.
WHerefore, laiyng aside al maliciousness and all guile, and dissimulation,
and envy, and all evil speaking,


















































HEre begins he to teach us, the right works of a Christian life and the
true fruits of the same. We have oftentimes before showed that in these two
things, Faith toward God, and Love toward our neighbor, does consist and
is contained the whole life of a Christian. Also, that this Faith of Christ is
not given to any, but that there remain (nevertheless) in our flesh (so long
as we here live) many naughty concupiscences, lusts and desires: sithins
that none here in this world can be so holy, but that he lives in the
flesh, and whatsoever is in the flesh, the same can not be perfectly clean.
Therefore says saint Peter, be ye so instructed that ye may abstain from
the Sins which as yet adhere, and cleave unto you, and against them see that
ye continually fight: for those be the most dangerous and most pernicious
enemies that we have, which lie within our own bosoms: and in the midst of
our flesh and blood do watch, sleep and live with us, as it were some
troublesome Guest, of whom (when a man has once harbored and taken him into
his house) he can not again be rid. Wherefore, seeing that Christ through
Faith is all and wholly yours, and that you be now possessed of his saving
health and all other his benefits and graces, know ye now that this charge
and duty lies upon you, that you lay aside all maliciousness, or
whatsoever is evil, and all guile, that is, that none deal with an other
vnfaithfullie and dissemblinglie, let there not be seen any falsehood in
fellowshippe among you (as the proverb is) neither any craft and treachery,
which (God he knows) is now adays too rise. But as it becomes us that
be Christians, in all poinctes toward God to deal, not feinedly and
crookedly, but directly, sincerely and with a pure heart: so also toward men,
it is our parts to deal plainly, simply and justly, that no man ouerreache or
undermine an other, in buying, selling, or such like.

So says saint Paul, Ephesians. 4. Put away liyng, and let every man speak
truth unto his neighbor. The truth is this, that your speech be, yea yea,
and nay nay. Dissembling is, when one shows him self an other manner of man
outwardly, then he is inwardly in mind affected. It behooves therefore and is
required of every man, that he bear and show him self such outwardly, as he
is in deed and in heart inwardly.

A Christian ought so to live, that he may not care though all men see and
know what he thinks in his heart: as he that in all his conversation and
life seeks nothing else but to glorify God, and to be serviceable unto his
neighbor: not fearing any man at all. For every one ought to show himself
such an one in the very secrets of his mind, as he is outwardly accoumpted:
and not under the visor of honesty to deceive and bleare the eyes of the
people.

Saint Peter further says, that we must also lay aside Envy, and evil
speakinges. Wherein he does very aptly and well reprove those vices that
among men are usual and common in their mutual traffiques and dealinges. This
vice of evil speaking, is a sin now adays very common, and rife, quickly
slipped into, and sooner committed then a man would ween. Therefore take heed
to your selves (says he) of this fault, yea although ye have the Spirit: to
the intent that ye may by proof know what be the fruictes of the Spirit.



HEre he brings in a similitude, and his meaning thereby is this: ye now are
new borne by the word of God, and therefore so behave your selves, as new
borne Babes are wont to do: that is: they desire and covet after nothing but
Milk. As they therefore desire the Dugge and Milk, even so ought ye to desire
the Word, and to have your whole delight in the same: accoumpting that all
delicacies and dainties are therein ready for you, so long as you may suck
that Milk which is sincere and without deceit.

Again, these words be figurative. For he speaks neither of bodily Milk,
neither of any corporal kind of sucking, nor yet of any natural birthe and
nativity. But he speaks here of an other kind of Milk, which is
Spiritual, which is drawn by the Soul, and sucked with the Heart. This Milk
ought to be without deceipte, and not guilefull, as it many times nowadaies
happens yt much paltring and deceiptfull wares are retailed and uttered in
sale. Truly it is most necessary that Christians being newborn and yet
Infantes, should be nourished with sincere, pure, and perfect good milk. Now,
this Milk is nothing else then the Gospel, which is the Seed whereof we be
conceived and new borne, as before we declared: the same also is our meat,
wherewith (after we be come to growth, we are fed: it is also our Armor
wherewith we be fenced, cladde and armed: and to speak all at once, the self
same Gospel is all things unto us. Now, whatsoever is thereunto myngled or
corrupts and infecteth the sincerity thereof, is the doctrine of men.
Therefore does the holy Ghost here warn us, that every one of them which be
regenerate and new borne in Christ, should carefully look about him, and
take heed what Milk he sucketh, and learn to be able to judge of every
doctrine.

The Dugges or Teates, distilling and draynyng out this milk, and out of whom
Infantes do suck, are they which preach and teach the pure Word in the
Church of Christ. So speaks the Bridegroom to his Spouse in the Cantic.
Chapter. 4. Thy two Breasts are like two twins of young Roes. Between these
ought there to hang a bu^dell of Myrrh, as the Spouse there says Canti. 1. A
bundell of Myrrh is thy Lover unto me, which lies between my breasts. The
meaning whereof is, that Christ only is always to be preached. This
Bridegroom always ought to lie in the middle between our breasts. Otherwise,
if Christ be not purely preached, the Milk is corrupted, and al things are
preposterous, noisome and contagious.

Purely preached I call that, when it is first taught, how that Christ has
dyed for us, and by his death has rescued and delivered us from Sin, Death
and Hell: this doctrine is in hearing very pleasant, and like as it were sweet
Milk. But withal, anon after must the Cross also be preached, to wit, that
we must even so suffer as he himself has suffered: this is a vehement strong
drink and mighty Wine. Therefore to such as are but newly won and begotten
in Christ, gentle meat (that is to say) Milk must be first given: which
can no way be so conveniently done, as first and foremost by preaching and
showing unto them Christ: who is nothing at all sharp and bitter, but rather
even sweetness it self: both pleasant in relishe and toothsome in taste,
without any manner of harshnesse or harm. And this is that very sincere and
Spiritual Milk, without all deceiptfulnesse.

And here again has saint Peter by Milk, comprehended and glaunced at other
places of Scripture, as his order and custom is often and very plenteously to
do: namely that in the 23. of Exodus and Deuteronomy. 14: The Lord gave this
commandment, saying: See that thou sees not a Kidde in his mothers Milk.
For what purpose I pray you, willed God this to be written? what matter is
there in it, that a Kidd must not be killed, so long as it sucketh?
Doubtless, for none other cause, but to signify the same thing which saint
Peter here teaches. For it is nothing else, then if he should say. Look that
ye preach gently and softly to those Christians that be as yet Infantes and
Weakelinges, let them be well fedd, and fatted in the knowledge of Christ,
ouercharge them not with strong learning, for their weakness and age can not
away with it, nor yet digest it. But after that they be grown and waxen
strong, then see them to be killed and sacrificed with the Cross.

The same sense and meaning has that Law which we read Deuter. 24. That a
man taking a new wife, shall not be compelled to go a warfare the first
year, least he should be slain, but shall be free at home and rejoice with
his new wife which he has taken. Whereby assuredly there is none oth^^ thing
meant, but that we are to allow and grant unto those that as yet be children
in the Schole and faith of Christ, their convenient time and space to grow up:
and in the mean season that we ought to deal with them and handle them
ge^tlie and courteously: whom afterward being waxed strong, and of sufficient
growth, the Lord will bring to the Cross, and make to be slain as he does
other Christians. And then is the Kidde killed.



IT suffices not once only to have heard the Gospel. It must continually be
inculked, that we may daiely thereby grow, and accordyngly as we see one endued
with strongnesse of faith, so ought he to be provided for, and so to be
fed. Now, do not think that this is spoken or meant, to such as yet have not
heard of the Gospel: for they neither know what Milk is, nor what Wine means.
Therefore added he these words, If so be you have tasted how bountiful and
gracious the Lord is, As though he should say: He that has not tasted this
gear, to him is it neither perceived with the heart, neither has it any
pleasant or sweet savor. But they that have tasted it, do long after it,
and are ever desirous of this meat: to them the Word relisheth and
sauoureth, even as it is in deed, and of them is it with wonderful
sweetness received and taken.

And this I call Tastyng, when I do with my very heart believe, that Christ
has given himself unto me, and that I have my full interest in him, that he
bears and answers for all my Sins, trangressions and harms, and that
his life is my life. When this persuasion is thoroughly settled in my heart, it
yields wonderful and incredible good taste. For how should not I herewith
be even ravished with joy and pleasure, seeing I am so glad and so joyful of
a small temporal commodity, as if a freende should give unto me but only an
hundredth pieces of gold? But he that feels no taste of this thing in his
heart, can not hereof conceive and take any joy or pleasure. Furthermore, they
best taste these things, that are drawyng near to the agonies of Death, or
are any way disquieted with remorse of conscience. In those cases, hunger is
(as the Proverb says) the best sauce, those pinches makes this meat
marvelous sauorie. For the heart and conscience, when they once begin to
have feelyng of their misery, and wretched state, can hear nothing that is so
pleasant as the Gospel: they wholly rely unto it, they smell afar of the
delicacie and toothsomnesse thereof, and can not be fully satisfied
therewith. So was the song of the blessed virgin Marie, He has filled the
hongrie with good things: In the mean season, those stiff minded persons,
that trust to their own holiness, and leave to their own works and
righteousness, have neither any feelyng of their Sins and wickedness,
neither enjoy any taste of these things here spoken of. As for example: when
any that is hungry sits at a table, each kind of meat sauoureth well, and
has a good relishe in his mouth: whereas to him that is full stomacked,
nothing sauoreth well, but all meats, yea the best and daintiest dishes seem
loathsome. Therefore uses the Apostle these words, If so be that you have
tasted how bountiful the Lord is, as though he should say, If you have not
as yet tasted this, my preaching to you is but in vain.



HEre again, takes he hold of Scriptures before time written, and brings in
the xxviii. of Esaie, saying thus: Hear the word of the Lord, ye mockers,
because ye have said: we have made a covenant with Death, and with Hell are
we at an agreement, and have made falsehood your refuge: Therefore thus says
the Lord: Behold I will lay in Zion a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious
corner Stone, a sure foundation etc. This place does saint Paul also
allege, and it is one of the principallest places of the Scripture. For
Christ is that precious Stone, whom God has laid for the foundation, and
upon whom we are to be builded. And here behold how S. Peter takes these
words and interprets them of Christ. Again, that which Esaie calls
Trustyng in him, that says S. Peter to be the same, that to be builded upon
him, is: And this is, truly and aptly to expound the Scriptures. They that
build, lay their foundation in such a place, where it may continue fast
and remain firm, so that it may bear up the whole house and frame that is
builded upon it: And even so does this living Stone, which is Christ, uphold
and bear all this spiritual buildyng. And to be builded upon him, is nothing
else, but that we all together repose our trust, confidence and hope which we
have in our selves, wholly upon him.



HEre again he alleges a place out of the Cxviij. Psalm of the Prophet
David: The same Stone which the builders refused, is become the hedde Stone of
the corner, and it is merueilous in our eyes. Which place Christ himself also
cites in the xxj. of Matthewes Gospel: and is repeted in the fourth of the
Acts: The Stone which you builders rejected and set naught by: You (says
he) are the builders. For they taught the people, preached many things,
enacted sondrie ordinances and Laws, but they made men nothing thereby but
Meritemangers and Hypocrites. Whereupon Christ pronouncyng sentence upon
them, calls them plain Hypocrites, and the generation of Vipers, and
pronounces many terrible sentences upon them, reckonyng them among Sinners,
and not for such great holy men, as they would feign have seemed. This can
they not abide, but reject him and say, Heretic, forbiddest thou to do good
works? Thou shalt dye the death for thy so saying. And therefore says
saint Peter here: This same corner Stone, upon which you must be builded, is
even likewise refused and set at naught. This (as the Prophet says) appears
merueilous in our eyes, and seems very strange, and so wonderful, that
unless the Spirit did teach it us, no man by reason could conceive in.
Therefore (says he) before God this Stone is chosen and precious, and of so
high price and value, that it takes away Death, recompenseth for Sins,
delivers from Hell, and last of all, gives also unto us the Kingdom of
Heaven.



HOw and by what means are we builded? Even by the Gospel and preaching of
the Word. The Builders are they that preach: They that are builded, are
such Christians which hear the Gospel: and they are the Stones which must
be laid and couched upon this corner Stone so, that we repose our whole
trust upon him, and that out heart lean only upon him, and so be at rest.
Now it follows, that we must so direct and frame our selves, that we may
express, show forth and imitate that course of life that he ledd, For it is
very meet, that I who am builded and laid upon him by faith, should freme
my self to the same works that he did, and show forth the same conversation:
Which order all men generally and jointly, ought and are bound, to resemble.
And this issues forth and proceeds from Faith, and is the work of Love,
that we should mutuallie be morteised and joined out into an other, that we
all together may make one buildyng. The same reason has saint Paul also, j.
Cor. iij. Howbeeit not altogether after the same manner that this is. You are
(says he) the Temple of God. It is not the material house, made of woodd and
stone, which is his House: a Spiritual house is that which he requires,
which is the Church of Christ, in which we are all through one Faith
equal: That which one is, an other is: all builded together within our selves
mutuallie, and among our selves cemented, couched, framed, and knitte together
by Love, without al maliciousness, guile, hypocrisy, envy, and evil
speaking, as before has been declared.



Here takes he away that outward and corporal Priesthood, which was in
the old Testament, as also that outward Temple: all which he quite remooueth,
and says thus: That outward and external pampe of Priesthood is now clean
ceased: now therefore begin yea new Priesthood? and offer other Sacrifices,
but so, that all things be Spiritual. Here have we had somewhat ado, for
that we have maintained and affirmed, that these persons which commonly of
late years have been called, and termed by ye name of Priests, are not
Priests before God at all: and that assertion proved we cheeflie out of this
place. And therefore understand it aright, and bear it well in mind. That if
any should be so wilful in such sort, to wreste and tear in pieces (for I
will not call it expound) this place, as that the same were to be meant of a
double Priesthood (which some blusteryngly and boldly have avouched) that is
to wit, both of a Spiritual and also of a Corporal Priesthood, will him
to clear his eyesight, and a little better to awake his senses. For saint
Peter says thus. Be ye builded into a Spiritual or holy Priesthood. Now,
demand of these corporal Priests, whether they be holy. That shall their
life quickly declare, as it is already openly known to all the world, how
miserably and desperately this leuderable of the^, is even drouned in
Covetousness, in Lust, and in all other great en^rmities. He that is invested
in this Priesthood, whereof is here spoken, he needs must be holy: and be
that is not holy, has nothing less then this Priesthood. Thereby is
appears that Saint Peter in this place speaks of one only and the same a
true and spiritual Priesthood.

Again, we will ask them this question, whether in this place, S. Peter make
any distinction or difference, between persons Spiritual and persons
profane: as commonly now adays the Priests, are termed Spiritual, and the
rest of Christians called profane. And they shall even (will they, nill they)
be driven to confess, that saint Peter here in this place, speaks unto all
Christians, and namely to them which ought to lay aside all Maliciousness,
Guile, Dissimulation, Envy and evil Speaking: and to be as new borne Babes,
and to suck this same sincere Milk. Behold, how a lie does rightly and
featly convince it self. The case therefore stands very clear, for somuche
as saint Peter speaks unto all that be Christians, and the truth is
manifestly showed forth by it self, how that these maskyng Priests do
utterly lie: and that Saint Peter speaks not so much as one word of that
Priesthood of theirs, which they them selves have frames and devised, and
afterward, according to their accustomed violence and tyranny, have derived
and drawn unto them selves.

Therefore, the whole route of this counterfeit Prelacie is in deed nothing
else, then as it were a sort of Idolles and light persons: even such Prelates
and Bishops as children make among them selves at saint Nicolas tide. And as
is their Priesthood, so also are their Laws, their Sacrifices, and all their
works, directed to mere superstition and for the belly.

They therefore only are an holy and spiritual Priesthood, which are the
true Christians and are built upon this corner Stone. For since that Christ is
the Bridegroom, we are his Spouse: and the Spouse or wife has all things
that be her hoasbandes, yea even his own body. For when he gives himself
to his Spouse or wife, he can not but withal also give himself wholly unto
her, and all that he has whatsoever. Likewise the wife does give, and dedicate
herself wholly unto him. Now, is Christ an high Priest, and chief of all
Priests, anointed by God himself, who for us has offered up his own body,
which is the first and chiefest office of a Priest. Secondly, he, he prayed
for us upon the Cross, which is an other office that appertains to a
Priest. And lastly, he preached also the Gospel, and taught men both how to
know God and them selves. These thres offices therefore, he bestowed and
bequeathed unto us. And since yt he himself is thus a Priest, and we his
Brethren, all we that are Christians have not only power and authority, but
also a commandment and charge: yea it is our parts and duties, and
necessarily behooves us to set out and preach the glory of God, to pray
and make intercession one of us for an other unto GOD, and finally to offer up
our selves unto God. All these considered, let him come forth that dare or ca^
presume truly to preach or declare the Word of God, unless he be a Priest
after this manner and fashion.



Spiritual Sacrifices are not the money that men are enforced and must pase to
the Pope, neither the Sacrifices that in the old Testament were wont to be
offered, when they were commanded of all things which they had and possessed,
to offer up the tenthe. These and such like outward actions both Sacrifices
and Priesthoodes are ceased, and are now new and spiritual. Christ is a
Priest, and so also are all we: and as he offered his body, so also ought we
to offer up ours. Then are al those things performed and fulfilled, which by
the Sacrifices of the old Testament were prefigured and signified, after
whatsoever manners they were done. And to knit up all in a word, all these
things are nothing else, but to preach and embrace the Gospel.

He that preaches this, and in his heart embraces the same, he it is that
does and perfecteth al these things: kills the Calfe, to wit, the motions
and concupiscences of the flesh, and crucifieth the old Ada^. For that same
brute Beast that is in our flesh and blood, must by the Gospel be slain:
which is as much to say, as that we must be offered and killed as a
crucified sacrifice. Then (I say) is the office of a Priest by us duly and
rightly executed, when we sacrifice unto God, this fame pernicious, naughty,
sloughfull and old Ass of our flesh. If the world do it not, we our selves
must needs do it. For abolished and killed must all that be, whatsoever it is
that we have of the old Adam, as before out of the first Chapter we heard more
at large. And this is that only sacrifice, which is pleasing and acceptable
unto GOD. Hereby now, may we clearly see, how far wide from truth, those
doltishe and blind guides of the blind have drawn us, and how shamefullie
they have hitherto mistaken this place.

But here now, may a question arise: If the case to stand, that we be all of
us Priests, and that all have power and authority to preach, what shall we
then say? Shall there be no difference among men? Must women also execute the
parts of Priests? I answer, that in the new Testament it was utterly
unmeet that any Priest should have a shaven Croune, not for that the thing of
it self is evil, (sithe^ a man may if he will have al his body shaven) but
least, there should be any difference at all between them and any other of
the common sort of the Christians, which thing in deed our faith can not
suffer: so that those which be now called Priests, are no otherwise in that
respect, then others of the people who^ their all the Laity. Only this they
used to appoinct some, unto whom being elected and chosen by the Church or
Congregation, the office and charge of preaching was committed. And therefore,
there is none other difference among Christians, but only in respect of
Office, unto which a man is by the Church lawfully to be called. Before God
there is no difference at all. For therefore are some chosen and selected out of
the Church, to the intent that in the name and behalf of the whole
Congregation, they may bear and execute that office and function: which
office (nevertheless) all have: and not, that one should have more power
(absolutely) then the rest. Therefore ought no man to intrude himself and take
upon him to preach to the Congregation, but it behooves, that he be chosen by
the Church, and be thereto appoints to and (...) admitted: whom again, upon
just occasion the same Church may displace. Now, these shauelyng Priests
have erected and (...) among themselves a certain proper state and condition,
as though they were so appoincted and constituted by GOD by means whereof they
have gotten here such large privileges, that now adays even among us our
selves here in the midst of Christendom there is more diversity and greater
difference, then is between us and the Turks. When thou will consider and
look into the^ that bear the name of Christians, thou ought not to make of
them any respect or difference: as that thou should say, this is a man and
that is a woman: this is the master and that is the servant: this is a young
man and that is an old man, as saint Paul says to the Gala. Chap. iij. For
they are all one, and a spiritual people: and therefore they are all Priests
together, and all both may and ought to show forth the Word of God. Saving
that, in the Church, women ought not to speak, but to refer that to men to
teach and preach there, because of the commandment of God, who has
commanded that women ought to be subject to their housbandes, as Saint Paul
teaches j* Cor. xiiij. This order does God in deed permit and allow of. But
for this, he does not admit any difference of power. But in places where none
are allowed to be but women, and no men, as in Nunneries, there might a woman
well be appoincted to preach to the rest.

Therefore this is the two Priesthood, which (as we have said) consists in
these three poinctes* namely, in spiritual oblation: in praiyng for the
Church or Congregation: and in teaching and instructyng the same with the pure
Word of God. He that can do this, is a Priest: and whosoever are such, upon
them also lies the charge to preach the Word: to pray for the Congregation:
and to sacrifice themselves unto God. Forsake therefore and renounce the
opinion of those Doltes, which call the common rascal sort of Clergy men, or
Clerks (as they term them) only Priests: which kind of persons, you
evidently see to execute no other office, but to brag out their lewdness
with a shaven croune, and greasy fingers. If this shauyng and anoyntying do
make Pristes, then truly can I as well make an Ass to be a Priest, by shauyng
and clippyng of certain of his hairs, and by annointyng and beesmearing his
hoofes.

Last of all, saint Peter wisseth us to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ. Now, if Christ be that corner Stone upon
whom we are builded, it must needs be, that all our cogitations to Godward,
ought to be furthered, administered and done by and through him alone, as has
before been sufficiently declared. For God (although I should pine away and
consinne my self even to death) would never a whit regard or respect my death:
but he respects and regards Christ, by whom it comes to pass, that my
works are regarded and had in price with God, which otherwise, he would not
accoumpt worth a rushe. Great cause therefore there is why the Scripture
terms Christ, a precious corner Stone, seeing that he communicates and
imparteth his virtue and power unto all them that by Faith are built upon him.
Therefore teaches S. Peter in this place, how Christ is that living Stone:
whereby plainly appears, what also Christ is to us. For it is a very apt
similitude, whereby we may easily understand, how and in what sort we
ought to believe in Christ.





disobedient, unto the which thing they were even ordained.





I Have told you before, how notably S. Peter has confirmed and fortified this
his Epistle with Scriptures: at which mark, all preachers generally ought to
aim and level, to wit, that they settle and ground all their speeches upon
the Word of God. So does he here in this place infer and bring four or
five places of the Scripture together. The first whereof, he has taken word
for word out of the Prophet Isaiah: to wit, that Christ is that precious
fundamental or Corner stone. Which place is the very same, that we even last
of all entreated of, and according to our ability expounded. The first and
chief place is, the Doctrine of Faith, which ought to be first set down as
the Foundation, if a man were to preach in any place where Christ aforetyme
had not been preached. For here and hence must we take our beginning, that
Christ is that Stone, upon whom Faith ought to be builded and to rest. That the
Prophet speaks not of any corporal or material Stone, it is most plainly
proved by that which next follows: He that believes in him, shall not be
ashamed. If I ought to believe in him, then it follows, that he must needs
he a Spiritual Stone. For how or why should I believe in Stones or Woodd?
Again, he must needs be the true God, for because in the first
Commandment of the first Table, we are expressly forbidden to believe in
any other thing, saving in him. Seeing therefore that such a Stone is couched
and said in the foundation, upon whom we ought to believe, it consequently
follows, that he the same is God. Again, he can not only be God, but he
must also be Man withal: because he is to be partaker of the building, and
not only partaker, but also the head thereof. Now, where any house or building
is set up or reared, there it behooves that one Stone be agreeable to an
other, that each one may frame and be couched and squared in the same
condition, nature and form that the other stones are. Therefore, seeing that
we ought to be builded upon Christ, it must needs be that he be like
unto us, and altogether of the same nature that other stones are of, which are
builded and laid upon him, that is to say, very perfect, and true Man as we
are.

After this sort, in plain and common words the Scripture expresses such
high Mysteries and weighty matters: to wit, the Sum of our Faith: and in
such short and brief sentences comprehends more then by any mortal man can
possibly by uttered.

What Buildyng or edification is, we have also declared, to wit, It is that
Faith, by which we are stayed and builte upon Christ, reposyng our whole
trust and confidence in him, by which means we be come like unto him: and
this must therefore so be, that the whole dividing may consist of all his
parts aptly agreing together, and mutually joined and framed one into an
other. For it is of necessity, that all the other Stones must be placed and
couched orderly, according to this first fou^damentall Stone. And this is
Charity, the fruit of Faith.

But why does the Prophet call him, a Fundamental Stone? Truly for none
other cause, but that, as nothing can be builded, unless the foundation Stone
be first said (for except all the other Stones test and state upon that
Stone, they can not stand) so must we lean and stare upon Christ, and
acknowledge him as our foundation. From whom deyng our state and Buttre^^e, we
receiu^ all benefits. For we do not support and bear him, but he us: and
upon him, lies Sin, Death, Hell, and all that we have (...) that, being thus
supported by him, nothing is able any whit to hurt us. For so long as we rest
and stay upon him, as natural stones do upon their foundation, and put our
trust in him, we must need be where he is.

Furthermore, the Prophet also calls him, a Corner Stone. The manner of the
holy Ghost, is to conclude and speak much in few words. Now, Christ is
the Corner Stone, for that, he conjoined both Gentises and Jews, who before
were at mortal enemitie, and of them gathered together one Church: of which
matter and argument Saint Paul writes at large. The Jews gloried much,
that they had the law of God, vauntyng them selves to be the people of God, in
respect whereof they contemned the Gentiles. But when Christ came, he took
away these glorious boastes of the Jews, by calling the Gentiles also unto
God. Therefore of both of us, the Jews (I mean) and the Gentiles he has
made one people, by Faith: and has so bountifully dealt with us, that both
of us can not but needs confess, that of our selves we have no goodness at
all, but that we be all Sinners, and that both of us jointly together, ought
to look for our righteousness and for heaven, not elsewhere, but from him
alone: and that we being the Gentiles, have our assurance of Faith, that
Christ is come for our avail, help, relief, and succor, as well as for the
Jews. And therefore is he the Corner Stone, for that he has joined together
these two walls, knittyng them fast one to an other, to wit, the Jews
and the Gentiles, that thereby we might be made one buildyng and one house.

Last of all the Prophet thus concludes, He that believes in him, shall
never be ashamed. In that, the Prophet says, that they shall not be
ashamed, which believe in Christ, he plainly shows unto us, what God has in
his own counsel decreed, namely, that the whole world, shall one day be
confounded and ashamed: But yet that he will deliver some out of that company
and number, so that none shall be able to avoid and escape that confusion,
saving only such as shall firmly believe in Christ. In this sort does
Christ also him self, expound and interpret these things in the last
Chapter of Mark, where he says thus, He that shall believe and is Baptized,
shall be saved, but he that will not believe, shall be damned. In which
words soothly he alluded unto this Prophet. And therefore very well to this
purpose spoke S. Peter before in his first Chapter, where he said, That the
Prophets have enquired of the time and searched of the salvation, and
Prophesied of the grace that should come unto us. And after this manner now
ought Christ to be preached, that it is he which has rid and delivered us
from this confusion and shame, whereunto we did al lie open and were
endau^gered.

Let these stout Champions, and braggyng mainteiners of Freewill, and of any
ableness and power in man, come forth and answer this place if they can. When
soever thou art minded at once and with one reason, utterly to overthrow all
human works, all human doctrines, and all whatsoever else can, or may
proceed from man, this one place shall abundantly furnishe thee with
sufficient matter to confute the same, that they shall not be able to stand,
but to fall down even like dry leaves from a Tree.

We conclude therefore, that whatsoever does not stay and leave upon this
Stone, the same to be in a desperate and forlorn case. This quite debarreth
thee from attributyng any thing at all, unto thine own works. The holy
Ghost and Divine Majesty speaks in such familier phrases, that any man
may perceive the same and again, utters all so mightily, that nothing is
able to stand against it. Who therefore dare oppose himself, or again say
this? Naie, who is he that will not therewith be daunted and terrified? God
therefore requires at our hands, that we should utterly distrust our own
selves, and rely only and wholly upon his goodness, being builded upon that
foundation, which no creature can be able to overthrow, or cast down: which
is as much to say, as that no man should trust to his own righteousness,
but depend and stay upon the righteousness of Christ, and the benefits
that he has purchased for him. But what is it, to stay, depend, and rely
upon his righteousness? It is nothing else, but that I should altogether
despair of all help in my self, and enter into this cogitation: all
righteousness, all truth, and all whatsoever is mine, must needs quail, and
be renounced: And I am wholly to put my trust in this, that the
Righteousness, Truth, and Life of Christ, and all his goodness and
benefits, which I doubt not but are frankly, and freely given unto me, shall
continue for ever. The foundation is already laid, wherein I firmly stand:
And sure I am that whatsoever is not stayed on it, can not but altogether fall
down. But he that leans upon this foundation, shall not only not be
confounded and ashamed, but shall for ever stand so fast, that no power
shall be able ever to hurt him. Therefore must Christ not only be a Stone, but a
Stone of foundation: which thing ought to make us cheerful and bold. For it
is God that has spoken it, who can not lie.

Finally this Stone serves not for it self, but suffers it self to be
trodden down, and dug so deep into the ground, that it can not be seen: but
the Stones which be couched and laid upon it, are seen. For therefore was
he given unto us, that we should receive gifts of him, that we should rest
our selves upon him, stay on him, and steadfastly believe that whatsoever he
is, the same to be wholly ours: And whatsoever he can do, the same makes to
our salvation, in so much that I dare boldly say, They are mine own proper
Goods, and my Treasure, whereupon my Conscience is firmly stayed, and
whereto I steadfastly trust.





THis most excellent and precious Stone, is unto some precious and most
highly regarded: Again, unto no few, it is not precious at all, but rather a
Stone of Offense, and a Stone whereat many do stumble. And how comes this
gear to pass? Forsooth, the Scripture speaks of the same, in two sorts:
namely, there be some that do believe on him: And again, there be many
that do not believe on him. Now, unto them that do believe on him, he is
precious: and it can not be, but their hearts (having still their hope, trust
and confidence in him) must needs be excedyngly cheared, and made joyful.
And therefore it is, that he says: Unto you which believe on him, he is
precious: that is to say, he is of you highly esteemed. For, although he be
never so precious and excellent of himself and by himself, yet would that
without more nothing at all avail us: and therefore it behooves that he must
be precious unto us: to the end it may enriche us with many singular good
things: Like unto some precious Pearl or Gemme, which keeps and retains
not his virtue to it self, but utters and shows it forth to others: and
so totallie manifests he his whole powers and virtues, that we may now both
enjoy and possess, whatsoever the same is.

But unto them which believe not, this Stone is nothing precious, for they
disalowe and cast it away, and take offense and stumble at it* whereby it
falls out, that they repose no assurance or trust in it, and so unto them it
turns unto a greater detriment, and makes them worse: albeit the same of his
own nature is wont rather to stir up in men a more strong hope and perfect
trust. They that thus stumble, are not only such as are chained and clogged
in those gross and manifest sins: but such hypocrites rather which hear
themselves bold upon their vizured sanctimonie and fained holiness, which
trust unto their own Freewill, to their own Works and their own
Righteousness. These fellows can not choose but stu^ble and be offended at
this Stone* Here now does God definitiuely set it down, that they which come
without works, must come by Faith only, for their righteousness: and that
they which come otherwise then by Faith, shall never speed of their purpose:
because they go about (as saint Peter says Romans x.) To stablishe their
salvation by their own righteousness. And therefore says Saint Peter here,
That he is made the Stone which the Builders disalowed and refused: and here he
conferreth certain places of the Scripture together, eftsoons cityng that
text out of the 118. Psalm: whereunto he before alluded: The Stone which the
Builders refused, is the head of the Corner. Who these builders be, we have
before sufficiently declared: namely, they that teach and preach the Law, and
go about to justify men by their Works. These Iusticiaries agree as well with
Christ, as Winter with So^mer, and therefore it must necessarily follow, that
these? Meritemongers be even they, that reject and refuse this Stone.

He further brings in an other place out of Esaias Chap. viij wherein the
Prophet foretells that the same thing should come to pass, which saint
Peter here in this place tells is come to pass already, and is daily done
and put in practice. His words are these: Sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and
let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be to you as a
Sanctuary: but a stumblyng stone, and as a Rock to fall upon, to both the
houses of Israel. The meaning of the Prophet is as though he should say: The
Lord shall be unto you a Sanctification, that is, he ought to be sanctified in
your hearts: other Sanctification you need none, neither is there any other
thing required of you, but that you believe in him. To all others, he shall be
a Stone of offense and stumblyng.

And what is the sense and meaning of hese words, Offense and Stumbling?
Truly this: when Christ is preached, and that thou hear these words,
Behold, he is the Stone that is laid for a foundation: then art thou utterly
to despair, distrust and renounce al help in thy self, and to condemn and
accoumpt as detestable, all thine own works and all thine own
Righteousness: and only to repose thy confidence upon him, firmly beleuyng
that Christ's righteousness is thine: At these and such like words these
fellows stand aghast, are offended, and become worse then before. What (say
they) dare thou auouche and say that Virginity, Single life, Massing and
such like, are nothing worth? Thou speak thus through the very instinct of
the Devil. For nothing but mere good deeds are accepted before GOD. Yea they
are not (as they think) without some strong places of Scripture, for the
maintenance of their assertion: having still in their mouths, that God has
commanded us to do good Works. Therefore when we reject the same,
straightwaies we hear at their hands, Heretic, Heretic, to the Fire with
him, to the Fire with him. And thus they can not abide this Stone, they
violently rushe and push at it, and do all they can to pull it down, and are
therein themselves so crushed and bruised, that by the same very Stone they are
utterly dashed in pieces. Even as in the xxj. of Mathewes Gospel, Christ
himself says: Have you not read in the Scriptures, The Stone which the
Builders refused, the same is made the head of the Corner? And anon after it
follows: Whosoever shall fall on this Stone, he shall be broken, but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. Take heed therefore
what ye do, it is no game nor plaiyng matter that is spoken concerning this
Stone. It is laid and shall for ever remain in his place: he that will rushe
and bruise himself upon it, can not better escape but be dashed in pieces and
ground into powder.

This is the stumblyng and offense taking at this Stone, whereof the Scriptures
speak much. Therefore the Jews even to this day do stumble at this Stone,
and still will continue till the end of the world: for then shall this Stone
fall upon all Infidelles and faithless Miscreauntes, and grind them utterly
to powder. And thus it comes to pass, that Christ (albeit he be an elect
and precious Stone) is called without any fault of his own, a Stone of Offense
and Stumblyng. And as the Jews did, so also do we and that continually. For
as they greatly boasted of the name of GOD, and vaunted themselves to be the
peculier people of God: even so fares it now with us: for under the pretext of
Christ, and of the Church of Christ, we renounce and renye the name of
Christ, and flatly refuse this precious Stone. He came into the world among
them, to the intent they should reject and renounce their own works which
they not abiding, rejected and refused him.



WHen it is said that their works are not good, nor any thing accoumpted of
with God, they neither can, neither will abide the hearing thereof, Now, God
has put Christ for a foundation, upon whom they ought to be laid and placed,
and by him attain al their Salvation. For to the end that they should be
founded and laid upon him, he has caused him by preaching of the Gospel to
be notified, and declared unto the whole World. Him will not they receive but
reject, and so persiste in their own fleshly sense and works. For if they
could abide themselves to be placed and couched upon Christ, their high pomp,
dignity, wealth and power would soon quail, and be abated.



HEre has he dignified them that be Christians, with their true titles: and
this place has he taken out of the vij. of Deuter. Where it is thus said to
the Jews: Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy GOD
has chosen thee to be a precious people unto himself, above all people that
are upon the Earth. And in the xix. of Exodus he says. Ye shall be my cheef
treasure above all people ye shall be unto me also a kingdom of Priests and an
holy Nation. Here thou see of whom Peter speaks. As I said before, so say
I still, that we must acquaint our selves so to speak of Priests, as the
Scripture speaks of them. Let it not trouble thee, who they be that the
vulgar and common sort terms Priests. Let every man in Gods name, term
them as he list, but cleave thou fast unto the word of God, and whomsoever
thou see by him* to be termed and called Priest, let the same also be
likewise termed and called by thee. We give good leave to the greasy Rabble of
those (whom the Bisshoppes and Pope do consecrate and anoint) to term them
selves Priests, or by what other name they will, so that they call not
themselves the Priests of God. For they are not able by one word out of the
Scriptures to approve them selves so. But when they will stiffely maintain,
that this place also is to be understood, as spoken of them: answer thou unto
them, as before I have taught thee, and ask them, to whom Saint Peter here
speaks, and thou shalt quickly see them lay them selves open unto shame
and impudency. For it is most manifest and plain, that he speaks to all
the people of Christ, and the whole Congregation of Christians, when as he
says, You are a chosen generation, and an holy people. Again, hitherto he
has spoken of none other persons, their of them that are builte upon that
Corner stone, and do believe. And therefore it evidently and certainly
follows, that he which does believe, is no Priest. Again, when as they
shall say, that these words are so to be taken, as the ancient Fathers
have interpreted and expounded the^. Thereunto make thou this answer: Let
the Fathers or any other whatsoever, interpret what they will: but saint
Peter does thus speak unto me, who has a far better testimony and
warrant from God, then they have: and also is elder then they, and therefore I
will subscribe and yield unto him. Finally, this place needs no
interpretation at all, s^^^e it in such plain terms and words, speaks
of them that believe. Now, who is he that sees not, how monstruously these
Polleshorne greasy Popelynges err, and fail in the Article of Faith. And
therefore we entry not the name that they call themselves by, whether it be
Priests or otherwise. For we make not any care, what, and how they call them
selves, but herein stands the question, whether in the Scriptures they be
called Priests, and whether God do so name and call the^. There may some be
chosen and appoincted by the Church, to execute the charge and office of
Ministers of the Word: to feed the Congregation by preaching, and to
administer the Sacraments: and yet nevertheless we are all Priests, as many
of us as are Christians. For seeing that we be founded and couched upon that
Stone, which is the highest Priest before GOD: we also must needs be
Priests also, for that whatsoever he has, we have, and the same is ours.

Wherefore I would wish that this word Priest, as well as this name
Christian, should be common to all. For these names, Priest, Christian, and
Baptized are all one. Now, as I can not abide, that these Popish Shauelynges
should thus presume and take upon them, only to be good Christians, or only
Baptized: So neither ought I to suffer this, that they would only have them
selves to be Priests. Although notwithstanding, they have violently haled and
pulled this word, as pertinently and properly spoken unto them, even with
the like presumption and brainlesse boldness, as they have called that only
the Church, which the Pope with his Mured Crewe has hitherto concluded and
decreed. But the Scripture teaches us an other manner of lesson. And therefore
diligently note and mark these things, to the end thou may thoroughly
discern between them whom* God calls Priests, and them that so call
them selves. For by this means, (after a long mistakyng of it) we must at
length recover and reduce this word Priest, to his right sense and proper
meaning, that it may be as common a name, as the name of Christian. For to
be a Priest, is not the name of any outward or external office, but it is
such as is exercised only toward God, and that in Spirit.

And even after the self same manner it is, that we are all indifferently
called Kings. For even as Priests, so also Kings are in this place,
Spiritual vocables or words, like as also these names are, Christian, Holy,
and Church. And even as thou do not call any man a Christian, because he
has much money and wealth, but because, he being builte upon the aforesaied
Stone, believes in Christ: So likewise art thou not therefore called Priest,
because thou haste a shaven Croune, and iettest the streates in a long Goune,
but because thou dare appear and show thy self in the sight of God, offryng
up thy self unto him: and praiyng for the whole Church: unto whom thou both
can and use to preach Christ. And after the very same manner altogether,
thou art not therefore a King, because thou wearest a Croune of gold, and
have large Dominions, and many people under thee in subjection, but because
thou art Lord of all things, yea, over Death, Sin and Hell. For thou art
as well a King, as Christ himself is a King, if so be that thou believe on him.
Now, he is not a King in such sort, as the Kings of the world are: For he
neither wears any Croune of gold, neither rides he pompouslie abroad with
any glitteryng train, and gallaunt horses. But yet nevertheless, he is the
King of all Kings, and has all Kings under his power and jurisdiction: and
to speak all at once, all things must be subject under his feet. Behold,
even so great and such a Lord art thou, if thou believe on him: for what
soever he has, the same is also thine.

Here might some peradventure obiecte thus unto me and say: Saint Peter by
this thy assertion called Christians, Kings: and yet all the world well
knows, that we are not all Kings: and therefore (say they) this place is
not to be understood, as spoken of all sorts of Christians. For he that is a
Christian, is not therevppon straightwaies the King of France, or that Priest
of Rome. But here now will I demand this question of them: whether the King
of France be a King in the sight of God or no? Which thing no man dare upon
warrant affirm.

For GOD will not Judge according to the dignity of a Croune. In Earth (in
deed) and before the world he is a King: but when Death has once seized upon
him, then shall his Kingdom cease and have an end, and then shall he
(unless he believe aright) be subject under the feet of them that truly
believe. We in this place speak of an eternal Kingdom and Priesthood: of
the which sort is every one before God, which believes: and is both a true
Priest, and a true King. Now, who is so ignoraunte that knows not, that all
the table of the greasy Shauelynges, be nothing less then Priests? And as
these aforesaied Polleshorne Shauelynges, are not therefore to be reputed
Priests before GOD, because of their crounes, so neither before God are Kings
accoumpted as Kings, because they wear Crounes. Crouned Kings and anointed
Priests are of this world, and are established and constituted by Men. The
Pope may at his holy pleasure, make as many such prollyng Priests as him
lists, to serve his turn, but let him not presume to constitute and make a
Priest, that boldly may be accoumpted for a Priest before God: for, such
does God himself make and appoinct. Therefore, in that, Saint Peter here in
this place says: You be a royal Priesthood, it is as much as if he should
say, You are Christians. If thou would know, what title, what power,
prerogative and glory, true Christians have, thou see that they be, Kings,
Priests, and a chosen people. Now, what this Priesthood is, does here
straightwaies ensue.



THis office especially appertains unto the Priest, that he should be the
Ambassador or messenger of God, and according to that Commission which he has
from God, sincerely preach and declare his Word. The virtues (says saint
Peter) that is to wit, those wonders which God has done for you, in bringyng
you out of darkness into light, your parts and office is, to preach and tell
forth: for therein chiefly consists the office of a Priest. Thus therefore
and to this end ought your preaching to tend, that one Brother should declare
and show forth unto an other, that great, and wonderful work of Gods
admirable virtue: how Christ has delivered us from Sin, Death and Hell, and
all other miseries, and has called us unto eternal life.

Hereof you ought to admonish others also, that they in like sort may attain
and come unto this Light. For unto this end ought all your driftes to be
directed: first to acknowledge and know what God has done for you: and next,
with all diligent care and study, to notify, preach and openly make known
this benefit of God toward you, and this wonderful work of his in you: and
also to draw and call all men indifferently into this Light. Where you see
any men that are as yet ignorant hereof, those ought you to instruct, and to
teach these things, in which you your selves have been enstructed and
taught: to wit, that by the virtue and power of God, they must obtain
salvation, and attain this merueilous Light.

Here thou see how saint Peter plainly says, that there is but one only
Light: wherein he makes it most apparaunt, that all our Reason (seem it never
so sharply to understand and perceive) is nothing else then mere darkness.
For albeit, that Reason be able and has the skill to coumpt, one, two, three
etc. and likewise to see, discern and know, black from white, and great
from small, and so of other external and outward things, yet is it not able
to see what Faith is. Here is it altogether blind, insomuche that if all the
wisdom of al men in the world were gathered and incorporated into one, yet
were it not able to comprehend or reach so much as unto one letter of the
wisdom of God. Wherefore, S. Peter here speaks of an other Light and that a
merueilous Light, and flatly also tells every one of us, that we grope in
darkness and utter blindness, if God do not call us into his true Light.

Experience also teaches us the same thing. For when we hear it preached,
that by our works we can not obtain any thing at Gods hands, and therefore
that we have need of a Mediator, to make intercession unto God for us, and to
reconcile us unto him: here (doubtless) must reason needs confess, that of
it self it was never able to understand and know these things, and therefore
had need of an other Light and an other knowledge, to teach it to understand
the same. Therefore whatsoever is not the Word of God and Faith, the same is
nothing else then blind darkness. For without these two (the Word of God (I
mean) and Faith) Reason iumbleth at randon, and groapeth after his way like
a blind man in the dark, catchyng hold first of one thing and then of an
other, and never knows what it should do. But when these things are told
to the great learned and wise men of this world, they can not abide to hear
it, they stamp and stare, they fret, fume and merueilously rage at it. And
therefore, S. Peter shows himself here, an Apostle of a singular undaunted
boldness, in that, he dared to call that Darkness, which the whole world in
a manner does even generally almost, adore and reverence as Light.

Now, therefore we see that the chiefest and especiallest office of all
others, appertainyng unto us Christians, is, that we should show forth and
declare the virtues and wonderful works of our God. These Virtues and notable
works, by God for us done, are those which somewhat before we have spoken of:
namely, how that Christ by the virtue of God has swallowed up Death, devoured
Hell, consumed Sin, and placed us into an eternal life. These Virtues are so
great and wonderful, that no man is able to comprehend the same, much less
to perform them. And therefore it is to little purpose, that some in this
point object and preach to us Christians, the doctrines of men: they ought
rather to preach unto us this Virtue, which ouercometh both Devil, Sin and
Death. And here again, alludeth saint Peter to sundry places of the sacred
Scripture, as in all the rest of his Epistle almost, he still conioyneth and
knitteth one place of Scripture to confirm and prove an other. For of this,
do all the Prophets foretell and prophecy, that it should come to pass,
that all men every where should worship and preach forth the name and glory
of God, and the power of his mighty arm: and that he should work such a
work, whereof the whole world should both speak and make report. Of this,
the Prophets are euerywhere very plentiful: and to these places does S.
Peter here allude. They have also spoken much of Light and of Darkness, and
that it is necessary for us to be illumined with the Light of God: whereby
(undoubtedly) they showed and signified, that all human Reason is nothing else
then very Darkness it self.



THis place word for word is taken out of the Prophet Osee in his ij. Chap.
and is cited also by saint Paul in the ix. to the Romans. I will call them
my people which were not my people. Al which saiyngs belong to this place. God
peculierly choose the people of Israel, and bestowed on them great honor: he
gave unto them many Prophets, and did for them many merueilous things:
because he had decreed, that out of this people the man Christ should be borne.

For this Childs sake, were all these things done for the^, and for this
cause, are they in the Scriptures called the people of God. Which the
Prophets more at large expounded, and foretold, that this promise of Christ
should stretche further and reach also unto the Gentiles. Therefore says S.
Peter in this place, You are now the people of God, which in time past were not
a people. And by this it evidently appears, that he wrate this Epistle unto
the Gentiles, and not unto the Jews. And hereby his meaning is to prove and
show, that the saying of the Prophet is now fulfilled, since they which once
were Idolatrous Nations and blasphemous Gentiles, and thereby no People, are
now made and become an holy nation, a peculier people, a royal Priesthood and
a Kingdom: and have all things that Christ has: so that in the mean time
they have only a steadfast belief.





Saint Peter here uses a Style somewhat differyng from the phraze of Saint
Paul. For Saint Paul's method is not after this sort, as anon we shall
hear: but every man has a several and peculier kind of speaking: as also in
the Prophets we may easily perceive and see. Hitherto has he very aptly
and orderly planted the foundation of the Christian Faith, which is his
chiefest drift: Now proceeds he to teach us, how we ought to demean and
behave our selves generally toward all Men. And this is truly the very
right course and order of true preaching. Namely, first to set out the
dignity, excellency and effect of Faith: how it is to be known, how and what
it works, what virtue, strength, efficacy, and nature it has, how it
yields and brings unto us all things even abundantly, which are
appertinent and needful to Godliness or Salvation: how that no good Work can
be done by any man, but only by Faith, and finally how that by this faith,
all that which God has, is made ours. If God now have thus dealt with us, and
has given and bestowed all his rich gifes upon us, it follows, that he
himself also is ours: insomuche that by Faith, we are possessed of all his
goodness, whereby we can lack nothing. What a great charge therefore lies
there now upon us, to do in lieu of this so surpassyng bounty? Shall we give
our selves to idleness? God forbid. It were best (in deed) even straight
ways to dye, that we might presently have the fruition and possession of all
these his gracious goodness. But so long as we live here, it is our parts
and duties, so to deal and so to show our selves in every respect toward
our neighbors, as God has dealt and showed himself toward us. Therefore it
is Faith only that saves us: and Love requires of us, that we should serve
our neighbors and be careful over them. For that which Faith receives
from God, Love bestows upon our neighbor. That which was spoken in one word,
may now largely be expounded and declared in many, as S. Peter does in this
place. The meaning therefore of the Apostle where he says, Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, is this: You that are now one with
Christ, are grown (as it were) into one mass or lump with him, insomuche
that his goodness is yours, and your hurtes be his hurtes: who as he is
careful both for you and for all such things as may happa^ unto you, so
also ought you to imitate herein this your so loving a Savior, and so to frame
and direct your lives, that you may seem nothing less then to be Citizens
of this World, since you be adopted and enfraunchised Citizens in heaven, where
al good things are laid up for you. That if you should once loose all these
transitory and momentanie goods of the world: yet having still Christ, who
is infinitely more worth then all these brittle and temporal trash, you shall
receive and sustain no damage, no loss, no hinderaunce at all.

The Devil is Prince of this World, and governs the same: and his Citezens
are the men of the World: Therefore seeing that you are not of this World, so
use and behave your selves, as Strangers and Passingers do in their Inn:
who having not there their full wealth and Substance, make shifte to buy for
their money only such things as be needful and necessary, and
straightwaies address themselves forward to the dispatch of their journey. So
also we, unto whom this life is nothing then a certain passage to an other
place, (for here we have no abidyng place, but must pass to an other) ought
not to rake unto our selves, nor usurp more of these worldly pelf and
gooddes, then may competentlie supply our wantes for meat, drink and
raimente. All other things must be so rekoned and accoumpted of, as that
they may not be any hindrance or impechement, unto that speedy journey
which we make into an other Country. In Heaven we are Citezens, on Earth
we are but Pilgrims and Strangers.



I Will not here define, whether in this place S. Peter speak of an outward
Incontinencie or no: or whether he do (as Saint Paul's order is) call all
those things Fleshly, which a man yet living in this body and carnal life,
commits and does without Faith. But I am of opinion that S. Peter in this
place, uses an other manner of reason. Neither do I think that he takes this
word Soul, in such a sense, as Saint Paul does, who takes it for
Spirit: But that he somewhat more deeply (as I suppose) considered the
propriety of the Greek. Howebeit, it is not greatly material, whether a man
understand this place, as meant of all carnal affections, or else only of an
external and outward intemperaunce.

This profitable lesson (notwithstanding) is hereby taught us, that no man in
this life can be perfectly holy, and thoroughly pure from sins. This place
the School men have grossly mistaken, rouyng far wide from the true meaning
thereof. For they think it to be only spoken and meant of them that be
Sinners: As though the holy ones were clear without all evil lusts, and
carnal affections.

But he that will profitablie search and read the Scriptures, must with
judgment and discretion weigh and thoroughly sifte, the nature, sense, and
signification of every word: for the Prophets use sometimes so to speak of
them that be holy, as that they seem to pronounce them pure, and altogether
clear from all manner of Sins: Again, sometimes they so speak of them, as
that they confess them yet to have evil affections, corrupt motions, and to
fight against Sin.

This diversity and variety, that in apparaunce seems to be in them,
marueilouslie grauelleth and offends these great Rabbines, and wonderfully
blinds their Senses from rightly understanding the true meaning of the
Scriptures. Thus therefore stay thou thy self, and for thy sure conceiuyng of
this and such like places, be at this resolution. Thou ought to consider
Christians, after two sorts, namely, according to their inward and hidden
life, (to wit, Faith): and also according to their outward and open life,
that is to say, the Flesh. Now, if thou consider and respect a Christian,
according to Faith, he is all pure, and without all filthe and uncleanness:
but after the flesh, he is not so.

For the word of GOD, can abide no unclean thing, to rest in that heart
where it is thoroughly and faithfully received: so that the heart which fast
cleaves unto the Word, can not but thereby be thoroughly purged, and
entirely cleansed. Therefore in faith all things are perfect, according to
that saying before, wherein we are said to he Kings, Priests, and the
peculier People of GOD. But for so much as we having Faith, are as yet
cladde in this flesh, and dwell on this Earth, it can not be but that now and
then we feel within our selves, sundry corrupt and Earthly affections, as
Impacience, fear of Death, etc. And these be the diseases remainyng yet of
the old Manne: For Faith has not yet here raught to her perfection, nor
gotten a full power over the flesh.

This may thou plainly and evidently understand by the Parable, Luke. x.
of a certain man, Who going down from Jerusalem to Hiericho, fell among
Thieves, who robbed him of his raimente, and wounded him very sore and
departing left him half dead: on whom in the end a certain Samaritane took
compassion, bound up his wounds, powered in Oil and Wine, set him on his own
beast, and brought him to an Inn, and made provision for him. Here thou
see, that this man was cared for, and his cure provided for, anon after he
was wounded: and now being out of danger of Death, was left sick in deed,
but not unto Death, howbeeit he was not as yet fully healed and cured. His
life is preserved, and he left alive, but yet is he not come to his perfect
health, he is left in the charge of the Phisitious to be cured and dressed
afterward. Even so we that believe, have Christ all and entire, and are
assured of eternal life: but our perfect and consummate health we have not
yet obtained: for some relics of the old Adam remains yet still within us.

To the same purpose, serves that other Parable, mentioned by Christ Matthew.
xiij. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto Leaven, which a woman takes and
hides in three Peckes of Meal, till all be leauened. For when the Meal is
begone to be kneaded, the Leaven is all there, but it has not yet sowred and
pierced the whole lump of Dowe, the mixture is not yet fully perfected: and
yet the Meal is therein still, till it be fully Leauened, and more Leaven
may not be put unto it. So also, whatsoever thou ought to have, thou haste
it already by Faith, whereby thou haste taken hold of the Word and embraced
it: but it has not yet thoroughly soaked and pierced into thee, and therefore
it needs must be so long in woorkyng, until thou be wholly renewed. And in
this sort, ought thou to discern and interpret the Scripture: And not so
to Iumble and mangle the textes thereof, as do the Papists. Therefore when
in the Scriptures thou read of holy meime, that are said to be perfect:
thou must thus understand it, that according to Faith they were altogether
pure and without sin: But all the rest was flesh, and therefore could not
be entierly clean. Whereupon, Christians in their prayers, desire to be
dissolved and rid of this body or flesh, that they may wholly attain to
an entire purity. They that other wise teach, neither have any feelyng, nor
yet any sound taste of the same. And thereupon it comes to pass, that they
speak even as they think within themselves, and as they can comprehend by
their own reason, and therefore they can not choose but be deceived. This
has been a stumblyng block to many, yea, of them that have been accoumpted
worthy and famous for their holiness and sanctimonie, and who have taught and
written very much. Origene speaks not one word hereof in his Books.
Hierome never understood the^. Augustine also would have had small knowledge
thereof, if he had not so much buckled with the Pelagians. Some, when they
speak of holy men, they so much extol and dignifie them, as though either
they had been of some higher degree and excellency then other Christians: or
else as though they had had no feelyng of this Flesh: or as though they had not
complained thereof, as well and as much as we. Therefore says Saint Peter:
You are all clean, and have your full righteousness, there now remains
nothing for you, but yt you stoutly fight against these wicked and naughty
affections. And so also speaks Christ, John xiij. He that is washed, needs
not, saving only to wash his feet. For it is not enough, that the head and
hands be clean: and therefore albeeit he say, that they are all clean, yet
nevertheless he requires them to wash their feet.

But what meaning has Saint Peter, in saying Abstain ye from fleshly
lusts, which fight against the Soul? Forsoothe, even this. Think not that
your life is a game or a sportyng pastyme, or that you may Iulle your selves
in ease, without taking any further care. Your sin is (in deed) taken away
by Faith: But yet nevertheless ye carry flesh still about with you: which
flesh is given to many outrageous lusts and disordered affections: and
therefore ye must endeavor and apply your selves to suppress, ful^ue and get
the maistrie over it. Here have you need of a great strength, that ye may be
able to vnquishe and extinguish your concupiscence: for the stronger and
greater that our Faith is, the fiercer and sharper shall your assaults and
temptations be. It behooves you therefore, to stand stoutly on your guard,
and to be well furnished and armed; and to acquaint your selves to fight still
without intermissions: For, your assaults, will be grievous and terrible, and
will rushe upon you by lumpes and heaps, and nothing will be left
unattempted, to carry you away captive.

Hereupon also it is, that Saint Paul Roma, vii says I delight in the Law
of God, concerning the inner Man: but I see an other Law in my members,
rebellyng against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive, unto the Law
of sin which is in my members. As though he would say: I resist what I
may: but mine Enemy will never suffer me to rest be can never be thoroughly
and wholly overcome. Therefore willyngly would I be delivered from it, but it
can not be: My wishe^ therein avails nothing. What shall I then do? O
wretch that I am (says he) who shall deliver me from the body of this sin?
After the same manner, cry all ye holy. But them that are without Faith, the
Devil leads, and is very glad to see continue still in their Sins, to
frequent and take delight in their looseness, and not to care a whit, for
entering into conflict or co^bate against their Iniquities. As touching such
persons, the Devil thinks thus: well, I have these faithless people through
infidelity, now my captives and Bondstaues: I will so suffer them to proceed
and continue in their own imaginations and counsaites, that they shall not
commit any gross or notorious Sin, neither will I assault them with any
vehemente temptation: and by th^^ means, I shall counyngly hide their old
festered botch, and correctly s^roude their old natural, and secretly luckyng
Adam. Now, they that believe, have ever temptation in great abundaunce, and
never are free from continual conflict. They that are without Faith either
feel not temptations at all, or else they willyngly yield unto them, breakyng
out into outrageous wickedness, and yeldyng them selves to the service of
their own intemperate affections. But as soon as the Spirits and Faith have
seized upon the heart man straight ways seems to himself so weak, so frail,
and so unable, that he fears himself not to be able to quench the least
cogitation and spark of Temptation that can be: He feeth in himself nothing
but Sin, from the croune of his head, to the soale of his Foot. For, before
he walked as he list, but now since the Spirit has appeared and shined,
which seeks to cleanse and purify him, then there quickly arises a
skirmishe. The Devil, the Flesh, and the World, bid battle all at once
unto Faith. And of this do all the Prophets, in many and sundry places of
the Scriptures complain. And therefore the meaning of saint Peter is, that
this couflicte is not made by Sinners, but by Believers only. Again, it
conforteth, in that it has in it an hope, to expel and banishe all
concupiscence, if a man do but resist and strive against it. If thou be
accumbred with naughty cogitations and thoughts, yet be not there with
dismayed, neither despair for the same, but beware at any hand that they
carry thee not captive. The remedy which our Teachers and Doctors have
hitherto taught us, wherewith to prevent and mete with this inconuenence is:
that a Man afflict and punish himself so long, till he foete no more ill
thoughts within him: which devise many Do^^she, naie rather brainlesse
persons have and do use to put in practice. But learn thou this lesson: that
thou being a Christian, shall (doubtless) feel in thy flesh diverse inordina^e
lusts, and wicked motions For, when thou are once thoroughly settled in Fhithe,
thou shall be assured to be assaulted with a thousand wilful cogitations, and
a thousand temptations, more then thou were before. But stand thou stouttly to
thy ankerhol^^ and play the man: suffer not thy self to be therewith rapri^^,
but straight ways ^^ie but against their somm^n^e, and reply unto them with
a flat denial. For the case herein it stands* as it does between as
chur^she waiward housebande, and an unquiet scouldyng wife: who are ever
iarryng and murmuryng, one against the other, so that whatsoever likes the
one, disliketh the other.

For thus is a sure note of true Christianisme, when thou see thy self never
to live in quiet: neither must thou think to be so exempted and privileged,
as that thou should not feel Siunes within thee: for feel them surely thou
shalt: But yet thou must have such a feeling of the^, as that thou do not
withal yield thy consent unto them. And in this respect thou must both fast,
pray and labor, that thou may the better extinguishe and subdue thy
concupiscences. And therefore think nothing less, then that thou can be so
holy and perfect, as these aforesaied doatying Doctors surmize, to wicte,
such a one, as is without any feelyng of Sin within him. For so long as we
be cladd with this flesh and this blood, so long remains this Sin within
us. And therefore we must ever and continually strive and resist. Who soever
has not this feelyng in himself, that man in vain may boaste himself to be a
Christian.

They hitherto have taught us, that whosoever is once professed a Monk, is
clear and free from all Sins, and that, such an one has no need to fight
and strive against Sins. Also they affirm, yt Baptism does so, ent^erly
cleanse and wash away all Sins, that no remnaunt thereof at all remains,
and thereupon have thought thus with them selves: well, now shall I be sure to
enjoy rest and quietness. The Devil straight ways chargyng upon them,
carried them hedlong into far worse then before they were. Learn therefore
here, how the case in truth stands. When thou confessest thy Sins, and
crauest mercy for the same, thou must think with thy self so to deal, as
Soldiers are wont: who a little before the Battle, raunge themselves into
order and Martial arrayes but when the time comes that the matter is to be
tried by dent of sword and handyblowes, then (as though all that had been done
before, had been but preludes and sportinges) they buckle themselves to their
tools, draw their Blades, and coragiously slashe at the face of the enemy:
and so long as the conflict endures, are most diligently busied in gettyng
the conquest over the Enemy. Even so like wise and after the same manner, after
thou art Baptized, thou must carefully and warily look to thy self, and
promise not to thy self somuche as one hours truce or respite from the Devil
and Sin, or that thou should it live in any security: naie rather think
that now from hence forth thou shall never be at any rest. And therefore the
life of a Christian is nothing else but a Battle or a warfare, as the
Scripture says: and therefore the Lord our God is called the Lord God of
Sabbath, that is, of Hosts: and in other places, he is named, the Lord
mighty in Battle. And by this he declares, what a mighty Lord he is,
which makes his people wage battle, and to stand ever pressed in warlike
array and readiness, whenever the Trumpet shall sound: to the end, they
should still thus consider and think with themselves: stand here, stop
there: strike here, undermine there etc. So that here is nothing but a
certain perpetual combat, wherein all things must be assaied, and nothing
that thou art able to do, be left unattempted, but that thou may with the
Word of God, overthrow and discomforte the Devil. So long therefore as thou
live here, thou must manfully resist, and incessantly pray unto God, and
utterly despair of all human power or worldly strength.



HEre we may see what a precise and exquisite order S. Peter observes.
Hitherto he taught us, what we should do, to quench and subdue the flesh
with all the lusts and concupiscences thereof. Now he yields a cause, why
we ought so to do. Wherefore then must I bridle my flesh? Is it because I
should thereby obtain Salvation? No: but it is, to the end I may have an
honest conversation before the World. Neither are we made just through our
honest conversation, but we must first be just and believe, before we
begin any honest and good conversation. And I am bound to show forth an
honest conversation, not for mine own sake and commodity, but that the
Gentiles may thereby be drawn and provoked to amendment, and (as it were)
be even thereby won and allured to come unto Christ. Which is a work of
true love in deed: for we know, how that they both slander, rail and
backbite us, and accoumpt of us no better then of very leude and naughty
persons: and therefore it stands us upon, to behave our selves so orderly,
honestly and decently in our conversation, that they being enforced and
overcome by the truth, may report and say: Surely these fellows can not be
worthily charged with any notorious wickedness.

We read, that when the Emperors persecuted the Christians, they could burden
them with no odious crime, nor lay any other thing to their charge, but only
this, that they worshipped Christ and honored him as a God, as may appear by
certain letters thereof written by Pliny unto Traiane then Emperor: wherein
he specifieth that he could perceive no harm nor ill behavior in the
Christians, saving only that every morning before daylight, they assembled
together and song Psalms unto their God Christ, and that they did eat
together, (to wit) the holy Communion or Euchariste: But from any other
misdemeanors, he confesses them to be clear and vnaccusable. And therefore
(says saint Peter here in this place) you must patiently bear, though they
rail and backbite you as evil doers: but you therefore so much the rather
ought narowlie to look to your conversation, and so vnblameablie to live, that
ye give cause of offense to none. And by this means shall you at length, bring
them (thus seeing your honest behavior) to abandon their former naughty life,
and frame themselves to a better.



YOu ought so long to suffer the^ to slander and speak evil of you, until
the truth of all things burst for the and come to light: when they shall
openly behold the sincerity of all your dealinges, and shall plainly see that
they have slaundered you, and shall thereby begin to glorify God in you.











AFter this sort proceeds saint Peter in his orderly method of teaching us,
how and what manner of persons we ought to show our selves in each respect.
Hitherto he has reasoned in a generality, how in every several condition of
life, we should frame our selves and direct our conuersations: now he
instructs and teaches us, how we should behave our selves toward the
civil Magistrate. For, seeing he has already before declared, first what we
are to do to God: Secondly, how we are to deal with our selves, that is to
say, our Flesh: now lastly he also teaches us what we are to do and
perform to all other Men in general. This therefore is his meaning: First of
all, when you have performed these universal and general duties, which I
have before laid down unto you, to wit, of walkyng in true Faith toward God,
and of bridelyng and chastising your Body, for waxyng too wanton and
lascivious: the next and chiefest poinct, which I will and require you
unfeignedly and heartily to perform, is this, that you be obedient unto the
Magistrate, and unto the Laws set down by him. For, as the Laws and Statutes
by GOD enacted, are of us in all humbleness and reverence by faith to be
obeyed: so also there be certain human and worldly Ordinances and decrees
(consistyng in Laws and Proclamations) for the quiet and politic governance
of the Common wealth: unto which Statutes we also ought to be obedient.





THE obedience which we in duty owe unto the civil Magistrate, is not
(says saint Peter) for their own sakes, but for Gods sake whose children we
be. Which obedience unto Magistrates we are dutifully to exhibit, and that
without hope of any merit or reward. For, whatsoever I do for Gods sake,
that ought I to do freely for his sake: insomuche that there should be nothing
which I know to be agreeable and consonant to his will, but yt I am desirous
and most willing both to allow and do the same. And why ought we to abene the
Magistrate for Gods sake? Forsooth, because it is the good will of God by him to
punish the wicked and evil doers, and to defend, protect and maintain the
good and virtuous, that thereby Concord may be established in the world:
which public peace and concord, we for our parts and abilities are bound
too further as much as we may. For, since we do not yet all believe, but
the greater moitie of the world still wa^teth Faith, therefore has God
ordained and appointed the Magistrate to bear the Sword: thereby to curb and
restrain the wicked, compellyng them (even maugre their wills) to keep
peace: least otherwise, men should devour, consume and spoil one an other.
This office (I say) of Magistracy he executes, to the intent the world may
in each part be well and quietly governed. Here we see, that if there were
none evil men, we should have no need of the Magistrate: for he is (says
saint Peter) for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. They therefore that do well and live orderly and honestly,
ought at the Magistrates hands to receive praise: and them ought the
Magistrate to commend, prefer and gracifie: that others by their example
may be provoked, drawn and allured to the like virtue and integrity: not
that thou should think to reap unto thy self any merde at Gods hands for
the same. For so says S Paul Romans xiij. Power is not to be feared for good
works, but for evil: and therefore if thou will be without fear of the
Power, do well.



IN these words saint Peter schooleth and reprehendeth those vain talkatiue
persons, that brag and think themselves sufficiently furnished, even with
the bare name and title of Christianity: and also herein he prene^teth and
answers aforehande to an objection which (perchance) they might allege,
saying: If Faith only be sufficient to a Christian; and Works do not
justify, why then and for what purpose should we need to be subject unto the
Magistrate, and pay Tribute? To this he says thus much. Although we should
receive from the^ no good or commodity at all, (yet nevertheless) we are
bound even for Gods sake, freely to perform, and willingly to yield our
obedience unto them, that the mouths of the Enemies of God (which diffame and
slander us) may be stopped, and that they may not be able to speak against
it: But be compelled to confess that we are persons harmless, dutiful
and obedient. After this sort we read that many holy men warrefared under
Heathen Princes, vanquished and subdued their Enemies, and in all things were
subject and serviceable unto them, no less then we now are bound to yield
obedience unto Christian Magistrates. Howbeit, it is now thought of some, that
we could not be Christians, if we lived in Turkey in subjection to the Turk.
Here now again, may arise an other doubt or allegation, thus: Christ has
commanded that we should not resist evil: but to him that strikes us on the
one Cheek, we should turn the other: and how then (will they say) can it
be lawful for us to strike and kill other men? I answer: This was an old
objection, which the Ethnickes in times past alleged against the Christians,
saying: that if they should live in such order, their Countries and
Commonweales would soon be brought to ruin, and be quickly ouerrunne. But
we now unto these things answer thus: It is true that Christians ought not
to resist evil, neither to revenge them selves, but rather to suffer violence
and wrong, which also is a cause why they may not be chargeable, burdenous and
troublesome to Ethnikes. But by this, the Magistrate is not inhibited the
Sword, nor judicial tryalles, for although they live so orderly that no man
has any just cause to complain upon them, because they offer wrong to no
man, but deserve well of all men, and patiently bear whatsoever is done to
them by others: yet because of false and connterfaite Christians, and them that
know not Christ, these things (the Sword and Judgment) must be in use,
that they which do hurt and wrong to others, may be punished, whereby
public tranquillity may be maintained, and the Godly may live in peace
and safety. God therefore, over and beside his word, has instituted and
appoincted this profane or civil power, to repress them, which of their own
accord will not refrain from doing and offryng harm and injury to others.

It plainly therefore appears, that God has appoincted and instituted the
Magistrate, because of them that do not believe: And that therefore Christians
which administer that function, not only may, but also ought to use the
Sword: namely, thereby to relieve their neighbors, in repellyng and punishyng
malefactors, and in defendyng and mainteinyng the peace, tranquillity, and
safety of them that be good and virtuous: and yet nevertheless the saying
of Christ stands sure, of not resistyng evil.

For although a Christian man bear the Sword, whether he be a Prince, or any
other Magistrate, yet should he never use it for himself, neither should he
therewith revenge himself for any private quarrel of his own: But must execute
his place and office for the behoof of others, and this is the work of
Christian love, with the Sword to defend the whole Commonwealthe, and not to
suffer good men unjustly to be molested and trodendoune. Christ gave and
bequeathed his doctrine to them only, that believe and have Love: And such
do show forth and express the same in their works. But seeing that the
greater part of the world believes not, neither observes this precepte and
Commandment, therefore it is most expedient to ouerrule and govern them,
not as Christians (for such they are not) but as Ethnikes and Panims: and to
stay and repress their sensual and wilful outrages: For otherwise, if they
should be suffered to run hedlong at their own pleasures, in their
disordred looseness, and lawless violence, no man should be able to live in
quietness, and safety.

Therefore, there be two sorts of Rule and Dominion in the world as there
be also men of two sorts: to wit, Christians, and not Christians.
Christians are governed by the Word of GOD, and those need not in respect of
them selves any profane Magistrate. But they that be not Christians, have
need to be under an other power and rule, namely the Sword: because they
can not abide to be obedient unto the Word of God. But if we were all
Christians, and obedient to the Gospel, we should not have any need at all
of the Sword, or any Civil power. For where there are no misseli^ers and
malefactors, what use can there be of punishment* Sith therefore it can not
be, that we should all be godly and virtuous, Christ has committed the
evil under the rule of Civil and Profane power, that they may be so
governed, as they are and ought to be governed. But the Believers he has
reserved unto himself, whom he governs with his only Word.

Therefore, a Christian Empire is not against the Principality and Empire of
the world: Neither is Civil and Profane power against Christ: but yet it
properly appertains not to the office of Christ, for yt it is an external
and outward thing, as also all other offices, conditions, and states of men
be. And as these are beside the mere office of Christ, (in so much that an
Infidel and Miscreaunt may as well bear the Office, as a Christian) so is
also the office of the Sword: For it neither makes nor vnmaketh a Christian.
But hereof we have spoken elsewhere oftentimes more at large.



THis is peculiarly spoken unto us, that have heard of Christian liberty, and
yet do not abuse the same: that is, that under the color and name of Christ
and Christian liberty, we do not commit and do, what best likes our
selves: or that our liberty should break out into licencious wantonness, and
carnal looseness. As we see come to pass now in our days, and read to have
happened in the time of the Apostles themselves, as by the Epistles both of
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, we may manifestly gather: for the same was
then dooen and practiced, which now adays the greater sort of Men usually
commits. We now through the good gift and great favor of GOD, do
again understand and know the truth: And plainly see that all is nothing
but mere deceipte and iugglyng, which hitherto by the Pope and his Chergie
has been taught, established and done. Our consciences now (thanks be unto
God) are delivered out of the snares of human Traditions, and freed from that
violence, wherein they had before entrapped us: And now are we made free, and
not tied under pain of damnation to do such things, as they enjoined and
commanded us. In this liberty we ought to stand, and to maintain it,
neither to suffer our selves to be drawn from it: but withal, we are to take
heed, that we make not this liberty, a Cloak and pretext of wicked life.
And therefore shamefullie and very ungodly has the Pope dealt in this
behalf, in presumyng to compel and enforce men by his Laws: for in a
Christian people there neither ought neither can be a compulsion of any good
thing. For straightwaies decaieth and falls down Faith and all
Christianity, when the Conscience is bound with external Rites, and outward
Constitutions. For, Christians must be led and governed by the Spirit, that
they may know first, how that by Faith they already possess all things
necessary, and appertainyng to their salvation, and have need of nothing else
for the obtainyng thereof: and next, to know, that they ought to employe and
addicte their industries and endeavors to nothing else, but to help, serve, and
relieve their neighbors with all that they can or may, even as Christ has
helped, succored, and relieved them. And that whatsoever good they thus show
unto the^, they do it freely, freendly, and without compulsion: And that all
things may flow and spryng from a well willing and cheerful heart, that
humbly thanketh God, and praises his holy name, for all his gracious gifts,
so largely and bountifully powered upon them. Unto this purpose serves that
saying of saint Paul, j. Timoth j. where he thus writes: The Law is not
given to the righteous: For they that be such, do all thing es freely,
willyngly, and without either constraint or commandment, that they know to
be allowed and agreeable unto the good will and pleasure of God. Now, these
carnal, irreligious, faithless, and counterfaict Christians, knowing the
bonds of human Traditions to be broken, and hearing true Christian liberty
preached, come steppyng in, and vaunte themselves for iollie Christians, in
that they profess themselves not to observe and keep the Popes laws,
pretending for their excuse, Christian liberty, and that they not hereunto
tied and bound: and yet in the meant season omit, and leave undone those
things, which true Christian liberty requires, to wit, cheerful and
unconstrained helpyng of their neighbor in all things to the vttermoste of
their ability, without respect of any Commandment: which to do, all true
Christians endeavor themselves: therefore, they making Christian liberty only
a Cloak for their filthy and wicked impuritie, do disgrace and pollute the
precious name and excellent title of Liberty, which agrees only to true
Christians.

This does saint Peter in this place forbid us to do: and this is the
effect and meaning of his speeches, as though he should say thus: Although in
all outward and external things ye be free, because you are Christians, and
ought not to be compelled by the law to obey the Magistrate, for that, the law
is not made for the righteous and just, as before is declared: yet ought you
(nevertheless) to do it, willyngly, unconstrained, and not as by necessity
enforced, but even for the love that you bear to GOD, and for the benefit of
your neighbors. This we read, Matthew. vij. that Christ himself did, when as he
being free, and Lord of all, did (notwithstanding) pay Tribute or Polle
money. So also obeyed he Pilate, and suffered himself to be Judged of him,
whereas (notwithstanding) he in the very same place testified and said unto
him. Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee
from above: by which words he expressly and flattly confirms Magistracy
and Power: But he yet submitted himself thereunto, because it so pleased his
heavenly Father: and that not forcedlie or by compulsion.

We see by this, that these peeuishe counterfaites, contemnyng as well the
things that please GOD, as the things which the world requires, and still
persistyng in their wilful ways and corrupt Judgments, have no right
understanding nor knowledge what Christian liberty means, brag they never so
much of their Religion, and vaunt they themselves never so gloriously under
the shows and titles of the Gospel. We are (in deed) freed from all Laws,
howbeeit it is of us necessarily required, that withal we help and relieve
the weak and unskillful Christians, our brethren: which is the very office
of Love. Whereupon Saint Paul Roma. xiij. says thus: Owe nothing to any
man, but this, that ye Love one an other. He therefore that would boaste of
Christan Liberty, must first perform and do the parts and office of a
Christian to wit, to love and help his neighbor: and then afterward use
Christian Liberty after this sort. If Pope or any other whatsoever, would
compel and tie him unto their Laws, and to enjoin him by commandment to
do this or that, he may say again: Sir, I will not do that which you
give unto me in commandment to do, and for none other cause, but for that
you would bind me thereunto by commandment: and by taking away from me
Christian Liberty, to impose a necessity on me: we must deal and do freely
as the Servants of GOD, and not as the Servants of Men, as here in this
place saint Peter teaches us. But if any man whom I might thereby benefit,
should require any such thing at my hands, I am (willyngly and of mine own
accord) to do it: not respectyng, whether it be a commandment or no: But
only considering and waighyng, that Brotherly love requires the same at my
hands, and assuring my self, that it is a thing right acceptable and
pleasant to Almighty GOD, by such service and duties to help my brother.
By the same reason, and for the same causes I will not be compelled and
enforced, to obaie civil and profane Magistrates, but yet I will willynglie
and of mine own accord obey the^: not because they themselves so exact and
demand it, but because it tends and serves to the commodity and benefit
of my neighbor. To this end ought all our works to be framed, that they
may issue and proceed from a willing and loving mind, and that they may be
profitable and available to our Neighbors.



THis is no Commandment, but an Exhortation. For we owe honor unto all
men, although we be free, because this Liberty ought to be readily benie
always to do good, and not to do evil. Before we showed in many places,
that every Christian by and through Faith, is possessed of all those things,
which are Christ's: and is also made and become his Brother: and therefore
even as I owe all manner of honor unto Christ, so likewise must I honor my
Neighbor. But thou may not think, that this honor consists in outward
gestures, as bowyng down thy body, or vncoueryng thy head before him: but
rather in thy heart, with all unfeigned sincerity to reverence him, love him,
and highly esteem him: even as Christ himself is to be reverenced, loved, and
highly esteemed of the. Moreover, we are the Temple of God, as saint Paul
says. j. Cor iij. Because the holy Ghost dwells in us. We therefore that
have been so easily carried and leadde to a superstitious bowyng of the knee
before the Idolatrous Host (as they term it) or before the Image of a
wooden Cross, why should we not much more fall down and show obeisaunce
before him that is the lively Temple of God?

After the self same manner S. Paul Romans xij. exhorts us, that in giuyng
honor, one should go before an other, so that every one should be subject and
humble himself unto an other, and prefer an other before himself. The gifts
that are given unto us of God, are unequal, so that one surmounteth an other
in dignity and preeminence of place and calling, yet no man knows who is the
highest in the sight of God. For he is able to raise up him which in this
world is the abiectest: and from a most seely estate, to advance him to the
highest degree. And therefore every one (though here in this world he be
placed in never so high calling) ought to deiect and humble himself, and to
yield honor unto his Neighbor.



WE declared before, how the Apostles make a great difference between Common
love and Brotherly love. Our duty is, to love even our Enemies, and this
belongs to Common love. But Brotherly love is that, whereby we Christians
love one an other, even as Brethren, seeking one an oother commodities, and not
our own: because we have all alike good gifts given unto us from God. And
this Love is that, which Saint Peter here in this place peculiarly requires.



HE bids us not only to make great accoumpt of, and highly to esteem the
Kings and Rulers of the Earth, but withal also to honor them, y^a although
they be Ethnickes and Heathen. Which thing both Christ himself did, and the
Prophets also, who prostrated themselves at the feet of the Kings of
Babylon. Here might one say to me: Lo, thou see, that by this place, we
ought to obey the Pope, and every one ought to fall down and prostrate himself
at his feet. I answer. True it is, that if he usurped and took upon him a
civil or profane power, or did execute the place of any Temporal Magistrate
or worldly Prince, he were (doubtless) to be obeyed. As for example, if he
should thus say: I command thee to wear a Hood, or to shave thy Croune of
thy head, or upon this or that day to fast: not that thou should believe
that God any whitt regarded or cared for the same, or that any part thereof
were necessary to thy Salvation, but therefore do I command thee to do it,
because I being the Civil Magistrate and Profane Prince, am so minded to have
it dooen. But then as he shall (as he does) play the Tyrant after this
sore: I being Gods Vicar here on Earth, and his only Vicegerent, command
thee to observe, keep and embrace this my Commandment, no otherwise then as
if God himself by express words did command it, and this under pain of
Excommunication and deadly Sin: Then may thou say: Be favorable to me
Sir Pope: hold me excused: for truly, I mean nothing less then to perform
and do that which thus thou proudely and presumptuously commaundest.

We are bounden to be subject unto the higher Powers and to obey their
ordinances, so long as they bind not our consciences: I mean, so long as
they impose any thing upon us concerning outward and worldly things, yea
although they played the parts of very Tyrauntes toward us. For, to him that
takes away our Coat, we are commanded to let him have our Cloak also. But
when they entermeddle and take upon them to reign over the Spirit, and to
lead awa^ our Consciences captive, wherein God alone ought to sit and reign,
then ought we rather to offer our heads to the block, then any whit to obey
them in such points. The civil Magistrate and this external Empier, has
power over no further but erternall and corporal things. But the Pope has
not only violently challenged unto him and forcibly intruded upon this
external power and outward Jurisdiction* but also goes about to rake, catch
and challenge unto him, the Spiritual also: whereas in deed he has right to
neither of them both. He keeps a great coil, and sets down his Lordly
commandments, Rules, Laws and Ordinances for Apparel, for choice of
meats, for Colleges, Abbayes, Priories, Bishoprikes, and Benefices? He staieth
not here, but goes on further, and coyneth out of these, both Sins, and
good works: and therefore Christ can not abide such a monstrous Empier and
mean Domination. But this external or outward Government, whereby the
World is ruled, he both likes and allows: for that, it neither usurps
nor entermedleth any thing with Sins, or good Works and other spiritual
dealinges, but deals altogether in external and outward Policies: as the
maintenance, defense, and fortification of Cities, building and making of
Bridges, appointyng and assessyng of Tributes, Receite of Revenues, mainteinyng
and continuyng of peace, defendyng their Territories, Lands and Dominions, and
setting order for punishment of Malefactors and Offenders. Therefore, each
Christian may without danger (naie, willingly and of his own accord, not
compulsiuely and forciblie) ought to yield his obedience unto such a Prince,
since he chalengeth no authority over his Conscience.

Therefore now, if either Emperor, King or Prince should ask me what my
Faith is, I ought plainly to confess and protest the same unto him: not for
any his commandment: but for that, I otherwise am bound to confess my
Faith openly before all men, as often as occasion is offered. Now, if he
should proceed further with me, commaundyng me to believe this way or that
way: then must I say after this sort unto him. Noble Prince, your charge is
in respect of an external Principality and Empire, look well to that: your
authority reaches not to encermeddle with the Kingdom of God, it is not
lawful for you to eueroache upon the sanie, nor to usurp unto your self that
which belongs to him alone, and therefore herein I may not obey you. You
can not well abide, that any other should challenge any right unto him self
within any of your Dominions: yea, if he should but only pass through the
ranks of your Watchmen, setting them at naught, as though they had not to
deal with him, you would I say (I am sure) pursue such a one with Gu^nes,
Glaues, and other store of Partial provision. And how then can you think, that
GOD will suffer you, to attempt to pull him out of his Seat, and to set your
self in his place? Saint Peter calls here the civil Magistrate, only the
Ordinance of man: and therefore their authority stretches not (as of
themselves) to enact and command any thing upon the Statutes of God and
poinctes of our Faith.







Saint Peter hitherto has taught us, how we should be subject unto the civil
Magistrate, and what honor we ought to give unto the same. In the discourse
whereof we have declared, how far it extends, and how the same Magistrates
are not to stretche their authority further then their limited Commission,
neither to ouerrule matters of Faith. All which is spoken of Magistrates in
general, and therefore this doctrine appertains unto all. Now, he speaks of
such Magistracy as appertains not to the whole Commonwealth, but to
certain private persons: And first of all, how a Family ought to be
governed, and how Servants in an householde ought to demean and behave
themselves toward their Masters. The meaning of all which his words, in
effect is this.

Servants both men and women, are Christians as well as others, having one and
the same Word, one Faith one Baptism, and all other benefits besides,
as well as any others: and therefore in the sight of God are nothing inferior
to any other. Only here in this world, in this external and te^porall life
there is some difference, for in that respect they are of less accoumpt and
estimation, and therein being inferiors and underlings, they are bound to
wait and obey. Therefore, seeing that God has called them to that estate,
they ought so to frame and enure themselves in their duties, that they show
their subjection and testify their submission unto their Masters, honor
them, reverence them, be serviceable unto them, and carefully look to their
dealinges and business. Whereupon the Prophet David Psalm. Cxxiij. borowyng
from them a very apt and proper similitude, signifies thereby how diligently
they ought to attend unto their Masters and Maistresses. As the eyes of the
Servants look unto the hands of their Masters: and as the eyes of a Maiden
unto the hands of her Maistresse, so do our eyes wait upon the Lord our God:
which is as much to say, as Servants and waiting Maidens ought with
submission and fear to do whatsoever may please their Master and
Maistresse. God requires it, and therefore they ought with cherefull and
willing minds to do it. That which thou thus do according to the Word of
God and Faith, be assured is acceptable and allowed of God: And therefore
these are the best works of al others that a man can work: so that a man
may here perceive that he needs not to got far to do other Works.
What thy Master commands his Servant, or the Maistresse her Maid, that
has God commanded to be done of thee. Think it not to be the bare
commandment of man, although it be uttered and done by man. And therefore
thou ought not to consider and respect, what manner a Master he is, whom
thou seruest, whether he be good or badd, gentle and courteous, waiwarde and
churlish: but think this rather what manner a Master soever he be, yet is it
my duty truly and faithfully to serve him, and diligently to apply my self
in his business, and that for Gods sake, who requires the same at my hands:
remembryng also that my Lord Jesus Christ for the redemption and freedom of
me, became a Servant.

This is the true doctrine of life, which ought continually to be inculked
and beaten into the heads of all men: but alas, the blindness of our age is
so great, that it is nowadaies almost quight abolished and utterly extincte.
And this doctrine is of such sort, that none can well embrace and like of it,
saving only true Christians, who have their lesson for the same, out of the
Gospel. And therefore if thou will be the true child of God, frame thy mind
so to serve thy master, as if Christ himself were present, and commanded
thee every particular charge to do. For so writes saint Paul Ephe. vj.
Servants, be obediente unto them that are your Masters, according to the
flesh, with fear and tremblyng, in singleness of your hearts, as unto
Christ, not with service to the eye, as men pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of GOD from the heart, with good will seruyng the Lord
and not men. And again, Coloss. iij. For ye serve the Lord Christ. Oh that
our Monks and Nuns now adays were in that state, that these poor
Servants are, what joy might they have in their consciences, and to give God
thanks for his benefits: There is never a one of them that can truly say:
God has commanded me to hear a Mass, to sing Mattins, to mumble up the
Seven hours, or such like Trumperies: For there is not so much as one word
thereof spoken in all the Scriptures. And therefore if they should be asked,
whether they be assured and out of all doubt, that their profession and
condition be allowed of GOD: they will answer, No. But if a man should ask
any poor moilyng Kitchen drudge, why she washes Disshes and Platters, or why
the Milketh Kine, she can yield reason and say. Sir, I know that the thing
which I do, is acceptable and allowed of God: For I have the word of God,
and his express commandment for my warraunte, that I ought to do these
things. This is surely a singular comfort, an excellent benefit, and a
right precious treasure, of the which no man can well think himself worthy.
The Prince may think himself an happy man, and highly in Gods favor, if
upon like confidence and trust of a sure commandment of God, he can
thoroughly discharge and execute his weighty Office and Function. And truly
he may in his high calling do that, which God has commanded: Namely, if
he punish transgressors and malefactors. But when alas, yea, how seldom
happens it, that he rightly and lawfully is able thoroughly to execute this
his chargeable office? But in this condition and state of seruage, all things
are in that sort, that poor Servants certainly know and are thoroughly
assured that all the things, which they do at their Masters
commandments, are allowed and accepted before God. For God respects not
the baseness and vileness of the work, but regards the heart, that in
such vile dradging labors is obedient unto him. But it happens and falls
out in this case, as in all other matters it usually does: For, look what God
commands, that is no man willing to do: But that which men establishe and
command and not God: that (I say) every one seeks after and follows.

But here will some peradventure say: what if I have such a froward, testie,
waiwarde, and angry Master, whom no man can please, nor any service can
content, of which sort there are not a few euerywhere? Saint Peter hereunto
^^^eth a plain answer, in effect as if he should say thus: If thou be a
Christian, and be desirous to please GOD, thou must not respect how waiward
and churlishe thy Master is: But consider rather and ever bear in mind, what
the Lord thy God commands thee. Therefore think this with thy self: well,
in this my service I shall serve my Lord Christ: he requires at my hands,
that I should be obedient, serviceable, and in each respect duetifull to my
Master, be he never so froward, sullen, and unquiet. If God should
command thee to wipe the Shoes of the errantest verlett, or Deuelishest
Rakehell in the world, thou ought with a cheerful heart, and willing mind
to do it: and this work of thine should be both good and laudable before
GOD, and so is any other work whatsoever, of the like sort, to be
accoumpted right excellent and commendable: for that, God has commanded it.
And therefore in this case respect not the person, but consider only the
good will and pleasure of GOD, and what he wills to be done. Thy duty and
service in this sort, truly and faithfully performed, shall before God far
surpass and excel all the works and merits of all Shauelyng Priests and
mumblyng Monks in the world, if they were all laid together on one heap. If
there be any that thinks not this sufficient, in that, it is so pleasant
and acceptable a work before God: it shall not much avail to use any
further reasons to persuade him. For there is nothing better, if thou do it:
nothing worse if thou forslowe and omite it. And therefore (says saint
Peter) this must with all fear be performed, and all things must orderly
and duly be executed, seeing that it is the commandment not of man, but of
God himself.

And saint Peter doubtless in this place, peculierly speaks of such
Servants, as many were in his time, to wit, Slaves, such as in some
Countries yet to this day, are bought and sold, like brute Beasts. These
were evil entreated, and oftentimes whipped and beaten by their Masters, who
safely and without any danger of law, when they listed, might kill and put
them to death. And therefore it was needful, that such Apostles as S. Peter
was, should diligently admonish and comfort them, to be contented duetifullie
to serve their frounyng and waiward Masters, and to bear those injuries,
where with they were rigorously handeled. For every one that is a Christian,
must needs bear his Cross: and the more that he is pinched with injuries,
the better fares his case. Therefore take up this kind of Cross willyngly,
heartily thankyng God for the same: for this is that very true affliction that
pleases GOD. For what should it profit or avail thee, if when thou art
buffered, and shreudlie beaten for thy deserts, thou should boaste and
brag of sufferyng the Cross? And thereupon it is, that saint Peter here
says: If when ye do well, ye suffer wrong and take it patiently, this is
thank worthy and acceptable to God, that is a true obedience unto God, and a
pleasyng worship. Behold here plainly described and set out unto thee, those
true and excellent works, which thou ought to do, and yet we foolishemen
have set at naught, and trodden under our feet this good and wholesome
doctrine, and in steed thereof have devised, and found out for our selves
other good works, invented by our own brains and fantasies, of which we
make such special accoumpt, that we think we can never sufficiently and
enough, extol, praise, and dignifie the^. We therefore that are now delivered
out of this blindness, and are taught again, which be the true and right
works, that please God, let us with hands holden up to heaven, yield most
humble thanks unto God for this so great a benefit, and let us heartily and
entirely rejoice in the Lord for the same.











Hereunto (says Saint Peter) ye are called. Unto what is that? Forsoothe to
suffer persecution, trouble and wrong, even as Christ him self before you has
dooen. As though he should thus further say. If thou will be a true follower
of Christ, it is not fit, decent, nor agreeable to thy profession, when thou
art iniuried, to brabble much, and repine thereat, but pacientlie to bear
it, and to take it well in worth: considering how innocentlie Christ suffered
all things for our sakes. He did neither exclame, neither cried out for
vengeance, neither cursed, when he giltleslie was brought before the Judge:
and therefore thou must also not here look always to be justly dealt
withal, but as it were wholly to neglecte, and not to care, how
indifferently and rightly Justice in this respect is ministered unto thee: but
when thou haste wrong offered thee, say rather to thy wrong: I thank GOD,
hereunto am I called, that I should suffer wrong. For why should I complain,
sith Christ my Lord and Savior (who was guiltless and innocent every way)
complained not? And here has Saint Peter alleged certain words, out of
the liij. Chapter of Esaie the Prophet, where it is thus said that He had
committed no wickedness, neither was any guile found in his mouth. And these
words By whose stripes ye were healed, mentioned also in the same Chapter.
verse. v. Christ was so pure, that there was not so much as one evil word
in his tongue; he was worthy to have had all honor at their hands, he
deserved to be kneeled unto, and (as it were) to be carried in the arms of
all men. Finally, he had power and authority enough to have revenged
himself, if it had so pleased him: but he suffered himself rather to be
reviled, mocked, blasphemed, and last of all, put to death, and yet not once
opened he his mouth. Why therefore should thou be any whitte unwilling to
suffer persecution and wrong, since thou art nothing but Sin? Thou should
rather heartily thank God, and highly extol his gracious goodness, who has
accoumpted thee worthy to be like to his Christ: and not to repine and
mutter, nor to be impatient when thou art wronged, seeing that the Lord
himself, neither reviled nor threatened again, but earnestly prayed for his
Enemies. But thou will peradventure say: Sall I allow and think well of
them that deal Injuriously with me, and say that therein they do well? I
answer: No. But say rather thus in thine heart: although I have not deserved
this hard dealing, nor to be thus wrongfully entreated, yet will I willyngly
suffer these things for my Lord God his sake, who being most innocente, was
for my sake evil entreated, and most wrongfully dealte withal. Commit thy
cause to God, who is a righteous Judge, and he will abundauntly recompense all
thy sufferynges: even as Christ committed his cause unto his Father in heaven.
Who his own self (says Saint Peter) offered up our Sins in his body on
the Tree, that is, he suffered death not for any cause of his own, but for our
sake, and for our Salvation, whom we through our Sins, crucified and nailed
on the Cross. But alas, we are yet very far from such kind of sufferyng
wrong. And therefore if thou be a sincere and a true Christian, thou must
imitate Christ in this poincte, and be heartily sorry for them that hurt
thee, praiyng earnestly for the^ unto almighty God, that it may please him to
forgive them, and not to punish them for the same. For (alas) they do more
hurt thereby to them selves in their Soul, then they do harm to thee in thy
Body. This if thou thoroughly consider, and in heart rightly weigh, thou can
not choose but be presently eased of all inward grief, and willyngly suffer all
things with patience. And finally we are to remember, that we our selves
as well as they, a little before led a wicked life, but are now at length
turned unto Christ, as saint Peter in the knittyng up of this Chapter says.



AND this place also has he taken out of Esaias. Chapter. liij. Where he says
thus: All we like sheep have gone astraie: we have turned every one to his
own way. But now says saint Peter, we have gotten a Sheepeheard. The
Son of God is come down for our sakes, to be our Sheepeheard and our
Bishop: he by giuyng unto us his Spirit, feeds us, and so guides and
leads us by his Word, that we are now certain and sure of our Salvation.
Therefore, if thou acknowledge and confess that thy Sins are clean washed
and taken away by him, thou art his Sheep, and he is thy Sheepeheard, and
thy Bishop. This is the greatest comfort that all Christians have.

Thus have we fully finished two Chapters of this Epistle: wherein Saint
Peter has first laid down and plainly taught the sincerity of Faith: and
secondarily the sincere works of Love: and herein also has he treated of
two sorts of Works: namely as well of those works which we are all bound
in generality to show unto the Magistrate, as also those duties that
Servants owe unto their Masters. And what saint Peter here speaks of
Servant, the same also appertains unto certain other sorts of men: namely,
Artificers, Hirelinges, and all sorts of mercenarie servants whatsoever. Now,
next he lays down lessons, how man and wife should Christianly live
together.

The third Chapter.
LIkewise let the wives be subject to their housbandes, that even they which
obey not the word, may without the word be won by the conversation of the
wives,
















































Saint Peter in this place, namely speaks of those Wives, which in his
time had vnbeleeuyng Housebandes: and again, of such faithful Housebandes, as
yet had Heathen and Ethnic wives. For, it oftentimes happened in those days,
that the Apostles preached the Gospel among vnbeleeuyng Pagans and Infidelles:
among whom it was often seen that the one of the parties, to wit, either the
Housebande or the Wife, was converted and won unto Christ, the other still
wallowyng and persisting in error. Now, if this charge of Wives subjection and
obedience to their housbandes, were so straightly commanded then: how much
more is it behouefull and necessary to perform, and show it forth now
adays. The office therefore of a Wife, (says saint Peter) is this, to be
loyal and subject to her Housebande, yea, though he be an Infidel and a
Heathen. And here he infers the cause why it is convenient and behoouefull
so to do.



WHen the Housebande sees that his Wife lives orderly, innocently, and
honestly he is thereby moved and provoked to embrace the like Christian Faith
and godliness. And albeeit, the office of preaching be not committed, nor
allowed unto Women, yet ought they nevertheless, so honestly to demean and
behave themselves in manners and conversation, that even thereby they may
allure and draw their Housebandes unto Faith. We read, that the virtuous
Matrone Monica, Mother unto saint Augustine, converted her houseband a little
before his death, unto the Faith of Christ: and after that her Soonne Augustine
also. But we must note, that this is an external office and outward charge,
not to be done of any woman, with intent thereby to be justified. For, by all
this obedience shall not a woman be saved. For, even among the Heathen
Infidelles, we may find some Wives in each respect very duetifull,
serviceable and debonaire to their housebandes: but that obedience of theirs,
raught no farther then to content, serve, and please their housebandes. For, so
did God ordain and appoincte Genes. iij. when he said to the woman: Thou
shall be subject to thy Housebande, and he shall rule over thee: which is one
of the punishments, that God there inflicted and laid upon Women. But yet
this is (as I said before) appertainyng to outward conversation, and belongs
to the body, not to the Spirit.

Women have here great cause to rejoice, in that, they know, what Work to
do, to please God withal. For, this is such a great treasure, as a wife can
not have a greater, nor more precious: in that, she certainly knows, that
when she shows such subjection and obedience to her housebande, she highly
pleases God therewith, and does that, which to him is right acceptable: then
which knowledge and persuasion, what can be tide unto her more joyful and
gladsome? And therefore, she that is desirous to be a right Christian wise,
let her thus think with her self: I will not respect, what manner of person my
housebande is, with whom I am now coupled in marriage, whether he be Jew or
Gentile, good or badde: but I will draw my self to this consideration and
respect only, that God has appoincted me to be this man's Wife, and linked
me unto him in the bands of Matrimony, and therefore, as I am bound, so will
I in all poinctes be subject and obedient unto him. This persuasion being
once thoroughly settled in her, living in such duetifull obedience, all her
Works be both acceptable and commendable.

If any be so wilful and waiwarde, whom these reasons do not move, to such
a one (doubtless) no other persuasions will be available. By beatyng, a man
shall do no good, if he think thereby to bring his wife to be tractable and
duetifull: for in castyng out one Devil by beatyng, he shall be sure to beat
in two as badde or worse, as in our common Proverb we are wont to say: O
that Wives thoroughly knew this doctrine, and exhortation of Saint Peter:
how happily and blessedlie should they live? But our perverse and crooked
Nature is such, that what God commands, none are willing to follow, but
what man's idle brain deuiseth, after that men run headlo^g. Furthermore,
God has willed this Commandment of wives obedient subjection to their
housbandes, to be so firmly and inuiolablie observed, that he has granted
power and authority to the housebandes, to dissolve, undo, disalowe, and to
make frustrate, and of none effect any vows made by their wives, if they
mislike the same: As we read Number. xxx. And that for none other cause, but to
live thereby at home in peace, quietness, and tranquillity. And thus much
first, of the office and duty of Wives toward their Housebands: now next
the Apostle sets down, how a Wife ought to behave her self toward all
others.





THis treasure and inward garnishement, we may not think here to be
commanded and prescribed only for Wives, but the same stretches and ought to
be construed, as meant also of Men. Here may some ask this question: Whether
these sayings of Saint Peter, concerning Women's apparaile, be straightly
commanded or no? We read of Queen Esther, how that she ware a Croune of
gold on her head, and put on her royal apparaile that was very rich,
precious, and meet for a Queen: Esth. ij. and.v. Judith also apparailed her
self most bravely and magnificently. Iud. x. But in both places we find it
thus explaned, that they did it not for any vain delight that they had therein,
but rather that they contemned, and little esteemed that gorgeous furniture,
which they did wear but for the time, the better to compass and bring about
their godly and zealous purposes. The same answer may we make here. That
it is the duty of each godly woman, to be in mind so virtuously affected,
as that she may wholly contemn this gaie attire and womannishe bravery: for
if they once link the^ selves in love therewith, (the nature thereof is such)
that they will daiely seek more and more to prancke them selves, and will
keep neither mean, nor order therein, but wantonly and licenciously without
end, covet the continual maintenance of such vain and dissolute
prodigality.

A Christian Woman therefore ought utterly to despise this outward deckyng, and
worldly gallantise: but yet so, that if her Housebande will have her so to
do, or any other honest respect require the same, it is to be borne
withal, and tolerated. Howbeeit it is most to be wished, and they are most
especially so to frame themselves in their attire and deckyng, as saint Peter
here teaches them: to wit, to be inwardly garnished, and decked with a
mild and gentle spirit. Thy bravery and furniture is gaie and gallant
enough, if thou deck and attire thy self, to content and please thy
Housebande. Christ requires no such thing at thy handemaie, he is highly
offended, if thou trim thy self to the intent to please the eyes of other
men, or because thou seek thereby to be dignified and called fair, lovely,
or beautiful. But thy cheifest care ought to be, to carry this precious
furniture, and incomparable garnishement (before spoken of) in thy heart, far
from all corruption, as saint Peter says, and to lead a decent, honest,
and chaste life.

It is a sure token, that thou haste very small workyng of the Spirit in thee,
if thou feel thy self to be much given to this fantastical, worldly and
outward bravery. For if Faith and the Spirit were truly settled within thee,
thou would sooner stamp and tread it under thy feet, then to take delight
and pleasure therein. And thou would say as Esther did: Esth. xiiij. Thou
know Lord that I hate and have no delight in this Croune which I wear on
my head, and that I wear this gorgeous apparel even against my will. If I
were not compelled so to do, to please my Lord the Kings eye, I had leifer
tread it under my Feet. A wife thus minded, can not herein but be much the
dearer and acceptabler to her housbande. And therefore Saint Peter wills
Matrones and Wives to set their delight in attiryng and garnishyng themselves
with this inward furniture, and to be endued with a meek and quiet Spirit,
having their hearts void and free from all corruption.

In aduising them to be meek and gentle spirited, his meaning is not only, to
restrain them from licencious gaddyng abroad, and other open and outward
misdemeanors of the world: but his meaning is, that they should with much
more heed and carfulness look to themselves, that their minds inwardly
be incorrupt, and that they constantly persevere in a true and sincere
Faith, not suffryng the same any way to be empayred or violated.

And thus it comes to pass, that the heart willingly contains it self
within his limited bounds, without breakyng out into any disorder, and be
thinks how it may please their housbande. And such an heart, is an
exceedyng pleasure and acceptable attire before God. If a woman be never so
richely apparelled in cloth or beaten gold, and garnished all over (even to
the foot) with Gemmes and precious Stones of price inestimable, this her
apparel must needs be very magnificent and sumptuous: but no woman can be
any way so richly and bravely attired, as in any respect to be comparable to
that invaluable attire of the Soul, which before God is a thing much
esteemed and set by. Gold and precious Stones in the eye of the world are
things highly esteemed and of singular price, but before God, they be things
filthy, abominable and of none accoumpt. That woman therefore is gorgeously
and richly attired before God, which has a quiet and gentle spirit: for
seeing that before God it is a thing so highly set by, it can not but be a
thing of singular great excellency and full of majesty. A Christian soul
already has whatsoever Christ himself has: because Faith brings together
with it al good things. And this is such a precious treasure and rich
attire, that no man can sufficiently and according to the worthiness thereof
esteem and prize it. For it is highly esteemed and prized by God himself. The
persuasion and inculkyng of these reasons, will be much behouefull, expedient
and forcible to draw women's minds from the desire of this worldly pompous
apparel, whereunto they are by nature otherwise much inclined: and so to
bring them in love with this inward garnishyng, that they may of themselves
willingly loathe and detest all worldly and outward bravery. For it can not
be, that a virtuous Christian woman hearing these things, and inwardly in
heart digesting them, but she straightwaies enters into this consideration
with her self: Behold, if this brave attire and sumptuous apparel be nothing
at all regarded before God, why should not I also contemn and despise it? But
if I must needs wear it, I will do it only, to please my housbande
thereby, whose pleasure it is to have it so: and unto whom, God himself has
expresselie commanded me to be obedient. A woman thus minded, is truly
garnished and decked in her Spirit. Now, moreover saint Peter brings in,
the example of holy women, thereby to draw and provoke other women to this
Christian purpose and consideration: saying.





AS they attyred themselves, so is it meet that you also deck your selves
(for so is his meaning) and to be loyal and obedient to your housbandes, as
Sara was unto Abraham, who called him Lord, as in the Scripture it appears
Genesis xviij. When as the Angel came to Abraham and said to Sara his wife:
this time tweluemonth thou shalt bear a Son, she laughed and said: After I
am waxed old, and my Lord also, shall I give my self to lust? Which place
Saint Peter here fitly remembered and aptly alleged. For Sara would not have
called her housbande Lord, if she had not been subject and obedient unto him,
and carefully bent to please him. Therefore he afterward says.



WHat means he by this admonition? Doubtless this. The nature and
disposition of women is for the most part, tymorous and fearful of every
wagging of a Straw, and is easily drawn to shake and tremble at every
shadow: which is the cause that there is in that Sex such stoare of magical
Impostures and supersticious enchauntmentes, which they also teach one an
other, the number of whom now adays is grown to be very great. This
mischievous practice ought to be far away from every Christian Matrone: who
ought to dwell in such safety of conscience, and to live so void of servile
fear, that she should not in such fearful sort run up and down, now
seeking help of this Enchauntresse, now of that. But rather so surely to
stand upon her guard, that she may boldly and faithfully committ all things
to the good disposition of God: not doubtyng but that all things shall happen
to her for the best, and that no harm can betyde her. For, being assured and
certain of her estate, and that her condition is allowed and liked of GOD,
what cause has she to fear? If her Child dye, if she her self be touched
with any disease, all is for her good: let her refer the case to God, for
since she is in that state that is pleasing and acceptable to God, what can she
wish better? And let this be taken as spoken to the women: now follows that
which concerns Men.



THE Wife (says he) is a vessel and Instrument of God: which God uses to
this purpose that she should conceive and bring forth Children, nourish and
bring them up, and govern the house. These be the offices and duties that
belong to the Wife, who is a vessel and Organe of God, created and made for
the same purpose: and whereunto he has made her by a certain natural
propension, apt and enclinable. Such an Organe and mean, must a man have to
help him, and therefore says S. Peter, you housbandes ought to dwell with
your wives as men of knowledge: And not that you should according to the unruly
affections of your own conceiptes and brains seek to rule over them. Their
duties are to frame themselves to fulfill their housbandes commandments, and
to seek all ways to please them: But withal, it is the housbandes charge
again, to deal with his wife by reason, and to handle her gently and
courteously, yea yeeldyng something unto her, and giuyng honor to her, as to
the weaker vessel of God.

The Housband also is the Vessel and Organ of God, but the Woman is the
weaker, and that not only in body but also in mind, wherein she is of a
weaker and fearfuller moulde. And therefore thou must so handle her and so
deal with her, as she may bear it. And herein thou must none otherwise
frame thy dealinges, then thou would do about any other Instruments
whatsoever, that thou have need for any purpose to use: as if thou would
preserve and keep thy knife in a good edge, thou must beware that thou cut no
stones with it. But of this point there ca^ not any certain rules be
prescribed. God refers that to the discretion and wisdom of each peculier
man, to use his Wife with reason and knowledge: and as the nature, wit and
disposition of every one does require. For thou art not allowed to use that
power and authority which thou haste over her, according to the devise of
thine own sensual fantasy: for thou art her housbande, because thou
should help her keep her, maintain and nourish her, and not to spoil and
mar her. Herein therefore (I say) can no certain scope and bounds be
limited to a man for circumstaunce how to rule and govern his wife, but the
usage thereof is referred to every particular man's discrete dealyng and wise
government.

After this sort we are likewise taught, as touching the Housebandes, what
dealings are fit and decent for them, and what behavior they are to use,
agreeable to Gods good will and pleasure: To wit, that they should dwell with
their Wives, and jointly with them seek to get both their livings, help
to maintain and comfort one the other, and to use themselves the one to the
other, gently and courteously. And although all things in household matters,
at all times be not handeled accordyngly as thou would have them, but many
times contrary to thy mind and appointment, yet must thou remember that thou
art a Man, and of more wit, reason, and perfection then a Woman: And therefore
the defects and missehappes, growyng through thy Wives weakness and
imperfection, thou art by reason to amend and bear with: And what any way
wants in her, thou art to supply: Yea, sometimes thou must wink at
matters, and seem not to know all things: sometimes to yield a little, many
times to forgive and pardon things amiss, and each way to give to thy wife
her due honor.

This honor (I know not how) many have after sundry sorts interpreted. Some
think it to be meant, that a man should provide for his Wife convenient
food and raimente, and so cherishe and keep her: Some others would have it to
signify the lovely benevolence, that is and ought to be between married
folks. In my opinion, the interpretation of this place, is thus much in
meaning, that the Housebande should so accoumpt of his Wife, and so use her, as
a Christian vessel, and the organ or Instrumente of God. For they ought both,
so to frame and dispose their lives, that the Wife must obey, love, and
honor her Housebande: and again, the Housbande is to give unto his Wife that
honor, that is due unto her. If they can frame themselves after this sort,
they should live in most amiable peace and love together, and all things
would go well with them, whereas otherwise, if this knowledge and mutual
zeal be wantyng, all things in their married estate are loathsome, tedious,
cumbersome, and full of grief. And hence comes it, that such couples (I mean
such Housebandes and such Wives) as marie together, for none other cause, but
for wanton pleasure only, thinkyng so still to live in lascivious delights,
and sensual appetites, find nothing in their marriage, but irksome grief, and
very torment of mind. But if they would have regard, and respect unto the
Work and will of God, and thither direct all their reasons and accoumptes,
they should live a right Christian life in their married estate, and far
otherwise then the Pagans and Ethnikes do, who are utterly ignorant of the
good will and purpose of God in this behalf.



THE Housebande ought not only to mark and consider. that his Wife is a weak
Creature, and easy to offend, and there to stay: But this rather is required
of him, that he have special regard unto this, that she is Baptized into the
Faith of Christ, and that she is possessed of all those good things in
Christ, which he himself is enheritable unto. For according to our inner man,
we are all equal and alike, and there is no difference between a Man and a
Woman: But outwardly, God requires that the Man be the head and govern: and
the Woman to be subject and obedient.



WHat means Saint Peter by these words: Forsooth even this: that if we
will not direct our doings herein, by this rule of reason, but deal
sensually, roughly, selfwilledly, unreasonably, unquietly, and waiwardly, and
(as men that will never be pleased) look to have every thing to fall out
iumpe, according to our own wilful devises: We may not think but that the
Wife also, has her diseases and imperfections, and so shall the one never
please nor content the other, nor greatly care the one for the other: the one
never yield an inche to the other, never pardon and forget any thing the one to
the other: Nor the one to like well of that, which is done by the other, or of
the one to the other: and in these outrageous garboiles, how can they pray, and
say: Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. By this prayer, we must fight against the Devil, and therefore it
behooves us to agree among our selves. These are those true and most
excellent good Works, that herein we are required to ensue and put in
practice. Which if they were thoroughly inculked, and preached unto us, and
that we effectually and entirely would agnize and remember them, we should
have all things at home in most quiet case, and peaceable tranquillity.
Hitherto now we have heard how a Christian man ought to use, and behave
himself in sundry vocations and kinds of life: and privately also one with
an other. Now, he will teach us, how all manner of men generally are to behave
theimselues Christianlie one to an other, and what comely conversation
outwardly they are to use.



ALL that he here says, carries none other meaning, but that we should love
one an other. For that which the Scripture elsewhere comprehends in few
words, is here somewhat at large paraphrazed and expounded. The meaning
therefore of saint Peter here is, as though he should say: This is the sum
of all that can be commanded and prescribed, concerning your outward
conversation, that you be all endued with one mind, affected alike, and
linked in heart and judgment alike, that whatsoever seems right and good to
one, may semblably be so thought and deemed of others.

We can not all of us do one and the self same Work: every one must work
for himself, and in that vocation wherein it has pleased God to place him. The
Housbandes charge, is not as the Wives, nor the Servants office as the
Masters, and so of others. It is too too foolish and ridiculous, that some of
our maisterlie leaders have taught, how that we must all do the same things,
and work the same Works. Of this stamp are those dreaming Popelinges, that
are still beatyng into our heads, their liyng Legendes of Saints, preaching
thereout unto us, that this holy Saint did this, and that holy Saint did
that: inferryng thereupon, that we also must do the same. Doubtless, Abraham
when he would have Sacrificed his soonne Isaac, being so peculiarly
commanded to do by God, did therein a most excellent and worthy act: but
when the Gentiles and other Nations would imitate his dealyng therein, without
any express commandment of God, and sacrifice their children: that dealyng
of theirs was abominable before God. So did Solomon most godly and well, in
buildyng a Temple unto the Lord, for the which God most liberally
recompensed him: now thereupon suddenly starte up our blind foolish and
pratlyng Buzzardes, who teach us that we also must build Churches and
Chapells, whereas in truth, there is no such thing commanded unto us of God.
And hereupon it comes to pass, that whereas we ought among our selves to
have all one mind, and one judgment, but diverse works, the case is turned
clean vpside down: and we all seek to do one self same work, and to have
disagreyng judgments, and contrary minds: which is flatly repugnaunt to the
Gospel.

All men are now therefore to be taught, that it is required at all our hands,
that we should think all one thing, be all of one judgment and like
affection, but yet that we must work diversely: that we have one heart,
but yet many hands. We must not all follow one and the same work, but
every one must exercise his own work: For otherwise we could not persevere
and continue, in one mind and one heart. That which is outward, must needs
be diverse: so that every one must abide in that, which he is commanded
unto, and whereunto he is called. This is a true and sound doctrine for this
life, and needful of all men to be thoroughly known, and effectually
practiced: for the Devil is most busy in this poinct, yea, and has already
in many brought his purpose to pass, that few men continue in the function
peculierlie incumbent unto them, but blindlie run on, and seek to discharge
their own peculier offices by the works of others: whereupon there has
grown among us much iarryng disagreemente: Monks snappyng at Priests, and
Priests kickyng at Monks, and every several Profession of life, spightyng an
other. For every one would have his own Profession and trade, to be
accoumpted best, and therevppon has grown up such a table of sondrie
professed Religions, one seeking to be had in estimation before an other. Thus
the Augustine Friars sought to outcountenaunce, and deface the Preaching
Friars: and the Carthusians still grunted against the Minorites: So that they
are all grown to be several and distinct Sects, and in no Profession or
trade of life has there been less agreemente, then among these holy
religious Orders, for so (saving your reverence), they must be termed.

But if one should preach unto them, that no Work before GOD excels
other, but that all things by Faith are made equal, that our hearts should
continue uniform, and that we all should be alike minded: or if one should
say: This Order or Profession wherein the Bishop lives, is before God of no
more acceptance, then the order of life wherein the poor Laiema^ lives: or
that the kind of life that a Nun has professed, is no better then the state
of a married woman, and so of the residue: I am sure, they can not abide to
hear it: for every one strives to be accoumpted of greater excellency then
other. What? (will they say) how can it be, but that this stricte and austere
trade of life, which we have vowed and professed, must needs be much
better and excellenter, then the plain profession of the Laity?

Therefore to be of one mind and of one judgment, signifies that every one
should so think of his own work and profession, as of an other man's: so that
he accoumpt and think the married state to be as good, as the vowed state of
chastity and virginity: and that all things are equal before God, who
judges according to the heart and faith, and not according to the persons
or outward works. And therefore we ought so to judge as God himself judges,
that is, that we must have all one mind and one judgment, that unity and
concord may flourishe and remain in the world: that our hearts may continue
vndisseuered, and not be drawn asunder for these outward by matters: so that
we are to deem allow and think well of the work that any other does, so long
as the same is not of it self, Sin.

Of this Concord speaks saint Paul ij* Cor. xj. where he says thus: I
fear, least as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds
should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ: which is as much
to say, as, I fear least the Devil likewise deceive you, and draw your
simple hearts and agreing minds into division and discord. Likewise Phil.
iiij. The peace of God which passes all understanding, preserve your hearts
and minds in Christ Jesus. And why is the Apostle so careful for our hearts
and minds? Truly because thereupon al other things do depend.

For if I once fall into a reprobate sense, and be possessed with a perverse
understanding, I make a general shipwreck of all together. As if I be a Monk,
and therein fully persuade my self, that my works are more regarded and
esteemed before God, then other men's: and should say: I thank thee O GOD,
that I am become a Monk: my profession is far better then the vulgar state
of married life: therevppon straightwaies necessarily arises a swelling
arrogancy of the mind: and a vain puffyng up of the heart can not but be
there, where I seem in mine own eyes to be more just and righteous then
others be, and in respect of my self contenme other men. By which means I
wilfully beguile my self: for there is no married woman living in the true and
sincere Faith of Christ, but is much more esteemed before God, then I with my
lousy Profession and witless Vow. Therefore when we acknowledge and assuredly
know that Faith brings with it all things that be expedient and needful
for a Christian man to have, then are we all of one mind, heart and
judgment, without making any difference of works, or preferryng one before an
other.

Think therefore that this place of S. Peter is not to be understood of any
external mind, but of a spiritual and internal judgment in things, and
such as before GOD are highly set by: that life and doctrine may vniformallie
agree together, and that the same thing that seems good to an other, may
seem also good to us, and also that that may be likyng and pleasant to an
other, that is liked and pleasant unto us, as before has been declared. This
heart and this mind have they that be right Christians, and this ought they
with all care and diligence to look unto, that by no means it quail
according to saint Paul's exhortation. For as soon as the Devil by his malice
overthrows this heart and this mind: straightwaies is the bond of true
unity broken asunder, and all things at once come to an utter confusion.



LET one have a care for an other: let the necessity of thy Neighbor no
less move thy heart, then if the case were thine own: yea think it to
appertain unto thee: And when he has sustained any hindraunce, loss or
mischaunce, do not thou rejoice thereat, neither thus think with thy self:
It is well enough: if some worse thing had happened unto him, he has well
deserved it. For where charity is, there is so much and so great care for
the state of our Neighbor, that if any mishappe befall unto him, it should no
less pearce our hearts, then if it had chanced unto our selves.



LEt every one accoumpte an other as his own Brother: the which how to be
understood, is very easy, for even Nature her self teaches us. We see that
they which be natural borne brethren, live in a more nearer bond of love,
and are more careful, zealous, willing and ready one to assist an other, then
any other friends be. The same must we now do, being all Brethren together
by Baptism, insomuche that our very Parents after our baptism, are to us in
the place and steed of Brethren, for that we have the same gifts, graces and
benefits at Christ's hand by Faith, which they have.



THE Greeks in this one word ((...)) comprehend all this sentence: which to
express again in one word in Latin, we must be driven to call it
Viscerosi. And I know not how better to interpret and explain it, then by a
comparison or similitude. Behold and mark how a Father or Mother is affected
toward their Child: that if a mother see her Infant to suffer any extremity
or want, her heart and bowelles earne within her. And thence is this form or
phraze of speaking borrowed, which is very usual and often in the Scriptures.
One History thereof we have in the first Book of Kings Cap. iij. Where it is
declared, how two women contended before King Solomon, for a young Infant,
whose it should be, for either of them laid claim unto it. The King therefore
purposing to try out, whether of them was the right mother of the Child,
could devise no better way to bolt out the truth, then by nature it self: by
which policy he tried out the matter. For he said to the women: Thou
say that the living Child is thine, and she says, it is hers: Bring me
therefore hither a Sword, and divide the Infant in twain, and give the one
half to the one, and the other half to the other. By which wise policy,
he found out which was the true mother of the Child. For the Scripture in
the self same place records, that straightwaies the bowelles of her
compassion were moved in love toward her Child: and that she cried out and
said: Oh my Lord, not so, but let her rather have the whole Child, and stay
him not. Whereupon the King presently gave judgment, and said. This is the
true mother of the Child, deliver him unto her. Herehence may we gather the
very true sense of this word, here delivered unto us by saint Peter, to
signify an entyer compassion and most hearty affection. And that we should be
none otherwise mutuallie affected one toward an other, then they that are
natural Brethren by blood: that every ones whole heart, marowe, veins and all
the powers of our mind and body be totallie moved with compassion at the
mishappes of an other: and that we ought to bear such a zealous, mutual,
hearty and motherly affection one toward an other, that if any thing with the^
miscarie, it should even pearce us (as it were) to the death. Such a mind
ought one Christian to bear toward an other. But I fear, there are but a
very few to be found, which so entierly with their heart love their
Neighbor, and that are so moved with compassion over the necessities and wants
of others, as a mother is over her Babe that she bore in her womb.



USE your conversation so gently and amiably one toward an other in these
outward things of the world, that every one not only accoumpt the things
which happen to an other, to appertain also to himself: even as Parents are
wont to do, who make no less reckoning of that which is their Childrens then
of their own: but also that every one use loving and courteous conversation
with his Neighbor. For there be some so waiwarde, churlishe, crabbed and
unreasonable, that every one almost is unwilling to have any dealyng or use any
company or conference with them. And so it comes to pass that such
persons commonly be suspicious and easily drawn unto wrath and anger, so
that none will willingly deal with them. But they be truly courteous,
freendly, favorable, sincere and amiable, which construe all things to the
best, be of nature nothing suspicious, and are not easily moved unto anger
and wrath, but can take well in worth whatsoever is done unto them.

Behold now and look into the Gospel, and there shall you find Christ
depaincted and set out after this manner, in whom we may behold and see
most evidently all these virtues singularly abidyng. The Pharisees tempted him
after sundry sorts, now one way and now an other, to entrapp and catch him
at advantage, and yet is not he a whit therewith mooues. And although his
Apostles now and then stumbled and did amiss and foolishly, yet never did he
roughly and hardly check them, but used always a myld and courteous lenity
toward them, assuryng and drawyng them unto him, to the intent to make them
the gladder and willynger with all their hearts to live with him, and to have a
great pleasure in adheryng and cleauyng unto his company.

The same kind of loving affection we commonly see to be among tried
friends and faithful Companions, where there be two or three that be
sincerely affected in mind one toward an other: If one of them make a fault,
the other takes it well in worth, and gently bears with it.

This example somewhat confirms this sentence and advertisement of Saint
Peter, but not wholly expresses the full meaning thereof. For the
freendlinesse and courtesy that is here spoken of, ought indifferently to be
extended and showed unto all men.

Here thou see the very nature of sincere and true Love, and what a
perfect, gracious and favorable people, Christians are. The Aungelles lead
this manner of life among them selves in heaven: Which kind of life we ought
also to practice, and lead here on earth: but the number among whom the same
is to be found, is very rare and scante. As saint Peter therefore has
taught Housebandes, and Wives, Menseruauntes, and Womenseruauntes, so to frame
and lead their lives, as that each one should look to his own charge and
function, and carefully apply his own peculier vocation: So wills he
likewise the same practice and order, to be put in ure in our common
dealings among our selves.

Now, the only Works, whereunto Saint Peter here would have us earnestly
and zealouslie to give our selves, are these: to be sorry at the harms and
mischaunces of our Brethren, to be fervent in Brotherly Love, to have our
very bowelles thoroughly enflamed with the love of the^, and to show our
selves ready, willing, tractable, and fit to love, and to be loved of all men.

Here is never a word mentioned of any of those flim-flam toys, and
frivolous devises that have heretofore very devoutly been preached, or rather
prated on unto us. He does not here say, Build an Abbeye or a Nunnerie, give
some maintenance for an ordinary Mass, take the holy order of Priesthood
upon thee, profess thy self a Monk, wear a Cowle, vow Chastity or any
such like. But he says thus: Look that thou be mild, gentle, and
courteous. These are the true good Works in deed, yea, rather the golden
Deeds, the Pearls and the precious Stones, wherewith God is singularly
delighted.

But as this doctrine is a perfect, Christian, and right wholesome doctrine:
So can not the Devil any way abide it. For this doctrine once prevailing,
would quickly overthrow and subuerte his Kingdom: And therefore he seeks
all the ways that he can to deface and extinguishe it, by stirryng up these
pompous Popes, and mumpyng Monks to yell and ^aule, to banne and curse, and
malapertly to affirm, that whosoever he be, that speaks against any of their
doings, speaks by the very instincte, suggestion and procurement of the
Devil himself. But little know they, the use of these ^eedefull and
necessary good Works, whereof saint Peter here speaks: Namely, Brotherly
love, being entirely and in the bowelles of unfeigned sincerity, meante and
exercised with all freendlinesse, courtesy, and sweetness. For if these be
(...), (as needs they must confess them to be) then are they much to blame,
and to be accoumpted as impudent liers, in presumyng and affirmyng their own
dregs and devises, to be most worthy to be preferred. It is to be
wondered at, how such gross and palpable blindness could sincke into men's
hearts. Thomas Aquinas ^^e of their most re^erende couled Rabbines, impudently
aduouched, that the Orders of Popes and Monks, far surmounted the common
state of the simple Laity. Which most impious, shameless, and liyng
assertions, were afterward by the Schoolmen ratified and allowed: and they
only that were the Professors thereof, invested with the title, dignity, and
name of right Reverend Doctors: and afterward the Pope with the Ruffianlie
route of his carnal Cardinals and adherentes, Canonized and Calendred them
for holy Saints.

Abandonyng therefore, and reiectyng all other doctrines, I wish thee to
embrace, and firmly to stick unto this. Christ himself and his Apostles have
taught so. If thou will therefore do those Works that of all others are
best, and take that profession upon thee, that of all others is most holy,
embrace Faith and Charity: and detest that gross impudency of these
Popelynges, which affirm and vaunte their Profession to surmounte either
Faith or Charity. For if their vowed Profession were of such worthiness,
that it excelled Faith, it must also excel the word of God: And if it
excel the word of God, it must needs follow, that it excels and passes
God himself. And here we see, that S. Paul ij. These. ij. wrate very truly in
saying, that Antichrist should exalt him self against all that is called God.
Finally, lea^^^ thus to judge al these matters: wheresoever Love, Mildness,
and Courtesy are wanting, there doubtless all other Works be damnable. We
see therefore how plainly and fully Saint Peter has here set down unto
us, how we ought to frame our selves to live a Christian life, even in our
outward conversation: having before, with no less excellency and skill
declared, how our ^nner life should be framed to God ward. Wherefore this
Epistle is fully staught with stoare of much godly and wholesome doctrine,
and therefore to be accoumpted as golden, and among the best, and most
absolute Epistles that are.



YEt he continues his exposition of Love more at large, instructyng us further
how we should behave our selves toward them, that hurt and persecute us. The
meaning of the Apostle is this: when they persecute, trouble, moleste and hurt
you, do not you the like again unto them, but for the evil that they do
unto you require ye good unto them again. When they ceuile and slander you,
take heed that ye do not the like unto the^, but contrariwise bless them,
pray for them, and wish well unto them. And this is a most excellent point
and office of Love: But O Lord, how few is the number of such Christians?
But why must we not render evil for evil, but contrariwise good for evil?
Doubtless (says he) because ye are hereunto called, that ye should be
heirs of blessyng. Which ought both to admonish and to inuit, and allure
you hereunto.

In the Scripture, we Christians are called a blessed people, blessed even by
God himself. For God said unto Abraham. Gene. xij. In thy Seed shall all
Nations of the Earth be blessed Seeing therefore that God has so bountifully
powered this blessyng upon us, that he might take a way from us all the curse
and malediction, which we had drawn from our first Parents, and which Moses
denounced unto all those that did not believe, it is very meet and requisite,
that we being thus graciously blessed, should so use and behave our selves
in each respect* as that this may be said and verified on us: behold, this
is a blessed people. And therefore saint Peter's meaning herein is, as though
he should have said: Consider with your selves and behold, GOD has infused
and bestowed this his gracious favor upon you, to take away all curse and
malediction from you, and has not imputed nor laid to your charge the
blasphemy, where with ye have dishonored him, neither has he for the same
punished you, as ye have well deserved: but contrariwise has most liberally
and franckly bestowed the richesse of his grace and benediction upon you: who
in respect of your continual blasphemy, were worthy of al manner of
malediction and curse: for where steadfast Faith wants, there can the heart
none otherwise do, but still curse and blaspheme God. Now therefore endeavor
your selves, so to deal with others, as it has been dealt with you. Curse
not, revile not, but do good and speak well, yea, although others rail on
you, and speak all manner of evil against you, and patiently suffer when
injury and wrong is offered unto you. And now he brings a place out of the
xxxiiij. Psalm, where the Prophet David says thus:



HE that would enjoy a pleasant and delightsome life, and not dye the, Death
but see good days, that all things may prospere and go well with him, let
him refrain his tongue from speaking evil, and that not only against his
friends, which is a most vi^e quality, and resemblyng the Nature of very
Serpents and Vipers: but his meaning is thus much more: let him carry about
with him an honest and good meaning mind, let him refrain his tongue from
speaking any harm even against his Enemies, yea, when he is thereto provoked,
and has great cause ministered unto him, to revile and speak amiss. Yea,
let him restrain his lips also (says he) that they utter no guile. For
there be not a few, which outwardly in mouth speak well, and bid their
neighbor freendly Good morrow, which inwardly in heart think cancardly and
spightfully: even wishyng them at the Devil. These men are they that have no
right nor interest in the inheritance of blessyng. They be evil fruits of an
evil Tree. And thus does Saint Peter fitly refer the place which he
alleged concerning Works, unto the root inwardly, namely unto the Heart.
And this is the very true and proper interpretation hereof. There follows
al^o afterward in the before alleged place of the Psalmist these words.



THE world thinks the best way to purchase this peace, is to require wrong
with wrong, and one displeasure with an other. But this is not the right way
to attain unto it. For there was never yet any King, that by this means could
win peace at his Enemies hands. The Roman Empire grew to such might and
Majesty, th^^ it subdued and overthrew all that againstoode it: and yet could
it never retain the people that were Subject unto them, in their due
obeisaunce. And therefore this course and order of repressyng our Enemies with
force, is not the best way to purchasse and confirm steadfast peace among us.
For if we overcome and suppress one Enemy, there will arise up ten, yea
twenty, till we our selves be brought to confusion.

But he takes the right and orderly way to seek after peace, and shall
surely find it, which refraineth his tongue, escheweth evil, and renders
good for il. This is another manner of way then the World takes or has skill
of. Now, to decline from evil and to do good, signifies to refrain either
from hearing or speaking any words of spite and malice, and not to seek
requital of injuries. Seek after peace this way, and thou shall be sure to
find it. For when thine enemy has served his own mind and fully satisfied
his angry humor in doing what he can against thee: if thou again reply not
against him with bitter and bityng words, neither storm and fret at his
injuries, thou shall overthrow him in his own turn, and get the vpperhande
of him in the swaie of his own maliciousness. For in this sort did Christ
overcome his Enemies upon the Cross, and not with any sword or material
weapon: Requital of one injury with an other, and one shrewde turn with an
other increases fury and sets parties at further jar then they were
before: whereas patience and suffraunce procures quietness and ease. But some
will say: how can this so be? it stands not with manhood, neither can flesh
and blood abide so to deal. I confess, it is more then is simply in man thus
to do, but being assisted with supernall grace, and thus patiently
tolerating injuries without desire of actual revenge, thou shall be sure to
speed as this next sentence purporteth: to wit.



IF thou thy self seek not private revenge, neither recompense evil for evil,
there sits one in the Heavens, even the Lord, who can not abide to see his
Servants to take wrong: and therefore they have the best and the iustest
cause which strike not again, neither seek revenge. God himself cares and
respects the^, and their prayers sound in his ears. He is our protector,
ayder and mainteinour, he is our Guardian and ouerseer, he will not be
unmindful of us, neither can we slide out of his sight, for his eyes are
always upon us. And this is it that ought to erect and stir up our
courages, and to persuade and provoke every Christian patiently to suffer all
manner of injury without requiring one evil with an other. For all I consider
the matter with my self aright, I mu^^ thus think, that the Soul of that man
which hurts me, (without earnest repentance) shall be in endless torments
in hell* and there upon a Christian heart can not choose but th^s burst out in
hearty and zealous prayer unto God and say: most loving and gracious Father,
forsomuche as this man has so horribly incurred thy displeasure, and so
miserably thereby thrown himself into the danger of Hell fire? I humbly pray
and beseech thee, that thou would pardon and forgive him this his fault:
and so do to him as thou haste done unto me, in deliueryng me from this thy
heavy wrath and anger. For as he has his eyes ever readily bent and with
favor most graciously beholding them that be good: so looks he with a
stern and frounyng countenance upon them that be evil. We therefore
which know, that he favorably and graciously looks upon us: but upon
them angerly, frouningly and with indignation: ought to pity their woeful case
and to be thoroughly sorry for their miserable estates, and heartily to pray for
the^.



WHen we follow that which is good, and recompense not evil for evil, but
rather most courteously and with the very bowelles of tender affection embrace
and love all men, there is none that can do us any harm. For although they
should take from us our wealth, our name and body, yet are not we in any
point harmed, because we possess such abundant stoare of good things: unto
which, the things taken from us, can by no means and in no respect be
compared. They that persecute and seek after us to do us harm, have no
goods at all, saving only these lame, momentarie, imperfect and transitory
trashe of the world, and shall afterward if they continewe in impenitencie,
be cast into Hell fire, there for even to be tormented. But our goods are
eternal and incorruptible, although we suffer a little loss of these worldly
and temporal goods.



HE not only says that no man shall be able any whitt to harm you, if ye
suffer any thing for Gods sake: but he further adds Blessed are ye for the
same: so that ye have great cause of rejoicing, if ye so be afflicted. For so
says Christ Matthew. v. Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you and
say all manner of evil against you for my sake, falselie: Rejoice and be glad.
He that rightly and thoroughly waigheth these words, and considers that
the Lord himself speaks them, and that so lovingly and so comfortably, how
should he but constantly stand to his tacklyng, and patiently abide all that
can or may happen? Again, they that in these words feel no comfort and
inward consolation, can not but be void and utterly without all strength,
joy and comfort.





THis place again has saint Peter cited out of the Prophet Esaias, where he
has these words: Fear ye not their fear, neither be ye afraied of them: but
sanctify God in your hearts, and let him be your fear, and let him be your
dread etc. Esaias. viij. Here we have a ver^ great protection and refuge, so
that we may boldly repose ourselves in safety, and be assured that none
shall harm us* Let the world terrify, and rage, threaten and menace never so
tyrannouslie, yet shall their terror come to an end, whereas our joy and
consolation shall be endless. And therefore we ought not to fear the world
any thing a^ all, but rather to be valiantly minded and constantly
encouraged against it: but before God to humble our selves and ^o fear with
all reverence.

And what means saint Peter, in bidding us to sanctify the Lord God* How
can we sanctify him, of whom we must be sanctified? I answer, that we after
this sort, pray, Hallowed (or sanctified) be thy name: for that it is our
duties to sanctify his name: whereas (notwithstanding) he himself
sanctifies his own name. Wherefore, saint Peter is thus to be understood:
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, that is, whatsoever it shall please God
to lay upon us, whether it seem to us good or badde, pleasant or grievous,
honorable or ignominious, luckie or unlucky, it is our parts and duties, not
only to embrace and take the same in good par^e, as things sent to us for our
furtheraunce and benefit, but also to accoumpt the same as holy, and
thereupon to say: This that I now receive from the Lords hand, is a thing so
precious and holy, that I am not worthy to be partaker thereof. So says
the Prophet David Psalm. Cklv. The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. When as I therefore in these things do thus glorify God,
and repute his works as precious and holy. I do thereby sanctify him in my
heart. But those fellows that dwell so much upon the poinctes of the Law,
that they think not God to be righteous, but that he does them wrong: and
that he is asleep and neither will maintain his own justice and
righteousness, nor yet repulse wrong and injury done unto him, these fellows
(I say) dishonor God, in thus deemyng him to be neither just nor holy. But
he that is a true Christian, must entierlie ascribe all justice unto God, and
unto himself (as truth it is) all injustice: to acknowledge God ever holy,
and himself profane: and sincerely to profess and confess that God is in all
his doings most just and holy. This hearty acknowledgment he requires at the
hands of every one of us. And foreade we Dani. ix. O Lord God, just and true
are thy Judgments which thou have done unto us, for we have sinned and
committed iniquity, and have done wickedlie, yea we have rebelled, and have
departed from thy precepts and from thy judgments: and therefore unto thee O
Lord belongs Righteousness, honor and glory, but unto us open shame and
confusion. To conclude, when any calamity or mishappe (as it is commonly
taken) betydeth us, let us heartily thank God and bless his holy name for
it, and that is it which saint Peter and Esaias do here call, the right
sanctifiyng of the Lord our God.

Notwithstanding, it is not hereby required at our hands, to say, that he
which has harmed us, has done therein well and justly. For the Judgment that
is between God and thee, is of a far other sort, then the judgment between
thee and me. I may foster and nourish in my heart, hatred, evil lusts, and
dissolutes desires, wherein I nothing at all hinder or harm thee: as thou
likewise hurtest not me in that which thou do: but yet before God I am
unjust and have deserved sharp punishment: and therefore if he punish me for
the sin, he deals justly with me and does me no wrong, for I have deserved
it. If he do not punish me but pardon my trespass and offense, yet he does
therein justly, for always and in all things justice and righteousness is
to be ascribed unto him: albeit hereupon it follows not, but that he does
unjustly which persecuteth me. For although I have grieuouslie sinned and am
guilty of heinous offenses before the Majesty of God, yet have I not thereby
wronged him, that without cause persecuteth me. Therefore when God gives leave
to the Devil and evil persons to have power to work any harm unto thee,
and to afflict thee, having done no harm unto them: know this, that God uses
them as Executioners of his Justice: that thou may thereby learn, that
godless persons and wrongful practices, are to the godly, things both
good, expedient and profitable.

For so read we, Ezech. xxix. of King Nebuchadnezzar, where the Lord by his
Prophet says: Dooest thou not know that he is my servant, and served a
great service for me. And then he further says: Behold, I will give him a
reward* for I have not as yet recompensed him, for the labor and service that
he did for me. I will give unto him, the land of Egypt for his labor, and it
shall be the wages for his Army, for he served against it, and they wrought
for me, says the Lord God. This King had neither right, nor authority over
the Egyptians, but GOD had both: And therefore it pleased him, by this King
and his Army, as by his instruments, to take punishment on them. And in
this sort also are evil and graceless persons the Servants of GOD, and
serve him: because they should not be fed at his hand frankly and
freely, without doing somewhat for their living. For God commonly franketh
and pampereth them full of these Temporal pleasures, and worldly delights:
in lieu whereof he uses their ministry and service, to work his will, and
that they should Butcherly persecute his Saints. Which purpose of God,
because these bloody Wolves by their fleshelie reason, can not look into:
they thereby nozzle themselves in this error, that they think themselves to
deal therein very well and godly. Whereas in deed they are in this present
world, only rewarded with wealth, prosperity, Pomp, Dignities, Revenues,
Jurisdictions and Seigniories: and that for none other cause, but for that they
be Gods Hangmen and Executioners, to persecute the godly Christians. And
therefore if thou pacientlie suffer, and sanctify God in thy dealings,
yeeldyng unto him thanks for all things, whatsoever it pleases him to send
unto thee, there is no doubt but all goes well with thee, For, he will never
fail them that unfeignedly trust in him, but will assuredly throw and cast
thy persecutours (except they earnestly repent) into hell fire, there to be
perpetually tormented even for the wrongs that they have dooen unto thee:
whereas thee he will mercifully receive into endless bliss and felicity.
And therefore be contented to let him judge and requite: for of him shall every
one receive, according to his deserts.

An example hereof we have in the holy man Job. Who after that all his goods
were consumed, his Cattall taken away, his Children slain, and all that he
had, wasted: brake out into no worse words then these: The Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken away again, even as it has pleased the Lord, so is
it come to pass, blessed be the name of the Lord. Job. j. And when as his wife
came to him, mocking and skornyng him, saying: What meanest thou? What gettest
thou by this thy uprightness? Blaspheme God and dye. But he said unto her,
Thou speak like a foolish woman what? Shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and not receive evil? Wherefore even as it has pleased him, so is it
come to pass: as the Lord has given (says he) so has he taken away
again: It was not God that gave, and the Devil that took away, but yet the
Devil was the mean or Instrument whereby all this was done: but he did it
none otherwise then as a minister or Tormentor appoincted thereunto by GOD.
This man righly sanctified God: wherefore God also highly commended him and
wonderfully enryched and dignified him.



WE must needs confess, that saint Peter writes these words unto all
Christians in general, as well to Popes and Popish Clergy as to the Laity, to
Women as well as to Men, to young as well as to old, of what state, sex or
condition so ever they be: willing every one that professes Christianity,
without any exception, to hold fast the sure ground work of their Faith:
whereby they may at all times be able to yield a reason of the same, and to
answer for it, when and wheresoever occasion requires, The Laytie hitherto
has been debarred and inhibited the readyng of the Scriptures: in which
practice the Devil used a marvelous subtle devise, to terrify, abashe,
waine, and estraunge men from the Scriptures: wherein (the more to be
lamented) he prevailed and attained to the very end and pitche of his first
conceived drifte. For thus thought he with himself: If I may once bring to
pass, that the Laity may not read the Scriptures, I doubt not but within a
while, I shall drive the Popes themselves from the Scriptures also, to the
study of Aristotle, and of the Schoolmen. Whereby it shall come to pass,
that ere it be long, they shall babble and prate on nothing so much, as their
own dreamyng devises, and make a Religion of their own foolish and absurd
fantasies: and as for the Laity, they shall be driven to have none other
instruction, but what it shall please the Clergy to tattle and preach unto
them. For, if it were otherwise, and that the Laity also might be suffered to
read the Scriptures, then should the Popes also theimselues, be driven to
apply the Scriptures, least they should be justly reprehended of the Laity,
and their falshoode and forgerie detected. But mark these words of Saint
Peter, thus generally spoken unto us all: that we should all be ready to
yield an accoumpt and reason of our Faith. When thou die, it is neither I,
nor yet the Pope, that is able to help thee, if thou stand not upon a sure
foundation of the hope that is in thee: or if thou should have nothing to
say, but that thou beleeuest and wilt believe, as the Councelles, as the Pope,
and as thy forefathers have believed. For the Devil will by and by reply
against thee, and say: What if they have erred? Whereby he will drive thee to
have never a word to say, and so hale and draw thee into Hell. And
therefore it stands us upon, to be certainly persuaded and grounded in those
things which we believe, namely, that the Word of God is not that, which
the Pope, or which our holy Fathers do either believe or say. For we must
not depend upon, nor trust unto any person whatsoever, but only upon the
very express and only Word of God.

And therefore when thou art rebuked, reprehended, or (as though thou were an
heretic) demanded any questions concerning thy Faith, or why thou beleeuest
that by Faith only thou shall be saved: let thine answer be thus: Because
I have the express Word of God for my warraunt, and evident textes of the
Scriptures that so teaches me, as namely, saint Paul Romans j. The just shall
live by his Faith. And again, the words before alleged by saint Peter out
of Esaie Chap. xxviij. as touching the lively Stone Christ, where he says:
He that believes on him, shall never be confounded. These sure grounds do I
stick unto, and in so doing, I am certain and sure that I cannot be deceived.
But if thou will wilfully (as many foolish minded persons use) say: Sir, we
will rely and adhere to what soever the General Counsel in this or in that
poinct shall define and determine: and whatsoever is there concluded, we will
stand unto and maintain: I tell thee, who soever thou be that so say,
thou art a forlorn person, and in a most miserable case. Let this rather be
thy saying: what is it to me, what either this man or that man, either
believes or decrees: For if he bring not the sincere and true Word of God,
wherewith to direct and persuade me, I will neither hear him nor believe him.

Peradventure thou will say: All things are now so perplexed and so
intricate, that no man certainly knows, what to believe and therefore we must
stay till such time as it be concluded, what we must observe, and what we
must follow, I say again, that if thou dwell upon that poinct, thou shalt
in the mean season go straight to the Devil. For when thou art come to the
last pinche of life, and see thou must dye, and yet know not what thou
art bounden to believe, then can thou neither be helped and relieved by me,
nor yet by any other. And therefore it behooves thee to know perfectly what
thou art to believe, and not herein to depend upon the determination and
appoinctment of any other manne: But firmly and steadfastly to cleave unto the
word of GOD, if so be that thou desire to escape the pains of hell.

It shall also be very expedient and necessary for such as be unlearned,
perfectly to learn, and faithfully to bear in memory some plain and evident
places of Scripture, and some such certain and infallible sentences, whereon
as upon a foundation they may lean and trust. Among the which this may be
one, where the Lord said unto Abraham Genesis xij. In thy Seed shall all nations
of the earth be blessed. This place being firmly fixed in memory, thy
surest Auckerholde and state is steadfastly to believe it, and strongly to
rely unto it with this persuasion in thy self. Behold, although the Pope and
all his Cardinals and all Councelles maintained the contrary, and would
affirm anything otherwise then is here set down, yet will I vnmooueablie
confess and stick unto this, because I certainly know this to be the
Word of God, which abides fast for ever, and can never deceive me. Nothing
can be blessed but through this Seed. And to be blessed, is nothing else, but
to be freed and delivered from all curse, that is, from Sin, Death and Hell.
Whereupon it necessarily follows, that he which is not blessed by and
through this Seed, is a damned Soul and a member of Satan: and that
therefore our own Works and Merits are nothing at all available to us toward
our Salvation.

The very same thing is meant up that before mentioned place of Saint Peter:
He that believes in that Stone, shall not be ashamed. Therefore if thou be
appreached by any, and asked a reason of thy Faith, answer out of this
place, and say: This is the foundation and groundworke of my Faith, which I
know can not deceive me: and therefore, I little care what Pope or Bishop
either teaches or defines. If they were true Bishops, as they ought to be,
they should so zealouslie, so painfully and so continually preach this
foundation of Faith, that none among the Christians should be ignorant of it.
Whereas they (contrari wise) cry out and say, that it is not lawful for the
Lay people to read the Scriptures. And therefore if thou be asked, whether
thou will consent and believe that the Pope is the head: answer thou, Yea: and
safe that thou so take him to be: to wit, the head and ringleader of all
ruffianlie Ve^lettes and bloody Tyrauntes in the world because thou have a
place out of saint Paul. j. Ti^^. illj. teaching thee: That there should come
some in the lati^e time, that should teach the doctrines of Deuilles,
forbiddyng to marie, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thankesgiuyng of them which believe and know the
truth. etc. These things has the Pope forbidden, which is so generally well
known that none can deny it, and therefore he is Antichrist. For what soever
Christ either teaches or commands, against that he both kicketh, and
endeavors all that ever he can, each way to infring it, and to establishe
the contrary. That which Christ has left free, the Pope binds, and that
which Christ plainly says not to be Sin, that does the Pope affirm to be
Sin.

After this sort therefore thou must learn to yield a reason of thy Faith.
For, of this be assured, that a reason thereof thou must yield: if not in
this life, doubtless in the time of thy death, thou shake be charged there
with. Thine Enemy the Devil will be ready at thy elbowe, to say: Why haste
thou called the Pope Antichrist? Now, if thou be not fully furnished with
sufficient reasons, to yield unto him the cause, why thou did so, he will
triumph over thee and go away with the victory. And therefore saint Peter's
meaning is here to premonishe us thereof: That seeing we have believed in
Christ Jesus, we must make our reckonyng to be exercised with diverse
temptations and sundry kinds of persecutions: in all which, we must be
strongly armed and comfortably shielded with the hope and expectation of
eternal life. And therefore when we shall be asked, why we so hope, it shall
most needefully stand us upon, to be furnished and instructed with the
Word of God, and thereunto only to stick.

Furthermore, the crabbed and Sophistical School men have utterly perverted,
wrested and misconstrued this place, as they have (in a manner) all the rest of
the Scripture: mainteyning and holdyng, that Heretics are to be confused and
convinced by Reason and by the light of Nature, by Aristotle and such like:
because in the Latin text it is termed, rationem reddere. As thaugh saint
Peter mean that this should be done by human Reason. Whereupon they grew
so far in their dreamyng dotage, that in the end they were not ashamed to
say, that the Scripture was too weak to refell and confute Heretics: and
therefore that the defectes thereof must be supplied by Reason: and that the
right trial of true Faith must be fetched out of the wisdom of man's
brain. Whereas our Faith far passes all reason, as that which is the
great power and virtue of God. Therefore when they will not believe thee, it
shall be best for thee to hold thy peace: and to, rest thy self inwardly,
satisfied, that thou can and do draw all the foundation and ground work
of thy Faith out of the pure and lively Word of God. But some of them will
here step forth and say. What Say thou that we ought not to observe the
doctrines of men? Were not Peter and Paul, yea and Christ himself, Men? When
thou meetest with any such shameless and impudent persons, so blinded and
obstinate, as either to deny or to doubt whether that which thou preachest
out of the Word of God, be the Word of God or no: give them no answer, have
neither speech (...) communication with them, but refrain them: giuyng this
reason (...) them for a farewell, that thou will and art ready to give
sufficient reason of that which thou preached out of the sacred Scriptures: if
that they will believe and give credit to the Scriptures, thou do a good
deed so to win and confirm them: if they will took for other helps
besides, deal not with them. But here will some say. So shall the Word of
Godly open to confusion, and be trodden down. Commit th^^ that is God, whose
quarrel it is, and who is best able to defend his own cause. It shall
therefore be very expedient (...), thoroughly to acquaint our selves with the
sacred Scriptures, whereby we shall be able to stop the mouths of (...):
because the number of them that usually make these and such like objections
is now adays very rise.



WHen ye are questioned withal, and asked (...) touching your Faith, answer
ye not with any opprodr^^^s or malaper^termes, neither with so (...) struggling
distemperaunce, as though you would how down a main Tree, but do it with
such in idlnesse and submission, as if ye should stand to answer ever before
the Judgment of God. For it may be, that it thou (...) to answer concerning
thy Faith, before Kings and Princes, and that thou hardest a certain time
before, very well prepared and furnished thy fr^t for the same purpose with
sufficient flo^^e of sundry places of the Scriptures, and (...) think with
thy self: I am now ready for all my (...) shall be very well able to (...)
their (...) their objections: it may be (I (...)) that the Devil (...) wa^te
to ^rippe thee, will be (...) thy (...) and of thy hand, and by thee means
so (...) the (...) of (...) and dismaie thy courage, (...) be able to do that
which thou pretendedst, but discredit the cause and thy self, and so thy
former furniture nothing avail thee. For, he is so enured with malicious
skill, that he knows well enough how to wring from thee (as it were thy
fighting sword out of thy hands) those places wherewith thou chiefly had
armed thy self to buckle with thine adversaries, and to maintain the cause
that thou had in hand: and so thy good purpose should come to none effect.
For he knows aforehande thy purposed deiuses, and God suffers it so to come
to pass, thereby to repress and pull down thy pride, and insolency, and to
make thee to humble thy self.

Therefore if thou would not that such a foil should happen unto thee, it
behdoueth thee to take it ill hand with tremblyng and reverent fear, and not
to repose any manner of trust in thine own strength and ability, but only in
the Word of GOD, and promise of Christ, Matthew. x. When ye shall be brought
before Kings and Rulers for my sake, take ye no thought how or what ye shall
speak: for it shall be given you in that hour, what ye shall say: for it is
not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father, which speaks in you. Thou
do very well, at such a time when thou must in such case answer, to
furnish thy self with sufficient stoare of textes and sentences of Scripture:
but this withal thou must take special heed unto, that thou do not trust
too much in the same, or insolently deal therein: least God take as well out of
thy mouth, as out of thy memory, that place or Text, wherewith thou did
purpose most specially and strongly to assail and encounter thine Enemy,
although thou were before armed and stoared with all the places and textes
within the Scripture. Therefore thou had need to tremble and fear.
Wherewith if thou together with the sentences of Scripture, be furnished, thou
shall be able to defend thy self and the cause that thou haste in hand before
Princes and Magistrates, yea before the Devil himself. Only take heed, that
the staff whereunto thou leanest, be the pure, Word of GOD, and not the
dreggie devises of man's fantastical imagination.



OF this spoke Saint Peter before. For we can not escape (if we stick fast to
the profession of the Gospel) but be evil spoken of, reviled, yea and
condemned of the world: in somuche that we shall be accoumpted no better then
the lewdest fellows and naughtiest persons that live. And therefore we must
arm our selves patiently and willyngly to bear all these things, and only
before GOD to stand in reverent fear, and to have within us the testimony of
a good conscience: And then let the Devil rage at us, and all the world
stamps and stare at us: let them both backbite, revile, and slander us as
much as ever they list: in the end they must be put to confusion and shame,
for so falsely and slanderously accusyng us. For when the Lord God in the
day of visitation (as Saint Peter says) shall lay all things open and
manifest, then shall we stand in safety before him, with a good conscience.
These excellent and pithie sentences, are sufficiently able to confirm and
strengthen us, and also to keep and conserve us in awe and fear.



IT can not possibly be, that they (to whom heaven is appoincted for their
enheritaunce) should here in this world live in quiet state according to the
desire of Nature: seeing the same happens not to those that be of the world,
and which have neither part nor portion in the kingdom of heaven. It is an
Iniunction indifferently appertainyng, and equally alike liable unto all Adams
children and posterity, which was denounced to Adam by the mouth of God
himself. Gene. iij. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread: And
unto Eve, In sorrow shall thou bring forth Children. Seeing therefore that
these external incommodities, are indifferently and alike inflicted upon all
persons, how much more meet is it, for them to bear the Cross upon their
shoulders, who shortly after shall be translates hence into the heavenly
kingdom, there to enjoy endless bliss, and life everlasting? Therefore
(says he) if the will of God be so, it is better that ye suffer for well
doing. They which suffer for evil dooyng, and deservedly, carry about with
them an evil conscience, and are tormented with a double punishemente: Whereas
true Christians abide only but she one haste of that pain: because although
they suffer outwardly much pain, grief, anguishe, smarte, vexation,
tribulation and torment in their Flesh, yet have they inwardly in their
Spirit and conscience, great joy and consolation.

But here he has set down certain limited bounds, how we should submit our
selves to affliction. And in that he says If the will of God be so, he
gives us a profitable lesson and warnyng, that none should be so mad, to
imitate the custom and manner of the Donatistes, of whom Saint Augustine
makes mention: who snatching certain textes and places of the Scripture,
touching suffryng and affliction, killed themselves, and wilfully threw
themselves headlong down into the Sea. GOD has no pleasure in seeing us to
do any kind of harm unto our selves, or to seek any new^angled devise of
bodily annoyance. Let this be our drifte and shoot anchor, sincerely to w^lke
in Faith and brotherly love and then if it please the Lord to lay the Cross
upon us let us joyfully embrace it as it please him to exempte us from
tr^^ble, let us not wilfully and willyngly (...) it. And therefore (...)
preposterous course do those (...) h^^te Spirits take, which use to whippe
and per^e, yea many times to (...) themselves with beatyng, thinkyng by that
means to (...) and win Heaven.

This kind of new found Religion, and wilful counterfaite humility and
affliction, in this outward punishment of the body, S. Paul forbids to be
used, Coloss iij. We must mortify our body, and subdue our members, that they
grow not wanton, ^r wax ^asei^i^^s, but we may not violently destroy them.
This is the meaning of these words. (If the will of God b^^ so) which is as
much to say, as, if God be pleased to (...) any kind of Cross or
persecution unto us* For then it is better to suffer, and them therein out the
happier and blessedder, if for well doing thou abide and suffer affliction.



HEre again does saint Peter propounde and set before us, for a pattern to
imitate, our Lord Christ and his bitter Passion: after the rule whereof, we
ought to frame our selves, and not presume to prescribe unto our selves, any
new devised singularity. For as Christ is a Pattern to all Christian
Believers, and to them all is set down for an Example, so ought all men in
generality to imitate his steps: and in all their actions, professions, and
functions of life, what soever betide, to have respect unto him, and after his
dealings semblably to conform themselves. And Saint Peter's words in
effect sound thus: Christ was just and suffered for well dooyng, for our
sakes that were unjust: But he sought not to sayng the Cross upon him, but
tarried the time till the will of GOD did so appoincte, that he should drink of
the Cu^^e of his painful Passion. Him now ought we to take is by Example, and
in the whole course of our life, diligently ^^^^presse and resemble. And this
example Saint Peter here namely sets down unto us, because he has
already taught every sort of persons, in what trade soever they live, their
sever all offices and duties, concludyng the same with this example of
Christ's Passion.

And this is here to be noted, that he says that Christ suffered once: which
is as much to say, as that Christ suffered and satisfied once for all, even for
all the sins of the whole world, and not that he should for every several
sin, severally die. By which his death, once for all, he has clean taken
away all the Sins, of so many as in Faith approach nexe unto him, and
faithfully believe in him: All which are now delivered from the danger of
Death, as surely and as certainly as he himself is now delivered and freed from
the power of Death.



AS though he should say: How much more ought we to be willing to suffer,
being so sinful, and so many ways deseruyng it, seeing that Christ was
content to suffer death for our sakes, being himself most just, for us that
were unjust, and clogged with the chains of so many most horrible Sins,
wickedness, and transgressions?



ALL this is spoken, only to instruct and teach us in what sort the Passion
of Christ was, to wit, such, that he died not for any cause of his own,
but to the intent to reconcile and bring us to GOD. How can that be, will thou
say? Did he not offer up himself? I answer: True it is, that he offered up
himself on the Cross, for so many of us as believe in him: In which his
offryng and oblation he offered us up also, so that so many of us as steadfastly
believe on him, must also with him, according to the flesh suffer and be
killed, even as he suffered and died. God has here in such estate placed us,
that we living in the Spirit, might yet due in the flesh, as afterward
saint Peter declares. But as we are offered up with Christ (that is) as we dye
with Christ, even as he, according to the flesh truly died, so do we live
with him in Spirit, even as he himself does Spiritually live.



THis word Flesh in the Scripture is a common usual word, as also this
word Spirit is: which two vocables the Apostles do ever in a manner set,
the one against the other. Now, the meaning of these words is this: Christ
in his Passion died and was taken out of this life, which is flesh and blood:
such flesh and blood as manne here in this world is cladd withal: the
offices and functions whereof are these, Going, Standing, Eating, Drinkyng,
Sleapyng, Watchyng, Seeing, Hearing, Touching, Feelyng, and to speak all at
one word, what soever is naturally to be done in this body, and is frail
and transitory. To all these died Christ. Saint Paul calls these, the
Natural or Animal body, for that all other Creatures, have the use of all
these actions as well as we. But his flesh died not, in any other sort but
according to the flesh: that is, according to those Natural and corporal
functions, which are done and exercised by the body: To this life (I say)
Christ died, so that all these functions likewise died and ceased in him, and
he himself transported into an other life. And being quickened according to
the Spirit, took unto him a life Spiritual and supernatural, comprehendyng
and possessyng in it self, all that life which Christ now possesses, as well
in Body as in Spirit. Who now has not any longer such a carnal Body as he
had before, but a Spiritual body. And thus does saint Paul expound this
place.

The very same, hope we also at the latter day to enjoy: to wit, that our
flesh and blood shall pass and be altered in to a spiritual life, wherein
these our Bodies shall no more eat and drink, begette children, digest,
concoct, euacuate or any such like: but shall (...) in Spirit, and this body
shall be as clear^ as n^w the S^nne is, yea (...) clearer. Flesh and blood
shall not thenceforth be natural, there shall then be no such function
either (...) or corporal, such as other Creatures now (...) as well as we.

These be in a manner the words which saint Paul uses. j. Cor. xv. The
first man Adam (says he) was made a living Soul, and the last Adam was made
a quicknyng Spirit. And it there follows, That as we have borne the Image of
the earthie and natural Man, so shall we bear the Image of the spiritual and
heavenly. From Adam we have all the offices and functions natural, even as
brute Beasts have, according to our outward senses and faculties. But Christ
lives in the Spirit, and is flesh and blood, but not so as he did before: all
outward functions of bodily Senses are ceased in him, he neither sleeps nor
watches, and yet knows he all things and is in every place. Such also
shall we be: for he is the first fruictes, the oblation and first box^re (as
S. Paul says) of the (...): that is, he is the first that arose from the
dead and took unto him a spiritual life. Therefore Christ does now live
according to the Spirit, that is to say, He is still very perfect Man, but he
has a spiritual Body. And therefore that which is here said, is not so to
(...) taken as we usually do, when we separate Flesh and Spirit asunder the
one from the other: but that the Body and Flesh are now spiritual, and that
the Spirit is both in the Body and with the Body. For saint Peter's meaning
is not here, that Christ was raised by the holy Ghost, but he uses this
word Spirit after a general manner: (...) if a man should say, the Spirit
does this or that. In which words, is not simply meant the holy Ghost, but
rather that inward working, and effectual force which works in us by the
operation of the holy Ghost.





THis place I do take to be as obscure and hard to be understood, as any
in the new Testament: insomuche that I confess my self not yet to have found
out the certain meaning thereof. First the words them selves do sound, as
though Christ had preached unto Spirits: I mean, the Souls of them that
would not believe in the time that Noah built the Arc. The sense thereof
being somewhat hard to conceive, has hitherto so entangled me, that neither
can I aduouche any sound interpretation of it, neither any other as yet that
has taken in hand the exposition thereof. Some peradventure will not stick to
take these words so, as that Christ after his death on the Cross, went
down into Hell, and preached to the Souls there: with which vain opinion I
mean not here to enter disputation. But me thinks, these words do very
well admit an other sense and meaning, to wit, that our Lord Christ, after his
ascension into Heaven, came in Spirit and preached, albeeit not bodily. For
he speaks not now with any bodily voice, as he also uses none of the other
functions of corporal or bodily nature. And therefore, let us take the words
to signify and mean, according as they sound, that is, in Spirit: and that
he preached to the Spirits in that his spiritual life. Whereupon it also
follows that his preaching then was spiritual, emplantyng the same in their
hearts and Souls: so that, there was no need for him to go in body and
preach with mouth for the same. These words of saint Peter prove not, that
after he dyed, he went down unto the Ghosts that are in Hell to preach unto
them. For he says thus: In which he went etc. Which is as much as if he had
said: After he was dead according to the flesh and quickened according to
the Spirit, (that is) after he had laid down and left his life in the
flesh, and all other natural works and functions of his body, and had now
taken unto him a spiritual life and conversation, as now he has and does in
heaven: then he went and preached to the Spirits etc. Now it is most evident
and certain, that Christ descended not eftsoons to Hell, after he had
received this his new glorified life. And therefore we must understand, that
he made this preaching, after his Ascension into Heaven.

Seeing therefore that the words do well bear to be understood of a
Spiritual preaching: we are to think that S. Peter in this place speaks,
of the Office of Christ: for that as the word is outwardly preached by Voice,
so works he inwardly in the heart. He enjoined his Apostles, to preach the
Gospel bodily, but yet is he himself present spiritually: and whatsoever the
Apostles utter in outward speech to the bodily ears of men, that doethe he
speak and preach into the hearts and minds of them inwardly. And then
preaches he to the Spirits, whom the Devil holds captive and in
thraldom: so that we take this word (went) and these words preaching to the
Spirits that are in prison according to the accoumpt and computation of God
himself, because in the sight of Christ they that have been long since, are
even in the same state as they be that now presently live. For his Kingdom
reaches to the dead as well as to the living. In that life wherein he now
lives, the Beginning, the Middle and the end of the World, are contained and
reckened after one and the same accoumpt and all as one: although in this life
these things be not reckened so, but each thing according to his orderly
succession, as the Son after the Father, and so of others. All things lie
naked to the sight of GOD, and are as now present unto his eyes: and he in one
moment or minute of time ouerlooketh and surueigheth all that is, was or
shall be. A thousand years with him are but as one day, as saint Peter in
his second Epistle declares. And therefore the first man is as present unto
him, as the man that shall be last borne, for with one glaunce he beholds at
once the whole World.

Let this therefore be the meaning of this place: that Christ now preaches not
any more corporally, but is present in his Word, and thereby preaches to
the Spirits in their hearts. And here we must note, that Saint Peter uses
a Figure, named Synecdoche, which is, when the whole is taken for a part: and
contrariwise, when the part is taken for the whole. For he preached not
altogether unto them alone, but unto all that are like unto them, and of
semblable disposition to theirs: As if a man (for example sake) should now
say: This man preached among the Heluetians, who sometimes were under the
government of the Dukes of Austria. It herevppon by and by follows not, that
he preached to them that sometimes were Vassalles to the Dukes of Austria,
and are now long since dead: but it suffices to say, that he preached to the
people dwelling now, in that Country, which before lived in such subjection.
And thus under the name of the part, the whole is many times understood, and
the whole again oftentimes is put to signify the Part. And after this sort
must we by this life have respect, and consideration of the other life.

This is the best interpretation in my Judgment that can be for this place:
howbeit if any manne bring a better, I will be glad (as meet it is) to allow
of it. But to be plain, I can not at any hand be persuaded to believe, that
Christ being quickened in Spirit (that is, having now taken unto him a
Spiritual life) did descend into Hell, and preach to the Souls there:
specially, seeing the Scripture is flat against any such matter: affirmyng
that when things are brought to that poinct, every one shall receive
accordyngly as he has dooen and believed. Again, it is not certain in what
state the dead remain. To conclude, the words themselves are against any
such meaning for the dead. Now, this is undoubtedly true, that Christ is
present and preaches in the heart, when as the faithful Minister or vocal
Preacher, with fruit utters and instilleth the Word of God into the Ears:
and therefore we may boldly and without danger, admit and embrace this
interpretation of this place. He to whom God has reueiled, and opened a better
exposition, I wish to be followed. The very sum therefore of this our
Interpretation is this: Christ being now quickened in Spirit (that is, after
he was ascended into Heaven) preached afterward unto the Souls of men, who
before used to preach to their bodies: among which Souls there were many
Unbelievers in the days of Noah.



HEre again persisteth Saint Peter, in alleging and insertyng the
Scriptures, in which, his purpose is to draw us to enure and exercise our
selves. And out of them he brings the figure of Noah his Arc, which be
also explaneth. It is very comfortable and proper, to fetch Similitudes from
such manner of Examples as this: which order Saint Paul also followed:
Gala. iiij. where he records the mystery of the two Sons of Abraham, and
also his two Wives, and afterward expounded the same. And Christ also Ihon.
iij. speaks of the Brazen Serpent, which Moses lift up in the wilderness,
Number. xxj. Such pithie Similitudes are easily learned, and willyngly hearkened
unto, and men commonly take great delight in the hearing of them. And
therefore Saint Peter here brings in by way of comparison, the Similitude
of the Arc of Noah: whereby he briefly and in few words, and yet with a
certain pleasure, sets down a sure lesson to confirm Faith. And that
which he here sets down, to have come to pass when Noah made the Arc:
after the same sort stands the case now: that as he and his, (even eight
Souls) were saved in the Arc, which was carried upon the Waters, so must we
also be saved through Baptism: that Water did then once save both men and
all Creatures beside: and so Baptism being received in Faith, drouneth in us
whatsoever is carnal and natural, and makes us Spiritual: And this comes
to pass, when we betake our selves into the Arc, which signifies and
figureth our Lord Christ, or the Church of Christ, or the Gospel which
Christ preached, or the Body of Christ, in which we all hang together by
Faith, and are delivered from all euilles, even as Noah by the Arc was saved
from being drenched in the Waters. Gene. vij. Thus we see, how this example by
him here brought, comprehends (as it were) compendiously and briefly, both
what Faith is, and what the Cross is: what is Life, and what is Death? Now,
where soever there be men that wholly depend upon Christ, there certainly is
the Church of Christ: and there is utterly drouned and killed, what soever is
in us that is evil, and that issues and comes from our old Adam.



YE are not hereby satted, in that the filth of your bodies is clean washed
away, and nothing else cleansed but the Body, as the Jews precisely observed
and used to do, (for such kind of purifiyng is of no moment nor force: but
it is a good Conscience making request to God, that saves you. When as ye
feel within you a good Conscience, cheerfully and confidently daryng to show
it self, and to appear before God, as though there were a covenant or bargain
between them, and therevppon dare boldly say: This has my Lord God
promised me, and I am sure he will perform it, for he is such a one, as can
not deceive. If ye thus steadfastly cleave unto his Word, and wholly depend
upon him, you can not miss but be saved. And the Mean whereby we thus
obtain Salvation, is Faith: and not any outward Work, that we our selves are
able any ways to do.



THis small portion of words has Saint Peter purposely added to that
which went before, to show a reason of the Faith that is grounded hereupon:
because that after Christ died, and descended into the lower parts, he stayed
not still there, but anon arose again from the dead. For if he had continued
still in Death, we had remained still in our miserable estate, forlorn as we
were before: But because he is risen again from the dead, and now sits on
the right hand of his Father, and has caused the same to be published and
preached unto us, to the intent we should believe on him, we have therefore a
certain covenant, or promise with GOD, unto the which we certainly and
unfeignedly do trust, and by the which we are saved and preserved, even as
Noah was by the Arc. Thus therefore has Saint Peter laid before our eyes,
and made the whole Arc spiritual unto us: in which is neither Flesh nor
Blood, but a good Conscience to Godward, and that is Faith.



ALL this he speaks, to make our Faith the perfecter and stronger. For it
behooued, that Christ should ascend into Heaven, and be made Lord of all
Creatures, and that all Power what soever, and where soever, should be
subjected unto him, to the end he might advance and bring us thither, and
make us also Lords of all things.

All which be of singular force and efficacy, to comfort and confirm our
hearts and minds. For hereby are we assuredly persuaded, that all things
through Christ and by Christ, are made to serve us: That whatsoever power there
is in Heaven, or in Earth, yea Death and Devil, all are hereby enjoined and
compelled to serve us, and for our uses, even as they are bound to serve
Christ, and to lie in all subjection under his feet.

The fourth Chapter.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
like wise with the same mind, which is, that he which has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin,



















GOD. If any man minister, let him do it, as of the abilite, which God
ministers, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ,
to whom is praise and dominion for ever, and ever, Amen.




















Saint Peter still continues in the same Argument that he had in hand in the
other Chapter before. For as he there generally exhorted us to suffer
affliction and persecution (if so the will of God be) and for the same, set
Christ for an example unto us: so does he here more largely handle and
confirm the same, making thereof as it were a repetition: saying: Forasmuch as
Christ our Graund Captain and head, suffered in the flesh for us, and also by
his bitter passion redeemed us, and in his suffryng became an Example unto us,
it is most meet and our bounded duties are to imitate him, and to be likewise
armed and furnished. For, the life of Christ, and especially his passion, is
set down unto us in the Scriptures after two sorts. First, as a free Gift
given unto us (as saint Peter in the third Chapter before has worthily
described and set him down unto us) most chiefly laboring to build us on
him by Faith, and teaching us that by the Blood of Christ all our sins are
expiated and clearly done away, and we freed from the thraldom of our
transgressions, and restored to the participation of eternal life: seeing that
Christ was freely given unto us: all which benefits can of us be none
otherwise conceived and apprehended then by Faith only. And of this he spoke
before, where he said, that Christ once suffered for our Sins. This is the
principal and the chiefest poinct of all, and in the holy Scriptures set
down as most excellent. And secondly, Christ was given and set forth unto
us, as an Example or pattern for us to imitate.

For when as we have once apprehended and taken hold of Christ as a free
Gift, by Faith, we must next endeavor our selves and bend all our studies
to imitate and resemble him in the whole course of his life, unto passion.
After this sort, does saint Peter here commend unto us, Christ's passion.
He purposelie speaks not hereof the works of Love, wherein we serve our
Neighbor, which be properly called Good works (for of them has he already
spoken very sufficiently) but of such works as concern our own bodies: as
namely, when we serve our selves, and be so careful of our own estates,
that our Faith (while we mortify our Sins) may be the stronger, and we our
selves the fitter to serve our Neighbor. For when as I do tame and bridle
mine own body, and keep it under, that it wax not wanton and prove to
lasciuiousnes, I shall not have any delight to enueigle my neighbors wife or
his daughter to satisfy my inordinate lusts. So likewise, if I my self kill
and quench in mine own mind, the flames of spightfull envy and cancarde
hatred, am I not a great deal the fitter to deal lovingly and gently with
my neighbor? I have oftentimes before said, that although by Faith we be
fully justified, and have Christ with all his merits fully our own, yet
ought we to apply our selves to good Works, and to seek (all that we can)
the benefit and commodity of our Neighbor. For we are never perfectly purged
and clean so long as we dwell in this world: there is no man but feels and
finds in his Body a Storehouse of many evil lusts and filthy desires. For
Faith begins to mortify Sins, and to bring with it an heavenly life: but
it is not as yet here perfect and strong enough to do that which it would:
Even as Christ reasoned of the Samaritan, which was not yet wholly restored to
health, although his wounds were bound up, and charge enough given for his
curyng and looking to: so fares it with us. For when we believe, our wounds
are bound up that is to say, the infection and disease which by propagation is
derived into us from Adam, is begone to be healed: which is brought to pass
(as we see) in some, remisselie and slowly, in other some, speedily and
quickly, accordingly as every one chastises himself and represseth his flesh,
and has a fuller measure of Faith given unto him.

And therefore, when we have attained these two, Faith, and Charity, our next
study and care ought to be, even until we dye, to skowre and pourge these
relics of Sin, yet harboroughyng within us. And therefore says saint
Peter, Arm ye your selves likewise with the same mind, that is, confirm your
minds, and strengthen your hearts in this cogitation, to do as Christ has
dooen before you. For if we be right Christians, we ought thus to think with
our selves. My Lord GOD has suffered for me, has show his precious blood for
me, and has suffered Death on the Cross for me: why should I be such a
bastard, to be unwilling to suffer any kind of affliction? For, if our Lord
himself issue out into the brunte and breaste of the Battle, how much more
meet is it for us, being his poor Servants, joyfully to abide and undertake
any danger? These cogitations would animate us to pearce into, and boldly to
adventure to give the ^nsect upon any dangerous assaies what soever.

This word Flesh signifies not only the Body, consistyng of Flesh and
Blood, Skin and Bones: but all what soever comes from Adam. So says God
Genes. vj. My Spirit shall not always strive with manne, because he is but
Flesh. And Esaie likewise: Chap. xl. All Flesh shall see the saving health of
God: That is, it shall be manifest before all men in the world. So also say
we in our Creed, I believe the resurrection of the Flesh, (that is) that all
mennesh all arise again. Flesh therefore signifies the whole and entire
Manne, even as he lives in this life. Now, the w^^rkes of the Flesh are in an
excellent order, reckoned up and recoumpted by saint Paul, Gala. v. And not
those gross actions and works of the Flesh only, as Fornication, but the
chiefest and greatest vices that be, as Idolacrie, and Heresies, which be
resiau^t not in the Body only, but rather in the Reason. Note therefore, that
Manne, together with his Reason, Will, and all inward motions, (Soul and
Body) is called Flesh, and that because with all his powers both inwardly and
outwardly, he pursues and himteth only for those things that are carnal,
and delightful to the Flesh. Even so says Saint Peter in this place, that
Christ suffered in the Flesh: whereas it is certain, that his Passion was not
only in the Flesh but in his Soul also, which adode that most extreme
agoine, whereof Esaie speaks.

And after the same sort must we also take this that follows He which
suffers in the Flesh, cease from Sin. For this is not the meaning of it,
that he which has his head chopped of, or his body only dismembered,
ceasseth from sins: but this suffryng in the Flesh comprehends in it, what
soever it be that aggreeueth and utterly discontenteth Man, or that which
shall be his hap willingly to suffer and bear: what Misery, Calamity,
Vexation, or necessity so ever it be. For there are a great sort, that
being sound in body, are (notwithstanding) inwardly in mind greatly
perplexed and disquieted, and in heart grievously tormented. Now, if these
grieves be laid upon them, for Christ's cause, it is good and commobious for
them: for he that is afflicted in the Flesh (says he) ceasseth from Sin.
For this purpose is the Cross very profitable, because thereby Sins are
qualified, and greatly alaied. For when a Man once begins earnestly, and
from the very bottom of his heart to repent, it is wonderful to see, how
soon and how quickly Lust, Envy, hatred, and other sins do vanishe away
and cease. Wherefore, GOD has laid the Cross on us, thereby (as it were) to
compel and pushe us forward, as well to believe in him, and to put our thirst
in him, as also that we should reach our helpyng hand one to an other,
through Love.



Our parts and duties are, as in the whole course of our life, so by the
Cross and daiely chastifyng of our selves, to conquer and subdue our Flesh,
and to bring it in subjection: not with intent thereby to merit any thing
toward our Salvation, but to show our selves grateful and duetifull unto God.
Not after the lusts of men, (says he) that is: We must not do it, to
please either our selves or others thereby. For we must not fashion our selves
like unto this world, as Saint Paul writes in the xij. Chapter to the
Romans. Whatsoever the world requires of us, that must we refrain and
forbear.



WE have already too much cockered our selves, and been too much given to
our own wa^ton delites: for before we received the Faith, we spente our
time and bestowed our lives, according to our own sensual appetites, in no
better sort then very Gentiles: And therefore we must strive and endeavor our
selves to consecrate, and direct the residue of our life, according to the will
of God, and to do that which may be acceptable, unto him. For we have our
Enemy within our own bosom, we foster and nourishe him within our own
flesh: there and from thence the crafty and most Pestilent enemy (as it
were) out of an ambushe, privily and secretly sets upon us: and that not
with any gross and apparaunt vices, but rather with the credit, iolitie, and
estimation of the Flesh, which is called by Saint Paul, The wisdom of the
Flesh. j. Cor. j. This being now beaten down, all the rest would easily and
with little adode be repressed and vanquished. For this oftentimes annoyeth
and hurts our neighbor, and that so closely and secretly, as that it can not
be descried or espied.

Saint Peter calls that Wantonness, when with sasciuious words and
gestures, the lust of the heart and mind is stirred up and although no
actual dealyng ensue therevpo^: and when either in speaking or in listenyng to
others that use lend and unchaste talk, a man any way intemperately
behaueth himself: so that anon after, there be enkindled naughty desires and
inordinate motions, yea, and many times burst out into open act. Thereout
sometime spryngeth Idolatry also, which in the sight of God is a thing
abominable. This mischievous wickedness (if we be not wary and careful,
to keep our Faith unspotted, will go nere to touch us. For if we once loose
and make shipwreck of our Faith, we are most sure withal to loose God
also, and so shall we committ more gross and horrible Idolatries, then ever
any Gentiles did, and therefore it stands us greatly in hand, to look well
to our selves.





YE have heretofore led a Heathenishe life, and now because ye have forsaken
that trade, it seems unto them that still wallowe in the same mire, a very
strange thing, yea, a very foul and foolish part of you: not stickyng to
say: Lo, what foolish fellows be these, that thus they renounce all
worldly iolitie, and dispossess theimselues at once from all the delights of
this life? But suffer ye them to have this their vain talk, let them
accoumpte this your conversion, and alteration very strange, and let them
dispraise and despise your purpose as wilful and absurd. The day will come,
when they must be called to their reckenyng, and give an accoumpt of their
dealings: and therefore in the mean space, commit ye all things unto God,
that will judge all things according to right.





THis place again is somewhat strange and difficile. The words do plainly
say, that the Gospel was preached not only to the living, but also to the
Dead, and yet nevertheless he adds these words, That they might be
condemned, according to men, in the Flesh. Now, they that are dead, have no
Flesh: wherefore these words can not be understood otherwise, then of them
that be alive. How soever we take it, the phraze is somewhat strange. Whether
the whole text and sentence in this place be perfect, or whether some
words be missyng, I will not take upon me to define. But thus do I
understand this place, and am certainly persuaded in the same, that it
belongs nothing to us, how and after what manner GOD means to condemn the
Gentiles which dyed many hundred years ago: For it behooves us rather to
look and consider what he will do to them that yet are alive in the world.

This word Flesh is so to be understood as was before declared: to wit,
that it entierly signifies the whole Man, as he lives, as also he is called
all Spirit, when he cares for the things that be of the Spirit. These be so
mingled together, as if one should say of him that is wounded: this man is
whole, if but only the better part in him be wholly cured. For he is said
to be wounded but only in that part, wherein he was stricken. So likewise in a
Christian man, the Spirit ought to have the chief Souereigntie. Therefore
says he, that they are condemned in the flesh: that is, according to the
outward man: but according to the inward man, which is the Spirit, they be
saved and live.

But how comes this to pass, that he says, they live, and yet
notwithstanding calls them dead? Truly, according to my poor skill and
capacity (for I will not that this my interpretation should prejudice and
forestall the meaning of the holy Ghost, but that I dutifullie yield my self
to them that bring a better) I do think, that by those whom he calls Dead,
he means Infidels. For it carries no likelihood of truth, to say that the
Gospel was preached to them that be departed out of this life. Unless
saint Peter's meaning be this: that the Gospel was so generally and
universally in the world proclaimed, and so openly in every place rong out,
that it was hidden neither to the quick nor to the dead, neither to Aungelles,
neither yet to Deuilles: that is to wit, It was not preached secretly in
corners and in huckermucker, but so publicly and openly that al Creatures, if
they had cares to hear, might hear: according to the tenor and effect of
that Commission and charge given by Christ himself. Mar. xvj, Go ye into all
the world and preach the Gospel to every Creature. Now, when it is in this
sort preached, it finds some, whom according to the Flesh it condemns,
but in Spirit it makes them to begin to live.



AND this sentence also seems very strange. There are now passed above a
thousand and five hundredth years since Saint Peter wrate this Epistle,
which is no small time to look for the end of all things to approache. But
he says, that the end of al things is already come, and is now present.
And so says saint John also in the second Chapter of his first Epistle.
This (says he) is the last time, Unless therefore such an excellent Apostle
had plainly said, that the end of all things is at hand, it might have been
said again, that he had erred and not told the truth. But now must we
steadfastly believe, that (no liyng but) a true Apostle has spoken it. What he
means in so saying, he himself declares in his second Epistle, where he
yields a reason why he says that this so long a space is but a short time
and nere at hand: One day (says he) is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day. But we must undoubtedly think,
that there rests not so many years till the dissolution and end of the
world, as have continued from the beginning unto the time wherein this was
written. Neither must we look that this life shall continue yet two or three
thousand years from the nativity of Christ, for the end will be sooner then
we think.





HEre we see, to what end Continency and Sobriety are needful, and
whereto they serve: to wit, that we may be the readier to pray both for our
selves and also for our neighbors. Furthermore, our Love can not be fervent,
unless we so chastise our bodies, that they may be apt to receive and ledge
Love within us. This sentence saint Peter boroweth out of the x. Chapter of
the Proverbs. Hatred stirs up contentions, but Love covers the multitude
of sins. This therefore is his meaning: Chasties your flesh, and quench ye
the lusts thereof, for if ye do not diligently endeavor to do so^ ye shall
easily offend one an other, and not be easy and willing to forgive one an
others offenses. And therefore strive to repress and subdue the affections and
lusts of your flesh: for so shall ye both love one another, and willingly
forgive one an other. For love covers Sins.

This place is by some so wrested as though it did seem to make against Faith.
For this is their saying: Thou affirmest that man is justified only by Faith,
and that no man can be delivered from the guilt of his Sins, by his works.
How chances it then, that both Solomon and S. Peter affirm and say, that
Sins are covered by Love* Solomon's meaning and words are in effect these: he
that swells with any hatred against an other, teasseth not to practice and
stir up contentions and braulinges: But where sincere love is, it covers
Sins and gently pardons any offenses. Where ^naer and wrath have taken
hold, there is a man waiward, stubborn, hard to yield to any reconciliation,
remains still full of indignation and spite: but when a man is endued with
Love, he will not be incensed and moved to any garboile and unquietness,
though he be greatly provoked thereunto: he courteously covers, hides and
winketh at all things, as though he saw them not. So that this word (Cover)
whereof both Solomon and saint Peter speak, when they say, that Love covers
the multitude of Sins, must have relation to our Neighbor and not unto God.
For as it is Faith only, which covers my Sins before God, so is it Love
that covers the sins and faults of my Neighbor. For as the mere love of
God to me ward, covers my Sins, when as I faithfully and steadfastly
believe that God will not look upon them nor punish them: so ought I also
with my Love toward my Neighbor to cover his sins toward me, that I be
not therewith offended. And therefore (says he) Above all things have fervent
love one to an other, that ye may cover and hide one an others faults. And
this is further to be noted, that this Love covers not one or two Sins
only, but the multitude of Sinnie: it cannot be drawn by any provocation to
be so angry, but that it covers all. The same also has saint Paul j.
Cor xiij. Where he does (as it were) expound this place. Love suffers all
things, believes all things, it hops all things it endures all things:
that is, it thinks the best of every thing, it can patiently bear all
things, and take well in worth whatsoever it be.





HE is barborous, which cherefully and heartily receives and entertaineth
Strangers. As when the Apostles travailed through diverse Countries, and
preached where they went, sendyng their disciples abroad to sundry places, it
was requisite that they should mutuallie be harborous one to an other. Which
example were good to be more put in ure nowadaies then it is: that we having
the gift of preaching, should likewise travail from place to place, from City
to City, from house to house, and not to sit still in one place: to see
where any were weak, that we might comfort him: if any were fallen, that we
might raise him up, and likewise to do such other duties as to an
Apostolical function belongs.

Now, all this must be done without grudgyng (says saint Peter) not as
though we were loath to do it. And this is one office or duty of Love, as
this is likewise which next follows, namely, that we should with the gifts
wherewith God has endued us, minister one to an other. The Gospel requires,
that every man should be as an others Servant, and to minister and serve to
the necessity of an other in that vocation and function whereunto he is
called, to the best of his ability: according to the measure of that Talent
that is committed unto him, and according to that stace and condition of life,
wherein every one is placed. For it is not hereby meant, neither is it the will
and commandment of GOD, that the Master should minister and be at beck to
his Servant, nor that the Handmaide should have the rule over her Mistress,
or that the King should be corporally serviceable to a Beggar: for he can not
abide, that that authority and high degree of superiority, wherein they are
placed should either be disquieted or diminished. But he requires that every
one in heart and Spirit should serve an other: that although thou be of high
calling and authority, yet may thou none otherwise use thy authority but
to the commodity and benefit of thy Neighbor. And in this sort, is it
requisite and convenient for the Master to further and help his Servant with all the service he can, wherein he yet remains a Master still, and lawfully
may repute and accoumpt himself in higher degree of calling then his Servant:
but a man may not lift up himself in the pride of his heart for the same, but
to think of himself, as of a Servant, insomuche that he could find in his
heart (if it so seemed good to the Lord) even to be a Servant. This inward
persuasion ought also to be in the godly, in every state and degree.



GOD has not given a like measure of grace and gifts to every one of us. And
therefore every one must look about him, and consider with himself whereto he
is made fit of the Lord, and what gift it has pleased God in mercy
specially to endue him withal. Which when he has thoroughly skanned, and
exactly noted in himself, his duty is therewith to serve his neighbor, and
that in such sort as here is more at large particularly set down by saint
Peter, saying.



THat is, if any manne have the gift of preaching and teaching, set him
preach and teach, as Saint Paul Roma. xij. wills him: That no man be
wise in his own conceit, nor presume to know more then is meet for him to
understand, but that every one understand according to sobriety, as God has
dealte to every manne the measure of Faith. For as we have many members in
one body, and all members have not one office, so we being many, are but one
in Christ, and every one, one an others members, having gifts that are diverse,
according to the grace that is given unto us. And immediately after in the same
Chapter he adds: If any manne have Prophecy, let him Prophecy according to
the proportion of Faith: If he have an office, let him wait on his office:
Or he that teaches, on his teaching: After such an order and course does he
teach in other of his Epistles, as namely. j. Cor. xij. And Ephesians. iiij.

And this is the cause, why God has diuersely distributed his gifts unto
men, namely, to the intent we should use them to the benefit and mutual
help one of an other: specially and chiefly they that be in any manner of
public office or function, whether it be in the ministry and preaching of
the Word of God, or in any other. To the office of preaching, that properly
belongs, which here saint Peter prescribes: namely, unto whom soever the
office, vocation, and charge of preaching the Word of GOD is allotted, let
him speak, As the words of GOD. Which caveat and lesson ought most
carefully to be taken heed unto, that no man presume to preach or teach any
thing, whereto he has not the express Word of GOD for his warraunt, and
except he be most certain, that the same be directly to be avouched out of
the sacred Scriptures. Which being so, what may be thought of the Pope, and
of his dirtie Dregs and traditions? Do we not see his mouth with this one
word notably stopped? This I say, to the intent every one may manifestly see
how shamelesly and ridiculously he braggeth and vau^teth him self, to be
saint Peter's Heir and Successor, not making any accoumpt at all, of that
which saint Peter in this place prescribes and wills.



WHo soever executes any function in the Church, or has the cure of Souls
committed unto him, may not deal as be list himself, or to ouerrule matters
according to his own sensual will, ^^^ither may he say: Tushe, I am a
Prelate, the people must all listen to that which I say, and observe my
Laws, Ordinances, and Injunctions without gainsaie. For God requires this,
that no man minister, or do any thing, contrary or repugnaunt to that
which he commands and appoineteth. A Prelate or Bisshoppe (I say) ought to
do nothing in the Church, unless he be certain and sure of the warrantise
thereof by Gods Word. For God can not abide to have his service iumbles and
mingled at pleasure, with every foolish guegawe, and light tromperie. And
therefore he ought to have an assurance and certainty in his mind and
conscience, that even GOD both speaks and works in him: and to stand upon
so sure a ground for the verity thereof, that his Faith dare boldly
witness with him, and say: Whatsoever I have spoken, and what soever I have
done or dealt herein, I am so out of doubt, that the same in each respect is
consonant to the Word and will of God, that I am ready and dare to seal the
same with my blood, and to confirm it with my death. For other wise, if I
waver and totter this way and that way, not knowing whose cause and business
I have in hand, my Faith is builded upon the Sand, so that the Devil mine
adversary, is able to shake and tumble it which way be list. And therefore
we are here straightly forbidden, not to rely unto, nor to allow what soever
decree or constitution these Bisshoppes list to obtrude and enjoin, unless
they stand upon a sure ground, that the things which they do, are allowed
of God, yea done of God himself: and unless they be able to say: Do this,
for it is the will and commandment of GOD, and we have his express Word
and Commandment for our warrant. If they be not able to say thus, they
ought to be accoumpted as Liars and deceivers: much less ought any Christian
to yield unto them therein any obedience or subscriptio^. For, the Lord has
so appoincted, that our Consciences should not elsewhere be stayed, but upon
the most sure and infallible Rock. And thus much for public functions,
wherein it is not lawful for us at any hand, to follow our own wilful
devises, and sensual conceptes nor to prescribe any role or order to be
embraced, unless we be undoubtedly assured, that it stands with the will
and Word of God. Wherein we evidently see, how clean against the Kingdom
of the Pope, and his Mitred Bisshopps (as things therein are now handled)
Saint Peter's mind and Judgment was, long before any Pope were known in the
world, to rule the roste in such Pontificalitie, as since they have done.



I Would have you so sure and certain, that that which you speak and do,
God himself speaks and does, that ye may therein glorify God as the
aucthour thereof, humbly thanking him for his bounteous gift: which thing ye
can not do, when ye do any thing, whereof ye be not sure whether God allow
it, or no. But being sure and certain thereof, how can ye choose but with
most humble thanks to praise and extol so good, so gracious, and so
bounteous a Lord, who vouchsafes to give his blessed Word to speak in you,
and he himself to do his own work in you? Whom otherwise ye should but
mock and skorne, and lie unto him, so long as ye pretend to give thanks unto
him for his good gift: being not sure, whether it were his gift or some idle
devise and imagination of your own brains. And therefore there is nothing so
pernicious, nothing so monstrous, nothing so beastly, as to go about to
govern the Church of God, without the warrant of Gods own Word and Work,
and therefore saint Peter saw great reason to add this much, thereby to
teach how the Church ought to be governed.



HEre again he uses a phraze or form of speech where with our tongue is not
acquainted. But Saint Peter therefore uses it, to put us in mind of
sundry is textes and places of the Scriptures, which many times terms
Persecution and Affliction, by the name of a fiery Furnace. After which sort
Saint Peter himself, before in the first Chapter of this his first Epistle has
these words: That the trial of your Faith being much more precious then gold
that perishes, (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your
praise, honor, and glory at the appearyng of Jesus Christ. Likewise we read
in the Prophet Esaie. Chap. xlviij. that the Lord speaks these words:
Behold I have tried thee, in the furnace of affliction. And in the xxvj.
Psalm. Try me O Lord, prove and examine my reins and my heart. Again Psalm.
lxvj. We passed through fire and water. To be short, it is an usual phraze
in the Scripture, to call affliction, Fire: and trial of fire. And hereunto
alludeth Saint Peter, willing us, not to think it strange, or a thing
unmeet and vnexpediente for us, though this fiery trial happen unto us, to
prove and try us, even as gold is tried in the Fire.

For as soon as we have vowed our sincere Faith unto God, and have given our
names to serve him: God lingereth not long, neither makes any delaie, but
presently withal, lays his Cross upon us, to try and confirm us in our
profession, and to make our Faith the more strong and effectual. The holy
Gospel is a Word of wonderful power, and therefore can not show out his
proper force and might otherwise, then in Temptation and Affliction. And no man is ever able to declare or to know, what the mighty power and virtue
thereof is, unless he have experimented and tasted the same in Tribulation.
Wheresoever the Cross and Affliction be, there namely does the glorious
Gospel of GOD, both displaie and exercise his force, might and virtue. It is
the word of life, and therefore can not declare out his mighty operation and
power, otherwise then in Death. And therefore where there is not a Death and
affliction, there is no man that can tell or try, what the force and power
thereof is, and how far stronger it is then either Sin or Death. And
therefore it is, that he says [ Which is kindled among you to prove you]
that is to say: GOD never sends unto you any Affliction or fire, (that is,
any Cross or tribulation) to make a fiery trial of you, but he does it to
prove, whether you will stick unto him, and depend upon his holy Word and
Providence, or no. In the x. Chapter of the Book of Wisdom it is written of
Jacob, that GOD gave him an hard conflict, to the intent be might by trial
know, that the fear of God is stronger then all things. And this is the
cause, why GOD lays the Cross upon all them that be believers, that they
might taste and feel what the power and might of GOD is, which by Faith they
have embraced.



Saint Peter does not here require that we should feel and sustain the same
afflictions of Christ, wherewith he himself was persecuted, and so to be made
partakers of his suffringes: but his meaning is this: Christ was afflicted and
persecuted, and therefore think not you to escape scotfree without
persecution. When ye are thus afflicted, ye partake with Christ. For if we
will live with him, we must dye also with him. If we will reign with him,
we must also suffer with him, as saint Paul says Romans vj. Col. ij. Ephe.
iiij. Hebr. xij.j. Cor. vj.ij. Tim. ij. and in many other places.



WHen ye fall into any such tribulation and Cross, ye have cause to rejoice.
And this joy must be no less in the Spirit, then the torment is in the
body, if so be that ye aspire to eternal joy. For this manner of joy in
afflictions has his beginning here, but his continuance is everlasting.
Whereas on the other side, he that kicketh and repineth at the affliction
which the Lord sends unto him, and is (as it were) displeased and angry
with GOD for the same, that person shall suffer double torture: that is, both
here in this world, and perpetually in the world to come. We read of
certain holy Martirs, how they went to their torment, and suffered death with
most cherefull and merry minds: as of saint Agatha, who showed more joy and
alacrity when she was haled and drawn into Prison, then if she had gone to
any pleasant melody and daunsyng. So also did the Apostles return with joy
from the Counsel, yeeldyng earnest thanks to Almighty God, who had
vouchsafed to make them worthy to suffer persecution for Christ's cause, who
now are in bliss and eternal joy in Heaven.



Christ shows not forth himself visiblie as Lord, but as yet labors and
is in travail with us. As concerning himself he is already Lord of all
things, but we that be his members, are not as yet become so. But we shall
be so, when his domination and glory shall be manifested and shine brighter
then the Sun.



Christ is to the world, an o^ious and hateful name: of whom when thou once
beginnest to preach, thou must not think, but that they which on Earth be of
highest calling and greatest countenance, will both blaspheme and speak evil
of him. And in this Age wherein we now presently live, this further mischief
is grown, that they which be our persecuters, are those, which pretend yt name
of Christians, and would dear us in hand that they be the true professors of
his name: whereas in their deeds they utterly deny, renounce, and persecute
Christ: and yet (forsooth) they will be called Christians, gloriyng and
vauntyng themselves for that they be baptized. So that our case now is both
more dangerous and also more troublesome and grievous then others before has
been. For is not that conflict and Battle more then twice lamentable, wherein
our Enemies and adversaries against whom we fight, carry the same title, bear
the same Standards, and pretend to maintain the same quarrel that we do?
And therefore if this comfort and consolation of saint Peter were ever
necessary for any people, truly it is in these times most expedient and
needful for us, that we may constantly stand in our profession, and
cherefully persevere in maintenance of the truth against those that
persecute us: those (I say) which in the eye of the world are accoumpted the
best and the wisest.



YE have among you (says he) the Spirit, which is the Spirit of God and
the Spirit of Glory, that is to say: the Spirit which makes us glorious:
but not here in this world, but in the last day when the glory of Christ
shall appear and be reueiled. Furthermore he is not only the Spirit of
Glory, for that he makes us glorious, but also for that we agnize and
acknowledge him to be glorious, and attribute that honor as peculier unto
him: steadfastly believing that he will also glorify and dignifie us, even as
he has already glorified and dignified Christ, and brought him into the
glory of his Father. And therefore we ought not to be aggreeued or much
disqu^eted, although we be both blasphemed and accursed, since this Spirit
rests upon us: whereof we may be sure, for that the name of Christ rests
upon us. For that Blasphemy redoundeth unto him, that is the Spirit of Glory,
and not unto us: and he will in his good time be revenged thereof, and will
bring us out of it into glory. This is a notable comfort that we Christians
have, in that we may say: the word which I preach, is none of mine own,
neither is my Faith mine owne^ they are all the works and the gifts of God:
He that reuileth and raileth on me, reuileth and raileth on God: according to
Christ's own saying, Math. x. He that receives you, receives me, and he
that despises you, despises me. Saint Peter's words therefore are in
effect as though he should say: Know ye that the Spirit which ye have, is
of that power and might; that he can easelie avenge himself of his enemies as
the Lord himself Exodus xxiij. promises saying: If thou will has Led unto my
voice, and do all that I speak, I will be an Enemy unto thine Enemies. And
the Scripture in many places calls the Enemies of Gods people, the Enemies of
GOD himself. And therefore when we are rayled on for none other cause, but for
that we be Christians, and truly honor Christ: let us be assured, that so
long as we steadfastly believe, it is not we that are railed on, but the
spite and railyng properly reboundeth unto God. And therefore (says he)
patiently abide it, and rejoice in your mind is, for that which is done unto
you, is done unto the Spirit, which is the Spirit of God. And now be
proceeds and gives good fruiteful (...), that we should take heed and not
suffer for (...).





HIs meaning is this: Ye have heard both how ye must needs suffer affliction,
and also in your affliction how you must behave your selves: always forseen,
that ye suffer not for your own ill deserts but for Christ. Ye have heard
also how in this our Age the case so stands, that we are compelled to suffer
persecution under wicked bloudsuckers, who (notwithstanding) bear the name of
Christians. So that now a true follower and embracer of the truth of Christ,
suffering for the sincere profession of Christ, is not thought to suffer
persecution as a Christian, but is rather reputed and taken as an Enemy of
Christ: for that they which be the persecutours, challenge to themselves the
name and title of the true Christians: affirmyng as well as we, that he is
blessed and happy which dies for Christ. In this case, none but the Spirit
is able to discern who be the true, and who be the dissemblyng and
counterfaite Christians. And therefore thou must be firmly settled in Faith,
and thoroughly persuaded in soundness of Conscience, that thou art before God a
right Christian, and that thy heavenly Father does so accept and take thee,
whatsoever otherwise the World judges of thee.

When ye are therefore afflicted as Christians, let none of you (says saint
Peter) be ashamed, but rather let him glorify God for the same. Wherein he
shows that tribulations, afflictions and torments are things so precious,
that we ought to give God hearty thanks therefore, and to glorify his holy
name for so great a domitie: in that, of his especial favor toward us, of
unworthy he makes us worthy to suffer for the profession of his name. But
alas, this bearyng of the Cross nowadaies in many places is thought in a manner
wholly to consist in a garishe carryng about of a material Cross, after a
io^ie ceremonious solempnitie, which does a man as much good as Saite cast
into his eyes. It is not the Cross of Christ that shall faue me: I ought to
believe it: but to bear mine own. If thou in thine heart conceive and think
upon his affliction, thou haste obtained and art possessed of a right true
treasure. The Boanes of S. Peter be holy, but what good get I by that: Thou
must so strive that thou thy self and thy boanes may attain to be holy,
which thing thou art sure of, when thou art afflicted and suffrest persecution
for Christ.



HEre he brings in two places of the Prophets at once, tendyng both to this
purpose. The first is in the xxv. of Jeremy, saying thus. Behold, I begin
to plague the city, where my name is called upon: I will first chastise and
punish my best beloved and dearest children, they must first have some trial
and experience of this fire of tribulation, wherein the just are proved and
tried: And shall ye that are mine enemies (says Jeremy) go free? Ye shall
not go free. And again, Cap. xlix. Behold, they whose judgment was not to
drink of the Cup, have assuredly drunken: and art thou he, that shall go
free? Thou shall not go free: but thou shall surely drink of it: that is to
say: I strike and punish those whom I dearly love, to the intent thou
should see, what I mean to do to them that be mine enemies. The meaning
of which words are worthy of diligent consideration. The holier and godlier
children that God has in this world, the more ignominiously and cruelly he
suffers them to be dealt withal and massacred in the world. What then may
the rest look for?

The other place is out of the ix. of Ezechiel. The Prophet there saw certain
armed men, cariyng tools and weapons of destruction in their hands, who were
commanded to smite all that were in the City, young and old, men, women and
children, that were not marked in their forheades with TAV. And unto them, GOD
there further said: Begin ye at my Sanctuary. As Soon as ever the Gospel
is preached, God begins to punish Sin, that he may both kill and
quicken again, but he uses to beat the godly to their no harm, but as it
were with a Foxetayle (as the common Proverb sounds) and with a few twigges
after a motherly affection. What shall we think then, will he do to those
that do not believe? As though he should say: if he deal so roughly and so
severely with his well-beloved children, we may easily guess, what the
torments shall be that tarry for the unbelievers.



THis place is taken out of the xj. of the Proverbs. Behold, the righteous
shall receive punishment in the earth: how much more then the wicked and the
sinner? If the godly be beaten, where shall the wicked remain. The very
same here reports Saint Peter, saying: The just shall scarce be saved. He
is just which steadfastly believes, but no man persisteth and perseuereth
in Faith without great labor, trouble, and sweat: he must pass many Pikes,
taste of many a sharp brunte and calamity, and go through the fire of many
tribulations. Where then shall there be any place for him that believes not?
When as Faith is so violently and forcibly assailed and shaken, that it even
trembles and quaketh, how can he stand that is void of Faith? And therefore
he concludes.



They unto whom God sends affliction, being unsought for, undesired, and
vnprocured by themselves, let them commit their Souls unto him that is
their Creator. They still continue in well dooyng, they persevere and go
forward in good Works, they shrink not back for afflictions, but commit
and commend their Souls to him that created them, and is faithefull: In
which Word is contained most plentiful store of heavenly consolation. For,
seeing that God has created thy Soul without any care, labor, or help of
thee, when as thou was not as yet any thing, shall not be also easily preserve
and save it? And therefore commit it only to him, but yet so, that thou
must not think thy self exempted and privileged from good Works: for thou
must not think that thou must bye idle: thou must strive and endeavor thy self
to accomplish, and be each way aunswerable to the name of a Christian:
witnessyng thy Faith by thy good Works. But if thou live here carelessly and
rechlessely, thou shall in the end (doubtless) find that thou haste foulie
deceived thy self. This is the last admonition of saint Peter unto them that
must suffer affliction for the will of GOD.

The fifth Chapter.
THe Elders which are among you, I beseech which am also an Elder, and a
witness of the suffrynges of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be reueiled.

















his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a little,
make you perfect, confirm, strengthen and stablishe you.












HEre saint Peter teaches those that have any charge of feedyng the Flock of
Christ, how they ought to behave themselves. In the Chapter before, he told,
that none should presume to teach or preach any thing, unless he were
certain and assured that the same was the sincere and pure Word of GOD, upon
which as upon a firm and strong Rock, our Consciences may boldly stay. For
this in duty is required of us Christians, that we should be certain and
know thoroughly what thing is allowed of Christ, and what is not: for they
that waver in uncertainty of this knowledge, are not to be taken as
Christians. He adds also thus much, that whosoever enters into any office or
function, should so behave himself therein in each respect, as that he should
not doubt but that God was the Author thereof. But what he here says,
peculierly belongs to Bisshops and Ecclesiastical Pastors, wherein he
teaches them how they are to deme^ne themselves in the administration of their
duties and charges, and what manner of persons they ought to be.

We must here further be acquainted with the phraze and propriety of the
tongue, wherein this Epistle was written, that we be not deceived through
ignorance of the signification and force of the Word. For this Greek name
(...), which S. Peter here uses, does signify An Elder: by which word they
also are called that be. Senators: that is, Meuiexcellyng in age, gravity,
virtue, wisdom, and experience. After the same sorce; does Christ call his
Disciples, Ministers, and Senate, to whose office it belongs to ouersee and
govern his Spiritual Empire (that is, to preach and to take care of the
Christian Congregation) by the name of Elders. And therefore marvel not awhit,
neither let it any thing move thee, though they which be Elders, ^e nowadaies
called by other Titles or names, whereof the Scripture makes no mention at
all: But not respectyng the order, wherein things presently stand, weigh and
conceive the matter thus: When S. Peter or any other of the Apostles, came into
any City wherein Christians were, they ordained some one or other of them,
such as lived honestly and unblameably, and had wife and children, and also
skillful in the Scriptures of GOD, to have the superintendencie and charge over
the rest. And them they called Seniors or Elders, whom afterward both saint
Peter and also Saint Paul called Bishopps, whereby we may note, that
Bishops were none others, then the very same, that were Elders.

Touching this purpose, we read in the history of saint Martine, how a
ceirtaine man came unto a place in Apbrica, and there in a poor Cotage found
an elderly man, whom they thought to have been some plain Countrieman. Within
a while, they saw many people come flockyng to him, to who^ he preached and
expounded the Word of God, whereby they perceived that he was their Pastor
or Bishopp. For in those days, there was no difference either in apparaile, or
manners between the Bishops, and the residue of Christians.

The Elders (says S. Peter) upon whom the charge lies, to feed the flock
of Christ with the Word of GOD, and to have care over them in the Lord, I
exhort, which am also an Elder. Whereby it manifestly appears, that they
whom he here names Elders, were such as labored in the ministry of the
Word, and diligently preached the glad tidings of the Gospel. For, such as
he was that calls himself their fellow Elder, such also appears it that
they were. And here we see; how far he humbles and abaseth himself, in that,
he takes not upon him the name of a Prelate, (which in respect that he was an
Apostle of the Lord he might have done) but calls himself a Fellow Elder,
and also a witness of the suffrynges of Christ. As if he had said: I do not
only preach, but I am also among those Confessors of Christ, that are
exercised in daiely afflictions. And withal he also shows that so many as
be Christians, must be persecuted and suffer affliction. And this is a true
Apostle of Christ, unto whom if the Pope and his Bishops were any thing
like, (as they are shameless enough, to challenge to themselves the same title)
we would not greatly stick, willingly to kiss their feet.



THis part of the Apostles Style and Title, is of far more excellency, then
any that our Popish Bishopps dare pretend to use. For thereby does Saint
Peter take and reckon himself holy, and a blessed Manne. And alhou^gh he
perfectly knew, that he should be a partaker of the glory to come, yet takes
he no pride therein, he lifts not himself up in any swellyng glory, but
modestly contains himself within the bounds of temperate softnes and
courtesy.



CHrist is the first and chiefest Pastor, who has many Pastors under him: as
he also has many Flocks: whom being dispersed in sundry quarters of the
world, he commits to the charge and oversight of their Sheepheardes and
Pastors, as in this Epistle of S. Peter, written into diverse Countries and
Regions appears. But what is the charge of these Pastors to do? Forsooth, to
feed the Flock of Christ. This word (Feed) the Pope has raked and haled
unto him self, whereby he goes about to prove himself Lord and Prince of
all, and that it is in his own choice and authority, to deal with the
Sheep as he lists himself. But alas, who is so ignoraunte that knows not,
what this word (Feed) means: To wit, that the Pastors and Sheepheardes
ought to provide Pasture for their Sheep, and to see them have their meat in
conueniente and due season, whereby they may grow to be fruitful: And
moreover to watch that deuouryng Wolves rushe not in among them, and tear
the Flock in pieces? This word (Feed) signifies nothing less then to kill
and spoil.

Furthermore S. Peter calls it peculierlie the Flock of Christ, as though he
should say: Think not that the Flock is any of your own, ye are but only
Servants and Minister to look unto it, ye are no Lords nor Masters over
it. Contrary to the bold practice and customable dealyng of many Bishops,
which accoumpt and call every one within their Diocese and jurisdiction,
their Sheep. We are the Sheep of Christ, for he said before, Ye are now
returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. Bishopps are the
Ministers of Christ, to keep his Sheep, and to give them meat and pasture.
And therefore to feed, is nothing else then to preach the Gospel, wherewith
their Souls may be fed, fatted and fructified, that so the Sheep may be
nourished with the Gospel. This is the only and proper office of a Bishopp.

So said Christ unto Peter: Feed my Sheep, Ioh. xxj. that is, the Sheep
which I commit unto thee to feed, are not thine, but mine. Howbeeit these
words have been so canuassed and wrested by my Lord the Pope, that he
thereby usurps and exercises an external domination and Lordship over the
Church of Christ, whereas neither he, nor any of his sacrilegious Chapleins,
preaches so much as one word of the Gospel. They brag that they have
their succession from S. Peter. If it were so; yet fear I, that it could
scarcely be proved that any Pope ever preached the Gospel: For none of them
has left any thing behind him, that is written and extant, wherein a man may
read the Gospel. Saint Gregory the Pope was surely an holy man: and yet the
things which he preached, are not to be esteemed worth a straw: whei e^y it
may appear, that the same See of Rome is peculiarly and specially accursed of
God. I deny not, but sundry of the Popes suffered Martiredome under cruel
Tyrauntes, for the Gospels sake, but yet there is nothing extant that was
written by any of them, which is Evangelical. And yet they still brag and
crake, that it is their charge to feed, whereas in deed they do nothing else
but entangle, and clogge men's consciences with Laws of their own, and make
havoc and sale of men's Souls, never troublyng theimselues with preaching
one word of Christ his sacred Gospel.

True it is, that there are many to be found, as well women as men, which are
able to preach, and that with no less dexterity and sufficiency, then he
unto whom that charge and office is peculiarly committed. But because the
greatest number in the flock always is of weakelynges, therefore it is
expedient that some be appoincted to strengthen and confirm such, and to
keep back the Wolf from russhyng in among them and deuouryng them. For a
Preachers office and duty is not only to feed, that is, to teach his
Sheep, how they ought to frame theimselues to become true and sincere
Christians: but he has the charge also to look that the Wolf be kept out,
and that none of the Sheep be devoured, or seduced by false doctrine, and so
drawn into error, which is the continual drifte and practice of the Devil.
Now, there be many that can well enough abide to have the Gospel preached, so
that there might be no exclaimyng, and speaking against Wolves: I mean, so
that Preachers in their Sermons, would forbear railyng and tauntyng against
Prelates. But although I preach sound doctrine, and that which is true: and
although I feed and teach (my charge) the Sheep, well and rightly: yet is not
that sufficient: for it is further required at my hands to keep the Sheep
from danger, and to have a careful regard unto them, that Wolves come not
among them, to drive them away out of their fertile and wholesome pastures.
For, to what purpose is my building. if when I have couched and orderly laid
my Stones, an other straightwaies come and hurl them down as fast again, and
I seeing him, forbid him not? The Wolf is well enough contented, that the
Sheep be well fed, and fatted in good pasture: because the fatter they be,
they pleasaunter and daintier pray thinks he to make of them. But that
Dogs should incessauntly bark and baule at him, that can he not abide. And
therefore it is a matter of no small weight and charge, to feed well,
according as GOD has given in commandment to do: and it behooves each one
in that function carefully to consider his charge in this behalf.

The Flock (says he) which depends upon you, that is, over which ye have
charge, or which is among you, and not which is subject and liyng at your
Feet. Care for it, and that not by co^straint because ye can none otherwise
choose, but willingly: not for filthy lucre sake, but of a ready mind. Here
he comprehends in one word, all that which the Prophet Ezechiell in the
xxxiiij. Chapter of his Prophecy, writes concerning Pastors or Bisshoppes.
The meaning of this place is thus: Not only feed ye, but take ye care also
and provide for them, that they want nothing, and where any stands in
necessity or need, there see that ye relieve them: and in each respect, do
the parts and duties of right (...), that is, good Watchmen and faithful
Espialles. Look out, least danger appear, stand always priest and ready
on your guarde, and diligently behold and epsy out of your Watchtower, what
it is that is wantyng, or what it is that is befallen unto every one within
your charges. Hereby we may well perceive and know, that a Bisshoppe is even
the same that is here meant by an Elder. And therefore it is not true, which
some say, that a Bisshopricke is a dignity, and a Bishop only he that
wears a forked Mitre. Episcopacie is not a name of Dignity, but of Office:
for he that is invested with that name and title, ought to look to his Flock
and to be careful for it, and to serve as a good Watchman, to see abroad and
learn what things be amiss any where within his charge. As if there be any
that is weak, having his conscience wounded, him ought he to confirm,
comfort and heal: if any fall, him ought he to lift up again, and so as
other defectes arise, to be ready to help, whereby Christian people may be
sufficiently looked unto and provided for, both in Soul and in Body. This is
the reason that has moved me heretofore oftentimes to say, that if we would
institute a right Christian Common wealth, it were necessary, that in every
City there should be three or four Superintendentes, to take care and
regard over the Church and Congregation, and to reform and restore
whatsoever therein is amiss or wantyng.

And here he touches two special points, enough almost to terrify and
discourage any man from bearyng authority over the people, or to take this
great charge and burden upon him. For, first there be some virtuous and
honest men, who half vnwillynglie are drawn into the Ministry and function
of Preaching: for that, they see it to be a painful and laborious office, to
skoute about every where, to see how the Sheep live, to succor and help
them that be in want, to strengthen and raise up them that be waueryng and
ready to fall: and finally to have such diligent care and continual watch
over them, that the Wolf find no entrance to invade and come russhyng in
among them: yea in that, he must not stick to lay down his life for their
preservation and safegarde. And also for that it is such an hard matter and
of so great difficulty, truly to discharge the office of a godly Pastor: yea
of so great danger also, because it must be thoroughly executed, and that not
unwillingly, or as though it were, by constraint. True it is, that no man ought
to intrude himself into that Office: but if he ^^^hereunto called and required,
he ought willingly to take it upon him, and to discharge and perform as much
as to his function and office appertains.

For they that take this matter upon the^ upon necessity and constraint, and
have neither courage nor pleasure in the same, shall never with any profit
fruitfully discharge or execute their office.

Again, there be others worse then these, which take this Office upon them
for none other end, but for filthy Lucre, to scrape and rake together wealth,
and to pamper and cramme their bellies. These fellows seek only for the
Wool and the Milk of the Sheep, but as for good pastures for them they care
not: and with this scabbe is the Popish Clergy horribly infected. And this
is a most hurtful, dangerous, noisome and filthy Vice, then which there
can not be any so dishonorable or shameful for him that takes on him the
name and charge of a Christian Bisshoppe or Pastor. Which was the thing that
caused both the Apostles, Peter and Paul, and also the Prophets so often to
record and inculke it. This caused Moses to say, Number. xvj. I have not taken
so much as an Asle from them: neither have I hurt any of them. And Samuel
also: Ye know that I have not taken any man's Ox, or Ass from him, nor done
wrong to any etc. j. Sam. xij. For if he that has this charge and function of
feeding the Flock, be greedily given to scraping together of richesse and
wealth, and to gape after filthy Lucre: such a one (I say) is himself
easily and soon changed from a Pastor into a Wolf.



THat is, even with pleasure. Let the Pastor or Bisshoppe apply his Office and
vocation, and that with a ready willingness. They that thus cherefully,
pro^ptly, and zealously discharge their function, are those, which as they do
their duties willingly, so do they not greedily pull the fleeze from the
Sheep. There be therefore two sorts of false Pastors. The one sort occupy
their room grudginglie and unwillingly: the other willingly and gladly: but
yet for gain and filthy lucre.



SVche are they that are willing to take the office upon them, for dignity
sake, because they would live pompouslie and bear great swaie and authority
in the World. He therefore exhorts Bisshoppes, Elders and Pastors, that they
practice not any Lordly tyranny over the Flock, as though the people were
their Slaves and Underlings, or as though they had such authority and
Lordshippe over them, to command what they list. For we have but one Lord
which is Christ, and he it is which governs our Souls. Elders and Pastors
have no further charge the^ to feed. And here in one word Saint Peter
utterly overthrows all the kingdom of the Pope: and concludes that no
Bisshoppe has any authority, somuche as in one word to clogge and tie the
consciences of the faithful to the observation of their precepts. For they
themselves ought to be Servants and Ministers, and to say: Thus says the
Lord, and these be the Words of Christ: it is not we, the words are none of
ours: and therefore ye ought to do that which is here commanded. According
to that which Christ says: Luc. xxij. The Kings of the Gentiles reign
over them, and they that bear rule over them, are called gracious Lords, but
ye shall not be so. Contrary whereunto the Pope boasts and braggeth, saying.
We ought to be Lords, and to us only it belongs to exercise chief rule
and supreme authority.





SEE that ye be the foremost in the battle, vsyng such honest conversation,
that your life may be a Lantern to give light, and an example to the people,
to imitate you. But our Lordly Shauelynges use to tell the people an other tale,
bidding them to do this and that, they themselves in the mean while leanyng
on their soft Cusshions, and taking their ease like Lordinges: laiyng upon us
great and grievous burdens, which they themselves will not touch nor lift at
with one of their fingers: not trauailyng any whit in preaching the true Word
of God, but rather in commaundyng others to do that, which they themselves
never did, nor ever meant to do. And yet must no man tell them thereof, for if
he do, he should be sure quickly to feel the smart of it.

Again, to such Pastors, Bisshoppes, Elders and Superintendentes, as here in
this world did their duties faithfully, truly, sincerely and holily, Saint
Peter assigns no temporal reward: As though he should saie^ Your Office and
function is of more excellency and dignity, then that in this life it can be
requited and recompensed: there is due and kept for you an everlasting Crown,
that shall be given unto you which faithfully and diligently feed the
Flock of Christ. And this is the Exhortation, where with S. Peter encorageth
them, to whom the charge and cure of Souls is committed. Whereby is manifestly
concluded and proved, that the Pope with his Cardinals and Bisshoppes is the
very Antichrist, and the professed adversaries of Christ, for that they do
nothing of all these, which Saint Peter here requires. For they neither
teach others, neither do they any thing themselves, but are wholly and
altogether busied in those devises, and bymatters, which are most opposite and
contrary thereunto. They neither feed the Sheep themselves, neither will
they suffer others to feed them: but rather play the rauenyng Wolves,
deuouryng and murtheryng the Flock, and yet brag they that they be Christ's
Vicars on Earth. Too truly (the more pity) are they in the room and stead
of Christ being absent: after the manner and example of the Devil? For
wheresoever Christ is not in place, there they bear swaie, and as Butcherly
Tyrauntes reign and command most imperiously.

It is therefore very expedient and requisite, that the Lattie and simpler
sort should perfectly remember this and such like places: by the which they
may be able to answer against that Antichristian Kingdom of the Pope, when
soever they shall be called into question and examination as touching their
Faith: yea, thus may they well say, when they are brought unto such
pinches: Behold, Christ says thus: and the Pope says the clean contrary:
Christ says yea, the Pope says nay. They therefore thus teaching
contrary and repugnant doctrines, the one of them must needs lie. Now, that
Christ should lie, it is impossible, and therefore it is the Pope, that is the
liyng Ruffian of the world, and not only a Deuilishe Liar, but even
Antichrist himself. Thus ought thou to be furnished and armed with the
Scriptures, by the which thou may not only boldly call the Pope,
Antichriste, but may also (when thou haste so done) must plainly and easily
prove it, so that thou may surely by the word of God persist in thine
opinion, even to the death, against the Devil and all his infernal Army.



THese are his last admonitions of this Epistle. This order requires S. Peter
in the Church of Christ, that the younger sort be duetifull and obeisaunt to
their Elders, and that in the whole course of their life the Inferiors show
submission toward their Betters. Which if it were now adays observed and put
in ure, we should not need so many Laws. For he requires of the Younger
sort, their obedience toward their Elders, and willyngnesse to be governed, by
the direction of their wisdoms: For that, they best know what is most
pleasyng to God, and what shall most redounde to their commendations and
praises. But he speaks here of such Elders as are learned in the holy
Ghost, and are godly experienced. For if they theimselues he not endued with
godly wisdom, but be sottishe and foolish, it is not to be thought, that
they can any way well govern others. But of such as be discrete and wise, it
is most expedient and convenient, the Youth should be governed. And saint
Peter here speaks not of the civil administration and government of the
Commonwealthe, but he speaks generally: namely, that they which be Elders,
either in years or by office, or any way else, should train up and govern
the Younger sort in their duties, and in matters of the Spirit.



HEre he somewhat tempereth and qualifieth his words spoken before, requiryng
that every one should submit themselves one to an other. But how can this well
agree, that all men should submit themselves one to an other, if the
superiority and government be to be given (as was before said) unto them
that be of the Elder sort? Some will say, that Peter in that former sentence
spoke of Elders and here in this place only of the Younger sort, who ought to
submit themselves first to their Elders, and next one to an other. But we
will take these words as spoken in a generality, even as that sentence of S.
Paul Roma. xij. In giuyng of honor, one going before an other. For I take
that place, as I also do this present sentence of S. Peter, to have reference
to all manner of persons indifferently, and without respect. The Younger ought
to be obedient, and submissaunt unto the Elder: but yet so, that the Elder may
not think themselves to be Lords over them, but be ready and willing to
submitt them selves also, and be directed by them that be Younger, if any of
them be endued with deeper understanding, or profounder skill then they have.
Even as in the old Testament, the Lord oftentimes advanced Yonglie men, to
bear chief office and principality, where he saw them to excel the Elder
in wisdom and foresight. The same lesson teaches Christ, Luc. xiiij When
thou art bidden to a feast, set not thy self down in the chiefest place,
least a more honorable man then thou be hidden, and then he that badde both
him and thee, come and say to thee: Give this man room, and thou then begin
with shame to take the lowest room. But when thou art bidden, go sit down
in the lowest room, etc. Which parable he concludes thus: For he that
exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted. Therefore truly the Younger ought to submit themselves, and be in
subjection unto the Elder: and yet nevertheless, the Elder ought again for
their parts, to be so modestly minded that each of them think himself in his
heart the lowest. If we could thus do, the world would be in a merueilous
quiet stay and tranquillity. And this (says he) we ought to apply our
selves unto, that we may thereby show forth the lowliness of mind, that is
emplainted and resiaunt within us.



THem that be so lofty minded, that they will not yield and stoop, God
himself cools and deiect^th: and contrariwise, exalts and aduaunceth those
which humble and throw down themselves. This is a common beaten saying in
every man's mouth, but would God it were as well used and put in ure in
life, as it is often and almost every where still talked and pronounced with
tongue.



Forasmuch as God so requires, that ye should submit your selves our to an
other, see that ye do it willingly, and so he will exalt you but if ye do it
unwillingly, yet shall ye do it, because he will abate your pride, and throw
down your loftiness.



Think ye not that he will tarry long, but steadfastly trust ye in him: for ye
have his sure promise, that this is the hand of GOD, and his blessed will: and
though in the judgment of flesh, the time seem somewhat long, yet never have
ye any respect to the time, but commit your selves to be protected and
governed by the mighty hand of God, which most assuredly in the end will
exalt you.



YE have those promises, by the which ye may rest in most perfect
assurance, that God will never forsake you, but still take care for you: and
therefore abandon and cast away your own carfulness, and let the Lord
alone deal for you. Suffer him to take the entier charge and care, both of
you and yours. These be most comfortable and sweet words, and to a
Christian Conscience most cheerful and amiable. And why uses he so many, and
such forcible prouocations and reasons to persuade Humility? Truly, because
the Nature of man is so stiff and so stout, that no man almost willynglie
will abase and deiecte himself, or renounce his own sensual fantasies. And
therefore herein he suig^^^^y comfort us, showing how that God does not
only look to us, but also cares for (...), and bestows even all the
vowelles of his incomparable love upon us.



HE admonishes us to look to our selves, and goes about to open our eyes,
that we slumber not in slouthe or give our selves to idleness, not regardyng
how nere we be to danger and peril. And here we may behold and see, what
this life is, and how this worthy Apostle has depainted and set out the same
unto us: insomuche that there is none, having his Conscience touched with any
fear of God, but continually wishes to be dissolved and to exchange it for
that other. For here we be in the kingdom of the Devil and Satan. And as a
trauailer or Stranger that comes into an Inn, where he knows there are
none but Thieves and Murderers, will look well to himself, and be very
careful for his own safety before he will enter into that house: (if the
case so be that needs he must go in) and will be sure (as near as he can)
to arm his body from the violence of their furies, and will not sleep much
in that house, but stand upon, his guarde, that he may depart thence
without harm: Even so and with like danger live we here on Earth, where
Satan bears the swaie and is Prince, who has so the hearts of men within
the danger of his power, that by them he brings to pass whatsoever he
lists: It is a terrible matter to think thereon, and therefore S. Peter
herein gives us a watchworde to beware, and admonishes us to be careful and
diligent in looking to our selves: saying: Be ye sober. For they that be given
to drunkenness and surphetting, and as Swine, care for nothing but for their
belly, are fit for nothing that good is. And therefore we must endeavor our
selves to have always in readiness our Armor of Sobriety.

And Watch ye (says he) and that not only spirituallie but also
corporally. For a heavy, lumpishe and drowsy body, when it has pampered,
crammed and ingurged it self with meats and drinks, is not fit nor able to
resist the Devil seeing it is hard enough for them so to do, which are strong
in faith, and have plentiful gifts of the Spirit.

But what is the cause why we should so much give our selves to Sobriety,
and watchfulness? Because (says he) your adversary the Devil skuddeth
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. For the Devil never
sleeps, he is thoroughly enured and furnished with guile, suttletie and
malice, and carries that cancarde stomach against us, that he leaves no way
unattempted how he may molest and ensnare us, yea he well knows which way
to lay his baytes to catch us and bring us unto his lure, and therefore he
roameth and trudgeth up and down, like a roaryng and rampyng Lion, that
yelleth and roareth hideouslie and horribly, as though he would devour all
that comes in his way. And therefore has saint Peter left unto us in
writing this so necessary and profitable an admonition: wherein he discovers
unto us our deadly and infernal Enemy, that we should take heed of him, and
with S. Paul not be ignorant of his malicious driftes. For, in that he
skuddeth and walks about, his drift and meaning is thereby to bring us into a
negligence and security: wherein if he may once lulle us, there straightwaies
issue and budde out from thence Anger, Wrath, Contention, Arrogance,
Shamelessness, contempt of God, and all other mischieues whatsoever.

And here note, how he says that the Devil walks about. He sets not
upon thee directly before thy face, where he knows thou art fenced and
guarded: but he cowardly lies in wait to surprise thee behind at thy back,
or aslope on the one side: he pryeth and tooteth within thee and without thee
very diligently to epsy thee at some vauntage, where he may set upon thee.
For when he has attempted thee one way (if he speed not of his purpose) he
straightwaies takes an other in hand. If he miss his purpose on this side of
thee, he flingeth to the other, omitting no subtle devise, no crafty ambush,
no cunnyng policy to catch thee in a trippe and so to possess thee. If he
find thee strongly armed and fenced on one part, he planteth his battery to
an other side: if he be disappoincted there, he charge upon thee (and that
with incredible speed) in an other place, he never ceasseth, but is in
continual practice of mischief, for thy overthrow and confusion: he never
takes any pause or stay, but still runs about, not suffryng thee to have
any manner of test, or intermission. And yet we as men senseless and careless
make no reckonyng of this gear, neither watch we to withstand him, whereby
he may easily and without resistaunce assail and overthrow us. Let every
one therefore look diligently and warely to himself: and he shall find all
this to be most true: as they that have been tempted, can not be ignorant.
And therefore we are more then twice miserable, that live here so carelessly
and retchlesly. For if we would enter into consideration with our selves of
this our life present, we should see good cause for us to cry out and call for
help, none otherwise then if we were beset with a number of murtherous
Thieves. This caused Job to say, that the life of man on Earth is a mere
Warfare, and a continual temptation or fight. But why then (will ye say) does
God place us in this life being so full of miseries? Truly for this cause,
that our Faith may be exercised and increased, and that we should be the
gladder and willinger to depart hence: and further that Death might become
more sauoueie unto us, and be the earnestlier of us desired.



WE must be sober and watch, but yet to this end, that our bodies may be
fit and ready for the conflict and battle: and yet this is not sufficient,
to overcome the Devil withal. These weapons are only available for this
respect, that the body may be the less occasioned to sin. But the true
weapon wherewith we must give the overthrow and foil to our Eenemie, is
Faith. For if we take sure hold of GOD in his Word, and in heart constantly
cleave thereunto by Faith, the Devil shall never be able to vanquishe us,
but like a daunced Cowarde straight ways run out of the field. If thou
can say: This has my Lord my God spoken, this I do steadfastly believe,
hereupon I stay my self, and hereunto do I lean: thou shall see the Devil
quickly like a Micher sneake away and depart: with whom all beautinesse, all
ill concupiscence and just, all wrath, all covetousness, all
faint-hartednesse and desperation vanishe and pack away also. But such is
the ^uctletie and craft of the Devil, that he will hardly suffer thee to come
to that poynct, but will use all the means that he can, to pluck this weapon
out of thy hand. Which he easily brings to pass, when he has once
ensnared thee in a drowsy slothfulness, and made thy body utterly unapt for
the battle, and given to nothing else but to lascivious wantonness. For by that
means with little ado he wringeth out of thy hand the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God, as he did by our first Graundmother Eve. She had
the Word of God, whereunto if she had firmly and steadfastly adhered, she had
not fallen. But when the Devil saw her negligently and carelessly to regard
the Word, he easily pulled it out of her heart, and so obtained that which
he would have.

Saint Peter therefore has here sufficiently warned us, that we should
strive and fight against the Devil. To which battle and encountrie, it
nothing avails to run up and down hither and thither for any good Work,
which thou of thy self can do: but this only must thou have care unto,
that thou constantly stick, and steadfastly by faith embrace the Word of
God. If the Devil then approache thee, and go about to hurl thee into
pensiveness of mind and desperation, by reason of thy manifold sins and
transgressions before committed: betake thou thy self straightwaies to the Word
of God, wherein remission of all thy Sins is promised: commit thy self wholly
thereunto, and thou shall see, that he will quickly pack away and be gonne
from thee.



Marvel ye not, that ye must suffer temptations of the Devil: let this
rather comfort you that you suffer not the same alone. For there be a great
many of you, and ye are all Brethren: and ye must all suffer and endure the
same: All they take your parts, and in this conflict are aiders and helpers
unto you.

Thus have thou this former Epistle of S. Peter somewhat largely expounded: In
the which thou art taught even fully and abundauntly the whole sum of
Christian doctrine, and wherein also thou may see Faith, Love, and the
Cross, right aptly and copiouslie described: and may also read many godly
instructions, and necessary premonitions how to wage battle, and continue
fight with that great Dragon the Devil. Which Epistle who so ever has
rightly and thoroughly learned, has (no doubt) a rich Storehouse of all
such things, as any way concern sincere and true Christianity: In somuche
that he shall not need any other doctrine or help beside this: as in deed
there is none other: Saving that God of the aboundaunte store of his mercy and
bounty teaches the same doctrine, in sundry and many other places of the
Scriptures. For other then this that is here set down by saint Peter, there
is nothing that can be taught, or that needs to be displaied, since he herein
has omitted nothing of all those things, which are expediente and
behoouefull for a Christian to know.

Finally, he here delivers the parts of a faithful Preacher and good
Pastor: to wit, that he should accoumpt it his bounden duty, not only to
feed the Sheep, but also to be careful for them, and to pray for them,
that God may graciously increase them in goodness, and strengthen them in
Faith, whereby they may both receive and hear the Word, and also digest,
understand, and bring forth the fruits thereof. And thus with a prayer in the
end, he concludes, saying:



IN this Prayer he commends them to God. The God (says he) who a^^de is the
giver of all Grace, and that not pinchyngly, or in part, but who most
liberally and aboundauntly (as it were) by full heaps, powers all his Graces
upon you: who has called you through Christ, that ye should enjoy and be
partakers of eternal glory, and that not for any merit of your own, but by
and through Christ. Whom if ye have, ye also have through Faith in him (not
for any merit of your own) eternal life and felicity. He it is that shall
make you perfect, that you being by him strengthened, may grow and stand
fast, ready to work all good works: He also shall confirm and stablishe
you, that you shall be able to suffer and abide all things.



THis praise, is that Sacrifice, which the duty of all us which be
Christians, is to offer. He adds yet a few words more.



ALthough I am not ignoraunte, that ye have heard and learned these things
before, so that ye greatly need not to be taught the same again at my
hands, yet thought I it good to write the same again unto you: to the intent I
might be as a Remembrauncer to you (as it is the duty of al true Apostles to
be) to persevere and continue in that doctrine which ye have learned, to
practice and exercise it, and to live according to the precepts, rules, and
directions thereof: not thinkyng that I do preach any other thing unto you
now, then ye have before both heard and learned.



SAlutations were wont in this sort to be sent by letters. The Church
(says he) that is at Babylon saluteth you. There were two great Cities of
this name, the one in Chaldaea, the other in Egypt, which is now called
Alkair. Rome also by an Allegory is called Babylon, because of the great
confusion of villainous vices, being gathered thither, as into the common
Sink of the world. And some would feign have it to be here so taken. But I
can not be brought to that opinion. The word by interpretation signifies
Confusion. It is most like to be that Babylon in Assyria or Chaldaea, where
Saint Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision.



SOme say this was Mark the Evangelist, whom he calls his Son, not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. As saint Paul likewise calls Timotheus and
Titus his Soonnes, and writes to the Corinthians, that he had begotten them in
Christ.



THis custom of Kissyng is now grown out of use. We read in the Gospel
that Christ kissed his Disciples, which was a custom then in those Countries.
Of this Kiss Saint Paul also makes often mention. Act. xx.j. Cor. xvj.ij.
Cor. xiij. Romans xvj.



THat is, which faithfully believe in Christ. And this is the end of this
his former Epistle, wherein he commends them unto the protection and tuition
of Almighty God: who mercifully grant that we may thoroughly understand,
and effectually keep and practice the doctrine comprised in the same. Amen.

An Induction or Preface of D. Martine Luther, into the second Epistle
general of Saint Peter.
Saint Peter perceiuyng and foreseyng that the true and pure doctrine of
Faith, should after his days be corrupted, obscured and dimmed, writes this
Epistle: wherein ^e meetet^ with two errors at once, arisyng out of the false
understanding of this doctrine of Faith; and gives most profitable lessons
of either part: to wit, first, that no man ascribe any such strength or
force to Works, as that they should be any way able to justify us before
God for that is the effect of Faith only. Again, that no man should think,
that Faith can be without Good works. For, we can no sooner preach of
Faith, how that it alone without the help of any our Good works, makes us
just and acceptable before GOD, but straightwaies some are ready to bark
against us, saying, that then it is needelesse and bootelesse for any manne to
do any Good deeds: and this we know by daiely experience is the common
speech and saying. On the other side, when we urge and teach Good works, and
praise them: then Faith falls and loses much of her dignity. So that we
see it to be a very hard matter, in this behalf to keep a right mean,
specially where there is want of painful and faithful Preachers.

Now, the Lord teaches us, that we should attribute all our Justification
before God, unto a sincere Faith in Christ Jesus. But when we have thus
soundly preached, and inculked this infallible doctrine of Faith, we must also
teach, that Good works must needs ensue. Because we may not at any
hand, (so long as we be in this life) be idle, without dooyng some work.
All this does Saint Peter in this Epistle pursue and discourse upon at
large: meetyng with those, who peradventure out of his former Epistle, had
foded themselves with a false opinion, and mistaken his meaning: in thinking
Faith to be sufficient, although there be no good Works at all. And upon
this poinct, is the first Chapter of this Epistle specially written: wherein he
teaches and wills the godly to approve and declare the certainty of their
Faith by their Good works.

The second Chapter is against them, which extol Works only, and throw
down Faith. And therefore he warns us aforehande of false teachers and
seducers, which by new doctrines of their own devise, should darken and
abolishe this assurance, which each one ought firmly to have of Faith: for
he saw, what detestable iugglyng, Apostacy, add departing away from the
Faith would be in the world, which even then began: as Saint Paul
says, ij. These. ij. The Mystery of Iniquity does already work.

Jn the third, he plainly describes and sets out the impiety of those
that make a mockage and ieste of the word of God: and shows that in the
latter days the people through vnbebeleef, and lack of fear of the Judgment
of the last day shall be even as Epicures, wholly given to the flesh.

This Epistle therefore is written to forewarne us, to show our Faith by our
Works: but yet not so, that we should have any confidence or trust in our
Works, or think them any whitte, or in any respect, meritorious, or
available toward our salvation.

The second Epistle General of Saint Peter.
The first Chapter.
SImon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to you which have
obtained like precious faith with us by the righteousness of our GOD and
Savior Jesus Christ:















see far of, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.




























AS in the former Epistle, so in this, we have both a Subscription, and an
Inscription: That we may know, both who writes it, and to whom it is
written: namely to them that zealously hear the Word of GOD, and constantly
stand by Faith in the sincere profession of the same. But what Faith means
he? Eue^ that (says he) which is by the righteousness of God. In which
words he ascribes Justification to Faith only, even as S. Paul Roma j.
says: In the Gospel the righteousness of GOD is reueiled from Faith to
Faith: as it is written, The just shall live by Faith. Saint Peter
therefore warns them to stand ready, and not to be beguiled, nor to suffer
the doctrine of Faith which they had received and learned, to slip away
from the^. And whereas he here peculierly speaks of the Righteousness of
God, he thereby excludes and puts back all human Justice. For it is
Faith only that justifies us before GOD: and therefore, Faith is called the
Righteousness of God. For, before the world it is nothing accoumpted of, nay
it is rather persecuted, and flatly condemned.



THis is an usual Salutation, wont to be prefixed at the beginning of Letters
and Epistles: The meaning whereof is thus: I wish unto you the increase of
Grace and peace, and that ye may be therewith enriched every day more and
more. Which grace issues and flows from the knowledge of GOD, and of our
Lord Jesus Christ: as if he should say: This Grace no man can have unless
he have withal the knowledge of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of this knowledge of GOD, as well the Apostles as the Prophets do very
often and almost continually make mention in the holy Scriptures, as Esaie
the xj. In all my holy hill they shall not hurt nor destroy, for the Earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the Sea.
That is, The knowledge of God shall be as plentiful and abundaunt, as the
waters of the swellyng Sea, when it breaks out, and surroundeth some whole
Country. And here hence shall such peace and tranquillity presently ensue,
that no man shall seek to molest or damnifie an other. But this is not to know
God, if thou do but only believe that God is Almighty, and that he has
created and made all things: and that Christ was borne of the virgin Marie,
suffered death and rose again: for thus much do the Turks, Jews, and
Deuilles believe. But the true knowledge of GOD is this: That thou have a
feelyng of him in thine heart and conscience, and that thou be certainly
persuaded, that God and his Christ is thy God and thy Christ: which belief the
Deuilles and false counterfaite Christians have not, neither can have.
Therefore the knowledge of God is nothing else, then a sound and entire Faith
in Christ. For when thou thus fully know GOD and Christ, thou will most
gladly resign, and commit thy self unto him, and firmly believe and trust
in him, as well in adversity, as in prosperity, in death as well as in life.
This settled confidence and sure trust, can not be in them that have evil
consciences: that is, in them that want true and sincere Faith. For they
know GOD none otherwise, but that he is the God of S. Peter, and of all the
Saints in Heaven: But for their God they do not know him, neitheir have
any feelyng of him, but have him and take him, rather as their heavy
tormentour and angry Judge.

To have GOD, is to have all Grace, all Mercy, and all goodness that can be
named. To have Christ, is to have a Savior and a Mediator, who has brought
us unto God, and made him now all ours: and at whose hands he has obtained
for us all Grace, and Blessyng. All these things, thou must draw and apply
to thy self, and not doubt but that Christ is thine, and thou Christ's. And
this is the true knowledge of Christ. An vmnaried woman seeing a man, may say:
this is a Man: but she can not say: this is my Manne, or my Housebande. In
like sort, all of us can say: This is God: But all of us can not say, that he
is our God: because we do not all of us believe and trust in him, and
comfort our selves only in him and by him. This true knowledge of GOD the
Scripture terms the face and Countenance of the Lord: whereof the
Prophets speak very copiouslie. For they that see not his face, and know
him not, do see but only his hinder parts: that is, do see him as their
angry and displeased God: whereas if they saw his face, that is, if they had
the true knowledge of him by Faith, they should behold and see nothing but
Grace and Mercy.

We see here how saint Peter in this his second Epistle purposely entreats
not of Faith, (for he largely discoursed therevppon in his former Epistle)
but his purpose is in this to write an Exhortation to them which believe, that
they should show forth their Faith by Good works. For he would not have
Faith to be without Good works, nor Good works without Faith. But first
he requires in us Faith, and Faith being once surely grounded, to show
forth Good works. And therefore he adds:



WHen we thoroughly know God by Faith, we are possessed of the frank gift
of all his heavenly graces and benefits. We have the influence of his Divine
power woorkyng in us: which promoteth and furthereth us unto all things that
pertain unto life and godliness: that is, when we believe, we receive so
many benefits of him, that God bountifully bestows upon us even the gifts
of his power: which power is diffused into all and every our actions, and
both is, and also effectually woorketh in us. What soever we speak, or what
soever we do, it is not we but GOD in us that speaks and does. He is in
us strong, mighty, and omnipotence, yea, even when we suffer torment and
affliction, when we are killed and dye, and when before the world we are
altogether seely and weak: In somuche that when we have not this power of
God, there is in us no strength at all, no faculty, no ability.

Now, whereas Saint Peter says, that all things are given unto us of his
Divine power, his meaning is not, as though we should be able to make Heaven
and Earth, and to work Miracles, and do wonders: For what good would that
do unto us: But we have all the gifts of his godly and Divine power in us,
so far as is necessary and profitable for us. And therefore the Apostle
adds further these words, That pertain to life and godliness: That is to
say: we have all things by his godly and divine power, most abundantly
given unto us, that we should do good, and always live in virtuous estate
and blessedness.



THis mighty power and great grace of God, proceadeth not from elsewhere, then
from this perfect and sound knowledge of GOD. For when thou thoroughly
know him for thy God, he deals with thee as God. After this manner also
saint Paul j. Cor. j. says. In all things ye are made rich in him, in all
kind of speech, and in all knowledge, as the testimony of Jesus Christ has
bin confirmed in you: so that ye are not destitute of any gift* This is the
greatest and the most necessary gift of all others that God can give unto us,
which we ought not to exchange for all other riches, that is either in
Heaven, or in Earth. For what would it avail thee, although thou could go
through Fire and Water, without taking any harm, and work all kind of
Miracles and wonders, if thou should want this? For there be a great many
condemned, that have been able is work such Miracles. But this exceeds and
far surmounteth all Miracles: in that, God bestows and gives so great a
power unto us, whereby al our sins are forgiven us, and abolished quite out of
remembrance: Death, Satan, and Hell being utterly vanquished and swallowed
up. Whereby we possess our Consciences without fear, and have our hearts
joyful, merry, and bold, without being afraied of any thing. All which, the
knowledge of GOD that calls us, does afford and bring unto us.



AND after what sort was that Calling, wherewith God called us? Forsooth this:
God sent his holy Gospel into the World, and caused the same to be
proclaimed and preached abroad: for the which, no man ever made any labor,
no man ever prayed or made any entreatie to him but before any one so much as
once thought of it, he offered and gave this grace unto us, and powered the same
most abundantly upon us all, that he alone might have all the glory and
praise, and we enjoying such a benefit, should ascribe this power and virtue
al only to him. For it is no work of our own, but his. And therefore seeing
that this Calling is none of our own, neither comes of our selves, it is not
m^^te that we should lift up our selves in pride, as though we had brought it
to pass of our selves: but he is only to be glorified of us, and all thanks
are to be given unto him, for so mercifully bestowyng and giuyng his Gospel
unto us, and withal also for so strengthenyng us with power and virtue against
Satan, Death, Hell, and all mischieues at once whatsoever.



Saint Peter has added this, to show forth and declare the nature and force
of Faith. For when we know God to be ours, we have also with him, by Faith,
eternal life and the power of God, whereby we overcome and get the victory
both of Death and Devil. And yet for all this, we do not see these things,
neither yet feel we them, although all things be promised unto us. We have
al things, but they yet appear not: but in the last day we shall plainly
discover and see all things present and apparently laid open unto our eyes.

We begin here in this World, but we come not to any full fruition or
perfection thereof in this life. But we have this promise, that we live here by
the mighty power of God, and that after this life we shall be everlastingly
blessed. He that faithfully believes these things, has the some (as it were)
already in possession: he that believes not, has them not, but is sure to
perish eternally. How great and how precious these promises are, Saint
Peter further yet declares, saying.



THis benefit we have by the power of Faith, that we thereby are made
partakers of God, and come into a certain participation and communion of his
divine nature. This is such a sentence, as the like ye shall not read again,
neither in the old Testament nor yet in the new. Howbeit among the Painims
and Heathen writers it is often read, that we partake with the very divine
nature it self. But what is this nature of God? Everlasting truth,
righteousness, justice, wisdom, eternal life, peace, joy, pleasure, and al
goodness that can be named. He now that is partaker of the nature of God, is
seized and privileged in all these: to wit, that he shall live for ever enjoy
perpetual and endless peace, pleasure, joy, and mirth: be pure, holy,
just, and able to withstand and supplant Satan, Sin and Death. Peter's words
therefore sound as though he should say thus: Look how impossible it is, to
take from God everlasting life and eternal truth: so impossible is it also,
that these things should be taken from you. If any man hurt you, he must
needs also hurt God. For he must first oppress God, that seeks to oppress
a right Christian. All these properties are comprehended under this word
Divine or Godly Nature: which word be therefore used, because it contains
in it so large a signification. These be great and singular benefits, if we
faithfully believe the verity of them. But all that is here set down, is (as
before was declared) Doctrines, whereupon the groundwoorke of our Faith is
laid: for that which here is written is rather to declare and show what
great and excellent benefits grow unto us through Faith. And therefore he
says: All these things shall ye be sure to have, if ye so live, that ye
show forth your faith, Flee and the corruption which is in the world
through lust.



HEre saint Peter exhorts them to declare and show forth their Faith by
their good Works: as though he should say: Seeing that ye have obtained so
many and so great benefits by Faith, that what God himself has, ye also
have, endeavor your selves and geeue all diligence hereunto: be not slouthful
and sluggish, but show forth the effects and fruictes of your faith: that is,
let your Faith appear openly before Men, let it be dutiful, charitable,
serviceable, diligent, effectual and workyng, ever occupied in well doing: not
idle, neither unfruitful. Ye have a good Farm and a fertile Field to work
in: be ye diligent husbands therefore and take heed, least through your
sloth and security, there grow up in it Brambles, Weeds, Darnell and Cockle.



THis is that Knowledge, by the which ye may chiefly know, how by reason to
qualify and lead your lives, and how to direct theffectes and virtues of your
Faith: that ye neither ouermuche pamper and cocker your bodies, neither deny
unto it that which is needful. For thus far is the flesh to be brideled
and kept under, and no further, that it may be sober, watchful, and apt to
good Works* and not (as some Hypocrites wider the vizard of feined holiness
do) to hurt or destroy your bodies. For although GOD hate the Sin that is
in the flesh, yet his will is not that you should therefore destroy your
bodies. Ye ought to suppress and restrain the lusts and concupiscences
thereof, but not to destroy or hurt it: but rather to minister unto it
sufficient allowance and maintenance, that it may continue sound, healthful
and living.

Knowledge also is ioigned and linked with virtue, whe^as good respect and
regard of honesty and modesty is had in all our conversation and dealinges:
and when a convenient measure is observed and kept, in our Meats, Drinckes,
Apparaile, Words, and all other our actions: so that we neither swerue from
the rule of reason, nor give any occasion of offense to our Neighbor.



TEmperaunce consists not only in eating and drinckyng, but in obseruyng
that due mean, which, knowledge (whereof we spoke before) does prescribe to
be used in all our life and conversation, as well in words and works, as in
manners and dealinges: that no man frame himself to live after a more sumptuous
and nice sort then is convenient: that all superfinitie of Apparaile and
bravery be avoided: and that no man go more pompouslie and gorgeously then
is meet, or stands with Christian modesty. But saint Peter in these cases
inescribeth no certain rule, nither limiteth any bounds for the same (which
thing our Papisticall munckishe Votaries presumed to do) comprizyng these
matters within the compass of certain Canons and rules devised out of their
own brains, tiyng men to a straicte observation of these things after one
and the selfsame manner. Which thing to be used among Christians is
impossible: to wit, that a certain set order and precise anotation in these
external things, should be comprehended within the compass of certain
precepts and general rules, of every particular person to be particularly
observed. For, men be of unlike disposition: one is of a strong and sound
nature, an other weak and faint: and no man is at all times and in all
respects so affected and given as an other is. And therefore every one ough^
to have a special regard to the constitution and disposition of his own
body what he is able to bear, sustain and endure, and what he is not.



Saint Peter's meaning (...) these words is this: Although ye live according to
knowledge, modesty, and temperaunce, without giuyng offense to any in your
conversation and behavior: yet think ye not that ye shall live quietly
without temptation and persecution. For, when ye believe, and lead an honest
and Christian life, agreeable to your profession, the World will not cease to
hate and persecute you. Here then must Patience be showed forth, which is
one of the fruictes of Faith.



WHat soever we do, or what soever we suffer in this l^fe, let us be
thankful to GOD for the same, not seeking our own glory, praise, or
commodity: but only that thereby God may be glorified: and that we so behave
our selves in all things, that it may appear, that we do all things for
the love, which we bear unto God.



HEreby Saint Peter binds us one to serve an others turn, and to be
helpyng one to an other as Brethren: one to be careful of an others welfare,
one not to hate, despise, or hurt an other. And this is an other trial or
fruicte of our Faith, whereby we testify to the world, that we have that
Godliness, which is spoken of before.



BY Love be means that common and general Love, with the which we are
bound to Love as well our Enemies, and those which do not account of us as
Brethren, nor vouchsafe to live together with us friendly and Brotherly, as
the^^ that are our very friends in deed. In which few words, Saint
Peter has comprehended all that appertains to a Christian life, and what be
the works and fruletes of true Faith in deed: namely, knowledge to live
well, Temperaunce, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly kindness, and a general
Love to all. And therefore he adds further.



WHen ye give your selves to these exercises, and works, ye tread the right
pathe, ye go the right way, and have in you the true and sincere Faith: and
further, the knowledge of Christ is effectual and fruitful in you. Take heed
therefore to your selves, that ye make not light accoumpte of these things.
Keep your bodies in subjection, and so deal with your neighbors, as you
know that Christ has dealt with you.



HE that has not in himself these fruictes of his Faith, does but (as it
were) grope for his way like a blind man in the dark, not knowing whereto
set his foot: yea, such is his life that he rests doubtful and
uncertain, in what case he stands toward GOD: He neither has true Faith,
nor any further knowledge of Christ, saving that, he can talk of him as he
has heard others report. And therefore does but bluster blindly and at
rando^ in the whole course of his life, like a blind manne that seeks his
way with his hand, and has forgotten that ever he was Baptized, or that his
sins were forgiven him: and so becomes he unthankful, Idle, and
vnfruictfull, without any consideration of his profession, living loosely
without any remorse of Conscience: Having neither feelyng, neither yet so much
as any taste of so great Graces, gifts, and benefits. And this is an
exhortation wherein Saint Peter exhorts and stirs us up which believe, to
the practice of Good works, thereby to declare and show forth, that we
have a true, sincere and sound, and not an Hypocritical, or feigned Faith.
Nevertheless, he still earnestly urges and proves this, that Faith only
does justify: and that where soever this Faith is, true Good works do
also necessarily ensue. That which now follows, makes for our confirmation
herein.



THe Election and eternal predestination of God is so sure in it self, that
there is no need to make it surer. And so also is our calling firm and stable.
For he that hears the Gospel, believes, and is baptized, is (doubtless)
called, and is sure of his Salvation, yea he already has it. Seeing
therefore, that we are called to these things, we ought to give all
diligence (says S. Peter) to approve and assure our Calling and Election to
our selves in our Consciences, as the same is already assuredly known with
God. And this is a phraze or manner of Speech usual in the Scriptures, as
Ephesians. lj. Ye were strangers from the couenauntes of promise* and had no hope,
and were without God in the world* For although there be no man, whether he
be good or had, but God has the rule over him, (since he is the Lord of
all Creatures) yet nevertheless (S. Paul says) that he is without GOD,
which does not acknowledge him, love him, and trust in him. Even so here,
although in it self the Calling and Election of God, wherewith he has called
and elected us, be sure and undoubted: yet is it not sure and stable to thee,
so long as thou dooest not certainly believe, and undoubtedly assure thy self,
that the same belongs unto thee. And for this cause does S. Peter exhort
us, that we should make our Calling and Election sure through good Works.

And here again thou see, how much the Apostle ascribes and attributes
unto the Fruits of Faith. For albeit they appertain, and seen to do good
with thy neighbor withal, yet also are they profitable unto thee, because
thereby thy Faith is stre^gthened and confirmed, (...) stirred up more and more
to the practice of Good works. Wherein also thou see a far other virtue
and quality, then is in the faculties of the body. For, the powers of the
body, the more they be exercised and used, the weaker and freebler they be,
and in the end utterly decaie: whereas contrariwise, this Spiritual virtue (if
it be not exercised, decaieth and faints: But with much use and practice it
is strengthened and greatly increased. And this was the cause, why God at the
beginning did lead the Christian Church, through hard and rough ways, vexed
it, tourmoiled it, and thoroughly exercised it, in diverse conflictes of Faith,
through Ignominy, Persecution, and Death. For he knew, that hereby it should
receive strength, and increase, and become the mightier, because the more that
it was oppressed, the more it flourished. And this is that, which Saint Peter
here means, when he faieth, that we should not suffer our Faith to be Idle
or vnfruictfull: seeing that the nature thereof is such, that it grows and
increases by vexation and persecution, so long till be fully assured and
certain of the Calling and Election of God, so that it can not be deceived.

This is the mark that we must shoot at, touching Predestination. There are
many light Spirits, who being endued with very small pi^^aunce of Faith,
will yet rashelie presume to despute upon this poincte, and curiously scare he
in what place they be reckened and accepted with God. But do not thou
entermeddle with such scrupulous curiosity for thou shall never by this way
attain to that, which thou seek. If thou desire to be sure of thy
Salvation, tread that (...) and follow that course, which Saint Peter has
(...) showed thee for if thou take any other way, thou ^^^iuest thy self, and
shale be sure to miss thine entente. Thine own experience must teach it
thee, and that shalt thou certainly know, and be assured of when thy faith
is thoroughly cried and en^^ed.



YE shall stand firm and steadfast, ye shall neither stumble, fall, nor
sin, but walk without offense: all things shall go well with you, and
frame to the best: whereas if ye lean and trust to your own foolish
cogitations, and rotten devises, the Devil will quickly and easily hurl you
headlong into desperation, and hatred of God.



THis is the highwaie to Heaven, and none other: And therefore let no man
think by dreams and devises of his own making, touching Faith, to come
thither: there needs nothing thereunto but a lively Faith, that is
thoroughly tried and exercised. But alas, what repugnant doctrines to this,
has there but foisted into the Church of GOD, by our seducyng teachers, while
they affirmed and taught, that if a man, having run headlong in wickedness
all his life, and at the last pinche of his death, have but a seely pittaunce
(be it never so small) and as it were but a very spark of Faith in him,
that he should be sure thereby of salvation? But if thou put of, and deferte
thy repentance and Faith till then, thinkyng and presentyng that thou shall
then even presently and upon the sudden, have the gift of such a iustifyng
Faith, thou trustest to a broken Reed, and shalt seek after Faith and
Salvation, when it shall be too late. Dooest thou not hear, that even they
which be strong, shall scarcely be saved? Howbeit we ought not to despair
of them that be weak, because there is hope that they may be called,
although it hardly and not usually so comes to pass. But he which in this
life thoroughly and effectually exercises and strengthens his Faith in
dooyng good, shall have abroad and easy passage or way, with cheerfulness
and assured confidence to enter into the life to come. Such a one may dye
with courage and gladness, such a one may (not esteemyng this present life)
depart hence in the peace of Conscience: And (as it were) with mirthe and joy,
take possession of the kingdom of Christ. Whereas on the other side, they
that have a languishyng, fainte, weak, and unexercised Faith, and have not
enured and acquainted themselves to good and godly exercises, shall not with
like confidence and joy as the others, enter into eternal life: And if they
do enter, yet shall they not find the door so open, nor the entrance so easy
into the kingdom of Christ, but shall tremble and quake for fear, and be
loathe ^odye: wishyng rather still in this life, to lie be dred, sick and
diseased, then once to dye or exchange this life for any other.



OF this we have oftentimes spoken before. Albeit GOD has caused a great light
to shine unto us, in this so merciful a manifestation of the Gospel: so that
we both now know what a Christian life is, and also what Christian Doctrine
means, and do also see the skope of the whole Scripture to tend to none
other end but this: yet, nevertheless, it is expedient and necessary still
to persevere and go forward in preaching and teaching without ceassyng, and to
^terate and in^^lke the self same doctrine from day to day, if not to learn,
yet to be admonished and put in remembrance of doctrine before learned and
received. For there are two Offices in the Church as S. Paul teaches Romans
xij. the one consists in Teaching, the other in Exhorting. He that teaches,
let him take heed to his teaching and doctrine, and he that exhorts, to his
exhortation. Romans xij. Teaching is, where we lay the foundation of Faith,
and preach the Gospel to them that have not yet heard any thing thereof.
Exhortyng, or admonishyng is, (as here saint Peter says) to preach to them
that have both heard and learned the same before, to encourage them manfully to
proceed and continue in their well begone enterprise, and to awake and stir
up their dull and drowsy natures to go on forward, from step to step and
from degree to degree every day more and more. We are all cladde and laden
with this old rotten Sack, our Flesh and Blood: which still pulls us down,
and draws us the wrong way, whereby the Soul is easily ^ulled asleep and
brought into security. And therefore it is very beh^m^^ful and necessary for
us to be continually exercised, even as a good householder keeps his
Servants and Family still occupied, and calls upon them to look to their
business, least they should grow into idleness. Now, if the dullness of our
nature be such, that it must be called upon and put in mind to do
things expedient and behoouefull for external food and maintenance of the
Body, how much more convenient and meet is it, that the same be used and
put in practice in matters appertainyng to the Spirit and Soul?



Saint Peter here calls his Body; a Tabernacle, wherein the Soul for a time
saiourneth and it is a much like phraze to that which is used in the former
Epistle: where he called the Body of the Woman, a Vessel or Droun. And after
the like sort speaks S. Paul ij. Cor. v. We know that if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of God, that
is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens: for the which
we sigh, desiryng to be clothed with our house which is from Heaven. For so
long as we are in this Tabernacle, we sigh and are hurdened etc. And again:
But we are comforted and are bold in this, that we know, that whiles we are
in the body, we are absent from the Lord: But we had leifer to remove out
of the Body and to dwell with the Lord. Here we see S. Paul calls this
Body of ours, an House making two manner of Dwellynges, and two manner of
Pereg^inatio^s or absences from home. By which phraze of speech, Saint Peter
also here in this place calls this Body, a Tabernacle for the Soul to
soiourne in: by which name, he does much extenuate the reputation that is
commonly made of it, and also seth it lower then most part of men accoumpt of
it: for he does not call it an House, but a Tabernacle, (...) poor Cotage
such as seely Sheepeheardes use to dwell in* The house is slender and
contemptible, but the treasure that is laid up and kept in it, is rich and
precious.





Saint Peter here testifies of himself, that he is assured of eternal life
and that by special revelation from the Lord, he knew when he should dye:
all which was done for our sakes, and to confirm and strengthen our Faith: For
it was very expedient and necessary that there should be some such men; that
had in themselves a certain persuasion and sure knowledge of their election:
who might establishe and lay the foundation of Faith in others, whereby it
might be out of all doubt known, that they preached not the dreams and
fantasies of men, but the true and sincere Word of God. Which men before they
came to that assurance and certainty, God thoroughly tried and proved.
Therefore says saint Peter: I will not only with my lively voice admonish
and put you in remembrance, but I will also committ these my admonitions to
writing, and leave my exhortations written for your directions and
instructions: that after my death as well as in my life time, ye may be
thereof put in mind by others, and be called upon to observe and put the same
in ure practice. Behold here what a vigilant care this Apostle had for the
safegarde and salvation of Souls, and yet nevertheless we see, through the
malice of Satan, what shameless shifts and cogging marchaundize has been
and still is made of them.







HEre S. Peter brings in the history of the transfiguration of Christ upon
the Mount, written by the Evangelist Mathewe Chapt. xvij. Wherein is declared
how the Lord Jesus, took three of his Disciples, viz. Peter, James and John
into an high Mountain, and was there transfigured before them, his face
shinyng as the Sun, and his clothes being white as the Light: where also
there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, talkyng with him: till at length a
bright Cloud shadowed them, and a voice coming out of the Cloud, said: This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear him. Which when the
Disciples heard, they fell on their faces and were sore afraid. Then Jesus
came and touched them and said* Arise and be not afraid, And when they lifted
up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only. And as they came down from
the Mountain, Jesus charged them, saying: Show the Vision to no man, until
the Son of man rise again from the dead.

This therefore which here Saint Peter writes, has this meaning: That
Gospel which I have preached and showed unto you of Christ and of his coming,
I have not sucked out of mine own fingers ends, nor feigned out of mine own
brain, neither yet received I the same from vain and Sophistical Pratlers
and Ianglers, that can roundely and readily talk and tattle of matters, such
as the Greeks were: Whereas in truth, all that which they with finenesse of
Eloquence, and galantnesse of phrazes painted out (thinkyng them selves therein
great Wisemen) was nothing else but mere toys, trifles, and vanities: These
and such like persons we neither have given ear unto, neither followed and
sought after: that is, we do not preach unto you the doatyng dreams, and
foolish fantasies of Men: But we are most sure of our doctrine, and of the
certainty thereof, that it is of GOD: because we have both heard it with our
ears, and seen it with our eyes. To wit, when we were present with Christ
in the Mount, and there both saw and heard his glory from heaven
proclaimed. Whose glory was such, that his face shined as the Sun, and his
clothes were white as Snow, and we also heard a voice from the high Majesty
of the Father, saying: This is my beloved Son, hear him.

Therefore every Preacher ought to be so sure, and so far from any doubtyng
of the certainty of his doctrine, and of the Word which he preaches, that
he should not fear to scale and confirm the same with his death, seeing it is
the Word of Life, which he has in hand. The Apostles therefore were
certainly assured of the truth of the Gospel, which they preached, and were
out of all doubt that it was the true, and infallible Word of GOD: and
withal, that the Gospel is none other thing, then the preaching of Christ.
And therefore none other preaching is to be heard; because the Father will not
have any other. This is my beloved Son (s^^th he) heal him. Let him be your
School master and your Teacher: as if he should say: when ye hear him, ye
hear me: And therefore says S. Peter, we have preached and made known unto
you, that Christ ^s ^e Lord and Ruler of all things, and that all power is
delivered over unto him: which power he also has, which faithfully
believes in him. These things have not we devised, and forged by our own
imaginations, but we have both seen and heard them by the Reuolation of God,
who has commanded us, to hear this Christ alone. But what is the cause that
S. Peter here seuereth the Power of Christ, from his Coming* His Power is in
that he is Almighty and able to do all things. And again, in that he has
all things in subjection under his feet. This his Power shall perpetually
continue, and stand in force, so long as the world has continuance, and so
long as Flesh and Blood has any being upon earth. This entire power of the
Kingdom of Christ shall have continuance and force, till the last day, and
then shall an other world begiane, when as Christ shall deliver up his
Kingdom unto God his Father, whereof is spoken by S. Paul j. Cor. xv. Christ
is the first fruictes, then they that are of Christ, which shall be at his
coming, and then shall be the end, when he has delivered up his Kingdom to
GOD, even the Father etc. And again, When all things shall be subdued into
him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that did subdue
all things under him.

And whereto tends all this? Is not the Kingdom of God the Father now at
this presence? and are not all things now also subdued unto him: I answer:
S. Paul in the self same place expounds himself, and yeldeth a reason of his
words, saying: That God may be all in all: that is, what soever a man longs
after, what soever he desires to have, that shall God be unto him, that (as
S. Peter said before) we may be partakers of the Divine Nature. And therefore
what GOD has, the same shall we have, and what soever is needful and
necessary for us, shall be ministered unto us: what soever any manne requires,
as Wisdom, Righteousness, Fortitude, and Life, it shall be given to us: which
we now believe by hearing with our ears, and truly possess in the Word of
God. But then shall the Word cease, and our Souls shall open and displaie
themselves, and shall see and feel all things present. And this is it that
both S. Peter and S. Paul mean, that now in this while, the power of
Christ's Kingdom bears all the authority: now does the Word reign and
exercise his Empire: by which Word, he now reigns in his humanity over
Deuilles, Sin, Death, and Hell. And all these things shall not till the
last day be plainly manifested. For although God does reign for ever and
always, yet is not the same manifestly to us apparaunced. He sees us, but we
see not him. And therefore it behooves, that Christ should resign his
Kingdom over unto him, that we also may see, and then shall we truly be
the Brothers of Christ, and the Soonnes of God. In this sort Received he of
God the Father, honor and glory, (as here S. Peter says) when as the Father
subjected all things unto him, and made him Lord of all, glorifiyng and
dignifiyng him with these words: This is my beloved Soon, in whom I am well
pleased.

And in these words S. Peter's meaning is, to confirm his Doctrine and
preaching, that it might be known from it whence it was. Besides this seeing
of the Majesty of Christ, and hearing of the voice of the Father concerning
Christ, it was needful also that the holy Ghost must work withal, and
confirm him in that he had both seen and heard: the more to make him to
believe it, and that he might both boldly preach, and zelouslie confess
the same to others.



HEre comes S. Peter nerer to the matter: and of that which he here says,
this is the very meaning. All that I preach unto you, is to this end, that
your Consciences may be surely settled and strengthened in the truth: and
that your hearts may be firmly fixed upon the same, not suffryng your selves
to be carried a ware from it by any means, because we are out of all doubt,
that we have the very pure and sincere Word of GOD. For the Gospel is a
matter of great weight and importance, and therefore we ought to be most
diligent, careful, and precise, that we keep and retain the same sincerely
and soundly, without addyng any thing thereunto. or myng^ng any false and
erroneous doctrine therewith. And therefore S. Peter now afterward addresseth
him self to write against human doctrines, and newfangled devises of man's
Idle and fond imagination. But for what cause does he say, We have a most
sure Word of the Prophets? Truly I am thus fully persuaded, that we shall
never hencefoorthe have any such Prophets, as in the old Testamente the Jews
had. A Prophet properly is he, that brings the glad tidings of Jesus
Christ: and although many of the Prophets in the old Testament, prophesied
also of other matters to come, yet they came and were sent of God peculiarly to
this end and purpose, to preach and foretell of Christ. All they that
believe in Christ, are Prophets: For they have the chief head of that thing,
which Prophets ought to have, although al of them have not the gift of
Propheciyng. For even as through the Faith of one Jesus Christ, we are all
Brothers, Kings, and Priests: so also through Christ we are Prophets. For
we can all utter and declare those things that appertain to the glory of
GOD, and Christian life: we also (so far as is needful and expedient for
us) can foretell of things to come, as that there shall be a day of general
Judgment, and that we shall all rise again from the dead: and finally we
understand the whole Scripture. This witnesses S. Paul, saying, You may all
Prophecy, one by one. j. Cor. xiiij.

Therefore says S. Peter thus: We have such a word of the Prophets, as is
sure enough of it self: Only see ye that it be firm and sure to you. And ye
do well, if ye take heed unto it: As though he should say: It is very
necessary and expedient for you to stand sure in it. For, it fares with us
in this case of the Gospel, much like as it does with a man that is taken
and enclosed in a dark house, at Midnight, who had need to have Candlelighte,
till it be day light, that he may see which way to go. Even so, the
Gospel is as a Candle at Midnight, and in the darcke: whereas all human
reason and wisdom, is nothing but mere error and blindness. The World is
nothing else but a Kingdom of darkness. In this darkness, God lighteneth us
with his Candle, to wit, his glorious Gospel: which directs our steps
aright, that we may see which way to go, and walk in this World, till
such time as the Morning appear, and the day dawne.

This place does also mainly oppugn, and beat down all the foolish
tromperies of human doctrines. For, seeing that the Word of God is the
Candle and Lantern, that gives light in dark corners and obscure places, we
must necessarily thereupon conclude, that al other things be mere darkness.
For if there had been any other Light beside the Word, S. Peter would not
have used these speeches. Never consider and weigh therefore, how skillful and
wise those men be, that teach any other doctrine beside the Word of God:
neither let it any whit move thee, how gloriously and galantly so ever they
couche their smothed reasons. For where thou feel and see the Word of God
to be absent, doubt not but all which thou hear, is mere blindness and
erroneous darkness. Neither let it any thing move thee, in that they b^agge
and say that they have the holy Ghost. For how can they have the Spirit of
God, which have not the Word of God? And therefore they do nothing else but
call Light darkness and darkness light, as it is said, Esaie. v. This
Word of God is the Gospel, whereby we are through Christ redeemed from
Sin, Death, and Hell: he that harkeneth and gives ear thereunto, has a
Link or a Lamp lighted and kindled in his heart: By the which we may see, and
are enlightened and taught what to our duties is appertainyng. But where soever
this Lamp is absent, there we fall into our own rotten ways, and seek by
Works, Merits, and devises of our own Forge, to bespeake (forsooth) and make
to our selves a nerer way to Heaven. Here now and in such like cases, thou
may with the help of this Lamp, judge, and plainly perceive all these
doatyng Inventions and dreams, to be nothing but mere darkness. The
aucthours whereof have not the Light, neither can they abide the Light: and
therefore they must needs remain in darkness, and continue in blindness.
For this is the Light, that teaches us what we ought to do, and what things
be needful and necessary to our Salvation: which be poinctes far
differyng from the wisdom and skill of the World. We daiely stand in
great need of this Light, and we must give heed unto it, even till the last
day. Afterward we shall not need the Word any longer: as a Candle is wont
to be quenched and put out, when the broad day light is once appeared.





HErein S. Peter begins to oppugn false and erroneous doctrines, and of his
words this is the meaning. Forasmuch as ye know, that we have the Word of
God, cleave fast unto it, and suffer not your selves to be seduced by false
Teachers, although they come and say, that they have the holy Ghost. For,
know ye this first, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of any private
interpretation. Note this saying therefore well, and think not that ye shall
ever be able of your own reason and industry to expound and explane the
Scriptures.

Hereby are thrown down to the ground, all the proper and private
interpretations of all the Fathers: and strait charge here given to the
contrary, that no man should rely or lean to any such explanations. If
either Hierome or Augustine or any other of the Fathers interpret and expound
any place of the Scripture, of themselves, or by any of their own devised
gloses, we are (if the same be dissonant to the doctrine contained in other
textes of the sacred Scriptures) utterly to refuse those their interpretations.
For S. Peter does here forbidd any man to interpret and expound the Scripture
by his own spirit. The true explanation thereof, is the work of the holy
Ghost, and he it is that must interpret and expound the same, or else it must
be left without interpretation. Therefore, if any of the ancient Fathers can
auerre and justify his interpretation and exposition by the Scripture, and can
thereby prove that the place which he expounds, is so to be taken and
understood, we are reverently to accept and embrace his sayings: if no, we
are not bounden to believe him.

Within the compass of this Censure also, we may see, how S. Peter notes
and nippeth the spirits of those great Rabbines and Doctors, that are in
countenance and credit accoumpted and reputed for the best and the grauest
Clerks. Therefore this must be holden as a firm and general rule, that no man
(whosoever he be) interpretyng ye Scripture after his own humor, is to be
credited, no although he allege and bring Scripture for himself: because the
true Sense thereof can not by any means be attained and found by the private
enarration of Man. In this poynct have stumbled and foulie failed our Graund
masters and teachers which have heretofore taken upon them to expound and
interpret the Scripture. As when they expound and stretch that saying of
Christ, Matthew. xvj. Thou art Peter etc. to be meant of the Pope, which addle
interpretation is of man's own devise, and forged by the Expositours
themselves, to draw it to the pitch of their own conceit and to serve their
own turns, and therefore not to be credited: for that they be not able to
prove by Scripture, that this name [ Peter] any where signifies the Pope: but
we are well able to prove that Christ is the Rock, as S. Paul says: j. Cor.
x. This interpretation is true and sound, for we are sure thereof, and know
that it is not devised and invented by man, but grounded and drawn out of the
very Word of God. For, those things that are written and mentioned in the
Prophets, were not invented and devised by men, but holy me^ spoke as they
were inspired and moved by the holy Ghost.

And thus ends this first Chapter, wherein Saint Peter has first taught us
the right and true good Works in deed: which we ought to practice and
walk in, thereby to notify and declare our Faith. And next, that in the
Church of Christ there ought nothing to be preached, but only the Word of
God, which remains and continues for ever, and by the which our Souls are
saved and made to live eternally. Now next here follows a fruictfull
admonition, wherein both Christ and his Apostles warn us diligently to beware
of false Preachers. And this also must we with all diligent care look unto,
that we suffer not our selves to be bereaved and cozened of this right and
power of examining judging and proouyng doctrines: neither to be so pent in and
curbed, that we should stay and expect till we see what the Councelles define
and decree what we shall believe, and what not: keepyng our heads so under
their girdles, that they would not willingly suffer us to believe and embrace
any thing but what they list to set down, ratify and determine.

The second Chapter.
BUT there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false teachers among you: which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord, that has bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
damnation.





































the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled again therein, and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them then the beginning.








ALL true Prophecy has his proceedyng from the holy Ghost, and so has had
from the beginning of the world, and shall have till the end of the same: so
that nothing is to be preached, but the sound and sincere Word of God. Howbeit
it has always been seen, that as there have been true Prophets, sincerely
vtteryng the pure Word of the Lord, so have there still been false Teachers,
and malicious Seducers: And shall so hencefoorthe continue till the end of the
World. When ye therefore have the true Word of God, think none otherwise, but
yt ye also shall have false Teachers. This admonition may stand for a general
and infallibe rule: that wheresoever the Word of GOD is sincerely preached and
taught, there also by and by arise false Teacher's, and dissemblyng Hypocrites.
The reason is, because although the Word be preached to all, yet do not all
embrace and believe it. They that believe it, do follow it, and conform
their lives thereafter. But the greater number, which be they that believe
not, do construe and take the same Word in a false sense, contrary to the
true meaning of the holy Ghost, and thereof it comes to pass, that there
spryng and grow up so many false Teachers. But full slenderly have we
heretofore harkened unto this admonition: For what dreams soever have been
obtruded and preached unto us, we rashely and without judgment have been
ready to accept, embrace and allow the same. And by this means we have
rushed headlong into such a brainsicke doltishenesse, that we have verily
thought the Pope, with the rabble of his Chapleins and Mu^kishe Clergy could
not err. And they which should and ought to have kept us from error, were
the first, that taught this doctrine unto us. Here we learn, that we are
inexcusable, if we believe amiss, or follow and allow any false and erroneous
doctrines: ignorance shall not excuse us, seeing we have been so diligently
warned aforehande. And God has expressly charged, that every one should be
able to judge of that which is preached, and to give a reason of the doctrine,
which he has received: if we neglecte or make small accoumpt thereof, we
are in a forlorn case, it shall not avail us (I say) to plead ignorance. The
danger is no less, then the hazard and loss of the salvation of our own
Souls. And therefore it behooves each one to know which is the true Word
of God, that he may adhere and cleave unto it: and which is false doctrine,
that he may flee and eschew it.

Of such kind of admonitions, that we should take heed of false doctrines,
we have in many places of the Scriptures great store. Saint Paul in the
last Sermon that he made to the Ephesians, when he took his leave of them,
and was now ready to depart toward Jerusalem, forewarned them of these
things, saying: I know, that after my departing* grievous Woolues shall enter
in among you, not sparyng the flock: And of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking peruers things, to draw Disciples after them. Act. xx. Christ
also foresheweth no less to his Disciples. Math. xxiiij. When any shall say
to you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not. For there shall arise
false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders,
so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect. Again S.
Paul j. Timo. iiij. has these words: The Spirit speaks evidently, that
in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, and shall give heed
unto Spirits of error, and doctrines of Deuilles, which speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have their Consciences burned with an hot iron, forbiddyng to
marie, and commaundyng to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with giuyng thanks, etc. As these premonitions were both vehemently
and seriously uttered, so ought we to have taken more heed, and to have been
the wiser in looking to our selves. But we have had no regard to them, they
have little or nothing auailed us: yea, we have suffered our selves still to be
wilfully seduced and nozzeled in error. Let us now see, who these false
Teachers are, of whom S. Peter here speaks. Truly I do think it was not
without the singular and hidden council of God, that our Popish Prelacie were
called and termed by the name and title of Teachers and Masters, to the end
every one might plainly see who they were, who^ S. Peter meant. For he uses
here the same very word, False Teachers, or false Doctors and Masters: he
says not, false Prophets or false Apostles.



HEresies, Sects, vowed Orders, and Professions of life, he therefore calls
damnable, for that, who soever haltereth him self into any of the same, is in a
damnable case, and in the state of perdition. They shall priuillie (says he)
bring in Heresies and Sects. For they shall not openly detecte the Gospel and
Scripture of falsehood, nor directly charge it with untruth, for that were a
clean contrary course, and would flatly and altogether mar the drift of
their malicious plat: but they shall under pretense of great cloked holiness,
still retain the names of God, Christ, Faith, Church, Baptism, Sacraments,
and such like: and shall be content to suffer the same to be honored and
reverenced: But under these names they shall s^ilie creep in, and privily
foiste in doctrines of their own forgyng and stamp, altogether discrepant and
derogatorie from the right honor and worship that is due unto God. And
therefore there is great difference, between preaching directly against
Christ, and preaching covertly and hypocriticallie under color of truly
worshippyng Christ. As for example, if I should thus preach: Christ is the
Soonne of God, perfect God and perfect manne, and he that believes in him,
shall be saved: this preaching is true and aduouchable by the Gospel and
Scriptures. Now, if another should come and preach thus: Christ is not the
Son of GOD, neither was he ever incarnate, and Faith does not Justify:
this manner of preaching were most false, and most directly contrary unto all
truth. But of such plain and palpable godless doctrine, S. Peter does not
in this place speak, neither do our Papists and Munkishe Mawmettes so
grossly deal: but they privily coigne a counterfaicte kind of doctrine,
and foiste it in among us, in steed of true and sound religion. As when they
say thus: It is true that Christ is both perfect God, and perfect Manne,
and that he suffered death for our sins, in whom whosoever believes not, ca^
not be saved. These and such like Articles, as they affirm to be true, so
do they hold, that they appertain and serve for the vulgar and common sort
of people. Let us therefore (say they) institute some perfecter way and
preciser trade of Life. Let us bind men by Vow to Chastity, to Poverty, and
to an Obedience to their professed Rules, let us teach them to build Abbaies,
Monasteries, Celles, and Hermitages, and let us flatly persuade them, that if
they zelously and devoutly do the same, they shall be sure, as soon as the
breathe is out of their bodies, to go straight to Heaven. When these and such
like dotages are preached, and colorablie instilled into men's minds, that
there is nothing more excellent and blessed then Virginity: nothing more
meritorious then counterfaite and feigned Obedience: that Mu^kes and Freers
live a far better and perfecter life then others. Here in these poinctes
there is no open defiaunce in flat words, made against the sincerity of
Christian doctrine: herein is neither Faith nor Baptism expresselie denied,
neither yet do they renounce or deny Christ to be the Savior of the
World: but yet (nevertheless) the doctrine of truth is here covertly
impugned, and clouded with devises of man's own invention: and men are
thereby drawn and seduced from the right way, and are brought to an
ouerweenyng and selflikyng of theimselues, trustyng in their own Merits,
Works, and rotten Ceremonies. They believe that Christ the Son of God, in
his humanity suffered death, and rose again the third day, and that he is the
Savior of the world, etc. but they do not firmly and only trust in him:
for if they did, they would not so scrupulously be tied to their own Lousy
trashe, and beggarly Traditions.

After the same manner, did they bear the Laity in hand, that they could not
attain to salvation, except they did after their directions. Ye are Christians
(say they, we confess) but this is not enough: ye must do such and such
good works: ye must build Churches in the honor of this and that Saint: ye
must erect and found Monasteries and Abbayes: ye must buie certain Trentalles
of Masses to be said or song for you: ye must pyue away your selves with
fasting and such like. Thus have the seely poor people been beguiled, and
thus have they been persuaded and brought to show themselves as well likers of
these trumperies, thinkyng it to be the Kings high way to heaven: and these
rotten works of blind devotion to be of all works the best, because they
saw them which carried the title of the Church, to allow and follow the same:
so that in process of time, there grew to be as many Factions, Sects and
Religions as there were Cities, yea, almost as there were Men. Whereas they
should rather have taught them thus: Ye are Christians, as well as they that be
an hundred miles distant from you: ye have all one Christ, one Baptism, one
Faith, one Spirit, one Word, one God: there is no work that ye of your
selves are able to do toward your salvation, or able to bring you to the
perfection of a right Christian. If this Doctrine might generally be preached,
men should be kept in the fellowshippe and unity of one Common Faith, neither
would there be any difference at all in things appertainyng to God, but all
would be alike: and one the same that an other is. This Communion and unity
they have broken and disioynted, in that they seduce and misleade us, in
teaching us that we must merit heaven by our Works: drawyng us thereby from
Faith to our own Pharis^icall deeds. S. Peter's words therefore if he be well
marked, ca^ie this meaning: There shall arise among you, Sophistical
Scholemen, Doctors, Teachers, Priests, Munkes, and such like, being the very
offall and Skumme of the World, who shall bring in pernicious sects, odible
orders, damnable heresies, and seduce the World with their lying and false
Doctrines. These, these, (doubtless) are they of whom the Apostle here
speaks. For they are all thus persuaded and verily believe, that their
wilfully Professed Orders are meritorious to the^, and shall bring them to
salvation: and persuade others also to put confidence and trust in them. If
this were not their opinion, who would think but they would rather live free
abroad, then (as they do (cage and empound themselves in their Cloisters, as
it were in Prisons.



They are ready to say, that they do not deny the Lord: but if this
question be demanded of them: what they mean or what they seek to get
through these their vowed Professio^s, if they believe (as they say they do)
that they are redeemed by Christ, and that their sins are washed away by his
blood: They will quickly answer, that (forsooth) Faith alone is not
sufficient, and therefore they must have the help of good Works. Thus with
mouth they confess God, and in heart flatly renounce him.

Consider also what pithie and vehement words S. Peter here uses. They deny
(says he (the Lord that has bought them. They ought to be subject unto him,
as unto their supreme Sovereign Lord, whose inheritance they are. Now, they
do believe that he is the Lord, and that he redeemed the world by the
sheadyng of his precious blood: but that he redeemed them, they cannot nor do
not beleeus, neither do they acknowledge and take him for their Lord: for
they say and confess, that he has bought and redeemed them, but yet they are
not persuaded that that is enough and sufficient: because they must (they say)
discharge and satisfy for their sins by their Works. To whom, this answer
may well be made: If thou can do any work to take away thy Sins, what
good has Christ by his death done unto thee? For there can not be two
Christ's to take away Sins. He (as good right it is) must be acknowledged
to be the only Redeemer and taker away of Sins. Which being granted to
be true (as it is most true) thou thy self can do no manner of work to
take away thy sins. If thou do go about or think any whit by thy works to
merit Heaven, thou can not truly say, thou beleeuest that he takes away
thy Sins. And this is flatly to deny Christ. For although these fellows
do acknowledge Christ to be the Lord, yet do they deny that he bought
them. They believe that he sits in heaven, and is Lord: but the taking
away of Sins, which is his proper and peculier office, they nippe and take
quite from him, and attribute it unto their own works: and by that means,
leave nothing to him but the bare name and title: ascribyng his power, work,
virtue and office unto themselves. And therefore Christ most truly foretold,
that there should come many in his name and say, I am Christ, and shall deceive
many. Math. xxiiij. Mar. xiij. For these Iusticiaries and Meritemongers thus
tying Salvation to Works, show forth in their so doing (as though they
should say) not I am [called] Christ, but I [am] Christ. Whereby they snatch
and apply unto themselves that office, which is only proper and peculier
unto Christ: and so thrust Christ out of his seat, and place themselves
therein.

This is so evidently known, that no man can truly deny it. And therefore
worthily does S. Peter term them damnable and pernicious Heresies, for they
lead a man straight to Hell, insomuche that I greatly fear, least in a
thousand of them, there is scarcely one saved. For whosoever of them wilbee
saved, must quight abandon himself and all that of himself he has or can do:
yea he must franckly confess and from the heart pronounce these words: The
rules of my vowed Obedience are nothing worth, my Chastity can not save me, my
works can not take away any part of my Sins etc.



THeir damnation shall come upon them sooner then they think: although God
seem to defer his coming, and to tarry long, yet will he hasten his
judgment, and come time enough to their cost. But this shall not be
corporally and visiblie to the eye, but so and in such sort as it is set
down in the l.v. Psalm. They shall not live out half their days: that is,
Death shall catch hold of them sooner then they think, so that they shall be
driven to say as Ezechias did: Esaias. xxxviij. I said in the midst of my
days, I shall go to the gates of the grave. As if he should say: O Lord
God, is Death come upon me so suddenly? For they that live without faith,
are loath to dye: the longer they live, the more they desire to live: and the
more of this painted holiness that has appeared in them, the terribler and
dreadfuller is Death unto them, namely to those that have such tender and
spiced consciences, and exercise and afflict themselves in these works of
their own, which they take to be meritorious. For it is impossible, that any
man should overcome Death by any human strength. Wheresoever Faith is not,
there must the conscience needs tremble and despair. But where Faith is,
there Death seems many times to tarry too long ere he come: whereas to the
Faithless and vnbeleeuyng, it always comes sooner then they would have it.

Saint Peter's meaning therefore is, that they which set abroache such Sects
and Heresies, and consequently deny Christ, dye most unwillingly, and that
with horror and desperation. For it can not otherwise be, seeing they stand
doubtful of their salvation, using these or such like terms: Who can tell
whether God wilbee merciful unto me and forgive me my Sins or no? And thus
while they stand in doubt, with these words, [ Who can tell? and who
knoweth] their consciences can never be merry nor quiet. And the longer that
they continue plunged in this waueryng doubt, the more terribler still will
Death be unto them: which can never be overcome, unless sin and
guiltiness of conscience be first taken away. Sudden Death therefore,
destruction and damnation shall come upon them, so that they shall always
remain in perpetual death.



THat this has come to pass according to Peter's prediction, all men well
know. For there were almost no Parents, but they desired and were willing, to
make some one of their Children either a Priest, or a Munke, a Nun, or some
like idle Votarie. Therefore foolish Fathers made foolisher Children: while
they mislikyng and being weary of the troubles, disquietnes and
discommodities of Matrimony, meant hereby to ease and rid their children
from the same, by tying them thus to a vowed Profession, thinkyng thereby to
make them live both quietly, ydlie and delicately. Wherein they showed
themselves merely ignorant, what an holy thing Marriage is, and how blessed the
troubles and greeues thereof are. Saint Peter therefore in these words
foretold, how the world should be pestered with Priests, Munkes, Nuns and
Votaries. To which Profession most of the Youth of the world betook
themselves, even as if it had bin into the clutches and claws of the Devil:
so that (alas) too truly has S. Peter foreshewed, that these damnable ways
should be followed of many.



AND this also we both have seen, and at this day in many places of the
World do see to come to pass. For, he that fears GOD, and studieth to
lead a Christian life, is sure to be evil reported of, rahated and detested:
and the true sincere profession of the Gospel shall not escape the rancorous
note of spightfull reprehension, but he spurned against and ill thought of, as
though it were Heresy and Error. If any man in zeal of truth should preach
and tell them, that their Sects be contrary to the doctrine laid down in
the Gospel, for that, they carry men away from Faith to Works, they
straightwaies with open mouth cry out against him, and say: Accursed art
thou, for thou seducest the world. They heinouslie also blaspheme God, tossyng
and turnyng the words of Christ which way they list, to serve their own
turns: of express Commandments, making Consultations, Counsels,
deliberations, and dispensations: forbiddyng that which Christ plainly
allowed, and did: and making that to be as Sin, which is no Sin: yea
whosoever he be that speaks against these their blasphemous treacheries and
enormious prankes, shall be sure to be condemned and burned to ashes. For the
way of truth is a right virtuous life and sincere conversation without any
halting or hypocrisy. This truth being only set down in the Word of God,
and by faith firmly believed, is that way wherein all true Christians ought
to walk. Which way and truth, these fellows can not in any wise abide, but
blaspheme, revile, slander and condemn it, to the end they may establishe,
extol, magnify and maintain the peeuishe pedlarie of their own shameless
Sects.



Covetousness for the most part is the companion of Heresy: These sowers of
fa^^e doctrine generally have chiefest respect unto their belly, as in our
days has been manifestly seen. For none of them would either patter up a
Mass of mumble up their Vigiles (as they called them) without money. Among
them, no peine, no Pa^er ^oster* No (...) nor College, no Monastery nor
Freerie was erected and peopled, till order was taken for their maintenance,
and that even riotously and abundantly: neither was there any of these Houses,
that for Gods sake only, would do any thing for any man. Money must be had,
without it there was no dealing, if purse were penilesse, there was nothing to
be gotten at the hands of these pitiful Lurdaines, and holy Masters. But
where true Faith begins to be preached, there is very little money stirryng,
it brings no stoare of pence at all: for then down go Pilgrimages: Bulls
and Pardons will not be bought of any man, Abbayes and Nunneries are not
esteemed: upon all which (notwithstanding,) more then half the wealth of
Christendom was bestowed: and no profit at all redoundyng or coming thereof
to any man, saving only to these greasy Priests, Munkes, Freers and Nuns.
But by what ways and means do they thus scrape together and rake to
themselves, so much money? With fained words (says S. Peter) shall they
make merchandise of you. For they have coigned certain smooth speeches to
serve their turns, whereby to cozen men of their money: as when they say: If
thou will bestow so many hundredth Crounes upon our blessed Lady, or upon
this or that Saint, thou shall therein do a merueilous meritorious work:
thou shall buy therewith so many Pardons: and for so many thousand years:
thou shall have clear remission of all thy Sins: and finally thou shall
deliver so many of thy Friends Souls out of Purgatory etc. These and such
like words are devised and feigned for none other purpose, but to pick men's
purses, and gleane their money from them. For in all these triflyng trashe,
which they sell so dear, and where withal they scratch together such huige
Sums of money, there is not a mite of merit grace or remission of Sins,
how much soever they boast and wrest the holy and precious Word of God, to
bleare the eyes of the World, and to serve their auaritious appetites. So also
of the Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of Christ, what other thing
practiced they, but a shameless marchandyzing? for they used the same in a
manner to none other purpose, but as a bait to catch men, and to wring money
from them. Judge and consider now (good Reader) whether saint Peter many
hundredth years ago, has not notably and lively set forth and described our
holy Romish Clergy with their usual properties.



THeir iugglyng and paltrie (for that is S. Peter's meaning) shall not always
continue in such iolitie, neither shall they choppe and change and use
merchandise of you ever: when they are come to their highest ruff and
stateliness, then shall they have a sudden downfall, and a heavy judgment
and destruction shall quickly light upon them. It is even now at hand, they
shall not escape. As S. Paul also says ij. Tim. iij. Their madness shall be
evident to all men, that they may be confounded. God open their eyes and
grant the^ grace to turn unto him by true and earnest repentance, and to
forsake and detest these their wicked and fruictlesse Sects: since they here
may learn, that they are nothing else then Sects of perdition and
condemnation. For albeit there be some, not altogether perverted and
desperately seduced in these Sects, yet are the Sects themselves nothing else
then undoubted and certain Sects of damnable perdition. After this sort
therefore has S. Peter here described the filthy and wicked life of these
Popish Monsters, which he saw would come to pass, after the sincere Doctrine
of the Gospel preached by yt Apostles. Now, lays he before our eyes three
strange and terrible examples of them whom God has condemned and in his
justice punished: to wit, the Aungelles, the whole World, and the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrhe.



IN these words S. Peter terrifieth the^ that live in security, and wilfully
wallowe in their wickedness: as we see in the^ which be the Popes sworn
Suppliantes, and are deeply drowned in the dregs of his filthy Traditions:
for they look so big, and vaunt themselves so impudentlie, as though they
would tread whom they list, under their feet. S. Peter therefore in this
place speaks to this purpose, as if he should say: Is it not a marvelous
malapert sauciness, and presumptuous boldness in them, thus impudently to
seek to establishe and maintain by force and violence, their Heilishe
impiety? as though they thought that GOD were in awe to them, and that he
would spare and wink at them, who spared not the Aungelles. As if he should
say: The very Saints and holy ones are wonderfully afraied to see so
severe a Judgment, namely in that, GOD spared not his excellent Spirits, and
most noble Creatures, which were far perfecter and wiser then we, but
bindyng them in Chains of darkness, cast them into Hell. This is that
severe Judgment and dreadful damnation, wherein the prisoners appoincted to
the same, are kept in Chains, and can not by any means escape out of the
hands of God, but are kept in hold, to be thrown into utter darkness,
whereof Christ speaks in the Gospel. Math. viij.xxij. and xxv. Here also
does S. Peter show, that the deuilles have not yet that punishment laid
upon them, whereunto they are condemned. but remain and continue in obstinacy
and desperation, lookyng every minute and momente for their Judgment: even as
a Felon or other malefactor that is condemned to die, and despairyng of any
releasse, hardens himself in obstinacy, and grows still worse and worse.
The punishment whereunto they are judged, is not yet laid upon them, but they
are kept for it, in chains of darkness, that is, in their malicious
obstinacy of mischief and desperation.

and brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly.

THis example also is so terrible, and so full of horror, as none in the whole
Scripture more: being able to appall and shake the conscience even of him that
is right strong in Faith. For when this and such like places of Scripture,
and such sharp Judgments of God, come into a man's mind that is diyng,
who in his heart deeply considers them, how can he but tremble and shake,
and be brought to the very brinke of desperation, unless his Faith be most
strong and constant? For what man is he in all the world, that would not be
merueilously daunted and dismayed, to consider how that among so many
thousands of men, as were then in the world, no mo should be saved alive but
eight persons? And what had they committed, think ye, why God should so in
his severe judgment at once destroy the whole world in the flood, drounyng
both Men and Women, Masters, and Servants, Young and Old, Beasts of the
field, and Birds of the Air? Forsoothe, the cause of so general a
destruction, was their wicked and abominable life. Noah was a just manne, and
a preacher of righteousness, he lived five hundredth years before the flood,
what time GOD commanded him to build the Arc, which he made within the
space of an hundred years after, and lived always an holy and godly life.
Wherein we are to note and consider, what a Cross this good man bare, in what
perilles, dangers, and extremities he was lapped, when as he must in word and
deed openly profess himself a Christian, that it, one that truly and
unfeignedly trusted in God. For it is not possible, that Faith should be Idle
or lie hid, without showing it self openly to the World before men, as well
in preaching, as in sincerity and integrity of life. It is therefore very
like, that long before he was commanded to build the Arc, he executed the
office of Preaching, and frankly uttered the Word of God, and that not in
one place and Region only, but (doubtless) in many other and sundry
Countries. And therefore it could not be chosen, but that he suffered many, and
the same very grievous persecutions: In so much that S. Peter here says) it
had need to be a special privileged protection, and a peculiar and
Spiritual assistaunce from above, that should in such a desperate and
forlorn time, relieve and help him: else had he been quickly dispatched, and
no way could he have escaped death: For he that sincerely and zelously
preaches the Word of GOD, can not escape the envious onsettes, and bitter
battries of many, and that of them which carry the countenance of wisdom,
modest life and sanctimonie. But when this holy manne had so long time in vain
continued his preaching to the men of that Age, and they never a whit repentyng
their lewd life, but still contemnyng the Word of God, and growyng worse and
worse: GOD said at length, after that he saw their obstinate perseueraunce
in Sin, My Spirit shall not always strive with Manne, because he is but
flesh: his days shall be an hundredth and twenty years. Genes. vj. And a little
after in the same Chapter. I will destroy from the Earth the Man, whom I have
created, from Man to Beast, to the creepyng thing, and to the Foul of the
Heaven, etc. These words did Noah in his daiely Sermons preach, and beat
into their heads: withal also buildyng the Arc, according as God had
commanded him, and that in the full space of an hundredth years. But they were
so senseless of their estate, and so frozen in the dregs of their accustomed
Sins, that they laughed him to skorne, and grew still more and more
obstinate and rebellious. The Sins wherefore God brought the Flood upon the
World, as it appears in the same sixte Chapter of Genesis, were, that the
Soonnes of God, that is, the Children of the holy Fathers, degenerated from
the Faith and knowledge wherein they had been trained and taught, For, seeing
the daughters of Me^ that they were fair, they took them wives of all that
they liked. Of whom were borne mighty Gyantes, and lawless Tyrants, which
did all things according to their own lusts, and as best liked themselves.
This was the cause, why God punishing their sins, drouned the whole World.



THis third example is of the five Cities, which God destroyed, as we read
Genes. xix. Ezechiel also in his xvj. Chapter, speaking hereof in the person
of God, and appliyng his words by way of vpbraidyng to Jerusalem, says:
This was the iniquitio of thy Sister Sodom: Pride, fullness of Bread, and
abundau^ce of Idleness, both in her and in her daughters: neither did she
strengthen the hand of the poor and needy: but they were hautie and
committed abomination before me, therefore I took them away, as pleased me.
Sodom and Gomorrha and the Territories thereof, till the Lord destroyed them,
were as Moses witnesses Genes. xiij. as the Paradise or gardein of the Lord,
aboundyng and flowyng with plenty of Wine and Oil: in them all things that
to the life of man were either necessary, delightful, or commodious, were in
most abundance to be had, in so much that the common sort believed, that
God himself had chosen it for his own peculier habitation and dwelling. And
therefore as Moses in the same Chapter says, the people thereof were wicked,
and exceeding sinners against the Lord, leadyng their lives according to the
level of their own leude lusts. Which inordinate, beastly, and wicked
lusts, their own vain curiosity and the great plentiful abundance and
Idleness which they enjoyed, procured and brought unto them. As we at this
day by experience do set, that the wealthier a^y Cities be, the wantoner and
dissoluter life the people therein lead: but where Famine, Penury, or other
extremities pinche, there the Citezeins are nothing so much given to
looseness and Sin. And therefore God uses to exercise, and enure those that
be his, and whom he loves with hard cheer and slender pittaunces because they
may the better walk in integrity of life.

These therefore are the three dreadful Examples, wherewith S. Peter
threateneth the ungodly: which he here aptly alleges and brings in, as
fitly hittyng the persons of who^ he here speaks: who (he says) lived
even as these Sodomites and Gomorrheans did: whose grievous punishment is
here laid before them, for their greater terror. And therefore these things
agree in each respect: and very fittly are to be applied namely and specially
unto the Pope, with his Cardinals, Bisshoppes, Munkes, Friars, Nuns, and
all the rest of his filthy Spirituality, and rumpwood retinue. For they being
appoincted to be as it were Angels, and in the places of Apostles, truly to
preach and expound the Word of God, in stead of being such Angels (for
the name Angel is a word of Office, and not of Nature, signifiyng a
Messenger, or an Ambassador: whereupon all Preachers of the Truth, who are
the Messengers of GOD, are called in the Scriptures, Mala. ij. and j. Cor. xj.
by ye name of Angels) they do carry us headlong with themselves, into the
dungeon of error, and quite reuolte from their loyal allegiaunce to GOD, by
mere Pride and Apostacy, like these of whom S. Peter here speaks: aduauncyng
theimselues above God, and will have no Lord over them, but be Lords
themselves and of them selves. And yet will they be called Apostolical,
having nothing in them, but only a vain braggyng show of the bare name and
title: as here before in this Chapter, they are named by the name Angels, who
properly are not so. This blasphemous route therefore of Pope and Popelynges,
for that they have conspired with the Devil against God, and denied him that
is their Creator, are kept fast fettered in Chains of darkness unto
damnation, whose Judgment (as he said before) ceasseth not, neither does
their damnation sleep, although as yet it be not fully and completly come
upon them.

Again, they be herein also like unto the old World, who although they have
the Prophets, and the Word of GOD preached unto them, yet did they blaspheme
and (as it were) defy him: and as Moses writes of them, took to them selves
Wives, according to their own lusts and likings, and became mighty
Tyrauntes and Gyantes in the earth. Genesis vj. Now a little let us see, whether
all the properties and dealings, reported by Moses, to be in those men of the
old World, be not now most manifestly resiaunte and invested in our Popish
Clergy. For they now be great, mighty, and dreadful Tyrauntes, they live of
all men most delicately, most riotouslie, and even as they list
theimselues, they have most aboundaunt store and plenty of all things, they
oppress the World, and with their tyrannous exactions, and bloody cruelties
ouercrowe all Christendom: and yet may no man speak one word, or once
open his mouth against them, no not Kings and Princes. Again, if they be
disposed to take a way a man's Wife, or his daughter from him, they may with
such impunitie do it, that no man may dare so much as complain of their
violence: and if any do complain, yet are they themselves, the judges of the
matter, and so it shall be even as good to say nothing at all: for amends he
shall have none at all. Finally, by all the shifts and driftes, by all the
ways and means that they can possibly devise to pill and poll, rob and
spoil, rake and scrape, by cosonage, pillage, exaction, tribute,
commandments, licenses, depredations, and al other subtle tricks
whatsoever, they hale and pull, they catch and snatche unto them, without
hoe, without measure, without conscience, without shame. And if any manne in
any sort lay his lawful claim, or touch any thing, which they pretend to
be theirs, and which they have in theirs possessions, by and by they bawle and
bark, howl and cry against him that the same thing so claimed is Spiritual
liuelihoode, Spiritual patrimony, and the goods of the Church, which has and
ought to have and enjoy a free immunitie, so that no man may or ought so
much as once to touch them. But those, that sincerely preach the word of God,
and charitable reprehende their loose and dissolute life, denouncyng and
declaryng unto them the judgments of God, that tarieth them such: preachers
of Justice (I say) can they not abide to hear, but mock and skorne them: and
not only so, but also cruelly persecute, imprison, banish, kill and murder
them. But their Style and Title [to be called Spiritual fathers] as these
others in the days of Noah were called the Sons of God, they hold fast with
toothe and nail: and needs will they rule all the roste with mere violence,
force and power, even as they list themselves. But in the end
(notwithstanding) they shall perish and be destroyed, whereas the true
Preachers of the Word of God (who are resembled to Noah) are saved, kept and
preserved.

Thirdly, as the Country wherein the Cities of Sodom and Gamorrhe stood,
flowed most abundantly with stoare of all things that the Earth yielded, so
that the Inhabitants thereof lived ydlie, giuyng themselves to nothing but
banquetyng, drunkenness and belly cheer, without lendyng any relief to the
poor: so also fares it with the state of this pompous Clergy. The best
lands, the fattest soyles and fruictfullest grounds in every Country have
they gotten to their shares: the best Cities, the goodliest Castles, the
richest revenues, and clearest rentes have they catched into their possession:
so that they may lie down and sleep, short, tipple, surphett and cramme, as
long as they list, and that of freecost: and as for ease, there is no kind of
people in the World so loytering and idle, so slothful and secure, as they be,
or that fares more deliciously and daintilie without taking any manner of
pains, but living altogether by the sweat of other men's brows. And what
commodity is engendered of sloth and ydlenes (specially when it is so rooted in
laziness) we can not be ignorant. The Pope forbids his forked Stalions
to marie: and if any of them keep a breedyng whore or twain, that brings
forth children, the Bisshoppes then (forsooth) because they may not seem
altogether to wink at such notorious crimes, assesse some pecuniarie
punishment upon them, and so for a little money they are not only for this
fact released, but also permitted still to keep their Concubines as before: as
though this were a sufficient remedy against the sin of fleshly lust. I
will not here speak any thing of other their secret, enormious and shameless
pranckes, which no modest and chaft minded man can almost without blusshyng
so much as either hear or name.

To conclude: we here see how S. Peter accoumpteth the state of these
Shauelinges no better, nor any otherwise then theirs of Sodom and Gomorrhe.
For such be the dispositio^s and dealinges of al yt whole table of that
viperous brood, that no good grows from them to any: but catch and get all
that they can to themselves, under a pretense and color that what soever is
given to them, is given to God: whom they have always in their mouth, the
easilier to beguile the World. And therefore as Sodom and Gomorrhe were
burned to Ashes, so shall they in the last day be consumed and brought to
nothing.



WAS not this a merueilous abomination in them, that they not only committed
all kinds of fornications and Adulteries, but other horrible factes and
enormities also, which are not to be named, and that openly, boldly,
presumptuouslie and without all shame: insomuch that they forbear not the
Angels that came to Lot: into which madness they ran all hedlong together
with one mind and consent, both young and old, in every corner and quarter of
the City. Against these their disordered dealinges the godly man Lot did daily
preach, and reprehended them, but all in vain. The more he exhorted them to
amendment and repentance, the more they hardened themselves in dissolute life
and desperate demeanor, so that not findyng in them any hope of recovery, he
saw he might as well hold his peace as speak. In the like desperate case are
we nowadaies: in whom (alas) there is no hope of better amendment: we so turn
the deaf ear to all good exhortations, and make so small accoumpt of them
that give us good and godly counsel out of the infallible Book of God.



HEre S. Peter describes what Cross this holy man was forced to bear,
preaching unto such desperate and forlorn persons, and bringyng up his
daughters in the Faith of Christ and nurture of the Lord: in which office,
vocation and trade he zelously and incessantly continuyng and living there
among them, was saved and preserved from the destruction of the rest, by the
merciful hand of Almighty God. Finally, S. Peter concludes and knitteth up
the matter, that he began withal: namely, how that the wicked are kept unto
damnation and torment at the day of Judgment.



IF God spared not the young World, when it was but new, how much more
severely and sharply will he now punish it, seeing the Gospel has been so
long time manifested and so openly preached? For there was never aforetyme
such light, as we have now since the propagation of the Gospel enjoyed, as
Christ himself says, Matthew. xj. Woe be to thee Capernaum, which art lifted
up unto heaven, but thou shall be brought down to hell: for if the great
works which have been done in thee, had been done among them of Sodom, they
had remained to this day. But I say unto you, that it shall be easier for them
of the Land of Sodom in the day of Judgment, then for thee. But these
comminations and threatninges makes a great sort at this day never awhitt
the warier and godlier after so much and so long preaching and teaching. The
wicked still persist in their rebellious ways, and utterly contemn and care
not for these or any the like reprehensions.





TO walk after the Flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, is to live like unto
Beasts according to the likyng of sensual appetite, and selfwill. As in the
Popes Decretalles, we see how all things be set down, as it pleases the
Pope to appoincte: each thing must ^^oupe and be determinable by the doom of
his lawless Tyranny: he and his adherentes have wrinched, wrested, and
expounded all things, as best pleased theimselues. And now lost of all they
have boldly pronounced, that the holy See of Room can not err. Not one of
them taught any thing of Faith or Charity, but of dreams and dotages of
their own brainelesse deuisyng.

By Gouernemente and Dignity, he means Kings, Princes, Lords, and all
Civil Magistrates, not the Pope with his Cardinals and Bishops, who ought
to be nothing less then Lords: For Christ in the new Testament appoincted
none to be any otherwise then Servants, and that one Christian should serve
and help to benefit an other, and one to reverence and honor an other.
Saint Peter's meaning therefore, is, that they which boaste themselves to be
of Christ, should in all things be Subject and obedient to the Civil and
external Magistrate, and should stand in awe of the power of the Sweard,
being Gods Institution and Ordinance. Contrary whereunto, these Shauelynges
in each respect do deal: who have exempted themselves from their due
obedience to Civil Magistrates, and affirmed themselves not to be subject unto
them: yea, they have not only exempted themselves from this their due
subjection, and lawful obedience unto the Magistrate, but they also most
arrogantlie have made the Civil Magistracy subject unto the^, and have
trodden it under foot: And withal most impudently suffer theimselues to be
called Lords, over Kings and Princes. The Pope also calls himself Lord
both of Heaven and Earth, and braggeth that he has in his hands both the
Sweardes, the Spiritual and the Temporal, and that every one should fall down
before him, and kiss his feet. Also says S. Peter, They fear not to speak
evil of them that be in dignity. For it has hitherto been but a plaiyng
matter, and a trick of small regard with the Pope, at his pleasure to curse
Kings and Princes, and to depose them from their Regal crounes and
aucthorities. And this to all Popes has been a thing usual and familier, to
set Princes together by the ears, and to sow inextricable discord, war,
and dissension between them.

If any resisted or withstoode this bloody Tyranny of theirs, him they
shortly suppressed and snatched up: not as one that had committed any thing
repugnainte or contrary to Christian Charity, but as a rebellious Child, and
wicked member, that would not enthrall and subject himself to the Sea of Rome,
and kiss the feet of that Italian Priest the Pope: whose power they affirm
so far to surmounte and excel the dignity of any earthly King or Civil
Magistrate, as the Sun in brightness of light exceeds the Moon, and as
far as the Heaven is higher then the Earth. Behold howegregiously they
blaspheme, and how impiouslie they lie. For they which ought to be subject, and
to show all humble obedience unto Kings and Magistrates, to bless the^ and
to pray for them (as Christ showed obedience to Pilate, and paid Tribute
unto Caesar) shake of the yoke of all obedience, and be the aucthours and
Seedemen of al Obstinacy, Rebellion, Contempt, and Disorder. They ought at the
hearing of any evil spoken against Princes and Magistrates, being placed in
sovereign dignity, to tremble: But they are so shameless, so graceless, so
void of reverent awe and duetifull fear, that they most saw^ily and
malapertlie theimselues without all fear, blapheme and speak evil of them.
Not waighyng and considering, that if the Angels which be of great power and
might, can not abide the heavy judgment of GOD against them, how much less
then shall they (wretched caitifes) be able to abide it, which boldly resist
and blasphemously speak evil against them?





HE calls them brute and unreasonable Beasts, for that they have not in them
any spark of the spirit of God, neither give themselves to that spiritual
function whereunto they are charged, but live like filthy Swine, altogether
swallowed up in the beastly pleasures of the flesh. Whereas he says, They
are made to be taken and destroyed, it may be understood after two sorts:
either that they do devour and destroy that which they have taken, as the
manner of Lions, Bears, Hawks, Egles and Vultures is (for after the manner of
these Beasts, do our Polleshorne Prelates take and catch to themselves all
wealth, honor, promotion, dignity and preeminence that possibie they can) Or
else because they shall be taken, caught, ensnared and made a pray to others, to
be destroyed, and (as it were) slaughtered in judgment at the last day.



Behold how angry S. Peter shows himself to be with these Bellygods. They
think, if they may live delicately and ydly, and fare deliciouslie, that then
they are thoroughly happy, and have raught to the tippe of their wished
desires. This evidently appears in their own Decretalles, wherein they
pronounce him the Son of the Devil and an accursed person, that dare presume
to touch or meddle with their pompous wealth and revel, or with their pampered
paunches and embolned bellyes. Wherein they so manifestly, so apparauntly, and
in so good earnest handle the cause of their Belly, that they can not
themselves deny, but that their whole Canons and Laws, and the whole policy
of their Church is purposelie directed to this end, that they may lie
snortyng in ease and careless security, and live in most abundant stoare of
all things without either pain or labor, making others to labor in the
mean while for them. And other cause to pretend and allege for themselves
why they should thus dea^e, have they none, saving that (forsooth) they must
chaunt, sing and pipe God a dance in the Church, or pray. But God has
expressly commanded all men without exception, that they should eat their
bread in the sweat of their own brows, and upon every one has he laid
some burdens and troublesome charges to exercise themselves in from which;
these our Lordly Rabbines and Masters would be exempted, and by their good
wills would do nothing but lean on their pillowes. And this is the greatest
blindness and blockishnes that can be, to think that such a beastly and
shameful life, is either good or worthy to be any way dignified or had in
any honor or estimation.



THese Drones and Humblebees in their own conceits think themselves the
Pillars and Ornaments of the Church, even as the Sun and the Moon are the
beauty and ornaments of the Heaven: they look to be accoumpted of all
others the best, the noblest and the excellentest: even as in the World, Gold
and precious Stones are of greatest price and highest estimation. But S. Peter
here in plain terms calls them foul Spots, filthy Blottes and
opprobrious Stains. For a true and sincere Christian life consists wholly in
Faith, it serves all men by love, and bears his Cross. This is the right
color and true beauty of the Christian Church: this is her ornament, glory
and renown. But these Shauelings in steed of bearyng the Cross have betaken
themselves to pleasure: in steed of love to their Neighbors, they have chosen
delicacie, nycenesse, love of themselves, desire of self gain and private
commodity: rakyng all things to themselves, and not having any regard or
remorse to serve any other bodies turn or benefit. And as for Faith, they
know thereof nothing at all. They are therefore nothing but Spots and
Blottes, of whom the Church has just cause to be ashamed: because for their
sakes she is evil spoken of, and pitifully slaundered. Hereby me thinks these
our spiritual Tyrauntes are well enough discovered, and sufficiently reproved.



THE relief and sustentation which at the first was given by charitable and
devout persons, of mere Christian love, to be as public Alms, for the use
of poor Widows, fatherless, and other seely poor members of Christ,
because there might be no Beggars or any distressed with pinching penury: all
this whatsoever being given to this good end, has been since, converted into
Freeries and Monasteries: so that now these Shauelings do there with cra^me
and pamper their own paunches, and fare most deliciouslie and live most
pleasurablie: finally they affirm that all these do properly appertain unto
them, and that it is lawful for no man to reprehend or find fault with them
for it. But doubtless, the holy Ghost can not abide, that the true Ministers
of the Church should live in delicacie and idleness, upon the gain of other
men's labors, or upon that which is appointed for the sustentation, succor and
relief of the poor, needy, impotent, and weaklyng.



FOR, this vicious effect can not choose but needs follow, when the body is
ingluuiouslie crammed and gurmandized with excess of meats and drinks, and
walloweth in ease and slothful idleness. But what is the cause, that S. Peter
here says not, that they be Adulterours, but that they have eyes full of
Adultery. Truly, his very meaning is this: Al their cogitations and
thoughts are still upon Whordom and Adulteries: their fleshly desires and
inordinate lusts can never with the dissolute haunt of sin be satisfied,
glutted or wearied. And the cause is, for that they are continually given to
riot, and bellicheere. To conclude, they boldly and impunely do what they list.



FOR the Pope has commanded, that neither Prince nor other civil Magistrate
presume to control or chastise that Romish Clergy: which if they should
attempt to do, he straightwaies excommunicated them. The censure over them,
must be referred to their Ordinaries and Bisshoppes: who being lewd and
vicious themselves, wink at the shameless and enormious villainies of others.
In this sort therefore, they have exempted themselves from under the power of
the temporal Sword, so that no man dare withstand or againsaie their lawless
lusts and wicked proceedinges: they live so abominably, and so sensually,
even as the Gyantes and Tyrauntes did before the Flood.



Under this gaie and glorious show, which they pretend in the whole course of
their wicked life (as mumbling of Masses, chattering and chaunting, praiyng and
singing) they beguile and deceive light and unstable souls, that want Faith.
And herehence it grew that all men so desired and wisshed to beecome Priests,
because they liked that state better then any other: and therefore the greatest
sort of Parents thought themselves happy, if they could train and bring up
their children to that profession: so that within awhile this opinion was
commonly received, that in this kind of life, there wanted nothing (nay rather
al things most plentifully abounded) whereby they might both in this present
World live commodiously and delicately: and again, because thereby they were
fully persuaded in their consciences that this was the very right high way and
straight passage unto Heaven.

But he that would somewhat more nearly sifte the truth and found the depth
of this matter, shall (doubtless) find, that therein they sought none other
thing, but how to fill the belly with delicious fare, and pamper this filthy
sack of the flesh with excessive superfluity and choice of the daintiest
Iunkettes.



AND this vice also is among these Shau^lynges so grossly and openly
c^^^mitted, that none almost even of the bluntest (...) common people, but
both sees and complains of it. He does not say (They are covetous) but
they have a heart exercised with covetousness, and through practice notably
enured and acquainted therewith. Which hereby evidently appears, in that
they have devised such a number of subtle shifts and crafty conueighaunces,
whereby they have catched and gotten into their hands the wealth and richesse
almost of the whole World. Yea, whatsoever this rabble of Monsters goes about
or takes in hand, is nothing else but cursed couetyse: it must bring money to
their purses, or else they will not meddle with it. But their lives, behauiours,
dealinges, practices and conuersations be so generally to all the World
manifested, and every man sees them so readily bent to the fingeryng of money,
and to catch by hook or crook, all that comes to hand, that S. Peter
needs not to fear to be herein reproved, as though he had herein spoken
untruly of them.



BY this Trope or figure of the Hebrewe tongue, is as much meant as if he had
said, They be accursed persons, and under the malediction of God: so that
with God they have no joy, nor consolation, but become every day worse and
worse, and increase daily in blasphemy and hatred of God, bringyng the full
measure of Gods heavy wrath upon them. These be very sharp and terrible
sayings. Whereby we learn that it is more then high time for them to be
dispatched out of this horrible and execrable life. For if they be termed and
called by this most dreadful title of the children of curse, their case is
most miserable. When the high Majesty of GOD does thus grievously reprove,
curse and condemn, who is he that is able to abide it?



THey ought to preach and teach the right way, how we should by faith
cleave unto Christ, and by him have access unto God: how by love we are to
help and further our Neighbors, and afterward how to bear the Cross, and
patiently suffer whatsoever for this cause is laid upon us: whereas they teach
nothing else, but bidd and enjoin us to gadde on Pilgrimage to this place and
to that place, to profess our selves Mu^kes and to wear a Friars Weed: to
become sacrificyng Priests, to build Churches, and to give exhibition and
maintenance for Masses etc. By these means they draw men from Faith, to
Works of their own appoynctment, no manner of way available or profitable to
our Neighbor.





THis story is taken out of the xxij.xxiij. and xxiiij. Chapters of the Book
of Nombers. Wherein is mentioned how the children of Israel coming out of
Egypt, into the land of the Moabites, Balak the King thereof sent messengers
into Syria to Balaam, to request him to come and curse the people of Israel,
whereby he might be able to smite them with the Sword, and drive them out of
his land. Then came GOD unto Balaam, and commanded him, not to curse the
people: whereupon Balaam sent away the Kings messengers, and denied to go
with them. But when the king sent to him the second time, and promised to
give him great wealth, and to promote him to great honor, God permitted the
Prophet to go with them, but withal he commanded him to speak nothing, but
what he should direct and appoinct him to speak. Then saddled he his Ass and
went. And in the way, the Angel of the Lord stood against him, with a naked
Sword in his hand, which when the Ass espied, she turned out of the way,
so that Balaam smote her, to turn her into the way again. Then the Angel of
the Lord went further and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to
turn, either to the right hand, or to the left: where the Ass seeing the
Angel, with his Sword still drawn, thruste her self unto the wall, and
dasshed Balaams foot against it: whereupon he smote her again^ And at last, she
lay down under Balaam: Wherefore Balaam was very wroth, and in a great
rage cudgelled his Ass with his staff. Then God opened the mouth of the
Ass, that she spoke in the voice of a man, and said: what have I dooen unto
thee, that thou thus beatest and bounsest me? To whom Balaam answered: If I had
a sword in mine hand, I would surely kill thee. The Ass said again to her
Master, am not I thine Ass, which thou haste ridden upon, since the first
time until this day? Was I ever wont to do thus unto thee before? Then the
Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, that he saw the Angel of GOD, standing before
him in the way, with a naked Sword in his hand: Wherewith he being greatly
aghast, would have gone back again, but the Angel commanded him to go
foreward: but withal, he gave him in charge, that he should say nothing, but
that which he should appoincte and tell him. So when Balaam was come to King
Balak, the King brought him into an high place, from whence he might descrie,
and take a full view and sight of the whole people of Israel. In which place,
Balaam commanded seven Altars to be made, and Sacrifice for every Altar. Then
went he to ask counsel of the Lord what he should speak: to whom the Lord
delivered his words: so that he in excellent Parables and Sentences, in
steed of cursyng, did bless the people of Israel, and that three times one
after an other. Then the King being exceedyngly angry, said: I sent for thee
to curse mine enemies, and behold, thou haste blessed them now three times. I
thought to have promoted thee unto honor, but lo, the Lord has kept thee
back from honor. To whom Balaam answering, said: Told I thee not by thy
messengers, which thou sentest unto me, that if thou would give me thy
house full of silver and gold, I could speak none other thing, the^ what God
should put in my mouth? Notwithstanding, afterward Balaam gave counsel to
Balak, how he should deal with the people of Israel, to make them to sin
against their God, because he himself was neither able to curse them, neither
the King by force able to vanquishe and subdue them. Then the King erected and
set up an Idol, which had to name Baal Peor, and caused the chiefest of the
Madianitishe women, and the daughters of the Princes and Nobles, to draw and
allure the people of Israel to the sacrifice of their Gods: who anon with
them began to commit Idolatry, to banquet, to feast, yea, to commit
whoredom with them. Wherefore the Lord being angry, commanded that all the
chief heads of the people should be hanged up in the Sun, that the
indignation of the Lords wrath might be turned from Israel: and there died
in one day of the people xxiiij. thousand persons. All this mischief was
brought in among them, by Balaam, for the covetousness of money.

Of this matter does saint Peter now here speak, meaning that our greased
Popelynges and Romish route, with all their Disciples, Favorers, Abetters,
and Sectaries, are the very children of this Balaam. For as he gave
Pestilente counsel to erecte and set up an Idol to be worshipped, whereby the
Israelites being drawn to sin, provoked the vengeance and wrath of God
against them, and were grievously punished for the same, with the death of so
many thousands: even so in like manner our Bisshoply Balaamites have erected an
Idol, under the name of God, to wit, their own peeuishe Traditions and
lousy Inventions, Doctrines of Merits and Iustifiyng Works, excludyng and
banishyng Fatther and thus they steal away men's consciences, and cause them
to leave the true and living God, and to go a whoryng unto strange Idolles.
Which rebellion and disobedience has so provoked Gods wrath and indignation,
that he has long punished the world with such great blindness and
obstinacy, wherein many a Soul has perished. For all which miseries and
mischiefs, we may thank none but these our graunde Spiritual Lordynges.

Saint Peter therefore peculiarly and properly resembles and likeneth these
false Teachers, unto Balaam the Prophet: because like as he, so do they, for
money sake, bring in most abominable Id^latrie, and destroy infinite numbers
of Souls. The very interpretation of the name of this Prophet, makes
somewhat to the better openyng of this matter. For Bileam or Balaam, in the
Hebrew tongue signifies a Deuourer, or a Sweepestake, or a Supper up, who with
open mouth deuoureth and gulleth up all that comes to hand. He had this
beastly and odious name therefore given unto him, because he allured, and was
the cause that so many men sinned, whereby they were brought to their deaths
and destruction. Such manner of fellows be our Balaamites, the Clergy of the
Romish Sinagogue now a days, who with their wide open throats, are very
Deuilles, dououryng and swallowyng up innumerable Souls. The Surname of this
Prophet, is the Son of Bosor, which signifith Flesh, or as Moses calls
him Beor, which signifies Foolish. So likewise are our Polleshorne Doltes,
blind, blockish and foolish: who seeking to bear rule over others, have
most need themselves to be ruled and governed by others. For such be the
men, that are begotten of Flesh: the Spirit beegetteth other manner of
persons. Thus has God in his Scriptures very properly and aptly termed, and
set them out in lively colors: namely, thereby to give us to understand and
know, what is to be thought of them.

The Ass being a dumme beast, and daiely accustomed to the yoke and burde^s,
signifies the People, which must be content both to be snaffled, brideled,
sadled, ridden upon, and to go which way they are bidden. And as this Ass
was violently dealt withal, and grievously beaten, when she went out of the
way, and was forced to go still forward, till she came into such a strait
Lane, where she could not any way either starte aside for the narownesse of
the place, nor go on, for the Angel that withstoode and stopped her, so that
she was driven to fall down: So, the poor people, so often as they feel
them selves to be hardly dealt withal, and to be carried into vnsuffe^able
errors, and feign would go aside out of that wicked way, straighwaies these
seducyng Balaamites were ready with rigor and violence, to bring them into
their erring way again, and therein compelled and enforced them to go, till
it pleased God to open our mouths, and to put his Words therein, so that
now (his name be praised) even young children do talk of it. Whereby their
brainsicke madness, is so notoriously detected, that though they be most
shameless and impudent, yet can they not choose, but blushe thereat.

And here, out of this place, our Balaamites may very fitly be answered, when
as they brag and cry out, according to their wonted order, that it is not
meet for the Lay people (as they call the^) to read the Scriptures, nor to
talk and confer of the same one with an other: but rather to give ear and
hearken what the General Councelles do decree: and what soever they agree
upon, that only to be believed and embraced. May we not thus answer them?
That GOD speaking by a poor Ass, reproved the Prophet which satte on her
back, of madness. They now therefore being infatuated, and their heart
wholly possessed with covetousness, what marvel is it, though God stir up
the poor common people, to declare and show forth his truth, whom they
hitherto have surcharged with heavy burdeins, and driven which way they
lift, none otherwise then a dumme seely Ass, seruyng only to carry burdens.
This is therefore the similitude that saint Peter shows between Balaam, and
our blind Popish Guides.



SOlomon in the xxv. of his Proverbs uses a similitude, saying: A man that
boasts of false liberality, is like Clouds and Wind without Rain. So
says saint Peter here in this place: They are Wells without water, and
Clouds carried about with a tempest, that is: they boaste of great things, but
they perform nothing: they are like Wells that are stopped and dried up,
having in them no water at all, and yet they bear theimselues highly upon
that title, and boste themselves to be the true Wells. But the Scripture
calls them, Wells, which teach, and from whom does flow and issue good
and wholesome doctrine, wherewith the Souls of men may be refreshed. This is
the office that they ought to do, and for this are they appointed. But alas,
saving only the name, there is no such thing in them: as likewise they call
theimselues Shepeheardes, whereas in very deed they be rather rauenyng Wolves.

Again, they be as Clouds, carried hither and thither with the wind: Not as
the thick and black Clouds, that destill and drop down Rain upon the
earth: but as the thin and light fleetyng Clouds in the Air, which are
tossed and carried about hither and thither, out of whom there comes no Rain
at all. Even so likewise do these Pompous Prelates vaunt and brag, and carry
lofty and high countenaunces in the Church, seducyng the world with their
own vaint guegawes and Traditions: being like to light windetossed Clouds,
and are contented to swaie which way soever Satan lifts to carry them, and
to preach what soever may be to his likyng: but not so much as one Word of
the pure and sincere Gospel of God. Which Gospel and Word* because none
preaches but they that be true Preachers and Teachers, therefore are they in
the v. of Esaie, and other places of the Scriptures termed Clouds, because
they do destill and let fall into the hearts of their Auditorie, the sweet
and comfortable Water of Gods truth and mercy.



THey live now even at their own pleasures: every thing according to their own
hearts desires prospers and has good success: but there is a glommie day
toward them, there shall come upon them everlasting darkness, although now
they neither believe it nor feel it.



IF ye ask, how they can be called Wells without water and Clouds without
rain, since they preach very much every where, S. Peter makes you this
answer: they preach (in deed) and rain enough and enough: but their
preachynges are nothing else then swellyng and proud words, wherewith they
accloye and fill the ears of the poor seely people, whom they make to
believe, that what they speak, is right good and Catholic, whereas indeed
there is nothing more vain, fond, and childishe. Thus are our lubberly Monks
wont with brave and plausible words, to boaste and vaunt their Obedience,
Poverty, and Chastity, and all because they would be thought of the common
people, to be of all men the holiest: whereas all their doings and
preachinges, are nothing but mere iugglynges, deceites, and collusions, not
having in them, either Faith or Charity. And so is also this lofty vain
brag of theirs, that the state and office of a Bishop, is an estate of
perfection: whereas they that be in that mitred state, do nothing but
Pompously ieste the streates, awaited upon with a great retinue of Suitors
and Servants, as though their were great Lords: and fare like Princes,
riding upon brave horses like gallant Caualieres: Without any regard had to
their Pastoral charge, saving that now and then they hallowe a Church, or
consecrate an Altar, or Baptize Belles: for with these and such like swellyng
and vain words, their whole Pontificiall Law is full thwackte and pestred.



THE drifte of these Wells and these Teachers is none other, but to entangle
and catch in their snares, the selie Souls that had scarcely before escaped.
As namely, children lately Baptized, and newly received into the Church, and
washed from their sins, delivered from Adam, and engraffed into Christ: them
I say, waxyng somewhat big, they lie in awaite to ensnare, and draw into
error. Whom they ought rather to teach the principles and grounds of Faith
and Charity, and how to bear the Cross of Christ: but alas they instill
nothing into their tender minds, but praises of their Hypocritical Works:
whereby it comes to pass, that they (seely younglynges) are carried back
again into error, although before they had escape out thence. But how do they
thus beguile men with wantonness, to the lusts of the Flesh, and what baits
do they use for the accomplishyng thereof? Forsooth, these holy Priests,
Monks, Freers, Nu^nes, and the rest of those marked mates do say and
teach them, that they ought not to Marie, but to live in single life, unto
the which they bind them fast by Vows and precepts: In which dooyng they
clogge and beguile men, incensyng and incityng them to the lusts of the
Flesh: wherein they suffer them miserably to burn, without allowyng unto
them that lawful remedy, which God has ordained. Here we see that S.
Peter speaks of none other, but of those false Teachers and Bussardly guides
which are aflote, and reign like Princes in the Church of God, over poor
Baptized and beleeuyng Christians.



They extol, praise, and vaunte their holy Orders, their religious Sects,
and sinnelesse professions: into the which, who soever does enter, shall be
saved, as that most Swinish and impudent Dominicane Thomas writes: affirming
that who soever professes himself a Monk is in that state of perfection
wherein he was at the time, when he was newly Baptized, and that thereby he
shall assuredly merit the joys of heaven, and have full remission of his
Sins, through his own Works. These and such like blasphemies of them, must
we listen and give ear unto: being nothing at all ashamed, to compare their
own dirtie dreams and triflyng toys, unto Faith and Baptism, which be
Gods own proper Works and institution. Who having the Spirit of GOD in him,
and hearing these horrible blasphemies, can suffer them and hold his peace?
Now, these and such like mad conclusions, and impious Sentences, our Monks
do train up Youth withal. Finally, which is not the least poinct to be
meruailed at, them that be the aucthours of these detestable errors, they
have canonized and Saincted: whereas them that be the true Saints in deed,
they have murdered and burnt to ashes.



Saint Peter here proves and shows reasons why they be the Servants of
corruption. For to know Christ thoroughly and truly, is to know what he is:
to wit, our only Savior and Redeemer, who of his own mere goodness and
grace has freely pardoned and forgiven us our Sins. Through this knowledge
we escape iniquity, and are delivered from the filthiness of the World.
Which corruption and filth they having in their baptism, renounced and put
of: are again myered and thrown hedlong into the same, whenever they
depart and start from Faith, to trust in their own vile Works. For, where
Faith fails and is absent, there is not the Spirit present: and where the
Spirit is wantyng, there is nothing but flesh, and there can no cleanness
be. And after this sort, has it fallen out hitherto in the Church. Rome at
the first hearkened unto, and embraced the pure Gospel: but afterward it
declined and turned aside into bypathes of ma^s devised doctrines, so that now
it swarmeth with all manner of abominations, and is become the common Synke of
all blasphemous impiety. The latter end thereof is therefore far worse then
the beginning, because they are now become far more desperate and forlorn
Ethnikes, then ever they were, before they heard the Word of God.





THis Proverb has S. Peter taken out of the Book of the Proverbs, where
Solomon has these words: As the dog turns again to his own vomit: so a
fool turns to his foolishness, Prou. xxvj. And so also by the m^^^ when as
in Baptism they have forsaken all wickedness and are washed clean from their
filthy life, and have be taken themselves co^^^re conversation of Faith and
Charity, and afterward fall back and infidelity, and a trust in their own
Works, they ^^myere and deraye themselves again in the filthiness of their
formed (...). This place therefore ought not in any wise to be applied to
Works: as these Papists use was to do, who after auriculer confession and
shrift, were wont thus to enjoin the^ whose confession they heard: Take heed
that from henceforth thou be chaste, mild, gentle, pacient etc. But they
ought rather thus to enstruct and teach them: If thou have a desire to become
virtuous and godly, humbly pray unto GOD by hearty and earnest prayer, that
it would please him to grant unto thee a true and sincere Faith: and thence
begin to live godly, and to depart from wickedness and impiety. For when
thou art possessed of a true and sincere Faith, good Works will straightwaies
follow and issue from it: then shall thou live chaste and pure: other remedy
is there none, to rid thee from the danger of sin. For although for a
while thou may hide and restrain wickedness and impiety in thine heart,
yet will it burst out in open flames at length.

This is now the second Chapter of this his second Epistle, wherein the
Apostle has forewarned and foretold us, what manner of Teachers and false
Seducers should afterward come among us, and miserably misleade us. We can
pretend no excuse, but that we have had sufficient warnyng aforehand, howbeit
we have little regarded it: and therefore our fault is the greater in that we
have thus slightly esteemed the Gospel, and swerued from the sweet doctrine
comprised in the same: whereby we have through our lewd lives provoked the
heavier wrath of God against us. We are all not unwilling to hear the Pope
with his lubberly Drones to be inueighed against, and for their monstrous
merchandise of Christian Souls to be condignely taunted and reproved: but few
of us takes any occasion thereby to amend his own life, or to refourme his
former conversation. For it is no tryfling matter, or laughyng toye, but a
serious case and of great importance, and such whereat our hearts ought to
tremble and quake for fear. These things therefore are most earnestly, and
diligently to be both spoken and heard: and God is most humbly to be desired
and prayed unto, to turn his heavy wrath and plague from us. For this
calamity and wretchedness comes not upon us by chance or blind fortune,
but it is sent unto us from God, as a plague for our wickedness and impiety,
as S. Paul witnesses ij. These. ij. Because (says he) they received not the
Love of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore shall God send them
strong delusion, that they should believe lies. For if this punishment and
revenge of God had extended no further, but to the perishing only of these
false, counterfaite, and seducing Teachers themselves, it might have seemed
very tolerable: but now they having maistered and ouerruled the whole World
at their own pleasures, they have carried with them to hell whole multitudes of
people, that have been bewitched and enchaunte^ with their spiritual
sorceries. There is no remedy therefore for us to recure this mischief, but
to prostrate our selves before the mercy seat of almighty God, in all fear
and humility, most penitently confessyng our faults, and suppliauntlie
imploryng his divine grace and assistaunce^, that it might please him to
vouchsafe to remove and take away this plague from us. It is earnest and
hearty prayer, wherewith we must impugn and withstand these false and
deceiptfull Teachers: for Satan our Adversary the Devil will not be driven
away with any other weapons.

The third Chapter.
THis second Epistle I now write unto you, beloved, wherewith I stir up, and
warn your pure minds,

















night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
Elements shall melte with heat, and the Earth with the works, that are
therein, shall be burnt up.






















IN this Chapter we are admonished to be in a readiness and every minute of
an hour to look for the last day. And first S. Peter declares unto them how
that he has not written this Epistle to them purposely and with intent to
lay down unto them the foundation of Faith (for that had he laid down very
substancially, effectually and sufficiently before) but to excite and stir
them up, and to admonish and put them in remembrance that they forgett not
those things which they had before heard and received, but rather that they
should persevere in that sincerity of mind and understanding, which was
requisite, fit, expediente and appertinent unto true Christianity. For the
office and duty of all true Preachers is, not only to teach, but also
continually to admonish and exhort. Because so long as we be clad with this
flesh and blood, we have great need to have the Word of God to dwell
plentifully in us, and to reign and bear sovereign authority in us: whereby
we may resist the motions, suggestions, delites and concupiscences of the
Flesh, and with faithful constancy valiantly subdue, resist, and strive
against the lusts thereof.





THere be some yet at this day very waueryng and ficklemynded, being carried
away through certain reasons set down in a Book, entitled and written of
Antichrist, in which Book is declared, that before the latter day men should
fall into such gross and Deuilish error as to deny God, and to mock and
deryde all that they hear preached of Christ and of Domesdaie. And this
saying is true, from whence soever it was borrowed. But it ought not so
straictly to be taken, as though the whole World should fall into such a
general Apostacy, and so universally blaspheme God: but that the greater
part and portion thereof should fall away. For we see it now plainly come to
pass, and more and more daily will it burst out, that when and where the
Gospel shall be published and openly preached among men, many wicked shall be
wraie themselves, and the inward hearts of many shall be openly detected, whose
wickedness and impiety now secretly lurketh, and is dissimuled. And the
number now adays is not small, that believe little or nothing of the latter
day, neither think that ever it will come.

Of such mockers and skorners S. Peter here forewarneth us, tellyng us that
there should be sundry which would think there were none other life after
this, and therefore would pass their days lewdely, inordinately and according
to the devises of their own sensual lusts. In deed, at Rome and in Italy,
this Prophecy is long ago fulfilled: and they that come from thence to us,
bring with them this opinion: that what filthy and wicked life they lead
there, the same do they teach us, and those Countries where they chance to
inhabit. But a little before the latter day, such manner of men must needs
be, as Christ himself foretold Matthew. xxiiij. As the days of Noah were, so
likewise shall the coming of the soonne of man be. For as in the days before
the flood, they did eat and drink, marie and give in marriage, even until the
day that Noah entered into the Arc, and knew nothing till the flood came, and
took them all away: so shall also the coming of the son of man be. And a
little after in the same Chapter: Be ye ready, for in such a time as ye
think not, will the son of man come. Again Luc. xxj. As a snare shall that
day come upon all them, that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Again Luke
xvij. As the Lightening that lighteneth out of the one part under Heaven,
shines unto the other part under Heaven: so shall the son of man be in his
day. That is, it shall come merueilous suddenly and most unlooked for, when
as the World shall live in most senseless security, and the Word of God
altogether deryded, and contemptuously skorned.

This therefore shall be a sign and a token of the near approchyng of the
latter day, when as men shall loosely live, according to their own wilful
lusts and pleasures: and when as they shall presumptuously ask, Where is now
the promise of his coming? The World has continued thus long, and every
thing is in the same case as it hitherto has been, what strange thing shall
there now happen? Saint Peter therefore forewarneth us, that we be not
lightly carried away with these wicked speeches, but rather know that they be
undoubted signs and tokens, that this day will come, and that very shortly.





They are such perverse and froward persons (says he) that they disdain
and grudge to bestow any time or labor in learning the truth: in so much that
with a flearyng disdain, they resist, and can not be brought so much as even
to read the Scriptures: Yea, they are so wilful and obstinate, that they will
not seem either to think or know, how that the same thing came to pass also
in the old world, when Noah builte the Arc. Namely, how that the Earth
being separated from the water, was in the beginning made by the Word of
God, and how again the same Earth was wholly ouerflowed and drouned with
water: and how that men lived then so secure and careless, that they looked
for no harm to come unto them, neither thought of any destruction at hand.
And yet suddenly the Flood covered them all. Of all which, these perverse and
froward persons, are willyngly and wilfully ignorant. The plain meaning of
his words is, as if he should say: If God then destroyed the World with
water, and by a terrible example declared, that he was able to droune it
universally: how much more will he destroy it now, having so much and so
often in plain and sundry words, and in so many several places threatened
and promised the same?

Heaven and Earth had their Beginning and Creation by the Word of God, they
were not from everlasting. And the Waters that rested above in the Clouds,
were by a Firmament separated from the Waters, which were in Seas and Rivers
upon the Earth below. So that the Earth which was overwhelmed and surrounded
with the Deep, was by the Word of GOD parted from the Waters, and became dry
land: standing and being hemmed in by the Waters. And that which Moses at
large describes, is by Saint Peter here but lightly touched. By the same Word
of GOD whereby they were made and created, are all things therein preserved
and governed. For it is not there Nature so to stand, or to remain in such
situation: and therefore if God by his unspeakable power did not uphold,
preserve, and govern them, all things would quickly come to a wrecke and
ruin, and be sonedrenched, covered, and wholly ouerflowed with Water. But
mighty is thee Word, which God spoke, when he said: Let the waters under
the heavens be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appear: That
it, let the Waters depart aside and give place, that the dry land may be
seen, and that men may dwell thereon for otherwise, (as I said before) by
Nature the water would ouerflowe and cover the whole Earth. Which that it so
comes not to pass, is as strange a miracle as any is, among all the works
of God. Now says Saint Peter: These wilful flouters and stiffenecked
deriders, are so perverse and inco^siderate, that they maliciously think
skorne to show this honor to the holy Ghost, to read the Scriptures, and
therein to see how God keeps, preserves, and governs the world within the
water whereby they might well perceive and see, that all things are in the
hands of GOD: and therefore sith he has once already destroyed the world by
bringing thereupon the general Deluge, so also when it pleases him can he do
unto us. For the example thereof ought so greatly to move each one of us, that
as he then performed that, which before he threatened, so we should now none
otherwise think, but that he will surely abide by his words, and do that
which he has spoken concerning us.



IN the old time when God drouned the whole World in the general Floude, the
waters in most abundaunce gushed out of the Clouds above: spouted out of the
bowelles of the Earth below, and on every side such streams increased, that
nothing was now to be seen but Waters: the Earth according to her Nature,
being all drouned, and covered under the Waters. But God promised that he
would never thence forth destroy the World with waters any more: making a
covenant and giuyng his Rainbowe in the Clouds, for a sign thereof, Genes.
ix. Therefore he will next consume and destroy it with Fire: so that there
shall then nothing appear but Fire, as aforetyme there was nothing seen but
water. Hereof also S. Paul ij. These. j. When the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, rendryng
vengeance to them that do not know God, and which do not obey unto the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, j. Cor. iij Every man's work
shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
reueiled by the Fire. Therefore, when that last day shall (like a sudden
flashe of Lightnyng) come upon us, all things in this Heaven and this Earth,
shall in the twincklyng of an eye be consumed to Cinders, and suddenly changed
with Fire, even as in the time of Noah, all things were changed with the
water: and that GOD will not fail in this his threatening and commination:
whereof we ought to take his former dealyng for an infallible token, the which
he has left unto us for a sign.







IN these words S. Peter meets with those cauillers (of whom he spoke
before) which say, that the Apostles have foretold many vain and foolish
tales of the latter Day, and that al things stand still in the same course
and order as they did before, notwithstanding so long a space of time, since
they foretold and Prophesied thereof. And this place borrowed he out of the
prayer of Moses in the lxxxx. Psalm. A thousand years (says he) in thy sight
are as yesterdaie when it is paste. This is after two sorts to be
understood and taken: One, as it has respect and relation to God, the other
as it respects Men and the World: Again, this life is to be considered
after one sort, the life to come after an other. This life can not be the life
to come, because into that none can pass, but by Death: that is, till he
cease from the functions of this mortal life. This present Life, consists
and is preserved by eating, drinkyng, sleapyng, digestyng, etc. all which
consiste and are done within the limitation of Hours, Days, and Years. But
when thou will thoroughly consider the life to come, thou must quight forget and
put out of thy cogitation and remembrance, all the course of this present life,
and never think, to make any conference or comparison, between this Life and
it: For all things in it, are as one Day, one Hour, one Minute, one Moment.

Seeing therefore, that there is no Dinumeration of time with God, it follows
that a thousand years with him, are as one day: and therefore the first manne
Adam is as near to God, as he that shall be last borne, the day next before the
General day of Judgment. For God respects not time, according as the same
is in length, but rather (as it were) aslope: as if a man should behold and
look upon a very long Tree, liyng ouerthwarte or aslope before him: For so
should he with one glaunce of his eye, behold both the ends thereof at once:
which he could not do, if he should stand at the one end, and behold it
long wise. Now, we mortal Creatures can not by our own reason, behold and
consider the Time, but according to the length, by numbryng and addyng year to
year, from Adam till the last day. But with God, all things are lapped up as
it were in one bundle, and seen with one blushe: What we think to de long, the
same with him is short, and contrariwise. A man when he dies, lies buried in
the Earth, and his body is consumed into duste, neither knows he any thing:
but when he shall arise again in the last day, he shall think he has slept
as it were scarcely as hour* then shall he see and behold a great multitude
that lived after him, of whom he knew nothing at all. Saint Peter's meaning
therefore is this: The Lord is not slack to perform his promise, as these
Mockers and Skorners do think that he is, but is pacient and long suffryng:
therefore be ye ready against the last day, which will come sooner then ye
look for: and will suddenly overtake the wicked Worldlynges, as Saint Paul
says: j. These v. When they shall say, peace and safety, then shall come
upon them sudden destruction, as the travail upon a woman with child, and
there shall not escape* That day shall come with such a noise, and shall so
suddenly (as it were a terrible tempest) fall upon the world, that al things
shall be consumed in a moment.





Seeing that ye know, that all these things shall pass away, both Heaven,
Earth and all things therein: consider and weigh with your selves with what
holiness of life and godliness of conversation ye ought to stand ready
against that day. For S. Peter so describes this day, as that it is even now
at hand: against the which, we should not only be in a readiness, but also
most joyfully and gladly expect and look for the coming thereof. Yea, he
would have us with most willing minds to go to meet the Lord in that day,
as in which, we hope at length to be clearly rid and delivered from the
tyranny of Sin, Death and Hell.





THE Lord by his Prophets in sundry places has promised that he will create
new Heavens and a new Earth, as Esaias. Lxv. Lo, I will create new Heavens
and a new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered not come into your
mind. Again: Esaias xxx. The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seuenfold, and like the light of seven
days. And Christ says Matthew. xiij. that the just shall shine as the Sun, in
the kingdom of their father. But how and after what fashion all this shall come
to pass, we ca^ not tell, saving that it is faithfully promised by him who can
not deceive, that there shall be new Heavens and a new Earth, in which shall
dwell no sin and uncleanness, but righteousness and they that be the
children of God, as Paul also Romans viij. witnesses. There shall be nothing but
joy and perpetual solace, to wit, the kingdom of God and all felicity.

Here he that would be inquisitiue to know, whether the elect and blessed
shall at that time be in the Heavens or on the Earth: Truly this place
sounds, that they shall remain and dwell on the Earth, so that al, both
Heavens and Earth shall be as one Paradise, wherein God himself will dwell. For
he not only dwells in the Heavens, but every where: and therefore where he
is, there shall the elect also be.



FOrsomuche (says he) as ye have escaped so great mischieues and dangers,
and shall come to such and so great joys, this ought not a little to move
you, to contemn and despise all the things of the World, and with pacient
minds to suffer what adversity soever shall be allotted unto you: and this is
it, that he says, ye ought diligently to endeavor yourselues to live without
spot and blame, and after this ^orce in peace to expect and look for that day.



IN that, he so long spares you and deferreth his judgment, and does not by
and by judge you, think ye it your great gain and avail. He has cause
enough to be angry with you, and even by and by to take present revenge upon
you, but such is his mercy and clemency, yt he spares you and pardons all
your transgressions.





Saint Peter here gives express testimony and allowaunce of the sound
doctrine contained in S. Paul's Epistles: which proves that this Epistle was
written long after the Epistles of Paul. And this is one of those places,
whereby a man may take occasion to think, that this Epistle was not written
by S. Peter: as also an other sentence a little before in this present Chapter
expressed, does insinuate, and purporte: where he says, that God would have
no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance. For it seems to
savor of a lower spirit, and to carry a meaner grace, then to one inspired
with an Apostolical spirit is usual. Yet is it not altogether incredible,
nor amiss to think, this Epistle to be written by Peter. For seeing that in
this Epistle his purpose and meaning was, not to write of Faith, but of Love
and Charity: be purposely abazeth himself in his Style, as the nature of
Charity always is to do, to the intent thereby to humble himself to his
Neighbor: as on the other part, Faith always mounteth and lifts up it self
to Godwarde.

And this (...) he well see would come to pass, that many light and unstable
Spirits would wrest and wring, inuert and pervert S. Paul's words in sundry
places: For that, in his Epistles there are some Textes hard to be
understood* as where he says, that no man is justified by works, but by
Faith only. Romans iij. Again, that the Law was given to know Sin. Romans
iiij. and vij. And moreover, Where sin abounded, there grace abounded much
more, Romans v. and such like places. For as soon as they hear this, they
straight ways break out into these or ye like speeches ^f it be thus, we will
live ydlie and merrily, we will do to good work at all, and yet shall we
(nevertheless) be saved and justified: and after this sort even nowadaies do
they ^aise on us and shamefullie help us, faiyng: that we in our Sermons
condemn and dispraise good Works. But we may not think it any marvel or
strange thing, seeing, they have not spared to wrest and misconstrue S. Paul's
words.





Seeing therefore ye perfectly know all these things before declared, and are
certainly given to understand that many false Teachers shall be chopped and
foysted in among you to seduce the World, and many froward mockers shall
wilfully mistake and wrest the Scriptures, not being willing to understand
them aright, it greatly stands you upon, to take good heed to your selves,
and most carefully to beware of them, least with their false and erroneous
doctrine they carry you away from the right Faith: but look rather that ye
daily increase in godliness and knowledge, that from day to day through
continual preaching and exercise of the Word of God, ye may be more and
more confirmed and strengthenes.

And here we are to behold and note, the great care that the Apostle had
over them which had now received the Faith: which caused him to write unto
them these two Epistles, wherein is largely and plentifully laid down, al
and whatsoever is expedient and necessary for a Christian man to know, yea
concerning those things also which are to come. God grant unto us his grace,
that we may both rightly understand also effectually keep and observe the
same, to the glory of his holy and blessed name, and to the comfort and
consolation of our own Souls and consciences. Amen.

THE GENERAL Epistle of S. Jude.
IVDE a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them which are
called and sanctified of God the Father, and reserved to Jesus Christ:











vengeance of eternal Fire.





















lusts.




















THis Epistle is attributed unto S. Jude the Apostle, brother of James the
less, and Simon: Mark. vj. Luke vj. Whose mother was Marie the wife of
Cleopas, and Sister of the blessed Virgin Marie the mother of Christ: Ioh. xvj.
But it appears not expressly to be written by that Jude who was the
Apostle, because herein he speaks and makes mention of the Apostles, as
though he were but one of their Disciples, and had written certain years
after them. Neither contains it any special or peculiar matter in it, other
then that may well and fully be gathered out of the before going second
Epistle of S. Peter: unto the which it has entier reference, and out of which,
al his reasons and sayings are in a manner taken. To conclude, this is nothing
else, but an: Epistle directly painetyng and poinctyng out the abuses, fleightes
and treacheries of our Papisticall Clergy.



THE effect of his meaning is this. I could not choose but write unto you, to
admonish and exhort you to persist and manfully gooe forward in that Faith,
which has now once been preached unto you. As if he should say, It is
needful and necessary that I should put you in remembrance, to strive and
with all your endeavor to continue and persevere in the right way. The cause
why it is so needful and necessary, here follows.



THis is the cause why I have taken in hand to admonish you, to persevere and
continue in that Faith which ye have heard: because even now there are
creepyng in, and already are entered, certain false seducers and deceiptfull
Preachers, which go about to teach and sow among you other counterfaite
Doctrines, contrary to those rules of Faith which ye have soundly learned:
take ye heed therefore, for they be such a mischievous and fly generation,
that they will suttlie and suddenly steal a way men's consciences, and with
their erroneous tromperie seduce and eatie them out of the right way of
truth, before they can perceive it or be a ware of their fetchyng collusions.
So said S. Peter before. There shall be among you false teachers etc. And S.
Jude here says, they were long ago foreordained to this condemnation and
judgment. Which thing is easy for us to understand, which know that no man
is justified by any of his own Works, but by Faith only in Christ: in
whom who so assuredly and faithfully believes, and staieth, as upon his chief
buttresse and only pillar of safety, is made partaker of al his benefits:
and all Christ's Works, by Faith are become his. After this sure groundworke
of Faith once laid: all our works that we are able to do, ought to tend to
the benefit and commodity of our Neighbor. What works so ever are wrought
to any other end then this, are Deuilishe and damnable. Let a man therefore
diligently take heed how he deals, and let him direct his works as
fruictes of his lively Faith, to the help and benefit of his Neighbor: for all other be odious and abominable in the sight of God, of which sort are
these vowed Professions, and meriting Works of Massyng Priests and mumbling
Munkes. He therefore that carries men from the ankerholde of faith to the
^^^she bables and lousy Ceremonies of these greasy Votaries, and their
works, is a deceiuer and a seducer, and draws men with them into the like
danger of condemnation.



THE preaching which is opened unto us of the grace of God, and wherein Christ
is set forth and commended unto us, and how he with all his good benefits is
exhibited and freely given unto us, so that we are now clearly freed and
delivered from Sin, Death, Hell and all misery: This free grace and gift (I
say) thus offered unto us in the Gospel, these seducyng and false deceiptfull
Hypocrites do abuse, to the maintenance of themselves in all lascivious
wantonness. That is, they bear themselves bold under the name of Christians,
and they b^ast and prate much of the Gospel but they live so dissolutelie and
disorderly, that they do all things according to the pitche of their own
wilful affections and lawless lusts, spendyng the time in ry^t, banquettyng,
carowsing and Gluttony. They vaunt and brag, saying, that they have taken
upon them in a spiritual kind of life, and utterly renou^ed the delights of
the seculer state, and worldly dealings: whereas under the vizarde of this
pretended simplicity, they have invaded and raked into their hands (in a
manner) all the wealth, delites and dignities in the World. This is already
(says Jude) begun to be put in practice. For we read, that this
mischief of Bishops seeking Lordly authority, and higher prerogative then
other Christians, began above a thousand years ago, which thing in the
Epistles of Hierome is evidently to be seen.



SO also writes Saint Peter in his Christ's* But that Deniyng (as it is there
and here in (...)) is not with the mouth, (for outwardly in words they
confess that GOD is the Lords) but in their works and dealings: they flatly
deny the Lord Christ, not acknowledgyng him to be their Lord, but challenge
rather a Lordinesse and predenimation unto themselves.

For when as they Preach, that Fasting, Pilgrimage, buildyng of Abbaies,
Chastity, Obedience, Poverty, and such like, is the right high way to
felicity, they th^re^^ miserably seduce, and draw men from the truth, to
them wretched Works, utterly suppressyng, concealyng, and keepyng Christ,
down. Which is no less, then if they should say: Christ avails that
nothing, neither can his works and (...) fires any whitte help thee. Thou
must needs trust to thy self, and merit Heaven with thine own Works. And
thus they ^^ny the Lord, who has bought and redeemed us with his own
precious blood, as S. Peter before declared.







HEre he infers three several examples, whereof the two last are mentioned
why S. Peter. One only he here adds more, and (...) it of the children of
Isral, whom God by many wonders brought out of the Land of Egypt, and who for
their unbelief dyed in the Wilderness and were destroyed: so that of six
hundredth thousand men, beside women and children under twenty years, that
came out of Egypt; there were left no more but only twain. Number. xj. This
example he brings for an admonition and terror: as if he should say, let
those that are called by the name of Christians* and under color thereof turn
the grace of God into wantonness, take heed and look well to themselves,
least that happen unto them, which light upon the Israelites. And truly,
since the time that blind Popery began, and the clear light of the Gospel
was covered and restrained from being publicly preached, one plague has
still fallen in the neck of an other, whereby GOD has still from time to time
taken revenge of the unbelievers, and given them over into the very Jaws of
Satan.



THese Doctors and Teachers he calls Dreamers, because that as when one
dreameth, he thinks himself to have somewhat, and to see many things, which
in truth are but vain fantasies: and when he awaketh and sees himself to
have nothing, then perceives he all to be but a dream, and so makes he no
accoumpt thereof. So, whatsoever these iuggling Rabbines and Lordly masters
do say, is nothing but mere dreams: which they shall one day, when their
eyes shall be opened, well find and know to have been nothing at all. And
namely, when they go about to persuade men that their shaven crounes, their
forked Cappes, their wilful Poverty, their counterfaite Chastity, their
vowed Obedience, and such like trashe and guegawes are things very acceptable
unto God Herein they marvelously blea^^ themselves in their own
imaginations, and think themselves to see that, which in deed is but false
and fantastical, and no better then a very fond and foolish dream: as in
truth, all this their trashe and tromperie is before God nothing else but mere
dreams and lies. Therefore, in calling them Dreamers, he did very well, and hit
them home with their right name, for that, with their dreams they seduce and
beguile both themselves and the World.

This vice of living looselie and wantonlie, the Apostles do peculiarly
attribute and ascribe to those which be greazed Priests and marked
Baalamites. God long ago foretold us, that they should be a Sect living
without Wives. And Daniell also prophesying of the kingdom of the Pope,
foretold long ago, that, their lust should be upon women, Dan. xj. because he
foresawe that they would be such, as could not abide to be linked in lawful
marriage with any women, but burn in lust and wicked concupiscence. And this is
one of the outward iolie virtues, not much unlike to that their other inward
properties, namely that they are dreamyng Sleepers.



THeir third quality is, that they refuse to be subject to the Temporal
Sword, and Civil Magistrate. But we know, and so teach, that so long as
we live upon Earth, we are bound by the Word of GOD, to yield our
obedience unto Magistrates. For the Faith of Christ does not violate,
infringe, and disanull external Policy: and therefore it is not lawful for
any man to exempt himself from his obedience toward them. Whereupon we see it
plainly and consequently proved, that the Popes Canons and Decrees, touching
Ecclesiastical Immunitie, be nothing but very devises and inventions of
Satan.

durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

THis is one of the places, for the which, this Epistle was of the old Fathers
not allowed and received for Canonical: because he here alleges an example,
which is not read else where in any place within the whole body of the Bible:
Namely, that Michaell the Archangell contended with the Devil, about the body
of Moses. This contention some think grew hereupon, because there are so many
notable stories written of Moses, namely, in the last of Deuter: where we
read that the Angel of God buried him, but that no man knows of his
Sepulcher where it is unto this day. Again, because the Scripture testifies
of him, in the same Chapter, that there arose not a Prophet in Israel like
unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. etc. Seeing therefore in what
great estimation and reverence Moses was among the Jews: some of the
Interpreters and Expositors, that write upon that same last Chapter of Deuteronomy.
say, that Moses was buried by God, and that his Sepulcher was never hitherto
known, or found by any man. Which God did, to the intent the Jews should
be kept from all occasion of committyng Idolatry, whereinto they might easily
and quickly have slipped, if they had had the body of so noble and renoumed a
Prophet among them, as Moses was. Whereupon they gather, that this contention
(here mentioned by S. Jude) arose: because the Devil would gladly have had the
body of Moses to be manifestly known where it was, to the intent the people
might have had occasion to commit Idolatry, thereby ministered unto them.
Now, albeit Michael were an Archangell, yet durst be not (says S. Jude)
rebuke him with cursed speaking, and railyng Sentence. But these blasphemous
mouths and perverse persons, are not ashamed to despise, tread under foot,
and speak evil of the Powers, which are ordained by God, and to curse them
to the eight and ninth generation. And whereas they themselves are nothing else
then wretched Caitifes, and seely frail Creatures: yet see they here, that
Michael one of the chiefest Angels, was afraied to curse and rail upon the
Devil, being a most wicken Spirit: Not daryng to say any farther, then, The
Lord rebuke thee.



THese kind of persons be cursed speakers, and blasphemous railers, because
they have skill of nothing but of Excommunicatyng, Accur^ng and delivering over
to Satan, not only Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Powers, but even GOD
himself, and his blessed Saints: as in the Bull of the Supper of the Lord is
to be seen. They know not, that their Salvation consists in Faith and
Charity: They can not abide to have their Works dispraised, rejected, and
condemned: Neither will they suffer any to preach to the people, that we
must only look for our Salvation by the Merits, Death, and Works of
Christ: And therefore they condemn, Accurse, Revile, and Blaspheme all true
Christian doctrine: wherein they plainly discover themselves* how utterly
blind and ignorant they be. But those things which they know by their
own natural understanding, as Trentalles, Masses and such like
Legierdemaine, which fills both their pouches and their paunches, and
brings in store of pelf, m^n^y and wealth, thereto they wholly emploie
themselves, and thereby carry both themselves and others into perdition.



CAin killed his brother for none other cause, but for that his brother was
iuster and godlier then himself: and for that God had more respect and greater
delight in his brothers Sacrifice, then he had in his. Therefore the way of
Cain, is to trust in our own Works, and to renounce and reiecte those Works
that be true, and good Works in deed: Finally, to murder and slaie all
those that walk in the truth, and in the tight way. Which nature and
practice we see the Papists most earnestly with tooth and nail, daiely to
put in ure.



They should be inwardly hidden with Christ, in an assured trust and
confidence of Gods divine grace: but they licentiously break out, and actually
dispose themselves into sundry sorts of external and outward Works: and do
all things for greediness of gain, and pecuniarie reward, to fill their
beallies, after the example of the Prophet Balaam, as was declared in the
second Chapter of the second Epistle of S. Peter aforegoyng.



OF the sedicious rebellion of Core, and how he with his wicked confederates,
was swallowed into the Earth, we read in the fourth Book of Moses, Chapt.
xvj. Moses was appoincted and called of God to this end, that he should bring
and conducte the people of Israel out of Egypt: and his brother Aaron, to be
the high Priest. This Core being also of the same Tribe and Family and
ambielously aspiryng to carry some high authority, adjoined unto him two
hundred and fifty Captains, of the best and most renoumed among all the
people: with whom he raised up such a mutinous faction, and seditious Tumulte,
that brought all the company into an uproar, and welnere caused Moses and
Aaron to flee, and give place to their fury. But Moses falling down upon his
face, prayed unto the Lord, that he should not look unto their offryng and
Sacrifice: and when he had spoken to the people, that they should separate
themselves, and depart from the company of those wicked conspiratours, he
said: Hereby ye shall know, whether the Lord has sent me, or no. If these men
dye the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of
all men, the Lord has not sent me. But if the Lord make a new thing, and
the Earth open her mouth, and swallowe down these men quick into the pit,
then ye shall understand that these men have blasphemed, and provoked the
Lord. And as soon as he had made an end of speaking all these words, even
the ground claue asunder thas was under them, and the Earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up with their families, and all the men that were with Core,
and all their goods. So they and all that they had, went down alive into the
pit, and the Earth covered them. And there came out a Fire from the Lord,
which consumed the two hundred and fifty men, that had adjoined themselves
to Core, and offered Incense.

This Example does saint Jude bring against these our horrible and
blasphemous Popelynges: who charge us to be the Aucthours of Sedicion and
mutiny, when we preach against them: whereas in deed, it is they that are
the causers of all garboile and trouble. For Christ is our Aaron and high
Priest: whom only we ought to hear, and acknowledge for the Bishop of our
Souls. But that can not the Pope and his greazed Bishops abide: for they
advance themselves alofte, and challenge to them all domination and power: and
flatly oppose themselves against Christ. These being altogether drouned and
buried in Earthly conversation and pleasure, and being the very world it
self, does S. Jude compare and resemble to Core and his companions, whom God
straungely punished, so that the ground opened and swallowed them up alive.





ALL this we have already heard largely discoursed in the Epistle of S.
Peter. The greater part of Christendom, has trained and brought up their
children to the order of Priesthood, and for none other cause, but to live
idly and delicately without any labor of their own hands, or trouble of
preaching: Voluptuouslie enioiyng and spendyng at their own ease and pleasure
those goods, which poor men painfully got in the sweat of their brows.
They are among the common people reputed and taken for the worthiest Pillars,
and (as it were) the Iewelles, and ornaments of the Christian Congregation:
whereas in deed they be but the Spotts and Wennes of the Common wealth, the
Skumme and Filthe of the people, and the detestable vizardes of hypocritical
holiness: they keep iolie cheer, and fare most deliciously, according to
the old Adage or Proverb, which calls delicate and dainty cates, morselles
for a Priest. Finally they are without fear and care, verily thinkyng that
Satan himself is not able to overthrow them. The flock they feed nothing at
all, but are rather themselves the ravenous Wolves, that devour and eat up
the Sheep. They are Clouds that are carried on high, and swaied alofte in the
Air. For they have enstalled themselves in the chiefest places, and best
roumes, and carry all the credit and countenance in the Church: they ought to
teach others, but they care nothing at al for that: suffryng them to be
carried hither and thither into the Foggie miste of error and ignorance by the
Devil, the professed enemy of mankind. They are also fruitless and naked
Trees, such as are in the beginning of Winter, bearing neither fruit nor
leaves, yet they occupy a room as other Trees do. They bear a show of the
Bishopps of Christ, but they have in them no piece nor part neither of him,
nor yet of his Words or Works, but are dead at the roots.

They are also ragyng waves of the Sea, that is, even as the winds in the Sea
do toss and stir the waves this way and that way: so are they also carried
whither soever Satan drives them. They foame out their own shame, even as a
pot, that has a great heat under it: they are so full of malice, that it
runs over at the brim, they are so nozzeled in spightfulnesse and cruelty,
that their swellyng and cankered stomachs can not hold it, but must needs
cast up and vomit out all their beastly filthiness, and therewith also defile
and pollute others. They are wandryng Stars, such as they call planetes
retrograde having their motion backwarde: in like manner these fellows, whose
life and doctrine is nothing but error, seduce and beguile both themselves
and all those that follow them. And therefore there is reserved for them, the
mist of darkness for ever.

In these words and examples, Jude has depaincted and set out our Massyng
mates and pollshorne Prelates, who under the name of Christ and of the Church,
do bring in a Sea of most lewd and execrable manners: and yet nevertheless
under pretense thereof do catch and rake unto themselves all the wealth of
the World, and bring all men's heads under their girdles.



THis place is not any where read in the Scripture: which is an other reason
why some of the ancient Fathers would not admit and receive this Epistle as
canonical: howbeit this is no sufficient cause, whereby to disallowe or reject
any Book: for S. Paul also ij. Timot. iij. names Iannes and Iambres, two
adversaries of Moses, whose names (notwithstanding) are not read in the whole
Bible beside. Howsoever men's judgments have been or be, we will not presently
stand upon that poinct. But this is true, that God from the beginning of the
World has ever reueiled his Word to some, wherein to the believers grace
and salvation is promised, but to the unbelievers, judgment and damnation is
threatened, and so it still continued even till the Ascension of Christ: from
which time, the Word of God has been openly and generally preached over all
the World. But before the nativity of Christ, GOD still chose some to himself
whom he used as it were a certain threede, from hand to hand to deliver the
manifestation and publication of his Word: first from Adam to Abraham: then
from him to David, and so to the Virgin Marie, the mother of Christ, and
others more to whom he reueiled and delivered his truth.

The Gospel therefore was always preached in the world, but never so openly as
now in these latter days. After this sort did this Patriarch Enoch preach
and publish the Word of the Lord: which (undoubtedly) he had learned of his
Father Adam, by influence from the holy Ghost.

For it is recorded of him in the Scriptures, Genesis v. that he led an upright
and godly life, and therefore was taken up of God and was no more seen.
Whereupon sprung that fable, that he should come again before the day of
Judgment: which thing is not to be looked for, unless we will understand
it in this sense, that he shall come again in spirit: namely, for that, his
preaching does fitly iumpe and agree to the time next before the general
Judgment: as here this present place very truly agrees thereto: wherein he
speaks so certainly of the last Day, as if he had presently seen it with
his eyes. The Lord (says he) comes with thousands of his Saints: that
is, with an infinite multitude. For, these words must needs be understood,
only of the last Day, wherein the Lord will come to Judgment with all his
Saints. For when he first came into the World, he came not with many
thousands of his Saints, but alone: and that, not to judge, but to give
Grace.



THis place does Jude not unaptly here infer, directly sounding against false
Guides and counterfaite Teachers, which he knew in great swarms should come
a little before the last Day: but it seems also very aptly to bear this
interpretation and signification, that the Lord at his coming will first
destroy and quight overthrow the Pope with all his imperious Po^tificalitie.
For, to such a great mischievous evil there is none other help or remedy,
for the utter abolishyng and quite taking of him away. For so long as the
World endures, there will neither be end of him, neither can there any
reformation and amendment in him be hoped for. And truly, this place can not
be understood of any other then of our Papists, who so miserably and
lamentably seduce the World. For a more forlorn, desperate and wicked life,
then that of the Papists, can not possibly be imagined: wherein as they
impiously already wallowe, so will they still continue worse and worse,
pretending (notwithstanding) great sanctimonie and holiness under the name of
Christ, whom they use as a cloak to contriue and hide all their villaynous
treachery. Under the name of Papists we may understand both them and all
the rabble of seducyng Imposters and deceivers beside, which shall come a little
before the last Day, and all such as embrace and follow^ their godless
impiety. This place therefore that he here alle^geth, is to be understood of
the last day of Judgment. We see, of whom he specially means that the
said Judgment is to be looked for. Whereupon we conclude that our tyrannous
Shauelinges and shaven. Tyrauntes are with tremblyng expectation reserved
sorthe last day and coming of the Lord, whether the same come and approach
with speed, or stay yet somewhat longer.



IN these words he both reprooueth their life, and reprehendeth their
sayings: and it is as much as if he should say: They speak presumptuously
and malapertly against the Lord, and against his coming, they be impudent and
tooto arrogant, they deryde and blaspheme him, as S. Peter also in his Epistle
writes of them. He speaks not here, of their life, as it is defiled and
deformed with sins and iniquities, but as it is given over and entierly
addicted to work all impiety. I call that Impiety, when the life is led
without Faith, although the outward conversation be not altogether flagitious
and damnable. Evil works be in deed the fruictes of Impiety: but Impiety it
self is properly called that life, which glittereth outwardly with a gaie show
of hypocritical works, whereas the heart is utterly void of Faith. Such
impious persons (says he) the Lord will reprove, because the presumptuous
doctrine which they boldly teach, they stiflie defend and obstinately
maintain: leanyng always to their own brainsicke glosses and constructions,
and not sufferyng themselves to be converted and turned to the truth: but are
harder then the Flint, and will never desist from condemnyng and blasphemyng
the doctrine of true godliness! Here we see, how lively these words of Enoch
paint out and describe these kind of persons that are and should foyst
themselves into the Church toward the latter end of the World, which
undoubtedly are ye Papists, as to every man evidently appears.



IF a man find fault with their dealings, and reprove them as unlawful and
dissonaunt to the Word of God, he shall be sure to bring himself thereby into a
pecke of troubles: they will murmr, repine and gnashe their teeth at him. As
for example: if a man should but leave out or omit any piece or part of the
Bishops ordinary style and wonted title, they straightwaies with open
throats cry out, ( Contempt and Disobedience.) There is no way left, to
withstand their lawless lusts and selfwilled dealinges, for they brag that
they have power both over our bodies and over our souls: they have gotten
into their hands both the Swords: so that they can not be compelled by Law
to do that is just and right: and that any man should preach against them,
that can they not at any hand abide. They have exempted themselves and all
theirs, from all manner of tax, tribute and imposition, so that no man dare
once touch any thing that belongs unto them: finally, they are grown to
that degree of tyranny, that no man dare presume to preach a word contrary
to the order of their peevish Proceedings. To allege any Scriptures against
them, it is altogether bootelesse: for they say, that none may expound or
enterprete the same, saving they themselves. By which means it is come to
pass that in all places and in all things they live as licentiously as they
list. For these sayings can not be wrested or applied against us professors
of the true Gospel, for that we reverently and dutifully submitt our selves,
and yield our obedience as well to the Scriptures, as to the civil Power: from
both which, they will be free and not compellable by any. Last of al, their
Decrees and Cannons be pestered and thwacked full of proud, arrogant, and
swellyng words, utterly void of all good and godliness.



THis hitteth their natures and dispositions very iumpe, for they judge all
things according to the person. In all the whole Popes. Canons, ye shall not
once find it commanded, that the Bisshoppe should humble himself beneath the
poor Parish Priest, nor any of the fruictes of a Christian life whatsoever.
But al things rather sound thus. Let the Curate be under the Priest, the
Priest under the Bisshoppe, the Bisshoppe under the Archbishop, the
Archbishop under the Patriarch, and the Patriarch under the Pope. Finally,
how every one should wear his Habit, his Amyse, his Weed and Cowle, after
what fashion he should clippe his hair, shave his crown, and beard, and make
his apparaile, how many Benifices and how many Prebendes he might keep etc.
Thus, they brought all things to certain external Ceremonies and traditions
of their own making, and wholly occupied themselves in mere, childishe,
foolish, and frivolous trifles, which they had in great accou^pt and
estimation: yea they judged it no less then deadly sin, if any man should
refuse to adore and reverence these their boyishe toys. And therefore very
well says Jude in this place, They have men's persons in admiration, for they
lap up their lewd and loud lies in vizardes of hypocrisy, and only admire
those gaie shows that are visiblie object to the eye. All this while they
never speak word, neither know any thing as they should know, of Faith, of
Charity, or of the Cross. And yet the poor vulgar people suffer themselves
still to be beesotted with these Popish Bugges, and think themselves to do
very acceptable service to God, in giving all their Goods, Substance and
Patrimony to feed these filthy Swine in the Stye of this their lewd
sensuality.

Jesus Christ,



THis place also gives some occasion to think, that this Epistle was not
written by Saint Jude the Apostle, because the Aucthour hereof reckeneth not
himself among the other Apostles, but speaks so of them, as though they had
preached long before his time: whereby it may well be thought, that this was
rather written by some other godly man, that had read Saint Peter's Epistle,
and out of it culled and gathered these words and Sentences. Who these
mockers be, we have before declared, and who they also be, that walk after
their own lusts: not only carnal and fleshely lusts, but those rather that
savor of horrible impiety, wherein they live in each respect, according to
their own inordinate desires: neither reuerencyng the Civil Magistrate, nor
obeiyng the Word of God, but live so loosely and contemptuously, that they
neither obediently acknowledge any external, nor yet internal Government. Al
Laws as well Divine as Human, they flatly despise and set at naught: and so
fly in the Air, in the middle between Heaven and Earth, even as they are
hoised up and carried aloft by their Master the Devil.



HEre he alludeth to that, which saint Peter in his Epistle said, That there
should come false Teachers, which privily should bring in damnable heresies.
These are they that disobediently break asunder the unity of Faith: and
being not contented with the common profession, and general appellation of
Christians, (wherein each one is to serve and do good to his neighbor) they
devise and invent certain new vpstart Sects of their own, whereby they
feign a false counterfaite service to Almighty God. Furthermore they are
Natural, and fleshly, as brute Beasts, having no more Spirit and
understanding, then has an Horse or an Ass: they follow the judgment of
Nature, and are carried away with the concupiscence and lust of the Flesh.
Finally, they have not the Word of GOD, to direct and lead them, how to
frame their lives and conuersations.





IN these few words he has briefly comprehended, the whole sum and effect
of all true Christianity. Faith is the ground work and foundation, whereupon
we must build: and this buildyng or edifiyng is daiely and howrely, to
profit and go foreward in the knowledge of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ: which is not done but by the operation of the holy Ghost. Being in
this sort builded, we are not to do any Work, whereby to purchase and win
to our selves any Merit, or Salvation, but only to profit and do good to
our neighbors. And herein must we have a most diligent care, that we
continue and persevere in true and sincere Love, without any intermission: not
as do these foolish people, which stay themselves upon their own rotten
Works, and devise certain peculiar Sects, wherewith they draw away and
seduce men from brotherly Love and Charity.



HEre is Hope taught, and the Cross commended. For our life ought so to be
framed and led, that it should be nothing else, then a seruent sighyng and a
longyng desire for the life to come. But yet so, that this our desire and
longyng must be wholly stayed upon the only mercy of Christ: unto whom
we must ardently pray, that it may please him, (even of his own mercy,
and not for any Merit that is in us) to take and translate us hence into the
life to come, where endless joys for ever abound.





THis place is somewhat dark and obscure to be understood, but yet this is
the true meaning thereof: Have ye compassion of some: and save some. That is,
so lead your lives, that it may even grieve you at the heart, to see some so
miserably blinded, and wilfully obstinate: Rejoice ye not at their misery,
neither take ye any pleasure or delight in their lamentable miscreauncie. But
meddle ye not with their Atheism, separate your selves from them, and have no
dealyng or company with them. Other some, whom ye may pull out of so great a
danger, save and deliver by fearyng them and holding them back with godly
severity: deal with them courteously and gently, even as God has dealt with
you: not roughly, not ragyngly and sharply, but mieldely and Charitablie. Do
not with churlishe sternesse terrify and so spoil them: but deal with
them, as ye would with those that lie in the Fire: whom ye ought with careful
diligence, wisely to pull out and save. If they be not contented to be pulled
out and delivered, they are with gentle means and tender mercy to be borne
withal: not (as the Pope and his heretical Rabbines use is) to be burned and
spoiled.



WE have received the holy Ghost by Faith, and thereby are we purified: but
yet nevertheless, so long as we here ^^tie, this rotten sack of Flesh and
Blood still hangs upon us, which is never without whose swarms of evil
lusts. And this is that spotted Garment, which while we here live, we ought
to lay aside and put of.





THis is the conclusion and end of this Epistle. And thus are the Apostles wont
in the end of their Writings, Preachynges, Exhortations and Prophecies, to
pray, to wish and to give thanks. We see therefore in these two Epistles,
as well this of Jude, as that second of S. Peter, what a true Christian life
is: and how we may discern the sincerity of that Doctrine which is pure,
Catholic, and Christian, from that which is corrupt, counterfaite, and
altogether Antichristian.

FINIS.

