The preface to the reader.
I Do not think good christen reader any reasonable or indyfferent person
living of so indiscreet and gross judgment, nor yet so malycyous or froward
to think this wholesome and profitable doctrine of Christ, his apostles and
prophets in this little volume hereafter ensuynge, worthy either of check,
condem pnacyon, or sclaunder, for the vehemence therein now and then comprysed
/ if at the least there be any such vehemence at all to the sight of any, but
of them which feel them selves sensyblye touched, and their vices plainly
rebuked in the same. Truth it is, that there can be nothing so wisely warely
or syncerely either pronounsed or endyted, which the blasphemous tongues of
false detractours and enemies unto the truth can not craftily peruerte to ye
worste Examples thereof be not so care, but ye thou may habundauntly find of
them in every place ynowe. Go to christ and his apostles, and se whether the
bishops, the scrybes, and the pharyseys, did not falsely impeche and accuse
them of sedycyon, and to prove their false and most untrue suggestyon by
them made in that behalf to ye high powers, note and mark well I beseech the
in reading of the serypture, how deuelysshely they do calumpnyate, peruerte,
wrythe, and wreste their deades and doctrine. And yet if they had been any thing
so malycious as some such their successors be now a days, how many times
more might they have accused them of the same / As for an example, Act. 4.
when the apostles were commanded no more to preach in ye name of Ihesu / yea
and ye not only by the bishops and priests, but also by the auctorytie of
the temporal power, and were for the in fryngynge and breakyng of the said
commandment brought again before the higher power aforesaid, and had made
their answer, Act. 5.
that they were bounden to obey god rather then man. Might not (I say) the
Jews then if they had been half so malycyouslye dysposed as ben our Jews have
perverted the sayings of the apostles to the worste, and have accused them of
sedycyon, yea and of treason after this manner? ye say syrs, that ye must obey
god rather then men: Ergo your doctrine is not to obey men. Now know ye that
we be no pryuate men, but men in Office, auctoryte and power, and to whom
both you and all pryuate men ben bounden by the law of god to obey, and yet
ye teache to the contrary. Wherefore we conclude you to be traytoures both to
god and man, and maynteyners and styrrers up of sedycyo^, strife, and treason.
Might not (I beseech you) the Jews (as I said before) thus have wrested the
words of ye apostles to a false sense, and otherwise then ever they meant? I
pray you who could have let or interrupted them? Or if they had so done what
remedy? Must not the poor innocente souls, the Apostles have sustained so
wrongful and grievous iniurye? yes certain. Albe it the blyssed Apostles
intended nothing less then such detestable doctrine. But their meaning was,
that where man would command any thing to be done contrary to the will of
god, expressed in his holy scripture, that in such case his commandment
ought not to be obeyed of what estate, power or dygnytye, soever he were or
might be. And yet not so meaning that he should be withstanded with vyolence,
but that rather then they should assente to the vyolatynge of gods word and
commandment, they were, would, and ought to be redye to abide and mekelye
to suffer. What soever trouble, or persecucy on might thereon ensue or follow,
to the example of all Christ's posterytie after them to be borne. And this to
be the true understanding of their words appears right manyfestly by ye
practyse of ye same and that imedyatly where after they had been sore bet for
the preaching of gods true word, Act. 5.
which they were forbydde to do by man, they departed from the council right
joyous, that god had elected them to that dygny tie of his infynyte benygnytie
and mercy / wherefore (I say) in like manner, it is not impossyble, but that in
this little book, or in any book some thing may be of malice taken to the
worste. But let no man malycyously wrynge, or wreste the contents and matter
thereof of a set purpose or festred rancoure. And I doubt not but unto all good
men, it shall appear, both meke and mylde, godly, and also virtuous, and an
argument plentuous of profitable erudycion and learning. And as for sedycyon
and treason I dare boldly affirm it to be as innocent and far from them as
heaven is from hell. except peradventure it mete with a sophystycall devil,
which can prove white to be black and truth to be treason. The book
descrybeth paynteth and sets forth before thine iyes (so that no appelles
can do it more excellently) the Images both of a very christen bishop, and
also of a counterfayte bishop, of a profitable, and of an unprofitable, of a
paulyne, and of a papyste, shortly of a true, and a false, yea and that it
does in such true, natural, fresshe, and lively colors, that the one of
them ones known, it is not possible but a man must feel the other even at
his fyngers ends, Albeit he were more blind then ye Molle. And in this doing,
even as it is impossyble in descrybynge the good bishop to say any thing
of him, but that which is good, honest, virtuous, and godly, oneles he should
deadlye belie him: even so contrarywyse in descrybynge the evil bishop, it
is as impossyble to say any thing of him, that good honest or virtuous is,
oneles he should deadly belie him, which of truth were great pytye, for (as
me^ say) it were sin to belie the devil. For asmoche then as there can be
no goodness without great lesynge reported by the evil bishop, what merueyl
then or why should any man be dyscontented but an evil byfshop, or the patron
and defender of an evil bishop / if your Auctoure do set him forth in his
natural proporcyon, like a mon stre as he is? Why should not a man declare a
monstre after a mo^struous fasshyon? Is it mete for a man to offer a candell to
the devil, or to paynte him like a good angel? Is it not comelye and
besemynge for every good and honest man, to exalte, and extolle virtue to ye
vttermoste of his power. And why then should not it become him as well to
depryue and suppress vice to the vttermoste, and to envy against it, and
against them that use it with all that he may? Finally he describes a good,
honest, virtuous and godly bishops as does ye scripture, whom when thou
know (except I be begyled) it shall be right easy to espy and know the
other / wherein I humblye beseech the father of alco^solacyon ones to make us
perfect, for ye precious blood of his sweet sone Ihesu, and thereto to grannte
to us his holy spyryte.

So be it.
BEcause good and gentle reader, It may to some certain persons either
corrupt with evil affeccyons or therwyse lyghtely moved to vain offense and
flau^dre, seem that I am of right little charytie, and yt mine whole study, and
endeuoyre sounds to no purpose else, but only to raise trouble, strife, and
sedycyons in the world as they of a set frowardnes / malycyously do
calumpnyate, their condemned conscience testyfyeng the contrary, for that
that I in despyte of the devil, and for the zele that I bear to the truth of
gods word, and his most blyssed name, do (as they think) somewhat to
sharply rebuke the vice of some that would be esteemed ye heddes of the church,
all unworthy to be the fete except they amend in time. Therefore as we enter
into the plain field of our matyer we entende purge us of such untrue
accusacyons, and to prove it right mete and conuenyent, yea and thereto
necessary, and that by reasons and scryptures inuyncible, so to behave us, in
our words and wrytynges toward such tops and heddes of ye people which
will admytte no charytable admonycyon.

IN deed the bishop of Rome has forbeden in his unrighteous and wicked law
Canonycall, The Canon faw.
that any man should sharply rebuke the prelates, or else resyste them / and
upon this goodly instytucion and ordinance, he and his counterfayte bishops,
the sons of hypocrysye from the most high majesty of god? The office and
duty of a preacher.
For the preacher is bound unto this under parell of dampnacyon, that he shall
sharply and sore rebuke wicked men and sinners. For god speaks hereof
manifest and open rebukyng, in as much as he has betaken unto him the office
of preaching his word. But I pray you, why does god with so great veheme^cye
require this thing, command it, and so straytely call upon it without doubt
because the preacher, if he do hold his tongue, does sin most grievously
against charity, in that he does este me at so small valor so great and so
precious a treasure / that is to wit, the soul health of his neygh boure, to
whom he ought never thelesse to succoure and releue in mete and drink and
clothing, and in far smaller things. we ought to be assured ye we preach
no thing but gods word. The holy scripture.
But yet he adds this thing expressly, that the prophet should here the word
of gods mouth least he might else preach his own word, or else any
other word of man. Now we have none other word, then the scryptures of god:
and therefore by these all wicked men are to be rebuked / neither can it help
them though, they would make this cauyllacyon, and say that this before
rehearsed place of the scripture does not speak of great estates and lords,
but only of the poor and low co^monaltie: for in as much as it does
express no manner of person, it is a plain and a necessary conclusyon, that
this said place is to be understood also of great estates. For it speaks
generallye of wicked men / whether they be great, or small, and what manner
ones soever they be. The word of god has no respect or regard unto one
person, more then an other. For it is above all persons, and it apperteyneth
egallye unto all manner persons. Ezechiel.
For even Ezechyell him self, although he was of low degree: yet that
notwithstanding he was sent to preach unto the whole people of Israel,
among whom were Princes, priests, and many great estates So likewise says.
Mycheas also in the.vi.chapter.

Harken you (says he) what the lord says / Arise and strain thy self in
Judgment against the mountains, and let the hills here thy voice, let the
mountains and the strong foundame^tes of the earth here the judgment of ye
lord, for the judgment of the lord is with his people, and Israel shall be
judged.

WHo are those mountains, Mountains.
and the foundamentes and the ground warkes of ye earth unto which he
commands him to preach? here he does give commandment and charge, that
the Judgment of god and the word of the lord should be showed not to the
people only, but to ye heddes and rulers among the people.

IN like manner all ye resydue of the Prophettes, The prophettes.
in those places where they are most vehement and most bold and free in
rebukynge, and do most rise up with those tragycall affeccyons, for the most
part they do touch and most sharply reprove not the pore co^mynaltie, nor
the rascal sort, but the high tops / that is to say, kings, princes, the
prestes, and those that were most co^nynge and most noble a monge the people,
as their own wrytynges do witness and bea, re record suffycyently, though I
speak never a word. So also did ye lord say unto hieremy in the first
chapter.

LO I have put my words i^ thy mouth: behold I have set the to day over
nacyons and kingdoms / For I have ordained and made the to day to be as a
fenced City, and a pyller of iron, and a wall of brass, to the kings of
Judah, to the princes and rulers of it / and to the priests, and to all the
people. And they shall make war against the, but they shall not prevail
against the: for I am with the, says the lord to deliver the.

NO we this hieremy as touching to his personage and estate, Hieremy.
was far under kings, princes, and prestes / A man utterly contempt and
abiecte / borne in a pore little Town called Anathot: Anathot.
and yet all this not withstanding, he was sent by god to preach the word of
the lord, and to be a comptroller over all men, and against all the highest
estates and head officers and rulers of the people. Besides this, Christ.
Christ him self, as he is descrybed in the gospel, was a very
co^temptyble, an abiecte, and a low personage in the sight of the world,
without any high power or empire and lordshyp at all. Now I pray you, whom
did he must pryncypally rebuke? what other persons did he reprove then only
the chyefe prestes, the scrybes, and the pharyseys? and to be short, who
soever were great and high in dygnytie and auctorytie. And in so doing, he
would be an example unto all preachers, that they should boldly and without any
fere rebuke ye great and high hedes among ye people, when they do work
against god because both salvation and perdycyon rests most in the hedes /
why should we then follow ye folysshe, furyous and mad laws of the bishop of
Rome, against ye example of christ and of al ye prophets Why (I say) should
we spare and forbear those great lords spu^all. whereto should it avail to
chyde and cebuke the common people: if we do ouerhyppe and look besides the
princes and rulers of the people? For there could never so much vice and
sin be plucked up by pure sincere, and fro teaching, and bold preaching of
the gospel: as they should plant by their wicked and sinystre commandments.
For it should in this thing plainly come to pass as Solomon says in the fyrsts
chapter of Ecclesiast.

WHere one buyldeth, and an other destroys: what can be there but only
travail and labor.

if we must now build among the people, it is necessary to resyste those
rulers, and those heddes the auctours of humayne do ctryne, and destroyers / we
ought therefore here to hold fast with tothe and nail, and to follow, and
toughly cleave unto that fre doctrine of the Apostle Paul in ye third
chapter of ye first Epistle to Tymothe, when he says.

SVche as do sin rebuke them in the presence of al men: The doctrine of
saint Pause.
that other may stand in fear.

Here Paul excepteth no man neither of low estate and degreneyther yet of
high / And all though he does say that contrapresbiteros, yt is to say
against aged men or senyours (for such were at that time governors and rulers
in the church) he should not receive any accusacion with out two or three
witness: he did not for all that by those words exclude and take away al
manner cebukynge of them, but rather did confyrme the reprouynge of them / For
after those words which he spoke of witness and record it follows
immedyatlye.

THey which do offend and trespass, thou ought to rebuke them openly
before all men.

But our bishops have interpreted and declared this word presbyter of
prestes, Presbyter.
that is to wit of their own selves, where as the apostle does mean of well
aged and ancient wise men: that is to wit, that such manner men are not to be
accused lightly and for every slayghte occasyon, likewise as he says also in
the.v. chapter.

DO not rebuke an old man very sharply, but desire and pray him as a father.

For the apostle speaks not of such bishops and prestes, as are now in our
time, which for the most part at of flowrysshynge age, and in a manner young
men, to ye incerdible hurt and hynderau^ce of ye church: but he speaks of
old me^ and ancient in age, and well skylled in ye scryptures. For such
manner persons it is mete and according to handle reverently: and if they have
trespassed and made a fault in any thing, they are to be desired and prayed
that they will leave it, and not to be sharply and sore rebuked.

OVer and besides this ye myny sters of the word of god ar pryn cypally
bounden here unto, The preachers ought much rather to rebuke the
spyrytuallheddes, then the temporal, for diverse just causes.

Nicolaicass bishops, I wene he mean ye bishops made of children at saint
Nicholas time.


that they shall more sharply rebuke ye bishops and ye prymates of the
Church, then the worldly princes and rulers, and that for many causes. First
because that ecclesiastycall hyghnes and dignytie, as it is now, is not of
god. For god does not a knowledge neither elect this dysgysed and painted
deceytefull people, and these childysshe, and in a manner counterfayte, and
Nicolaicall bishops, for as much as they do neither teach, neither yet do
execute any point belonging to the office of a bishop. Secu^daryly these
shadows of bishops have not ben co^stytuted by men, but they have exalted
their own selves, and they have catched unto them selves empire, domynyon, and
lordshyps against both god and men, against reason, co^mensence or judgment,
Tyrauntes.
after the nature and propretie of tyrauntes, which do rule only by ye wrath
and great indygnacyon of god / The temporal or worldly gouer nours and officers
are constytuted by the gracyous favor and merciful ordinance of god,
Temperas princes and governors.
to the chastysement and punysshement of evil men, and to the proteccyon
defense and mayntenau^ce of good men. No. 13.
Besides this ye worldly governors, although they do iniurye and wrong never
so much, and do unjustly and wyckedly: yet for all that they do but only
hurt ye temporal good des and ye body. But these great estates and prelates of
the church, if they be not good and virtuous, and do promote and set
forwards the course of the word of god unfeignedly and with their hertes: they
are mere wolves. and most cruel murderers of souls. And it is much like in
evil and wicked bishops, as if Satan him self having a mytre on his head,
and rings on his fingers, did sytte in a chair and did rule the people.
Wherefore even the bishops also, which do not teach the pure word of god, ar
no less to be eschewed then ye devil him self. For whersoeuer the word of
god is not, The word of god.
there without doubt is nothing else but humayne error, mere doctrine of
deuylles, and butcherye and slaughter of souls, For ye conscyences or souls,
without the word of god can neither live, neither be delivered from the
devil. But here I know well enough, they will obiecte and say, that it is
ieoper dye, least sedycyon might be raised up against those bysshoppes and
prelates of the Church Loo I make answer, shall the word of god (I beseech
you) for this your feigned obieccyon be neglected? and shall therefore the whole
people perysshe? And is it (I pray you) right and conue nyent that all souls
should perpetuallye perysshe, and be slain, that the temperall and most vain
pomp of such men might be preserved and maynteyned, and might endure and
continue in her peace and quietness? Nay, it were better (for spyrytuall
harms are most to be wayede) that six hondreth times all the bysshoppes
should perysshe for ever in their pride and dygnytie, and that all the churches
collegiate, and all monasteryes were plucked up by the roots / were
overthrown and utter lie destroyed (so it were done by the auctoryte of the
higher powers, then that one soul should perysshe / because I will not in the
mean season say that infynyte souls, yea that all souls shall perysshe for
any thing that such as they do, I mean no true bishops.
I pray you tell me, what profit comes of many of the bysshoppes that now
are, The profit that comes of our bishops.
or wherefore serve they, but only to live in voluptuousnes and pleasures, and
to play the ryotours and wantons of other men's labor and sweet, and in the
mean season with much grievous three tenynges and with dreadefull fears, to
condemn, to hysse out, to cast out, and to war against the word of god?
Good me^ they take exceeding great thought and care for them selves, and with
meruaylous great unquietness of mind fear and dread sedycyons in ye
temporal common weal but as for the death of souls, being thereof all
careless, and with out any manner fear or unquietness of mind, they do neglecte,
and pass nothing upon it. I be seche ye good reader, are not these goodly
wise, and exceeding bold and manly herdes men of the Church. if they did
receyne the word of god and of truth, and did pryncypallye search for the
life and sauegarde of souls then the god (as ye apostle says) of pacyence, 2.
cor. 1.
and of comfort and hope would be with them, that they should not need to
fear any sedycions or rysynges of the people / which is but their craftye
cloked excuse, to blind the iyes of the princes. But in as much as they like
deaf serpents stoppynge their ears, Psalmo. 57. deaf serpents.
woll not here the word of god, but (such is their furye and madness) do rage
against it with excomunycacyons, cursings, imprysoneme^tes with the sword,
and finally with fire. I beseech you what other thing do they (as concerning
their part / with this their extreme woodnes, then (which god defend (even
will inly provoke that there should rise up a very great sedycion, and that
some certain tempest and storm should violently and suddenly come upon the^
which should rydde them at ones out of the world. And surely if any such thing
did chance unto them, yet were they naught else but to be laughed and
scorned as wisdom says in the first chapter of the proverbs.

BEcause I have called and you have refused to com, I have stretched forth my
hand, and there was none of you yt would look to me, and you have despised all
my cou^sayl, and have set at naught my rebukynges: I also will laughe in your
destruccyon, and I will mock and scorn, when that thing, which you did
fear, shall be chanced and common unto you.

THe word of god does not stir or raise up sedycyo^s and stryues: They ye
resyst the word of god be sedycyous persons.
but the stubburne and obynat dysobedyence of them which do rage against it is
the cause that trouble and sedycyon is styrred up among the people / and that
then by such sedycyons that thing should happen unto them which they had
deserved through their own unbelief and frowardnes and wicked blyndnes. For
who soever receives ye word of god, that ma^rayseth up no manner sedycyons at
all, albeit that he does no longer fear those vain bugges, neither does
worship those episcopal puppettes, now syns yt he does know the word of god
And because that men do not fear and reverence their vain ymaginacions as
here tofore they have done, that same is the thing if I be not begyled, which
they do call sedycyons, What the bysshpos call Sedycyon.
and this is the thing, that those persons do so greatly fear, which have
hitherto suffered them selves to be worshipped and feared like gods, as
though they had been true bysshoppes or true herdes men of the Church. Sedycyo^
is against the word of god.
And if any man do raise up sedycyons or war, that man abuses the word of
god to his own affeccyons, and to his own lust and appetyte. For the word
of Christ or the word of god does never cause no strife or trouble bodily:
but to wicked me^, and namely unto tyrauntes it does oftentimes manace and
show before bataylles and boldly destruccyons to ensue, as it appears in the
books of ye prophets / But the said word does deliver by little and little the
souls from the bonds of tyrauntes, that they may be despised: which is of
all other ye most mighty and strongest remedy to break and overcome the
tyranny of them. For what soever thing begins to be little set by, and is
despised in the hertes of men, it needs not to go about with great might and
power to destroy ye thing. For it is fallen even all redye and can not stand
nor co^tynue long, as it is said in the.ix. psalm. 9. psalm.
So likewise this people of visures needs none other destruccyon then only yt
it be discovered and openly showed, Carnan.
yt it is dysgysed, a cou^terfayte, and an hypocrytal people. For this thing
ones known they begin to be little regarded a monge all men, and are forsaken.
But we will here use a certain plain and famyly are example. In the old time
the bisshops mytre was a certain mystycall sign and token. The bysshoppes
mytre.
The two horns in the top of it did sygnyfye the two testamentes, the old
and the new, which the bishops did bear in the top of his mind, yt is to
say in his understanding / and he was cu^nynge and well skylled in ye holy
scryptures as saint Paul commands in the first epistle to Tymothe. And the
two fyllettes or labelles hanging down behind at his back, The fyllettes or
labelles of the my mytre.
did betoken the office of preaching, by which he did freely and boldly
pronounce and declare the scripture of both testamentes among the people, and
going him self before them by holy and pure honest manner of living, did
teach them to cou^terfayte and follow him. But now a days when we do se ye
bishops wearyng those cappes with horns, I beseech you what shall they signyfy.
There are certain merry conceyted fellows, which do suppose yt the two horns
do betoke^ yt a bishop ought to be learned i^ ye scriptures of both
testame^tes but the two fyllettes hanging so at al auentures behind their
back, they do think to sygnyfy contrary wise, that they are excedyngly
ygnorau^t in both, and not so much as to be willing to learn them. For the
pryncypall virtue which appears and most shows it self in our bishops
and cardynalles is in a manner this that they are earthen pottes, and scalpes or
sculles without brain or wit, exceeding dulle and insensyble, and so
ygnorau^t that one would wondre at it / in so much that in these bitter and
miserable times of the decretalles, The times of decretalles.
it has begone to be accounted a great shame and rebuke, for a bishop to
stody in the Bible, and not without a cause aperdue^ture. For what should so
great a prince and lord vex and trouble him self with these so paynfull
cares, which (if I be not begyled) do hurt both the head and also
remembrance? seeing that there are on every side lymoturs enough, and freers,
and relygyous men enough on every side, which may be hired even for a lofe of
bread, to declare many such good things out of the bible to him, either
whiles he sytteth at dinner, or else whiles he lies i^ his bed, and so with
reading of such holy writ may bring the reverend and holy father a sleep
/ But now in good sadness, I beseech you what other thing are our bishops,
in comparyson then mere visures and such manner bishops in all points, as
children do make when they play: only because they can skylle to spyncle
dumb stones, (if god be pleased) and with frankensence cast in to the senser
to make smokes, and selle smokes / that is to wit yt them selves being naught
else but stocks and trees, may also consecrate and halowe trees and stocks,
and that them selves being none other thing then dumb stones, may baptyze
stones. But they do all these things with high countenance and solemn
ceremonies / and because else peradventure they should find none ye would give
them the lokyng on of these things: they do hyre them with. xl. days of
perdon (no little reward god knows) as though they were about to consecrate
or halowe churches or alters unto god / And it is very well done forsorth, for
where should god else find a dwelling place? or whether could he else flee for
succor, if the devil did chase him? (if I may say so (except these
profitable men, and these chaste and holy bishops did water those dumb stones,
and these du^be walls with certain holy drops of war, and except they did
delight his nosethrylles with swet fumes and plesau^t smelles. And doubtless they
do al things as well as can be, according to that yt becomes their persons.
For in like manner in these holy days (which may well be called Festa
lupercalia) before the hungrye fasting days we do make these men kings, He
means from Chrystenmas to Cent.
and for a sport and play cloth them in purple and gold and make them
cou^terfayte bishops / which in very deed ar nothing else but rascalles
ydyotes and boys. and albeit there is no doubt ye those earnest offices and
works belo^gyng unto very dysshops, such as the apostle descrybeth and wylleth
the^ to be, are not able to be counterfayted of children: yet not withsta^dyng
here it may be a great doubt, whether of them does counterfayte ye other,
the bysshoppes the boys, or the boys the bishops

Now which is the true I mage and form of a bishop, the apostle Paul does
descrybe in ye third chapter of the first epistle to Tymothe.

IF any man desire the office of a bishop or an ouerseer, The image of a
true bishop.
he does desire an honest work / a bishop therefore ought to be unreprovable,
ye husband of one wife, watchefull or dylygent, sobre dyscrete and lowlye / A
keeper of hospytalytie / apt to teach / no dronkarde / no fyghter / not
dysyrouse of fylthy lucre / but egall and indyferent, hatynge fighting,
abhorrynge covetousness, and a man which rules his own house well, and which
has his children in subieccy on and obedyence with all reverence. For if it
be so that a man can not skylle to rule his own house: how shall ye man order
the church of god? he must be no nouyce newly entered in to the Christen
relygyon, least he be puffed up with pride, and do fall in to condempnaryon
of the evil speaker / he must also have good report among strangers and
the infydeles, least he do fall in to rebuke, and in to ye snare of the evil
speaker.

LOnsydre now whether it be not a good work, The office of a Bishop.
to desire the office of a bishop, in which are so many excellent and goodlye
virtues. Saint Paul will not a bishop to be a nouyce, which has lately come
to the faith or which is little co^fyrmed and establysshed in the faith: least
ye bakbyter and evil tonged person might have occasyon to judge and say / Se
what manner fool they have made ruler and ouerseer of so great things. But he
wylleth him to be a man having expery ence, well skylled, sad and wise, so
that his evil wyllers may be asshamed to speak evil, yea and also can not
speak evil or judge evil of him / lykwyse also he must have a good report
even of ye Insydelles, and he must not be of vile reputacyon not so much as
even among them: for else he shall blaughed to scorn of them, and he shall be
bounden and holden in on every side, as it were with a rope. that he may neyter
boldly exhort, nor say any thing, nor rebuke any thing, for asmoche as there
are in him self also many things, which may be turned to his reproach, and
rebuke which thing should be both a great sclaundre to all the whole
congregacyon, and also a great cause of offensyon to the infydelles. For in the
time of the apostle the Christen men were mengled among hethen men.

Wherefore it was necessary, that the life of them, and namely of ye bishops
should be unreprovable commendable, and on every side pure and faultles. So like
wise he says unto Tymothe in the first chapter.

FOr this cause I left ye i^ Crete or Ca^dy, yt thou should continue and
hold on to amend such things as are wantynge, and that thou should
ordeyne priests in every town, as I appointed unto the. if any man be
vnculpable, the husband of one wife, having faithful children and not
skaundred of riot, nor sturdy and unruly. For a bys shop must be fautles, as
being the mynystre of god / not stubburne and self wylled / not angrye / no
dronkarde / no fyghter, not given to fylthy Iucre / but harberfull / a lover of
good things, sobre, ryghtuous, holy, temperate, tough ly cleuyng unto that
true word which is according to doctrine that he may be able also to exhort
by wholesome doctrine, and to confute and dysprone them, that do say against it.



LO these at the fasyons and virtues belonging unto true Christen bishops, of
which sort there ought to have been in every City or comynaltie at the least
one, or two, after as necessytie and need did require / But what say you now?
seeing that there is a certain new fasyon, yea and a more gentle and noble
example (if god be pleased) of bishops showed now a days, should these old
manners and qualyties, whereof the apostle does speak, and which are worn out
of use many years agoo, should they (I say) belong unto these bishops? There
are in the papysticall bishops (if I be not begyled) far better fasyons and
virtues, whereof least any man might hereafter desire a rehersall: I shall
rehearse as many of them as I can call to remembrance, and they are commonly
such as here follows.

THe first propryetie chyefly belongyng unto them is, The image and
properties of a papystystycal bishop.
to be excedyngly ignorant, and without any manner perceyuyng of all learning
to flee and eschew matrymony or wedlock, and instead of it to keep as many
harlottes as they list / to bear in their hands a shepehoke of silver bound
about with a towell, to wear a mytre with horns / to go after the manner of
pageauntes in processyo^s / to have their crown broad shaven / to have many
tytles and towns and a very large domynyon under their spryncle, (for I will
use their own term) to lead about with a certay ne pomp goodly palfrayes,
aspsio.
and that a great many of them, after the manner of one tryumphynge, to be
proud with all manner pomp and gorgyousnes after ye court facyon / to keep
offycyalles / that is to say, certain robbers and pyllers of prouynces, and
torme^tours of pore men / to kill souls by tyranny and exco^icacyons / and
(which thing I had almost forgotten) to paynte and set up in every place the
arms of their kynned rampyng lions, and such other monume^tes, with a
shepehoke and a bishops cross put thereunto to set forth their fyngers to the
show, decked with goodly rings of gold to arm their hands with purple
gloves, lest else they might be a cold in the mids of their ceremonies / to
spryncle dombe stones and stocks in the churches, hauig a ladder set to every
wall) with I wot not what war to co^fyrme,

(...) unkind, wicked / without affection / false accusers. ryotoures / cruel
despysers of good me^ / traitors / rasshe and hasty, puffed up with pride /
the lovers of pleasures, rather then the loners of god / having ye semblau^ce
and apparau^ce of virtue and godlynes, but denyenge the virtue and power thereof
/ those that are such, do thou abhor.

LO here (if I be not utterly begyled) Paul has descry bed and workemanly set
forth our idle and unlearned bishops with their own mete colors. And with the
same colors the apostle Peter also (whose successoures the pope bosteth him
self to be) does paynte them and set them out to the iye, Peter.
in the second chapter of his second epistle.

THere were also false prophets among the people, like wise as there shall be
among you false teachers, which shall pryuely bring in peruycyous and
myscheuous sects, even renyeng the Lord which has bought them, seachynge
unto them selves hasty destruction, and many shall follow their deadely ways,
by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of and thorughe covetousness
with counter fayte words they shall make mar chaundyse of you.

THese words can not be understood any other wise then of ye bishops and of
ye great prelates and rulers of ye church. For we do se, how they have devised
diverse sects, diverse orders, dyuer se facyons, and have brought them in to
the world contrary to the doctrine of Christ and of the gospel / which
things every one of them being clean out of the right and the high way of
the christen faith, do prescrybe and teach peculyer works and fasyons of
living, by which the knowledge of Christ is put away and quenched, Christ.
and christ him self, (whom only the apostle Paul does well nere in every
syllabe teache unto us) is denied, which Christ alone for all that did redeem
us. For those good holy men do teach, that we are iustyfyed by works, and by
the endeuermentes of free will: where as in very deed only Christ has been
made unto us ryghtuousnes, and sanctify cacyon, and redempcyo^. i. Cor. i.
besides this they do with evil words and blasphemies rail and speaks
against the way of the gospel and of the truth, neither will they suffer their
errors to be dysproued, or them selves to be taught that only Christ is our
health, our life, and our ryghtuousnes / Again this is more euydente, then
that it needs any probacyons, how they all being blinded and made stark
mad thorough covetousness, do dyrecte altheyr whole doctrine unto this end,
that all things should be given unto themselves alone / that temples and
monasteryes, and cathedral churches collegyate, might be builded / and that we
should suffer them to be rich, to be well monyed, and to have habundau^ce of
all manner things And these are lies and gyles, and these are ye deceytes,
which they do so cover and cloak, with the color of holy life, and of
spyrytuall estate: and in very deed they do deny ye virtue and power of true
virtue and godly living. And yet for all this in the mean season every man
does so give unto them, as though they were such as did live in holy life,
when in very deed it is nothing but deceyte and mere hypocrysy, and these
gylefull symulacion with out faith. So that saint Peter did not without a
cause say, nay men shall follow the errors of them.

Besides this saint Peter says, whose judgment is not slow of coming, and
their utter destruccy on does not sleep. For if god did not spare the
au^gelles which had offended, aungelles
which had offended, but did cast them down in to hell bounden with chains
of darkness to be kept there unto the judgment, neither did spare ye world in
old time, Noe.
but saved Noe ye eight preacher of ryghtuousnes and brought in a floode over
the world of wicked men / and did bring the Cities of Sodom and Gomorre in
to ashes, and did condemn them with utter destruccyon, and did make them an
example unto all those ye afterward should work wyckedly. And did deliver
ryghtuous Loath which loath was oppressed of the wicked men by their unclean and
Lecherous conuersacyon. For he being ryghtuous both in seeing and hearing,
whenne he dwelled among them, he did daily vex his ryghtuouse soul with
their wicked deeds. The lord knows how to deliver good and virtuous men out
of temptacion, and how to keep the unrighteous persons unto the day of
judgment for to be punysshed / namely such as following the flesh do walk
in the concupyscence and lust of uncleanness and do despise the governors and
rulers, being presumptuous, stubburne, and which do not fear to rail and
speak evil words on them which are in high auctoryte.

THe apostle here in these most vehement and sore words, sets forth unto
those gretestates and lords three terryble and dreadful examples / that is to
wit of the aungelles, of the world, and of Sodom. But al these things are
in vain showed and preached unto them. Our delicate bysshoppes do not believe
that this was spoken of them, and besides that they do not read nor hear
these things.

But I beseech ye good reader mark here, how well ye words of Peter do
agree with Paul, when he dyscrybeth their fylthy and unclean life. For where he
says presumptuous stubburne: there are skantly any men, to whom those words
do sooner agee. For it is they, which of all men do most set by them selves,
in so much that they do despise al worldly rulers and officers, and what
soever other person is of high dygnytie and auctorytie in world, in
comparyson of them selves, and do also rail upon them and speak opprobrious
words against them, For the Pope has many years ago taken this mo^struous
tyranny unto him self, The tyranny of the Pope.
that he has not ben affrayde to tread kings and princes under his fete to
depose them / to exco^munycate them / to curse them unto the.iiii. v. and.
vi. generation / and after their own pleasure to exercise all things which
any manner of way what soever it be may be long and help unto extreme and
wonderful tyranny, none other wise then if the princes and governors were
swyne or else dogs Notwithsta^dynge that the scripture wylleth al men to be
subject and obedyent unto the princes and governors for ye publyke peace and
tranquylytie of this life, namely for as much as they are co^stytuted and
ordained to serve ye dyuyne ordinance as mynysters of the sword. And yet
nevertheless there are found some kings and princes so faynte herted, and of
so little manfulnes and courage, that they do fear these harmeles thundres and
vain cursynge, and do humbly beseech and obtain the extreme and vttermoste
folysshenes and insensy by lytie that they may be blyssed again (for so they
call it) of the Pope I wot not with what charms or coniuracyons and words
appointed for the same purpose only: that is to wit to the end that that
cruel presumpcyon, and that wonderful tyranny of his (as though he were not
mad enough of his own swing) might by the reason hereof the sooner gather
power and strength, and with those most vain deceytes of cursings might
deceive all the whole world. Besides this the bysshoppes do stoutely and
manfully help the Pope, and so do all the great lords belonging to the Pope
/ and they be in very deed ye despysers of all rulers and potestates, which
will in no wise be subject to any manner high power, neither in body neither in
goods, but only they being presumptuous and stubburue and more then wood do
on every side make busynes and rage to exco^munycate and curse all kings, and
princes, and other which are in auctorytie.

Tell me I beseech you, has not our Peter here largely and plainly touched
our most delycate and tender bishops? I pray you of what other persons may
these words be understood, that they are not subjects nor obedyent unto the
rulers? that they speak evil of kings and princes? bryefly that being
presumptuous and stubburne they do fear no man? is it not openly known to the
world, who they be, that committee these lewd deeds? Besides this Peter says.

WHen the aungelles them selves which are greater in might and power do not
receive of the lord judgment with evil words against them selves. 1.
petri. 2.
But these persons as brute beasts naturally ordained to be taken and
destroyed, speaking evil of those things which they understand not, shall
perysshe in their own destruction, and shall receive the reward of
unrighteous: and they do account it a pleasure, if they do live delycyously
/ they be spots and fylthy which feastyng and banketynge together in their
erroures do play ye ryotours of your good des having their iyes full of
adulterye, and which can not cease to sin, begylynge and allurynge to sin
unstable souls having also their hertes exercysed with rauynes and
extorsyons.



Behold how vehement and sore this excellent apostle is here, how hot he
is, how he is kyndled, and how he casts out pure flambes of fire / I
beseech you, who are they which do live in pleasures and ryotousnes of other
men's goods? who (I say) are they which supposen it to be suffycyent to care
only for them selves and for those things which do belong unto them selves
Who be they, which do live (as Peter says) like brute beasts? and whom no man
hitherto durst be bold to rebuke, yea or ones to admonysshe and tell them of
their defaltes / I pray ye, needs this place any gloss or declaracy on at
all? Is it not openly and euydentlye known that bysshoprykes, cathedral
Churches, monasteryes, vnyuersyties, in which holy scripture is not
syncerelye taught pryncypallye before all things, are nothing else but a
certain insatiable and bottomless whyrlepole, which swal lowen up ye riches of
kings, of princes, of dukes, of earls, of the common people, and to be short
of all the world? Is it not euydent enough, yt this sort of men have come
unto these so great goods and riches, not by their own in dustrye and
labor, but through other me^nes folysshenes, and a certain madness of gyuyng
unto them? They verily them selves (as they be naturally lovers of them
selves, and do stand in their own conceyte) would swear deapely, that them
selves are the most noble sort, and ye most fine and pure flower of all the
men that are in the whole world, and Peter yet for all yt calls them openly
and plainly spots, fylthes, and pestylences. And these also ar they which do
rail and speak opprobryous words against the truth, and do condemn it
whereof yet they be ignorant and have no knowledge. For they being all
together drenched in their humane, yea deuelyshe opynyons, and in their most
fylthy living, and being all together carnal and brutysshe are made
insensyble, and utterly partles and ignorant of faith and of ghostly things.
But yet for all that they do allure and begyle unstable souls with those their
intysementes and pleasures of riches and honors. For hitherto they have
aspyred unto bysshoprykes to benefyces, and to abbotshyps and pryorshyps, and
have panted for the love of ydlenes and ease, and for ye hatred of ye holy
cross, for the most part, which in the flower of their youth were most
honest good and virtuous. For even now a days also many folysshe and wicked
fathers and mothers do bryngevp their sons and their doughtes for the same
purpose, The folysshenes of fathers and mothers
that they should enter in to these manners of living, not verily for the love
of god or of virtuous and good living, but only that (as they call it) they
may be well provided for, and sure of a living / and that of other me^nes
goods they may live ydely in all manner delyciousnes and pleasures / that is
to wit, that they need not to get their living with their own hands, and
their bread or sustenaunce with the swette of their face, unto which thing
all men are bounden.

Now they have their heart exercysed with covetousness and rauynes, Seen. 3.
as every man perceyueth for they never make any end of deuysynge and finding
out crafts, and subtyleties: whereby they may catch unto them selves the
goods of all the world. And to this byenge and sellyng and get tynge of
lucre, Byenge and sellyng of spu^all things.
they do (which is abhomynable) abuse god, the sacraments, the mass, and all
spyrytuall things though I pass over in the mean season what things they do
exhort, and get from me^ by vsurye, lies, frauds and gyles. But if thou do
ask, who they be that have ye full iyes of an adulteres without doubt the
apostle here rebukes ye most filthy and a very strompettes life, which they
do led. An adulteres.
For eue^ likewise as an adulteress is passed all shame, and with full and
wanton iyes looks round about upon every man, being set forth and ready to
serve the flesshely lust of every manner man / even so ar they also without
shame, much like unto an adulteress, which have laid away shamefastnes for
ever. For they are given al together unto fylthy lechery, i^ which they do live
careless at liberty, and without the rebukes of any man Besides this saint
Peter says.

THey are the children of maledyccyon or cursynge, which have forsaken the
right way and gone a wrong way, following the way of Balaam the sone of
Bosor, which loved ye reward of wyckednes, but he was rebuked of his
wyckednes. The tame dumb beast speaking with man's voice did forbydde and
let the madness of ye prophet. These are fountaynes lacking water, and
clouds carried about of a tempest.

FOr likewise, as Balaam was rebuked of ye Ass, eue^ so do we se couetousues
to raygne among them with so great madness and unshamefastness, that even the
vnleraned common people do now begin to cry against it, and hereof has taken up
a common proverb, The common proverb.
which is this. He is more covetous (say they of a covetous person) then
other priest or monk. Bryeflye there is no man, which does not for their
covetousness most odyously speak against them, and give them evil words.
But I pray you how fearful a thing is this, yt Peter calls them openly
the sons of malediccyon Who else durst call the Pope of Rome, and the bishops
with their under officers, a cursed people? Now peter yt so excellent apostle,
yea and the holy ghost by Peter does call them, and does curse them / Who
now would not be sorry and tremble in his heart, that ever he has given and
bound him self to this cursed kind and manner of living? Oh I say, who
soever may let him eschew let him eschew, now in these days, these manners
of lyuyuge of priests, and freers, and of such other. Afterward he does
again gaylye garnysshe ye bishops with their mete tytles. For what other
thing is meaned here by a fountain without water, A fountain wtoute water.
and a cloud without rain: then by a bishop without mynystracyon of the
word of god? For this office lies unto ye bishops charge, and yet they do
not fulfill it accordynglye / much like as the dry and broken wells have the
name of a fountain or well, and do occupye the place of a well, and yet for
all that give no water at all. And the clouds, which troubled with ye wind
are carried and driven fro one place to another, ar in deed in ye air instead
of very clouds: and yet they do not give somoch as one drop of moisture So
likewise our bishops also being tossed with the wind of glory ar in deed in the
high rowme of the very Apostles / but yet for all yt they be moved and driven
according to all yt cogytacyons of ye devil / and they be greatly aduau^ced in
ye honors and pleasures of this world but they send down no drops of
moisture. They preche nothing at al / wherefore there is reserved for them also
ifernall darkness for evermore. But if you wylt say unto me how can they be
called fou^taynes without water and clouds without rain, i^ asmoche as they do
enough and more then enough fylle and replenysshe all the world with their
teaching and do on every side with loud voice speak great things? Peter
makes answer and grants that without doubt they do preach to much, to
the great hurt of all the world: and he says furthermore.

FOr when they have vehemently spoken proud words of vanytie, they begyle and
allure men through lusts of ye pleasure of the flesh, such as were clean
escaped, such as are in error, whiles they do promise unto them liberty,
and yet they are them selves the bond servants of corrupcyon.

HEre he shows the cause, why he does compare and lyken them to Balaam,
Balaam
and he descrybeth the nature of their doctrine. wherefore let us look upon this
somewhat stedfastlye and with good aduysement. Nume 24 et. 31.
Moses writes in the book of Numeri in the xxiiii. and.xxxi. chapitres, how
that Balaam made mocyon to ye king Balach, he should set up an Idolle called
Baal peor and instytude and ordeyne sacryfyces, in which certain women and
maids should after the manner of common women stand forth ready to satysfye the
flesshely lusts of all manner persons, in the honor of the god Baal / and
that he should provoke the children of Israel to Idolatrye and fornycacyon,
and so by that means might bring the wrath and indygnacyon of god upon
them / when he could by none other ways overcome, whose counsel king
Balach did follow and obey. So then the children of Israel entysed by the
women of the madyanites, did sacryfyce with them to the Idolle Peor / and
after that they had given them selves most shamefully to lecherye and
glotonye, they were deceived with the flaterynge words and behauoure of ye
women. wherefore god being dyspleased and angrye, caused the princes and rulers
to be hanged against the son, and he slew. xxiiii. M. persons. Lo ye author
and begynner of this so great and abominable sin was Balaam so great a
prophet / Lo this great offense committed he, which not long before had
preached so godly things. But for as much as the apostle Peter does refer
and apply all these things unto our bishops, let us now consydre more
largely of this matter. What manner Idolle Baal Peor was, Baal peor
the scripture does not so plainly declare, albe it that in the.xxi. chapter
of Ezechyell it does somewhat touch of the wonderful, and insatiable flesshely
lust of that spyrytuall adulteres / when it does most sharply rebuke her
for that she did desire and lust after the flesh of horses.

ANd she was made (says he) with lust to lie by them, Ezech. 21.
whose flesh are as ye flesh of Asses, and ye flux and issue of them as
the flux or issue of horses.

AUthors do say, Priapus
yt this same Idolle was Priapus of the which matter all together, I had much
lever hold my tongue then to speak any thing at al not but yt it might be
uttered pe^ned and spoken well enough (so it were done with honest shamefastnes
and reverence were not for ye capcyousnes of certain persons which when they
ca^ fide aff their long poryng and pryeng) no fault or challenge in the
argument or matter, will be right glad otherwise to find some thing, which
(al beit unworthily) they may with some feigned color of honest and virtuous
pretens, deprave and calumpnyate. Therefore who so lysteth to know more of the
fylthie rytes and ceremonies of this detestable Idolle priapus or Baal Peor,
used at the matrimonye of honest matrones among ye gentyles before Christ's
natyuytie, Let him resort to a book of. De ciuitate dei. fib. 6. ca. 9
S. Augustynes, intytled De ciuitate dei. where the holy doctor, is not
asshamed (for why should he) no more then men neded to be now a days, if the
devil did not rage so sore in his members, to show the detestable sacryfyce
don unto this abominable god filthy lecherye and uncleanness / Baal peor or
Priapus. The which abhomynacion every whytte notwithstanding, was done and
committed under ye cloked color of a ghyhe sacryfyce offered unto god. where
note to what great in conuenyence, the blind nature of man is brought unto,
and carried hedlonge, by the hypocrysie of feigned relygyon, and painted holiness,
when he has not ye word of god, to testyfye with him yt his service is good
and godly, The blindenes of man.
yea what thing can be ymagyned or devised so foul so abhomynable, and
shameful / but me^ may be persuaded unto it: so that Relygyon and holiness be
feigned and pretended, under the abuse of the blyssed and most worshypful name
of god: is not this a thing more then miserable, more then horrible, in so
foul and so abhomynable a thing as was this sacryfyce of Pryapus to mysuse ye
name of god? and by that cloak and pretense so many thousa^des of souls to be
seduced, begyled and led out of the right way? And yet god in ye mean
season held his peace, Note here the great sufferau^ce of god.
and suffered his name i^ ungoodly and shameful wise to be polluted and
blasphemed, to the intent that to those which were unkind, and had forgoten
his grace and favor, so great blindness, and so exceeding great error should
be as a reward and a recompensacyou of their wyckednes, likewise as they had
deserved / And look if it have not ben even so among us christen men For what
soever thing that wicked tyraunte the Priapus of Rome, Priapus of Rome.
and those sons of maledyccyo^ the bishops and doctors, ye hold of his
doctrine, lernyng and law, dare either deuyse or feigned and ymagyne, and offer
unto us: yt thing forth with we do receive and embrace and do think it
suffycyent. And ye for nothing else, but only because they do pretend ye name
of god, and therewith do cover and cloak their priapyshe doctrine and sacryfyce.
And when they praise their inue^cyons only with great tytles, calling them holy
virtuous and christen deuyses establysshed by the church of god: we forth with do
ron upon them in all ye have, and do receive them never so much as ones
bethynkyng us or co^sydri^ge whether it be also comanded of god or sta^dyng with
his scriptures so yt this co^me^ proverb came not up for naught, A proverb.
neither is itvsed without a cause / In ye name of ye lord is be gone al
mischief and ungraciousness But god did in especial threten and forbede this
very dylygently that we should not rasshely and vndyscretely receive every
manner thing, that is offered unto us under ye pretense and color of his
name, and as it were showing and payntynge with his finger the Pope and his
bysshoppes of our time, he says in the.xxiiii chapter of Mathewe.

MAny men shall come in my name, and shall say, I am Christ, and shall begyle
many, and lead them out of ye right way.

ANd for this cause, also he did so dyly gentlye provide and ordeyne yt we
should not take his name in vain in to our mouth, or otherwise abuse it /
again he has also taught us to parye in this wise.

" Hallowed be thy name. That is to say, The name of god
grant that the holy and worshypfull name of god may coutynue holy and in
honor, and only be applied unto those things / which are truly holy, and
truly godly, and so that we may not be seduced and begyled by the name of god,
but yt we may be saved by it / And that by all these things is sygnyfyed that
incredyble pestilence and calamytie of humane tradycio^s, Priapus was a figure
of ye popes tradycyons, as proves Moses. Deute. 4.
wherewith god now does punysshe and scourge the world by the Pope and his
clyentes. First Moses shows and declares it in the.iiii. chapter of
Deuteronomiu^, when he says.

YOu shall not add unto ye word which I do speak unto you, neither shall
you take away any thing therfro / keep you the commandments of your Lord
god, which I do command and teach unto you / And immedyatlye after it
follows. For your iyes have seen, what god has done to ye Idol Peor, And
how he has destroyed the worshypers of it, and has taken them from among
you.

Now why should Moses put Baal Peor for an example most specyallye before all
other things, when he does command that they should neither add any thing
to the word of god, nor mynyshe any thing thereof: except it were becanse he
would openly show that humane tradycyons are nothing else but an Idol Peor?
Man's tradycio^s
For these do take away the law of god, and do add humane things. Likewise
as even at these days the Pope has suppressed, or at the least wise has
neglected and despised almost all the commandments of god, and has added
his own humane abhomynacyons as patches sowed thereunto. The here tycall
doctrine of the papystes.
For (as we have said often times) the Papystes do teach, that it is no need
that god be loved with the whole heart: so by this is taken away the first
commandment / again they do teach, The papists destroy all gods
commandments.
that faith is not suffycyent to iusty ficacyon, but that good works are
required unto ryghtwysnes so by this ye second and third precepte falls to
ground. Besides this they do teach ye sons to be dysobedye^t unto ye fathers
and mothers, as the^ selves are to ye high governors and rulers: (as we have
said heretofore) by this is taken away the fourth precepte / Also they teach
that it is not needful to love our enemies: by this they do teach wrath
and hatred be of strength, against the.v. precepte. Moreover they have
inverted and devised innumerable means and crafts both of knyttynge or
cowplynge matrymonye, and also of deuorsynge or departing matrymonye: by this
is adnulled and put away the six commandment. Besides all these things,
they do teach to get and to hold and keep still other me^nes goods, other
men's things, and money gotten by vsurye, contrary to the.vii. precepte. Also
all their hole doctrine is false wytnes: contrary to the.viii. precepte. So
under that Idol the Priapus of Rome the re is no precepte of god any longer
safe: but al are abrogate and put away. On the other side he has added and
put to of his own, how that by ye habytes of his relygyous ordres, by sects
beggynge songs, organes, franken sense, smokes, belles, loud noise belowynges
or rorynges, pardons, satysfaccyons / and by such other vysyble things, the
favor of god is purchased and the works of ryghtwysnesse are fulfilled,
which things every one of them god does hate and abhor, and will not
know ye best them, if they be done without faith, as all the prophettes do
openly witness / wherefore even the doctrine also of him is very Baal Peor /
Here unto Moses also is consonaunte and very well agreynge, The manner of Baas
honor and sacryfyce. Nume. 25
when he descrybeth ye sacryfyce and manner of worshypynge Baal Peor. How it
was done all together in glotony and le chery. For the gentyles or paynymes
were fallen in to so extreme blyndnes, The blindenes of ye ge^tyles.
that in the honor of that Idol, they did most shame fully set forth their
own wives and their fairest daughters as common women to serve the beastlye
lust of who soever would, and it was the common manner and custom, that every
man should take his pleasure, and satysfye his abhomynable lust upon every
woman that was nerest unto him, after the manner and facyon of beasts and
dogs. Cosbi.
And Moses writes of Cosbi the daughter of a certain prince, how as she was
using the filthy pleasure of the flesh with a certain prince and gouerno'
of Israel, both she and he as they were joined together in that filthy act
doing, were stryken through with a dagger by a priest named Phynees, Psalmo.
105.
of whom the psalm also makes mencyon.

Phynees pacyfyed etc. Phinees.

BRyefly that most wretched people was so blinded, that they did also like
them selves well, and did stand in their own conceyte, as often times as
they did offer to this Idol their best sons, and their most tender
daughters / even likewise as now a days that Idol the Priapus of Rome does
with his doctrine corrupt and defyle the sons of great estates, and ye
daughters of princes, whiles he does entyse and allure them in to monasteryes
or howses of relygyon, which do wene ye their selves do very well in their
wicked opinion to be iustyfyed by entering in to the same, and that they do
follow godlynes and the right way of good living albeit they be never so
far from the gift of contynauncie. Now all the whole scripture in every
place calls ye madness of them which do bind their conscience captyue to
the tradycyons of men and in them lie tomblynge, Spu^all fornycacion and who
redome.
lettynge ye commandment of god go, whoredom and fornycacion And god in all
ye prophettes does rebuke the synagoge which for sakyng him the very god,
Synagoge.
does committee fornycacyon with the doctrynes of men, and with the masters or
teachers of humane tradycyons. So that bodily fylthynes and uncleanness of Baal
Peor, may sygnyfye none other thing, then spyrytuall adultery and
fornycacyon, by which souls are defiled and are led away from ye
symplycytie of the faith and from the knowledge of Christ, The souse is a
spu^all virgyne and co^ceyueth the word of god by faith.
in to the co^fydence of works for every soul ye scripture does call a
spyrytuall virgyne or spouses, that is to wit verily, because of faith, in
which she being great and full with the holy ghost does conceive the words
of god, and in which same faith also the holy ghost making plenty full the
sede of the word of god, faith is ye mother of truth.
does make her ye mother of truth that is to say does make her full of true and
substancyall good works, and of the fruits of true pytie and godlynes.
Besides this the nature and propryetie of the name does meruayllouslve well
agree unto this matyer and purpose. For Baal in ye Hebrwe tongue sygnyfyeth a
man, The iterpretacion of Baal.
and ye such a manner man which does by any means cleave to a woman, as if a
woman did say, this is my man, whether he be her lawful husband, or else
one to whom she is concubyne. And likewise as we do say of an harlotte, that
she has many me^: Baal.
so Baal does signify and betoken a man wholly addecte and given to women, and
a householder / so that this word does sygnyfie in his propre sygnyfycacion not
any manner man, but a man which is given to women, and a speaker and governor
of a household. For else a man which is mete to govern the common weal, or
to make war, or to do any other manner earnest and wayghtie busynes: Isch /
Enosch. Beelzehuh. Accaron.
is in Hebrwe tongue called Isch or Enocsh. So the Jews did call the Idol
Accaron Beelzebub, that is to say the man or husband of flies: that is to wit
a man nothing worth and without all might or strength scasely worthy to have
eue^ a fly to his wife. In the laten tongue such a manner man is called maritus
or coniunx (not vir, or mas) and the same is Baal in the Hebrwe tongue. Now
Peor and phegor betokens an opening or gapynge, Neor. Phegor.
and it belongs properlye to the mouth. Wherefore Baal Peor in the Hebrwe
tongue, does betoken in Englys she, men which have their mouths always
gapynge: and such for the most part ar fools without any wit recheles,
sloth full, dastardes, desirous of women's company, and nothing mete to any
sad or earnest busynes / And therefore unto this fylthy Idol this name Baal
Peor was very well and accordyngly given: Baal peor.
because it was on every behalf fylthie and unclean, and or deyned only to
fylthynes and baudrye / For what other thing should it mean that, yt image was
graven in such manner filthy and shameful facyon: but only that it should
sygnyfie a flouthfull man and a folysshe, and such one as were greatly
desirous of the company of women? likewise as the image of one in complete
harneys and with a salette on his head, does sygnyfie a man apt and mete for
wars and bataylles / And albeit that fervent fautoures of bishop of Rome do
committee all these spyrytuall adulteryes and for nycacyons, as we shall hear
hereafter: yet for all that (if I should not lie (they be so strong and mighty
and as it were twyse married, that some of them do in very deed play the
adulterers, and that notablye as men say even with their bodies also. For I pray
you for the love of god tell me what is the profit that comes of this holy
and godly people? Are they not in very deed Baal Peor, that is to say
recheles and folysshe idle me^? For what other thing can they skyll of, or
what other thing do they, save only ride upon well fed, and fat
palfrayes: if not chastelye yet warely.
and keep fair wenches yr not chastlye yet warely (for I will use their own
wise term) with whom they may lie (god wotte to avoid all manner feres that
happen in ye night. So then they are pure Baal peors and do continue always
Baal peors, and yet nevertheless i^ the mean season they do busely make this
color and semblaunce to begyle men with all, as though they did govern the
church in spyrituall things, and did conueye souls in to heaven, and as
though it were they alone, which do pluck up and rydde away errors and
heresies with great dyligence and care. Wherefore this Idol spyrytually is
nothing else, but the holy canon law, The Canon law
and the doctrine of ye Pope and the craftye maynteyners of ye same. For this
is that filthy and unclean image, in which the souls do lose their
virgynyte, that is to say in which they learn to trust in works, and to
leave and forsake the chastytie and purytie of the ryghtuousnes of faith /
which the Apostle calls the symplycytie, which is in Christ Ihesu.

Wherefore also the Pope should of right be called not the pope, but Priapus:
1. Co. vi.
and the papystes not papystes, Priapystes.
but priapystes And likewise as it was a very fylthy and a shameful thing /
and even also plain against alreason and yt common judgment of men, that the
paynymes should so set up an image of extreme uncleanness or rybauldrye, by
which men were provoked unto lecherye, and by twyce more fylthy and stynkynge
use thereof did worship this Idol as it were with common and solemn
ceremonies. So in like manner and a thousa^de times worse, and a thousand times
more filthy and unclean is the doctrine, the manner and usage of the papystes,
which by their Bulls and by their doctrine do allure and draw the
conscyences of men unto confydence and trust in works / to pardones and
satysfaccyo^s: wenynge that then pryncipally they have done excellent and high
honor and service unto god, if by inuentynge and deuysynge very many works
and tradycyons of works, they do daily encreace this spyrituall fornycacion:
as though the god of glory, and of soueraygne Majesty were made this Idol of
rybaldrye and uncleanness / when in very deed the true honor and service of
god, The true honor and service of god.
and yt true spyrytuall chastity stands or rests in faith only, and in
the works which god by grace does work in us. So we do se through out all
the world that the Papystes do set souls upon this Idol of Priapus, and do
fill the world with such manner spyrytuall uncleanness and monstrous kinds of
spyrytuall lecherye. For they do set up the mere doctrynes and works of men
in the holy place, where only the word of god ought to raygne. And likewise
as that abhomynable image of Priapus is made like unto a yo^ge man most
shameless, desirous of woman's company, even so yt papystycall Idol also, The
doctrine of men.
that is to wit that doctrine of men, is a certain madness and furye
contynually ragynge in pollutynge of minds, and in vyolatynge and defylynge
the chastytie of faith. For we do se with how great labor and dylygence, Nota.
with how great stryuynge / yea even yet at this day in England, the
papystes do nosell the selye pore people in their doctrine, but after such
manner, that by their wylles they will not be a known thereof, and so craftily
(as they think) that no man can perceive them, albeit in yt mean time every
fool may espy them. We se (I say) how wodde they are, and how they rage, as
it were me^ vexed offendes, as often times as their doctrine is judged or
examyned and tried by the rule of holy scry ptures. For they would not that so
much as one soul should escape that stews of spyrituall lecherye, and those
foul bordell howses, and yt foul lust, wherein they do contynually brenne to
maynteyne their Idol, and so to provide that there shall not one soul keep
the chastyte of her faith. This is sygnyfyed by the name Baal, Baal.
that is to say a man given to love of women, that is to wit, because such
manner doctrine of men is only ordained to the pollutynge, corruptynge, and
defylynge of souls.

This same also is sygnyfyed by the word Peor / that is to say a gapynge
mouth. Peor.
For they will not harken nor give ears that they may here the word of god
but only that stubburne, dysobe dyente, and shameless mouth, with contynuall
gapynge does bark forth humane doctrynes. For they only will teach and
give laws in the church, and they require and look that their selves only
should be herd, and that them selves only should be taken for bishops and
overseers / And this is the cause, why they do outwar dely pretend so goodly
and glorious names with so many colors and deceytfull hypocryses where as in
very deed they are nothing else but Peor / that is to say men full of tongue,
bablers tryflres, and shameful liars (as saint Paul says in the first
epistle to Tymothe.)

Willing or desiring to be teachers of the law, and yet they do not
understand what things they do speak, nor of what things they do affirm.

By these things we may now understand the words of the apostle Peter, why,
and for what cause he does compare and lyken the Pope and his preuye bishops
and secret friends unto the prophet Balaam. Balaam
For first this word Balaam in ye hebrwe sygnyfyeth a deuourer, likewise as
the papystes also have devoured and swalowed up ye riches of ye whole world.
Secondarely like wise as Balaam for respect of money, or for rewards sake
gave counsayll unto king Balach, that he should set up the Idol Baal peor,
and did begyle ye people of Israel, and let them ou^ of the right way: even
so says the Apostle, that yt papystes whether they ben preuye or known, and
such other men do follow ye ways of Balaam: and also do raise or set up the
Idol Baal peor for filthy lucres sake. For as we se, what soever humayne
doctrine there is, it is every whyt ordained to the end, to gather riches, to
increase worldly substance / bryefly to get plentefull lucre and auau^tage as
we se in ye king dome of ye Pope and his. On the other side the word of god or
ye gospel, The gospesscan get no money.
or the word of the cross is barayne and vnfruytfull to bring forth any
lucre or gaynes. For there is no man but he flies from ye cross, and every
man greatly hates trybulacyons and aduersytie, which do always accompanye and
follow the word of god. For the apostle could not of all the scripture have
found out a more mete example to descrybe and set forth the fylthy and the
dowble wicked life of Rome and of the romanystes, then this Balaam. For I pray
you what other thing is all ye whole kingdom of the Pope and his vpholders
where soever they be and all the whole wicked Monarchye of him and his, The
Monarchye of ye pope.
then covetousness and gredy desire to gather gold, then money, money, money?
for all things are there so ordered and appointed, that they may bring i^
lucre. For how tyrannously the pope with these byenges and sellynges, with
suits about prebendes, with the whyrlynge processes of the rote at Rome, with so
many palles and cotes belongyng to ye bishops, has pylled, made bare beggered
ye world: the thing it self, yt is to wit ye extreme pouerte of al Chrystendom
does euyde^tly wytnes and declare. How beit those losses of money and gooddes
were not to be passed upon, if he had not set up this Idol of his deuylisshe
and wicked doctrine and called away all the whole world from very god unto
Idolatrye, only for this execrable and most filthy lucre. For therein yt
Balaa^ of Rome and his does most hurt, and teaches spyrytual adulteryes and
fornycacyons, by which god is provoked to wrath and vengeance. So that not
only (as Moses writes).xxiiii. M. do perysshe and are destroyed: Humeri.
xxvi.
but innumerable souls and conscyences are slain and dampened if they persyst
in his doctrine. Furthermore the apostle says, ye they do speak excedyng
proud and dysdaynfull words. Without doubt by these words he does
sygnyfye and rebuke that wicked doctrine, of ye Pope and his, as if he should
say the doctrine of them is up and down the veryeryghte Baal peor. For the
masters and teachers of that doctrine with meruaylous pride, and with great
gapynge and opening of the mouth do preach and teach things vnfruytfull
and whereof shall come no profit at all. I beseech you is not this opinion
comenly rooted in men's minds? and has it not ben so used in our time, as
though only the life of Monks, freers, and priests, were ye very right way
unto salvation and heaven? No man durst hope to be saved, except he were one
of those holy saints or else at the least wise did bye heaven of them. And
they their own selves dare very boldly hope to be saved, and dare selle
salvation unto other being excedyngly shameless: likewise as they do openly
excerse marchau^dyse, selling Masses, fastings, prayers, and good works done
in their Monasteries, as though by these means they should conuaye other men in
to heaven / are not these great things I pray you? but what is hid under ye
royal and goodly cloak and pretense: Nothing else but hypocrysye, stark
lies, and crafts and deceytes Romyshe falshode, gyles, flaterynge slayghtes,
bryefly snares and grynnes of the devil. For in all that whole wicked and
ungodly people is there not one Cru^me of faith or fydelytie: but al their
holiness stands in their shaven crowns / in their long robes, in saying or
syngyng of Psalms in ye dyuersitie of garments or habytes, in hyocrytyse
fastinges, in belles, in the smokes of the sensers, in such things as these
(I say) rests all their holiness. And of these things they do challenge and
take unto them selves those noble tytles: of spyrytuall state, of holy ordres,
of priests and bishops as though they should be means between god and other
men, yt is to wit making their own selves new medyatoures or means, least
that only medyatour, whom god has ordained and appointed, Christ Ihesus were
not yuough for all suffycyent, but had lain him down to sleep. 1. Timothe.2.
O Balaam ye sone of Belyall god give the short time to continue with thine
abhomynable Idol, which gatherynge and scrapyng together money on every side
doste kill and slay souls. Besides this the apostle says, ye by so goodly a
colo and so glorious a cloak and pretense they do only allur^ and draw me^
unto ye lusts desires of the flesh, in so much ye those men are compelled
to live in error which sometime had truly escaped. I verily do not doubt,
that the spyryteof god does here by the mouth of peter rebuke not one error
alone, or one sin and abhomynacyon alone but does touch and rebuke all the
whole heap of sins and vices, which lies hid under ye goodly color and
hypocrysye. For we se how wide and largely the Relygyon of men of ye church
does extend and stretche it self, how many sects it does contain, which
sects are egally bounden all the rabble of them to chaster not without a
relygyous and a devout oath. when notwithstanding the scripture and with
daily experyence does teach, yt perpetual chastytie is an high gift of god
far above the power and strength of nature, which gift chances but even
to very few holy and spyrytuall men also. But our bishops here being
blind and maddo conne on hedlonge, and do bind all manner psones
indyfferentlye with this bond, none otherwise then if chastytie were a very
easy thing and light to be kept of every man / and so with those high
praises of virgynytie and of their spyrytuall state (for they so do call it)
they do allure and draw selye youth in to their nets of their syngle life,
The fructes of the popes chastytie.
which youth then afterward does defyle it self contynuallye with foul
lecherye and unclean lusts. And hereof it is that we dose them both men and
women, which being let and holden in within the prysones of monasteryes,
and with iyerne locks and grates can not have the company of man or woman, to
sin more fylthelye and more abhomynablie (saving reverence) in sodomytrie or
buggerie, then a man dare be bold to utter or express. For albeit they do
never so much conteyne outwardly, as concerning the bodily act: Nota.
yet that notwithstanding they do inwardly boil and brenne with unclean lust
so yt among the^ either there is whoredom under the color and cloak of
spyrytuall and ecclesiastycal life, or at ye least wise there is constrained
and tyrannously extorted chastytie. And of a suertie, there are more grievous
ieopardyes of co^scye^ces and greater calamytie and misery there, then any man
may either express with his tongue or thynk with his heart, and this is it ye
Peter rebukes here, when he says.

THey allure and draw me^ with pleasures of ye flesh through concupysce^ces
and lusts.

AS though he did say of those our bisshops and prestes In deed they do preach
many things of ye spyrytuall and ecclesiastycal state, and they do
meruaylously praise and magnyfie chaslytie: but with those their fair and
pleasant words they do begyle sely pore yo^ge men and women, and do lead
the^ and al other in to ye mids of ye fylthy stynkyng pumpe of lechery and
unclean lusts, which a little before through baptysme had truly escaped ye
power of sin and of the devil, and had begone well in the christen faith and
in the gospel. Why so many co^ne to religyon.
For hereof it is that so many men do run so hedlo^ge and blyndlye in to
these kinds of living: because they do suppose that baptism and the virtue
thereof is lost through actual sin, and does work nothing any longer in
them. And hereof also it is that they do not regard but do despise faith,
Faith.
as a vain and a triflyng thing without any fruit or profit (which for all
that is ye only thing that does justify) and they do take upon them a more
holy and a more pure manner of living, and (as it appears to them) also a more
spiritual and a more high kind of living, that is to wit to live sole and
chaste. And then this thing without faith and without the spirit is
impossible for them to do, and so they are cast down in to ye mids of this
deep dongeon of myserie and wretchydnes, for it is possible that the devil may
for the space of one year or two, yea and also sometime of hole ten years
suffer such manner men to be quiet (howbeit this happens very seldom) but
yet for all ye the same men at length do not co^tynue chaste, onles they do
learn faith and Christ, or else do get some higher gift. For the devil
has that man, who soever he be, A man without faith.
which is without faith, so surely and so fast bounden in the snares of lechery
and unclean lusts: that he need not to lie in wait, or to use his deuylyshe
crafts about them, wherefore he does so mock him, and does suffer him for a
certain season to live quyetly, yea in so much that he begins also to have
great delight and pleasure in chastity: but yet he is more the^ sure that the
man can not escape out of his snares without faith and the spyryte, or else
some spyrytuall gift of god, namely seeing that even those men also have
business enough and much work to keep them selves vpryght and vnouercomen in
this behalf, which ar spyrytuall in very deed, and which trusting and being
bold upon their manly and strong couragyous faith, always watchful, and
standing up right do contynually wrestle and fight with him contynually.
Bryesly take this for sure and undoubted, that all that so hyghly praised
chastyte and contyne^cie of ecclesyastycall persons, The chastyte of
alecclesyastycal persons / which have not the faith that iustifyeth
whose hertes are not puryfyed and raised up with faith (as all the priests
for the most part ar ignorant of Christ) is nothing else but mere
hypochrisye and deuylyshe deceypte, by which they do allure youth into most
great ieopardyes, when in the mean season no good thing at all is hid under
this goodly and deceyptfull semblaunces or apperaunce. And would to god that
now an hundred monasteryes were brought unto one, and that of one hundred
churches collegyate there were left scantly one or two, and the same to be
instytuted and ordained for a scole of chryscen youth, and not for a gage or
place to boste and she we forth ceremonies in. Believe me this so great and so
excellent Apostle did not speak in vain and for naught, wherefore as I have
said always even so I say again now, who soever may, let him keep him self
even as far away from all manner bonds of religyon, from all monasteryes and
temples, where the scripture and faith is not earnestly taught, and where
soever Christ is not taught, and spirytuall works are exercysed both day and
night, as he would from a pestylence. For it is not possible to be otherwise,
but that these monasteryes and churches both cathedral and collegiate are the
gates of hell: Cathedral churches.
if the gospel be not there contynually preached and syncerely taught. And
except the gospel do raygne in such places, and be exercysed by the cross, by
temptacions and tribulacio^s, always through most sure and vpryght hope and
most lively faith: it is not possible, but that all things there done are and
must be corrupt, hypochritycall, and deuylyshe, how soever holy they appear
in sight. Neither is there in such a place any hope of counsel or remedy.
Wherefore good reader, I do oftentimes louyngly admonyshe, and hertely exhort
the, flee flee (will thou that I shall speak it a thousand times?) flee and
eschew the estate of religyous men, which is so chosen, sought and invented by
the madness and vanytie of man's cou^sayll, without scripture, without the
byddyng, without the comau^ demente and word of god. True chastity.
To the keeping of true chastity, first there is need of a lively, effectual,
strong, proved, tried, and very angelical gift, which may of a certain
efficacy and stre^ght properly belongyng unto it self, and of her own
courageous force coming by the grace of god carye up the spirit above ye
flesh, and which also may rule and command desires and affeccyons, and which
may as it were a certain very hot fire, dry up the issues and flowynges of
ye flesh, and bring a man in that case, that he begin to set light by
this life, and by him self, in a manner turned by the gift of god in to an
angely call nature.

ANd except that god, with ye most free and passing high gift of
contynencie or chastytie in body and mind do gyrde in and hold under his
raynes: it is but labors all in vain, to goo about by any might or power of
man to bridle or subdue ye flaming heat of ye flesh. But those mad men and
utterly ignorant of faith and spyryte, and also vnskylled of spyrytuall
things, do go about to provide for these things, and to remedy them by their
cold works, with fastings, with habytes or vestures, with prayers set and
appointed, with the prysonnes of monasteryes or relygyous houses, A simylitude.
none otherwise then if one would go about to stop the river of Thaymes of
his course, with a bank made of straw, leaving in the mean season the
spring or head of it unstopped. This fellow that would so do, might
peradventure sooner destroy the lands lyeng nere, with the over flowyng of ye
said river: the^ stop or let the course of the same. So these men do leave unto
nature her natural flowynges, whiles they do not teach ye knowledge of the
gift of chastytie, and yet do go about with eating of fysshe and with
dyuersitie and choice of garments, and with the prysones of monasteryes, to
stop and keep under the said nature, that she shall not break forth in to
issues or flowynges: when that natural power and that natural desire to
continue and encreace his kind is so depely roted and grounded in the flesh
that it can not by any power or strength of man be plucked up and put away. and
so the goodly and excellent purytie of their chastytie is this only, to keep
them selves unmarried: The chastity of ye papistical spirituality.
but yet nevertheless in the mean season to follow flesshely lusts, commonly
being the worste lyuers of all other. And so it is true that Peter the Apostle
says, that with their goodly hypochrisy, and with their high and glorious
praises of this colored and painted chastity, they do allure and begyle the
common people, and very many vnskylled young me^, making them to believe that by
this spiritual (for so they call it) estate and by works they shall be chaste
and holy, and do most high honor and service unto god, and this is that
error of al other far ye worste in the which they are compelled to live,
which a little before were delivered from all error through baptysme and the
faith of Christ. Is not this then a goodly and an excellent praise of prestes
and relygyous men, which so great an Apostle gives unto them: that is to say,
that the life of them is nothing else, but great and goodly soundes of words,
under which there is no good thing hid or meaned, under which manner of
living also most foul uncleanness and most gross sins are covered, and
with which them selnes do seduce and lead christen men from ye high way of
faith, and from the knowledge of Christ, in to comberous and inextrycable mases
of errors? if I should paynt and set out bishops, prestes and relygyous
persons with such manner colonrs, I should be proclaimed. cccccc. times an
heretyke, and these praters of vain things (I should have said preachers of
dyuyne things) would cry our a thousand times and more. To ye fire, to ye
fire. Thou can not deny (say they) but that many saints, as Augustyne,
saint Barnarde, and Francyske, did profess this manner of living, what
thereof? (I say) you blind guyders, do you not se, ye those fathers Barnard,
Augustyne, and such other holy me^ were saved not by their works, not by these
orders, so as you do wene: How the ofde fathers esteemed outwatde works.
but by yt knowing of christ but by faith? and yt they did not acco^pte or take
these outward exercyses for yt way and cause of saluacyo^: but only for an
outward exercise to chastyce and subdue the pride and rebellyo^ of yt flesh.
Let this therefore be suffycyent to us now yt we have open and plain testimonies
of yt most excellent Apostles Peter and Paul, which have descrybed and have
set forth to our iyes yt papystes with all their wicked life and doctrine: yt is
to wit, yt they are yt sons or children of maledictio^ and mo^sters of yt
world, but deyns of ye earth, to be shoned and eschewed of al those which are
ye lovers of true virtue and good living But what Christ him self, and what the
prophets Esaie / Hieremie / and Ezechiel with other do say with most vehement
and very tragical affeccyons, and with meruaylous playnesse and boldness,
concerning this matter: we shall differ and put of in ye mean season whiles,
the pope and bishops with all their guard and retynue freattynge and fomyng
against this verity after their accustomed manner, shall blow on those my
little sparks. Now if the men, which are by nature so desirous of glory, and
which are wont to flaterynges, do co^playn that they be not handled of me like
bishops according to their dignytie: no man shall greatly blame me therefore,
for asmoche as they do not behave them selves, as it becomes bishops to do.
For I do forbear them and give the^ more honor, then they be worthy to have
in that I do vouchesafe to call them by so holy and so old a word, The name
of a hysshop.
I mean the name of bishop, for they ought to be called by very odyous
tytles, if I should call them as does saint Paul the Apostle, and as Steven
the first marter does call them. Acts. xii
For a bishop ought to be very co^nynge in the Bible, and day and night to
labor and study in the holy scripture, and to be such one, which should in
his own person teach his people, both pryuately and openly, Acts. vii
and instruct them to know Christ (as saint Paul does rehearse) and which
also in his own propre person should vysyte sykme^, and succoure and releue
pore, and nedye men. Now they are notynge else (I mean the papystes) but
blind guydes, which defendyng ye tradycyons of men and the papystycall
marchaundyse, by frauds and guyles do pluck away, and by infynyte crafts
do extorte the goods of other men. Therefore likewise as shepeherdes when it
fortuneth them to se the wolf, do make a great outcrye upon him, saying the
wolf, the wolf, the wolf, even so also will I cry out here even until I be
hoorse with cryenge to such time as they amend their manners. I will descrybe
some of their virtues, to thente^t that all christen men both now living and
hereafter to come may have knowledge thereof, howbeit yet I will forbear from
showing their names and persons, neither will I rebuke and inuaye against that
worldly admynystracyon and dignytie which they bear, but I shall pryncypally
touch that thing, which concerns ye captyuyte of conscyences, that they
may ones se and perceive, that there is by the gift of god some sheep of so
great a flock spronge^ up which al other hitherto being affrayde dare be bold
to say. Lo under these goodly dysguysynges, under this fair name, and under
this appareyll of bishops are hid rauynous wolves. And of this my liberty
and bold playnesse, I have an excellent example the Apostle Paul, Pause. Ac.
xxiii.
which did in open audyence very sharply and sore rebuke the high preeste
Ananias, Ananias
and said.

GOd shall stryke the, thou whyted wall, thou syttest here to judge me
according to the law, and yet contrary to the law do co^mau^deme to be
stryke^

THere he calls the high preeste a whyted wall, ye is to say, a person which
with certain payntynge and vain colourynge outwardly does pretend to be that
thing, which he is not, and the Apostle does threten unto him ponysshement
of god, and does handle him nothing reverently, but likewise as if he had been
not only a pryuate person, and not the high bishop. And when certain men
had blamed and rebuked him, for that he had spoken evil to the ruler of the
people: he answered. Brethern I did not know that he was a bishop, what those
words of the Apostle do mean, it is eathe to conjecture. For if he had feared
ye him self had done amysse in that he had so wysshed vengeance to him from
god, no doubt of it he would have asked after an humble manner forgyuenes of
the high bishop, and would have revoked his rebukefull word, but this thing
Paul in no wise did. Neither can these words of saint Paul be so taken, as
though he was utterly ignoraunte that he was bishop. For who would think it
lykely, that Paul was openly brought forth unto the place of judgment, and
that no man gave to him any monicyon or knowledge before with these or like
words. Lo Paul thou shall be presented before the bishop syttyng in
judgment, or else to the same effect. Lo Paul he that sytteth there, is the
chyefe bishop: namely seeing that we are wont in so open and common matters
dylygently to enquere and learn the persons, namely of the judges. And
though Paul had been nener so much ignorant, that he was the high bishop:
yet for all that he saw him sytte in the highest place, and by that he
perceived that he was the judge, be cause he did command Paul to be stryke^.
He ought therefore here of right to spare and forbear the power and
prehemynence which he him self does confess and know ledge. Wherefore this
saying of Paul of necessyte must thus be understand, brethren I did not know
that he is bishop, as if he had said, he ought in deed to be bishop: but I
se nothing in him, nor I do know any point in him that is belonging unto a
bishop. He ought verily to play the bishop in very deed: but he does not
but openly does iniurye to me being not conuyct or cast. For thus also does
Augustyne him self expound it, if now Paul the Apostle does so sharply and
boldly rebuke the preeste, which was constytuted by the law of Moses, yea by
the law of god: why then should I be affrayed to touch and rebuke these
colored and painted bishops, which by the tyranny of the pope, by the
favors of men, and by holy gold have invaded bysshoprykes, without the
commandment either of god, or of men.

The first propriety and virtue of the papystycall bishops.
First these bishops have suffered and now a days do suffer instead of the
word of god (which only, only, only, only, I say ought to be preached in
the church) their indulgences and pardones to be publysshed and preached, and
ye this thing is not only wicked, but also blasphemous and deuylyshe, and
full of death and hell, it appears euydentlye enough even hereof, seeing that
it is against the first precept and commandment of god, The first precept.
where he did command that none other ought to be preached, save only ye
word of god, and that to him alone honor is to be given in all things, that
he might be our god, our teacher and master, as he says by Esaie.

I Am thy god teaching the profitable things.

ANd Christ does most greuouslye and sore inuaye against ye doctrynes of men,
Mat. vv.
wherefore all humane doctrine is none other thing then an Idol, and a
certain image, which being set up in the stead of the living and very god,
does lead men in to perdicyon and a eternal destruccyo^. Pardone
But now no man can denay that bulls and pardones are not ye word of god, and
that nothing concerning these things is contained in the scriptures. Besides
this we are also compelled to confess and grant, that all these places of
scripture and other out of nombre do condemn all doctrine, which is not the
word of god. Again god him self does give sentence that all such manner
things ar unprofitable, vain, and apperteynynge to Idolatry: and which are
to be eschewed under pain of the indignacyon and wrath of almighty god. But
for as much as these delycate and tender bishops have foreheddes of iyerne and
necks of brass, as it is said in the prophets, and will not here: they can
not be persuaded and they run forth on, according to their own madness, The
sconthefusnes and reche sesnes of Bishops.
their own course, and their own swing, and where as they ought to spend
their blood and their life (I mean not in any worldly fight) for ye
mayntenaunce of ye word of god against the doctrynes of men: they sleep all
careless, and give their minds al togythers to pleasures, and to fare well, and
ye souls, of which they boste them selves to be the pastoures and feders, they
do most slouthfully neglecte, and nothing care for. But such is their
negligence They do only think and study how they may bring in the
dredefull wrath of god upon men, and draw souls unto the deep pytte of
hell, and that they may at the last carye the conscyences of men clean
ouerthwarte from the word of god in to lies and deuylysshe errors, and the
doctrynes of men, wherefore we ought here so much the more dylygently to take
good head, and to look well about, ye we may show and utter unto the world
these so cruel and so blody wolves, which do lie hid under forked myters
set with peerles and precious stones, I do therefore exhort all chryste^ men in
our lord, that they will here consydre and pondre the wrath of god. And
therefore likewise as you would do with a visyble Idol: even so do now with
the bulls of these Romysshe Balaam, the tourme^tour and sleer of souls.
Consydre how pleasant a thing you shall do unto god, if you do break and
dasshe in pieces (with the word of god, and not with the sword) these Idols,
and do sanctyfye his glorious name, and do deliver it from the fylthy
abhomynacyo^ of Idolatry, wherefore who soever I say who soever may: let him
here boldly and manfully conne on and tear the said Idolatry call bulls, let
him rent them in small pieces, let him brenne them, let him utterly destroy
them. And trusting unto his own good conscience and faith, let him boldly
pluck up by the roots these abhomynacyons brought in contrary to the word of
god, for the most precious and the most holy and devout worshippyng of god
is (if it be done by the high powers) to beat down and destroy Idols, and
to overthrow them, and to break them in to small gobbettes, which thing
Moses does so oftentimes teach and command in Deuteronomiu^. Moses. Gedeon.
So did Gedeon break the Idol Baal, in the.viii. chapyter of Iudicu^. Asa.
So did ye king Asa break the Idol of Papus in ye third book of kings
the.v. chapter. And all these said persons were hyghlye praised of god, and
rewarded again with meruaylous grace. No doubt of it the time that now is, is
that last age or time of the world, in which it is to be feared, that the
flock shall take more hurt of the shepeherdes, then of the wolves.

The second virtue and propryetie of these fore said bishops.
Christ says.
FRelye you have received: freely give you.

Clean contrary to this euy dent and plain saying of Christ our bishops do
run on hedlonge, and not only they do suffer lies and the doctrynes of men,
such as be contrary to to ye gospel, to be preached: but also with a bold
shameless face they do use and apply all their ceremonies, prayers, masses,
baptysme, holy oil, and halowynges of churches, they do (I say) apply all
these things to lucre, and do sell the^ for money. Notwithstanding that they
be bound to give freely all these spyrytuall gifts under pain of eternal
dampna cyon. Now the case put, that indulge^ces and pardones were of some
strength, and were good and profitable: yet they ought to offer vndesyred and
freely and lybe rally to give forth ye same, and the goodness and benefyte
thereof unto all manner men, according to the commandment of Christ, how much
more sinful a thing the^ and how much more shameful and abhomynable a thing is
it, now, to sell stark lies, mere deceyptes and more then harlottes guyles, to
Christ's faithful people for money, after a blasphemous manner and fasshyon?
For even the holy ghost has by saint Paul descrybed the riches of christen
men.

"Having (says he) meat, drink and clothing: The riches of christen men.
let us hold us content therewith.

I Beseech the now good reader has not this Balaam of Rome, riches enough,
possessions enough, lordeshyps, and domynyons enough, cities, and kingdoms
enough, even in Italy alone, that he may compare with the most myghtie kings
that are? though I speak no thing in the mean season of the most shameful
byenges and sellynges, of ye most stynkyng baudy crafts and of the most
ungracious and deuelysshe subtyletyes and deceyptes by which he does every
where through out the whole world scrape together gold and silver measuryng
all things by gold, and referrynge all things to ye end of gettyng money,
in the mean season the care and charge of pore folks, (which charge only
Paul does rehearse in his epistle unto ye Galatia^s to be committed unto him,
and which said care he does exercise stoutly this cure and charge (I say) is
strongly neglected and laid quyte apart. Act. viii. iv. Cor.
Besides this either of the Apostles, that is to wit, both Peter and also
Paul, among other virtues of a very bishop do no^bre and reke^ this also
THat a bishop ought to abhor and be far away from filthy lucre.

THey will therefore that a bishop should get unto himself such things as are
necessary to his sustenaunce and living by honest and godly means, to the
example of other. And Paul him self, which was so excellent an Apostle, did
live by the work and labor of his hands, and he did not dysdayne (although
he was greater than all the bishops yt ever were or now be) to exercise a
handy craft, in to what town soever he did come. And for this cause also he
lodged and was at host in Corynthe with Prisca and Aquila, Prisca. Aquila.
for yt they were of the same craft and occupacion, and he wrought with them.
Now let us make a comparyson of the one with the other. Is not ye most filthy
and more then hoorysshe manner of getting money, which the bishop of Rome and
his clyentes bishops do use. Is it not (I say) in comparyson of the purytie
of the Apostle, more stynkynge and more fylthy then any stues, then any bordell
house? when gold is required for those folysshe fortye days of indulgence and
pardon, by which certain nombre of days the Romanystes (god wot least they
should be over much lauace in gyuyng forth so precious a thing for naught)
have openly mocked our mytred bishops? is it not I say most shameful and
filthy lucre in alages and times, when money is required for such other
tryfles, bryefly for lies and deceyptes, and when those bawdes the Romanystes,
with such as they be, are fed and nourysshed with the sweet of the poor
people? But this is but ye least part of their wicked marchaundyse, for other
bishops of their complexcyon have infynyte crafts, and most shameful means
of gettyng money: of which we shall hereafter speak more largely if they being
offended with this gentle monycyon will also vncurtayslye be wroth with me
monysshyng the^ so favorably and openly enough, as I suppose. And here it is
not unknown to me what they do obiecte. Is it not enough nor suffycyent for a
prince (say they) to have meat, drink, and clothing, except he have also
suffycyently whereof he may keep and maynteyne a guard or bend of men
according to the condycyon and estate of a prince, what princes do in this
place obiecte and allege for them selves of the pryncelye state, and of
princes courts, advise them, the Apostle speaks not of princes, but of
bishops, as for these pryncely bishops and bysshoppely princes he utterly
knows nothing of, which do begyle the world with the name of bishop, and
with ye most vain colors of ceremonies, and gloves and mytres. But therefore
Paul and the spyryte of god, which spoke in him: shall not change their
words, neither attempre them selves unto these princes: but these pryncelyke
bishops shall be feign to atte^pre and apply them selves in their living
according to the mind of saint Paul and his words, or else they shall not
be bishops, nor pastors, but mere puppettes and vysures. I can not here
refrain (although I list not now great lie to bourde in the rehersall of
these things) but I must rehearse a pleasant and merye history. An hystory
or narracyon.
It happened upon a time that a certain such manner pryncely bishop did ride
with a royal pomp and goodly company of horsemen, (as commonly such bishops
ar wont to show them selves set forth gaylye and gorgyously even above any
worldly or temporal princes) through the feldes that lay nere unto a
certain vyllage, whom when a certain shepherde had happily espied as he rode
over the feldes: he left his flock, and did run unto him, and staring and
gasyng upon him, as it had been one amassed, he meruayled greatly at the riches,
and the pomp and gorgyousnes, which he saw about him. The bishop seeing him
so gasynge, said unto him: what doste thouse here, that thou doste marvel so
greatly? Then he as he was an homly rustycall fellow, made to him this plain
answer. I marvel (said he,) whether saint Martyn did use this same pomp,
or like gorgyousnes and superfluytie. To whom the bishop said. Forsothe thou
art a stark fool, and take thy mark amysse. For saint Martyne was
scacelye one of the vile and rascal people: but I am also a prince of high and
noble birth. Then said yt shepherde again, I beseech you my lord will you
give me leave to speak a word? yea marie, said the bishop, I give the good
leave, demand what thou wylt. Then said the shepeherde, what if the devil
should take and bear away the prince: shall there remain any thing of the
bishop? At these words that good pryncely bishop being confounded and
asshamed, departed from the man, and rode his way. So ye Apostle Paul in
comparyson of those dukes and Nemrothes, Pause.
was a plain simple crafts man, lyuyuge by the work of his own hands. And
therefore he went sometime on his feet, and preached the gospel all abroad, he
could play ye Apostle, but such a pore and lewd person as he was, could
never have played ye royal and pryncely bishop after this fasshyon, and the
wrath and the furye of god.

The third virtue.
THese bishops are content, and do suffer that the preachers do publysshe the
indulge^ces and bulls of the pope of Rome, by which the said pope does
mercyfully grant license to keep still other me^nes goods gotten either by
robberye and extorcion, or else by some other unlawful and mighty means, so
that some porcyon thereof be given to him and to the holy church of Rome, and
to the proctours and co^myssaryes of ye pardones, that is to wit, so that them
selves also may get some part of the said spoils, and wrongfully gotten
goods. And here verily I am in doubt with my self, with what title I might
best garnysshe these so mo^struous points of covetousness: and of truth I am
half in doubt, whether I may call the pope with his bishops following and
alowynge these things, dull asses, or else insensyble blocks, or else
peuysshe, mad, and utterly furyous men which with so great shameless boldness,
and with so great madness do not only exercise openly so foul and shameful
deceytes but also do in every country and place teach the same by their
freers and other relygyous persons sent forth to preach. For god has
commanded, thou shall not stele: This precept these monsters of Rome with
such other these cruel wild beasts with meruaylous fyersenes and with
meruaylous woodenes do withstand and gaynsaye, and do openly teach and say,
that thou art in no perell, though thou doste possess and keep still evil
gotten goods, so yt thou would gladly restore them if thou know from whom
they were taken, and so that thou purchase and bye ye popes pardones. I beseech
the what other thing is this in effect, then if a man did say, verily thou
may steal and be a theffe, and god which forbad this, was mad. Lo thus the
god and lord of majesty is compelled to be a scornynge stock to these
children of malediccyo^, who^ they also openly and euyde^tly reprove and
co^dempne for a liar and a fool For this precept those beasts do blaspheme
openly to his face and contrary it (though they would cloak or color the
matyer) they do in very deed teach theftes, roberyes, extorcyons, deceyptes,
and frauds. Go to now thou pope of Rome, tell I pray the, whereby doste thou
claim and take upon the so much auctorytie that thou dare say, that goods
evil gotten, or part of the goods evil gotten is thine? God which has
created all things, and which is lord of the earth, and of the fulness
thereof, says / that he will not receive any oblacion of goods gotten by
rauyne or robbery. And thou far ye most cruel tyrant of all that ever were
borne syns the first creacyon of man, being openly blasphemous against so
great and so high majesty, against the voice and commandment of god alive
against so great a precept, doste auaunce and lift up thy self above god and
doste take upon the greatter power and auctorytie, and doste teach men by thy
deuylysshe bulls to break and transgress the commandments of god, and to
exercise theft, roberyes, extorcyons, and vsuryes, contrary to nature and
reason, and the come^ judgment of men. Thus must they needs be cast down into
a reprobate sense or judgment and be utterly turned out from god which do
condemn the gospel, Bre^ning and conde^pnyng of Books without teadynge of
them.
and which do brenne the books which they never saw, nor looked through, which
do violate and break the publyke faith or fidelytie, contrary to the law of
all nacyons, ye so ronnyng forth all mad and wood against god, they should
stryke their foreheddes against the stumblyng stone Christ, To. iv.
and afterward do impugn all the words and works of god, and that they
should come to that madness and extreme blyndnes, that they should openly teach
the breaking of gods law. O how excellently, how plenteously and myghtely
with a stretched forth hand, and an high arm has god avenged the
contempt of the gospel: with how great encreace, and as it were a treasure or
heap of wrath, ye wrath of god.
he has requyted this iniurye, strykyng the^ with so obstynate mind with so
great blyndnes and with so great Ise or coldness of heart? Here now the thing
it self, and the very haynousnes of this of fence would require that not
only the bulls of the pope, but also that the very posts and the doors
whereupon the said bulls are wont after the common manner to be hanged up,
being roborated and strengthed with many Cardynalles seals, were burnt,
were overthrown, and brought unto ashes, and so utterly destroyed, that there
might be ones some end of these abhomynacyo^s, wherefore who soever thou art
good christen reader, I beseech the, and require the for Christ's sake, do not
suffer thy self to be seduced and led out of the right way by these so cruel
and mad beasts, remember that thy god, has not only forbeden the deed,
saying: Thou shall not stele: but also he has forbidden the affection and
desire of the heart, saying: Non concupisces, thou shall not lust or desire,
believe me, he will not revoke his own word, how is it possible then, that any
man or any creature can give the liberty to have or to possess thy neighbors
goods.

FOr Esaie says, I am the god loving justice, and I do hate sacryfycie or
oblacyon made of stolen good or of rauynes.

ANd though these foresaid things be openly deuylysshe yet those wolves do
teach us not only to make sacryfyce of rauyne: but also to possess and keep
still goods stolen or gotten by rauyne and extorcyon. Se how with their
blasphemies and extreme madnesses they do bring in ye wrath of god upon the,
and condempnacyon unto hell, and yet nevertheless they desire and look for to
be called bishops, and reverend fathers in Christ, and pastors or feders of
souls, flee flee from them my brother, they are wolves. I verily although I
be but a wretched pore caytef, as oftentimes as I do se, behold, and consydre
that blyndnes of bishops, I do very oftentimes think thus in my mind, that
it is best utterly to hold my tongue, and to leave them unto the judgment of
god, and not meddle with them any thing at all. For oftentimes such manner
thoughts do come i^ to any mind, that all things are desperate, and that
there is no hope left at all: all good things are so by those Romysshe
hypochrytes and very monsters not only feblysshed and corrupted but also
extyncte and utterly destroyed, in so much they have undone the whole world
drownyng them with so great a floode of errors and abhomynacyo^s: that there
are euydent and plain tokens on every side, that that day of the lord is
nere at hand. The last day.
But yet again on the other side, that so miserable perdicyon and pyteous
destruccyon of many souls, which those mo^sters do with so great cruelty and
with so great tyranny flee, sechyng nothing else but only money does not
suffer me to be still and to hold my tongue, but compels me to speak, to
the intent that if it may be brought about I might by some means happily
deliver at the least some souls from the mouths of the wolves, if therefore
my brother, thou have evil gotten goods do not in any wise think, yt thou
can be excused. Restore it therefore, for thou shalt not change the word of
god. It were a good and a godly thing, if thou could by the consent of thy
neighbors obtain, that he whom thou had deceived would for give the (for
every man is bounden unto his neighbor to forgyuenes) if peradventure thou
had any of thy neighbors goods, which could not be restored very well
and conuenyently unto him, nor without greater perel and ieopardye. But
concerning this thou may redemore in other diverse places. Of these things
now guess thy self whether both the pope and also his bishops have not bery
great need of an instructour to teach them, likewise as we do teach
ignorant young children, the.x. commandments, yt they might at the last
learn, that we ought not to stele, nor to desire ye thing that belongs to
our neighbor, and that much less they ought to teach other men to exercise
and use theftes, rauynes, extorcyons, and vsuryes. For except they them selves
do despise those mad and furyous bulls of the pope: they are bishops in
deed, but not of chryste^ men. What ar they then? bishops of thieves, of
robbers, of extorcyoners, of usurers, chyef capitaynes (I say) and defenders,
and the authors and counsayllours of great sins and abhomynacyo^s, as it is
easy to know and perceive by these things, which we have already said. And it
is a miracle or wondre of the dyuyne wrath and indignacyon many days a go
provoked and styrred up against us, that ever these things could have been
persuaded unto any man which are so repugnaunt and contrary to the common sense
or judgment and also to that blind light of reason. It is like a monstre and
a wondre that so open and many fest theftes, roberyes, and blasphemies of
Romanystes could so long be hid. And there is no man forsothe, which would
be leave, that there were even among the Scythyans any men so rude and
vplandysshe, and so much without wit or perceiving, that they would have
suffered so gross deceytes: if it were not so, that experyence did compel him
to confess, that this dulnes and insensybilytie has been even in our own
selves, which ar yet living. For what man or woman of Scythia will allow or
hold with this that evil gotten goods may be possessed and kept by the
dyspensacyon or bulls of the Pope. Swyne and asses, stones and stocks are
scante so insensyble, and so much without perceiving, as we have been made
under the pope. And here I know well enough, what they are wont to allege and
bring in for their part against me. The pope (say they) is the highest
bishop, and hedde, of all christen people generally, through out
christendom. It belongs to him to dyspense of goods evil gotten, whereof it
is doubted who is the right owner here I make answer thus. I be seche you,
where is this in all the scryptures? where is it written? Is it peradventure at
Rome with saint Peter in some chymney or furnace, as it is commonly said?
Forsooth, it is an excellent lie, why should not then every man his own self
by his own self dyspose, according to his own conscience of his own, which
way soever they have been gotten? what needs him to have another dyspensatour,
namely such a tyrannous one as is the pope? It is therefore nothing else, but
a gross and a most shameless lie ymagyned doubtless for this entente and
purpose, that the pope might be made the general head of all thieves, of
extorcyoners, of usurers, and that so by all the hands of all thieves, and of
all extorcyoners, he might stele and snatche away more then all the thieves
under heaven and so might be captain and chyefe ruler among the most erraunt
thieves and extorcyoners of the whole world, and among such other like
unthriftiness who soever they be, if he were hedde and highest in the church, he
ought according to the ensample of the Apostles, to committee the admynystracyon
even of honest riches and goods to other men, to give him self holy to prayer
and to the gospel, and to say with the Apostles.

IT is not mete ye we should leave the mynysterye of the word of god, Act. vi.
and to mynystre at the tables.

Now he clean contrary wise chalengeth and takes upon him the care and
busynes to admynystre a sclaunderfull and dishonest kind of goods, theftes,
rauynes, vsuryes, and such other godly and holy riches (if god be pleased) I
beseech the, is not this a worshypful and a goodly vycar of Christ and an
excellent successor (for so he calls him self) of the Apostles? why does
he not by the same right make him self the general steward and dyspenser of
all things, what soever christen men have in any place, and why does he not
adminystre the^? seeing that he has ones taken this aucrorytie unto him self
by this prymacy, that al we besides might live in rest and ydlenes, and the
most holy father might care for, and also order both us, and all that ever
belongs to us. Oh these things, ought to have been done to stones and trees,
and not to men: though I do speak nothing in the mean season, ye these
things are done to christen men.

The.iiii. virtue.
IN all the bulls of indulgences and pardones, he promyseth full remyssyon of
sins to all men being truly confessed and contryte. The fou^taynes of
errors.
This is the most strong venom and most deadely poison of most pestylent
error, that ever came forth of this founteyne and spring of errors and
humayne tradycyons, which is the pope. Christ in the ix. of Mathewe did not
say to ye man dyseased of the palsaye. Go put thy money in to a cheste, then
thy sins be forgyuen the: but he said.

Trust or believe son, thy sins are forgyuen the.

FRom that symplycytie and purytie of faith, and from the sure and steadfast
trust or believe in the grace and promyses of god, Trust in ye promyses of god
which believe only does iustyfye, which only does obtain remyssyon of
sins, as Paul the Apostle does declare through out al his epistle written to
the Romans: from this believe (I say) that wolf and abhomynable monster does
pluck away the people, and does lead them in to trust and confydence in his
bulls, and in dead wax, and in ye payenges of certain sommes of money
limytted and assygned unto them, in so much that the simple hertes do learn
to put their confydence not in the grace and mercy of god, promised but in
their own works and satysfaccyons. This inuencyon of the devil so magnyfyenge
bulls, is more heinous and abhomynable, then may be expressed with words, or
else compassed with man's thoughts. For the first and chyef commandment
of god is here condemned and extyncte, by which we are commanded to trust
only to mercy and grace, bryefly to god alone. Now they do teach the people
to put their confyde^ce in paper and wax, and in their flaterynge and bawdy
lies, and upon these things to build their co^scyences. And without doubt the
bishop of Romes bishops if they had any point of a chryste^ mind, they
would them selves (I say teach and preach this faith) which Paul does
well nere in every syllable inculke in to us, Faith.
and they would also suffer and exhort other men to preach the same in every
place. Now for asmoche as these papystycall vysures are rude, folysshe,
unlearned, which like unto their creatoure ye Pope are created to the intent
that they should pursue and strive against the very tie of god (but doubtless
though they would braste they shall never overcome it) it becomes the^ and is
semely for their personages, likewise as they be dysguysed and hypochrytes:
even so also to suffer deceytes, smokes, vysures, puffed proud words,
tryfles, and bryefly mere madnesses to be preached, and that only for profit
and lucre. Here again I desire chryste^ reader for Christ's sake, that no man
do desire her in me temperaunce and measurablenes: for as much as I am
provoked with so just grefe. For not without cause we christen men do sorrow
with heart and mind: which be daily compelled to se and suffer so shameful,
so manifest, and so furyous blasphemye against god. For even this one thing
alone the bishops were worthy to be far more sore rebuked of me. For all
things what soever I am able to say or to cry out, be they never so hot, so
sore, and so vehement: yet are they to little for to express scasely ye
thousand part of so exceeding and unmeasurable madness. Paul the Apostle does
boldlye condemn both him self and also the aungelles of heaven, if they
would teach (I do not say any thing against the gospel) any thing besides
that which is pure gospel, what would he the^ do now to those me^, which do
teach not only besides ye gospel: but also with more then fantastycall
madness, or with more then deuylysshe boldness do openly teach things contrary to
the gospel. And let no man think it to be spoken against the ecclesyastycal
state and against true bishops or good pastors: He rebukes no virtuous
estates.
what soever is said against these tyrauntes. Let no man think it to be said
or done against the heddes and governors of Christ's church: what soever is
said or done against these slouthefull idle and sluggysshe beasts given all
to the belie. For they are not bishops, but plain Idols and dumb images /
idle puppettes vysures, blocks / shadows / dysguysed game players / which do
not so much as know what this word Episcopus / that is to say, bishop
does sygnyfye / so far of they be from knowing what. is the office or
duytie of a bishop / will thou that I tell the at one word what they are?
wolves they are, tyrauntes / traytoures / manquellers / mo^sters of ye world,
burdeynes of the earth / the apostles of Antechryste, graue^ and made to
corrupt and destroy ye world, and to extincte and destroy the gospel. And
to utter at ones what I think: Lo I will here play the bedell or common
crier. Be it known to al men, that the bysshoppes of Rome with their clyentes
bishops which do now exercise tyranny upon so many cities in most ample and
large domynyon, are not bishops by the ordynacyon of god, but by error, and
by the seduccyon of the devil, and by the tradycyons of men. Wherefore without
doubt they are the messangers and vycars of Satan, if I do not show and prove
this by so euydent testymonyes, that mine enemies shall be constrained to
confess this verytie, and that even them selves (so that they do meanly
repent and wax wise) can not deny it: then let the^ be bishops then let me
be thought to do iniurye unto them. First Paul writes unto Tite, yt he
should constytute and ordeyne presbyte ros in every town. presbyter.
Here I suppose that no man can deny that all one thing is sygnyfyed by this
word bresbyter, and by this word Episcopus in saint Paul's wrytinges, for as
much as he does bydde Tite that he should in every city constytute
presbyteros. And because a bishop ought to be unreprovable, therefore he
calls him presbyterum. It is euyde^t therefore what Paul does sygnyfye and
mean by this word Episcopus: Episcopus.
bishop, that is to say a man excellently good and virtuous, of ripe age,
which also has a chaste wife, and children obedyent in the fear of the
lord. And the Apostle will that he should have ye ouersyghte and governance
of the congregacyon, in the mynysterye of the word and the admynystracyon of
the sacraments. Wherefore it is necessary also, that he be learned, and well
exercysed in the scriptures, and also as touching his life, unreprovable. I
beseech the, is there any man here so much a stone, that he can either deny
these words of the apostle, or else wrest them to any other sense, if he do
consydre and way well the words that goo before, and that follow after?
Besides this it pleases me here to ask one question, whether the word of
saint Paul be the word of god? whether the ordynacyon of the Apostle be the
ordinance of god? For I am assured, that neither the pope, neither the devil
him self (although both of them do busylye strive and labor all that ever
they can to extyncte and destroy the word of god) dare deny this ye Paul's
word is gods word, the word of saint Paul.
and that Paul's ordynacyon is the instytucyon and ordinance of the spyryte of
god. For albeit that the word of god does greatly grieve the devil: yet he
dare not deny it, but only he uses these subteltyes, and deuylysshe crafts
that under ye color and cloak of the word of god, and under hypochrysie, he
may do and entrepryse all things contrary to ye word, if then it be ye
word of god and the ordynacion of the holy ghost, what soever Paul does say
or ordeyne: it follows that what soever thing is done contrary to his word
and ordynacion, the same is done against god, and contrary to the ordinance
of the holy ghost. Now if it be against god and his spyryte: undoubtedly it
is of the devil. Could this thing be any more clear? could it be more
euyde^t? is there yet any thing whereof any man may doubt? For how can god be
contrary to him self seeing that Christ says, that. Luce. vi.


Even the devil him self is not repugnaunt, nor contrary to him self?

SEcondarely it follows, that all christen men are bounden under pain of
gods indygnacyon and of everlasting death, to maynteyne and defend the
word and ordinance of god, which saint Paul does teach. And contrary wise
again they are as much bounde^ to impugn to destroy, to overthrow, and
utterly to extyncte the ordinance of the devil, which is so repugnaunt and
contrary to god and his ordinance, and let them spe^de about this if need
require as when they shall be called by ye high powers, both their goods and
their friends, and also their life, and their blood, or else they can not
extyncte and destroy it, at the least wise let them eschew it and flee from
it, as from abhominacyon and from the devil him self. This thing verily is
open and manifest. For all things are to be forsaken for the defense and
mayntenaunce of the word of god, that his will may be fulfilled both in heaven
and in earth and the errors of the devil are to be plucked up by the roots
before all things, to the uttermost of our power. Herunto now take you head you
bisshops. For in as much as ye delight so much in bulls, I shall read unto
you a bull of a new making, I pray god it may please you.

The bulle of the author and reformacyon.
ALl men who soever they be, which by all honest and lawful means do spend
and bestow their goods, honor, blood, and life, to ye end that these
bysshoprykes so pompous and courtlye, so far unlike and contrary to all the
office and duty of an Apostle, namely to ye mynystracion of the word, and
that all this deuylysshe kingdom of ye bishop of Rome may be overthrown and
destroyed or if they can not in very deed destroy it, do cry against it, do
dysprayse and condemn it, and do avoid it as abhomynacy on: all those
persons that so done, are the sons of god, and true christen men, fighting
and helping the faith of the gospel in spyrytual battle against the gates of
hell. Contrary wise, who soever do favor the kingdom of the popes bishops
so wicked and that so tyrannous and deuy lysshe cruelty, and do wyllyngly and
gladly submyt them selves, and obey unto it: those persons are the mynystres
of the devil, fighting as enemies against the words, the laws, and
ordynau^ces of god. This sentence of mine, nay rather of gods judgment. I
prove with strong effectual arguments in this wise. The apostle Paul
commands Tite, that he should ordeyne and constytute a bishop in every
city, such one as was ye husband of one wife, a man virtuous, and
unreprovable. etc. This is the word, this is the will and sentence of god.
Against this said will of god these men do now strive and fight, which have
taken quyte away al true bishops out of all cities, and instead of true
bishops have constytuted shoppes or workehouses of most cold ceremonies,
monasteryes, and churches collegyate, and have brought in them selves in their
stead, that by this mean they might be made bishops or over seers of many
cities, and also of many prouynces. Now the sentence of Paul, or rather the
words of the holy ghost does continue fyrme, stable, and not able to be
moved or stered of the gates of hell, and does stand as styffe, as a brazen
wall, which says plainly and euydently, that in every city there ought to
be constytuted and ordained one bishop, and these then shall be every one of
them of egall power with the other. For Paul speaks plainly of every city,
and he gives to every bishop full power and auctorytie in his own city. God
to therefore now ye worldly bishops. Why do you not here rise? Why do you not
boldly and manfully resyste? why do you not break forth all the maynye of
you together? here you have to do not with me, but with ye Apostle Paul. Here
you resyste (that may I say with the holy martyr Steuyn) not me, Act. vii.
but the holy ghost which likewise again of his part does myghtcly resyste
you. Go to then what will you say here I beseech you? will you al hold your
peace, and say nothing at all? Lo your sentence is given, and pronounced
against you, you have the matyer judged, that is to wit, that, unto all
christen men it belongs, of their part (with the word of god) again to
destroy, to pluck up by the roots, and utterly to extyncte both you and
your kingdom, which you do tyrannously exercise, to extyncte and destroy the
gospel, you have hard now that they be in the indygnacyon of god, who soever
favors you: and on the other side that they are in the favor of god, who
soever overthrows, and destroys you. But I will not in any wise these
words, which I do speak of the destruccyon and utter subuersyon of the
kingdom of false bishops, so to be understood or taken, ye se here, ye the
preachere of ye gospesl, teach no sedycyon, sheddyng of blood, or fyghting
with the hand
as though it ought to be done with the hand, or with sword, or with
vyolence, or bodily inuasyon of them. For with this destruccyon of the men, we
shall be nothing further in this so great a matyer, that is to wit, gods
cause or busynes But as Daniel prophesied in the.viii. chapter.

THe kingdom of antechrist is to be broken all to pieces without any hand of
man.

ANd it shall com to pass that every man shall speak and preach against it by
the word of god, until that wretched sinful man be of his own accord
confounded, and forsaken of all men and so do fall down dead, and be utterly
destroyed. This is the very true destruccyon belonging to christen men: to the
bryngvnge of which to pass, we ought to bestow all that ever we have, or
else may do. But here I will give you metely good counsel (if you will so
take it) because you shall not think that I do utterly hate all your hole
order. The coilsayf of author.
It is expedye^t for you here to reteyne and hyre, what so ever it do cost you
(as you ar bishops of gold and of money) some excellent crafty liar, which
may so write a pleasant little book, likewise as many a foolys she ass of
your sort have done, as though they could have changed the whole world with
those wretched papers. For if the words of saint Peter, in which he speaks
of al christian men saying.

YOu are a regal presthode and a prestly kingdom.

IF these words (I say) may be wrested unto this, that they do sygnyfye,
priests shaven and anointed, as though Peter would that all christen
menshulde be such manner anointed and shaven priests: what thing does let yt
Paul's words may not by the same craft (se yt a crafts man have yt handelyng
of it which is inferior to no man in lies and unshamefastness (have ye neck of
them wrythen, and so be applied to this sense, as though we ought to
understand it of two manner bishops, Spyrytuall hysshops.
so yt spyrytuall bishops after yt exposycyon are all the preachers of the
word of god in cities, towns, and vyllages, although they do neither bye
palle, nor gown, ne yet any other garment of those bawdes the Romanystes.
Corporal hysshops.
And the corporal bishops are you which bearyng forked myters on your heddes
under ye apparayll of Aaron do in very deed play ye veraye stark tyrauntes,
and are fellows unto Nero and Caligula, riding upon fat and well fed
palfrayes, and slyke mules, and afterward with your rings only, and your
gloves, and your silver shepehoke (if god be pleased) you do play the
bishops. Now if Paul being god wot but a simple and an abiecte creature,
would refuse and dysalowe this gloss, or exposycio^ of so holy fathers: he were
worthy to be stryken with yt spyritual sword of excommunicacion, and to be
feared with the indignacyon at the least wise of saint Peter, for as much as
he is gyltie here in this thing after yt style of the Roman bulls, or else
at yt least wise he were worthy to be honestly rewarded with a good buffet on
the ear, likewise as Ananias the bishop did unto him For why should not he
being but one person alone, be content to be taught and to learn of so many
holy fathers? why should not they with a proud contenaunce by their auctorytie
command silence and say. Paul I say be content to be admonysshed and
counsaylled. That word city does betoken there by the determynacyon of ye
church of Rome, and of us an hole prouynce or kingdom. For if it be lawful
and free for the pope to change the true sense of scripture, which the words
and arguments do declare and fortyfye: why should it not also be i^ his
liberty and power, after his own lust and pleasure to change and turn
clean contrary ways both ye words and the vocabules of the same? For words
(to use their own paradoxe) do sygnyfye at pleasure. Words do sygnyfy at
pleasure.
Wherefore as soon as it shall please any such so myghtie, and so well mytred
and hatted a papyste, or as soon as it shall come to his mind upon his wine
benche: both the Greek and also the Latyne lettres and words, shall be
constrained to goo in to an other nature, so that if it like them well, from
hensforthe this word garden shall betoken a city, and a star, a stabule,
Garden. City. Star.
and an ass, a man. And if any man, that thinks him self wise, will here
obiecte against me and say, hitherto thou haste rebuked the pope, and now thou
dyspraysest ye bishops, what then? will thou alone confunde, mengle, and
turn all things up and down? Here I say, who soever thou art that doste
think these things, be thou thy self which art the dysputer) both judge
and vmpyer, I say I appeal unto the thy self as judge, all affeccyons laid
aparte, give thou thine own self the sentence. May I not by right, here make
that answer unto the bishops, Besias. Achab.
which Helyas made to king Achab in the.xviii. chapitre of yt third book of
kings?

IT is not I that troble and disquyet Israel, but you. etc.

I Say discerue and judge thy self, Who tour neth all things up set down.
whether of us is here in the defaulte, and whether I do turn all things up
and down and the wrong way, so as they do complain (which do teach ye
word of god, yt clear ordenaunce and decre of ye holy ghost) or else they
which teaching their own ordynacyon, do extyncte ye ordynaunces of god. Tell me
whether of these two things is more tolerable, whether less against equytie
yt they should ouertourne and destroy ye ordinance of god: or else yt I do
overthrow and cast down ye deuylysshe furyes and madnesses of them, and their
erroneous and humane ordynaunces? do not consydre here what I do, but consydre
ye very things selves, whereupon I do pryncipally ground, which of them selves
do this thing yt is to wit ye word of god, and the scriptures. The office and
duty of a preacher.
The preacher ought not so mochto regard and consydre what manner men, how
great, how myghtie they be, against whom he does preach, or what he may
get by his sermones, but this thing only and nothing else he ought to
care for, that he may preach the pure word of god, for this is not to be
watered, or to be attempred, and made to agree unto the affeccyons of men, what
soever things may chance, or else may be feared to be done unto him of
man. This word I say is purely and syncerely to be preached, although not
only ye bishops but also all the aungelles of heaven would resyste and say
against it. Now if thou will here again obiecte, that they are very great,
very high, very wise, and very well learned men after the worldely judgment,
against whom I do write these things: I answer unto the, Peter, Paul, and
all the prophets did prophecye before, that there should not come a more and
vengeable myschyef upon the earth, then that of Antechryste and of ye last
days. Do thou suppose these so high words of ye holy ghost to have been
spoken of the leaves of trees, or of small trysles? The word of god (as it
appears in the prophets) always speaks against kingdoms, against peoples,
of great things, against them that are the heddes among the people, against
many and great nacyons, which way soever thou do look: they are utterly
great and wondrefull things, whereof god does speak. How much more lykely is
it tha^, that they should be great, noble, worshypfull, and very wise men as
concerning the flesh: which shall be the doers and workers of this extreme
myschyef of the last days, whereof all the prophets have prophesied and spoken
before? namely seeing that the scripture does speak so horrible things of
these times.

THat is to wit, yt no flesh shall be saved, except those days were
shortened. And in an other place, that the sone of man at his coming shall
scasely find any faith upon earth. And also that even the very elect and
chosen persons should be seduced, and led out of the right way, if it were
possible.

I Beseech and require the good christen reader, I beseech the for Christ's
sake, consydre well, and way these words. For they are not words spoken of
any light person upon his ale or wine benche, neither yet any inuencyons of
man's mind: but the words of ye eternal majesty. For if thou do co^sydre
these words stedfastedly and with good aduyseme^t, thou shall find ye they
shall be great men, and me^ of might and power, and that it shall be a myghtie
kingdom, which shall do and work this last great and most sore and vengeable
mischyef as ye pope, his bishops, and other his prelates are in very deed,
bryefly what matyer I pray you makes it, how great, how high, and how connyng
they are: seeing yt it is more euydent and clear then day that all they and
their doctrine is against god? Is not god greater and higher then all
creatures? The great Turk also is a great lord of many prouynces, the furke.
and greater then is any of them: and yet he is against god, and ye enemy of
god. And here again I guess what they will obiecte. For all that (say they)
oftentimes many saints have been bishops not only of one city: but of many
cities. I make answer. As many as have been holy bisshops in very deed and
called pastors by the calling of god: all those for the most part were the
bishops of one city alone, as Cypriane, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustyne, Hireneus,
and these observed the tradycyon of the Apostles, it is found in deed in
hystoriographers, that there have bencerteyne (such was holy Boniface,
Boniface. Tite.
and such also Tite unto Paul) which did after their own judgment
constytute other bishops in the cities, as Titus did: but yet were they not
therefore the bishops of many cities And albeit that such manner example could
be showed of the saints: The exampfes of holy men may not be preiudicyaff to
gods holy word. For all men may err.
shall the examples of holy men be preiudycyal to ye word of god? Is not god
greater then all saints, how oftentimes dowe find that holy men have sinned
and erred? God saved Daniel in the dungeon of Lions, and he saved Ananias,
Azarias, and Misael in the flamynge furnace of Babylon. Is ye hand or power of
god now shortened and mynysshed? God saved Daniel in the dungeon of Eyons
Dani. vi Dani. iii.
Is it any doubt but that he might preserve and keep his elect and chosen
persons, if it should happen them by any means to be seduced, and led out of
the right way (as Christ prophesied) even in the mids of men's ordynacyons
and tradycyons, and of the errors of the devil? Nota.
we ought not to put confydence in any ensample, deed, or word of saints: but
our conscyences ought to lean and to be grounded only upon ye word of god,
which only is he (as Paul says) that can not lie. But let us furthermore here
Paul, what he says of this ordinance of god, for in this wise Luke writes
of him in ye.xx. chapter of ye Acts.

ANd sendynge messangers from Miletum to Ephesus, he sent for priests of the
church, which when they were come to him, he said unto them. Take heed to your
selves and to all ye flock in which ye holy ghost has set or ordained you
bishops, to govern the church of god, which he has purchased and gotten
with his own blood.



GO to now, is here any new thing? Is Paul a fool, and does he not know what
he does? Ephesus was but one city alone and Paul calls openly all the
priests or elders by one common name Episcopos: bishops. Al ye priests of one
city be called of Pause Bysshope.
But peradventure Paul had not red those books and those Apologies wretchedly
patched together of papystes, nor ye holy decretalles. For how would he have been
bold else to make many bishops overseers to one city, and to call all ye
priests of one city bishops, in as much as they were not all princes,
neither kept a guard of me^, and goodly palfrayes, but were certain rascal
persons, and of ye most abiecte and vile sort of men, after ye worldly
estymacyo^? For Paul peradventure wasig norau^t of that, which is grown in
use now in our time, that no man can be a great bishop in very deed, oneles
he do (as the Poet says) keep an hundred horses in goodly stables, oneles
he have a gorgyous house full of royal pomp, onles he have many royal tytles
of lordshyppes. For this alone is suffycyent now in our time, to that that
knights and princes (be they never so much unlearned and foolyshe, yea and
though their minds otherwhyles do stand nothing toward it) may by the
co^mendacyo^s of their parents and kynsfolkes, and otherwhyles by gifts and
rewards be suddenly made bishops. But in good sadness. Thou seyst pleynly that
the Apostle Paul does call these only bishops, which do preach the gospel
unto the people, and do mynystre unto them the sacra mentes, as now in our
time be the parysshe priests and ye preachers, All true preachers ben Bishops.
wherefore I do not doubt but these, although they do preach the gospel, but
to very little vyllages and graunges, and if they be the faithful and true my
nysters of the word: I do not doubt (I say) that they have by good right
the title and name of a bishop. Contraryewyse those valiant horsemen and
tyra^nous bishops have no point of ye office of a bishop, saving only those
bare goodly tytles, and certain disguysed apparayll, in like manner as those
bishops which are painted on a wall, have in deed the shape and lykenes of
bishops, but they are without life and speech. For even such dead and idle
stocks and blocks are the popes bishops in every point: albeit that then
they are over more strong and quycke when they do exercise tyrannous cruelty
against the very pastors, which do busylye govern cities in the mynystracyon
of the word of god, and by more then deuylysshe tyranny do forbede them holy
wedlock, and to the open sclaunder of the church do wynke at ye keeping of
whores do blaspheme the gospel, do extyncte the word of god, and under the
pretense and color of virtue and godlynes do with incredyble wodnes exercise
contynually extreme tyranny upon the sely pore people. By ye reason whereof we
do se in the courts and palayces of some bishops, likewise as in ye
fountain of al vice and myschyef ye court of Rome, the court of Rome.
not so much as one cru^me, not so much as the least shadow to be found of
christen manners, we se also all the cities of priests, and namely those noble
seats of prestes, to be nothing else but scoles of uncleanliness and bodily
pleasures, warkehouses of vices, in so much yt in comparison of their houses
the courts of ye seculare princes may be accounted monasteryes and holy
scoles of virtue and godlynes, yea and Sodom and Gomorre in comparyson of them
may seem te^perate measurable, and thryftye. For out of their courts or houses
comes forth neither the gospel, nor any other holy doctrine: but only
citacio^s, exco^munycacyons, exaccyons, in terdyccyons, cytacyons (I say) in
very deed peremptory, that is to say sleers both of goods and of souls. For
such as the bishops are them selves, such also is their doctrine. Prouerhes.
And though thou do never so much clothe an ass with a lions skynde: yet he
contynueth still an ass, and an ape is still an ape, although he be cladde in
purple, besides this saint Paul writes to the Philippians in this wise.

Paul and Timothe the servants of Jesus Christ, Philippi
to all the saints in Christ Jesus, which are in the city Philippi and to
the bishops also and the deacons. etc.

LOo Philippi was but only one city, and yet saint Paul saluteth all them
that believes, together with the bishops, undoubtedly ye bishops, whom he
means there, were the priests, likewise as he was wont to constytute and
ordeyne in all the other cities. This is now the third place of Paul, in
which we do se, what god and the holy ghost has constytuted and ordained,
that is to wit, that they only are called bishops in very deed, and by
right, which do take and bear the charge of the people in the admynystracyon
of gods word / in carynge for the pore flolke / in ye admynystracyon of the
sacraments as are now in our days ye christen curates or parysshe priests
if they might be suffered for those mytred horse men. Curates or parysshe
prestes.
And ye this belongs to the office of a bishop, the very word it self does
very well declare / For this word Episcopus is deryuyed of. Episcopus.
ii. greek words, Epi, and Scopin which sygnyfye to give attendaunce to
ouerse, to give dylyge^ce, to play ye keeper or watch man over the people, in
like manner as watch men do keep watch upon the walls of a city / or as
sheep herdes do keep watch upon their sheep. And episcopus i^ greek does
properly sygnyfye in english an ouerseer / and in the hebrew it sygnyfyeth a
vysytoure, ye is to say, one which vysyteth men at their own house, and does
dylygently inquire and search the condycyon of them, and the state of their
life, being redye egally and indyfferently to help and comfort all men. So
Christ says in the.xix. chapter of Mathewe.

BEcause thou haste not known the time of thy vysytacyon.

THat which is there called, time of vysytacyon / we call ye time of thy
bysshopriche. But our papystycall bishops have found and devised a certain
new proffe and declaracy on of that Episcopal office, semelye for such as
they are / that is to sytte them selves a high in a chair gylted, cladde in
purple, with cusshens of cloth of tyssue under their buttockes and their
elbowes, having habundaunce and plentye of all manner delytes and pleasures, as
much as any kings can have: and in the mean season to offer and set forth
the men belonging to their governance, to be pyl: led, Officialses.
tormented, and flayne of their offycyalles (to whom they make their flocks
subjects (men for the most part wicked, ungodly, and which do think that
there is no god / which then may also with their commandments at their own
pleasure by co^pulsyon cause to appear at those their holy consistories,
persons ye dwell very far of, not without damage and hurt both in goods
and in their souls / and may exercise and use all manner of extreme tyra^nye
upon them. For as much then as now it is euydent and open of these three
places of ye apostle, that those bishops, which are so far away from
mynystracyon of gods word, and be neglygent about their duty, are not
only no true bishops, but rather the people of malediccion before god, as the
men which have settled their minds against the statutes and ordenaunces of god
to extyncte the gospel, and do exalte them selves to destroy souls. It is
every christen man's duty by all lawful and honest means that he may, to
procure that their tyrannous and sinful tradycyons, may ones be utterly
continued and come to confusyon. It belongs (I say) to every chryste^ man's
duetye man fully and with great confydence and boldness where charity will
suffer without offendynge ye weak to endeavor him self to do all things
which are contrary to their tradycyons, none otherwise then he would do
against the devil him self. And also to trede under the feet and utterly
despise the obedyence of them, by which they desire to have, their own
tradycyons greatly regarded and observed, the word of god neglected and
nothing set by) even as they would tread under their feet the very devil
him self. All we therefore (if it so be that we have pytie of so many souls
which do perysshe for ever, if we be earnestlye moved and styrred with the
word of god) owe with our vttermoste dylygence to go about, and with very
great contencyon and strayni^g of our selves to labor about this, Old evil
bissops to be charitably reformed and if yey refuse to be reformed, then new
and good bysshopes to be put in their places.
that there may again according to the instytucyon of the apostle, very
bysshoppes and shepeherdes be co^stytuted every where in cities, which be men
pure, and virtuous, and well learned in holy scripture, and in spyrytuall
things / which have chaste wives, and children obedyent (as the apostle
says) in the fear of the lord. Wherefore seeing that the bysshoppes and
pastors every where in the Cities, which are now a days, have hitherto
rather obeyed the devil then god, byndynde them selves, against the
scripture, to this wicked vow of living, syngle, or sole (if there be any
point of christen breast or mind in us) we ought to give dylygence and
bestow labors, for a reformacion of ye same to be had, by the king our only
supreme hedde of the church, in whom only the reformacyon lies, so that
ones such a reformacio^ had, the pore captyue souls may bollye, to contempt
of the devil, and his papystycall tradycions, revoke those vows, as being
through error made with ye devil and with the very gates of hell, and that
they may according to the word of god wedde wives / and rather be wyllyng
(accordyn ge to ye instytucion of saint Paul) to be good married men in the
syghte of god, then for the pleasure of those baudes the Romanystes to be
adulterers and hoar kepers. For the very time it self does now in so great
reuelacyon of the gospel require that ones at the last the holy ordynacyon
of the spyryte of god, which can not be but very good, should be restored and
set up against those profane and abhomynable tradycyons of men. Loo this is
my decre against those proud puffed Bulls of the devil, The decre of the
author.
and of the deuylysshe Romanystes and their fautours. Neither do they here and
obey me, but they here and obey god and the spyryte of god: who soever do here
and obey this. And therefore I can also in very deed promise both everlasting
life, and also the favor of god to all those, what soever they be that do in
faith observe and keep it. And because this shall not be judged ye ordynacyon
of Paul alone / (For it is reported, that the deane and chanons of a certain
cathedral church did say after a blasphemous manner and fascyon, openly to a
precher, whom they did expulse for the gospel sake, what of paul? Chanons and
Chanonlyke.
what of paul: The pope has received more power of Christ then ever Paul
did) and for ye pleasure of those so sweet and gentle men and excellently
deuylysshe priests, let us se what Peter, and what Christ him self do say
concerning this matyer. In ye fyfte chapitre of the first epistle of Peter, it
is thus written.

THe prestes that are among you I beseech (which am also my self a priest,
Presbiteros.
and a record of the afflyctyons of Christ, and also a part taker of the
glory, which shall be showed) feed, asmoch as lies in you to do, the flock
of Christ taking the charge and ouersyght of them not by compulsyon, but
wyllynglye. Not for the desire of fylthy lucre but of a good favorable and
loving mind / neither as me^ exercysynge domynyon, in their in heretau^ces
but that you may be your selves ensample to ye flock.

And when the hedshepeherde shall appear, you shall receive an incorruptyble
crown of glory. Here thou seyst that.

PEter, eue^lykewyse as Paul did, does use these two words presbyter and
Episcopus both for one thing / that is to wit, that they are Episcopi,
which do teach the people, and do preach the word of god / and he makes
them all of egall power one with another / and he for byddeth them to behave
them selves so, as if they were lords, or had domynyons over those whom
they have charge of, he calls him self a fellow priest, (yt I may so say) by
these words euyde^tly declarynge and prouyng, that all parysshe priests and
bishops of cities are of egall power among them selves, and as touching to ye
auctorytie of a bishop, that one is nothing superyor to an other, and that he
him self also is fellow priest with them, and has no more power and
auctorytie in his own city then have ye other or every one of them in their
own congregation. Lo peter makes him self egall and not superyour to the
bishops / what I beseech you will those beasts allege here against these
things which do not cease not only to be lords and have domynyon, but also
to exercise most cruel tyranny upon our souls and our goods / which also
do never cease with exceeding mad braulynges and suytes to contend and
strive among them selves about the dyfference, and degrees of power and
auctoryte. And that I may ones make and end, Christ him self in the.xxii.
chapter of Luke says.

THe princes of ye paynymes are lords over them, and they which have power
and auctorytie over them are called be nefycyall and gracyous / but it shall
not be so among you / but he that is eldest among you, let him be made as
youngest.

HEreunto, harken and give good attendau^ce you pom pous and lordly bishops.
Lo all ye hole Christen people require of you a reason and cause of your
domynacyon and lordshyp, which you have hitherto with so many tytles and also
with so many tyrannous deeds taken, vyolently usurped, and challenged unto your
selves / Lo I say ye christen world requires a cause of this your doing /
for this you can not deny which is so open and euydent before ye iyes of all
men, that your kyngedome is an outward and a worldly kyngedome / yea and that
more worldly, then the kingdom of any worldly prince. For you play the lords
openly both upon the bodies, and also the minds / and that not by the word
of god, but by exteryour pomp / by exteryour and worldly tyranny / as other
princes and rulers of the hethen people do / I say go to therefore now and
tell me, Do non sic.
how those words of Christ vos autem non sic / that is, but so shall not you
do / how do they agree with that your kingdom go to now because you shall
not (as you are very slypper) slyppe from me: let us enserche and ponder well
the natural strength and sygnyfycatyon of the words, what is the meaning of
these words. But you not so? For here undoubtedly is rebuked your kingdom,
and your condy cyon and state. For this ought not to be such a one as it is,
if it were a Christen state.

Now let it be what soever manner one you will? yet for all that Christ
speaking of the domynacyon of those worldly princes, says plainly unto you
(for you will seem to be bysshoppes.) But you shall not do so / tell me I say,
do not both your ears ryng and glowe at these words of the soueraygne
majesty, but you shall not so / why do you keep scylence? why are you dumb?
Now let us se what you begin to answer with so many great books of decretalles
unto these words of one syllable vos autem no^ sic. But you not so? I say to
you what can you say to this little sentence of three sillables, vos no^ sic, you
not so? peradventure, as you are bold to do and say all things / such is the
madness of you) you will begin to make a cauyllacyon as though these words /
vos non sic, The papystes will keep the true significacio^ of words no longer
the^ they list
were as much to say as ye shall do so, for so ye be wont to change at your
pleasures the sygnyfycacyon of words.

And shall teach, that the Pope has also more power and auctorytye then
Christ him self. But why do I thus rebuke those obstynate persons? They are
blind and guydes of the blind / I will here earnestly aduertyse the good
gentyl reader, that thou do leave and forsake these men, and even likewise as
if thy deadely foo and enemy did come unto the under the semblaunce and
lykenes of a much dearlye beloved brother, thou would at the least wise have
him in suspectyo^, and would with great dylygence eschew his company: even
so now flee from those tourmentours of conscyences, and have them in
suspectyon, which do come under ye vysures and tytles of true bishops and be
none. For Paul has showed before that likewise as the devil does
transfygure him self in to an Angel of light, even so those his Apostles
should take upon them the lykenes and the name of the mynysters of Justice,
and of the Apostles of Christ / but by their fruytes, that is to say, by
their works and their doctrynes we do know them. For they do not preach nor
suffer to be preached any other things, then lucre / and ye chestes and
coffres of Indulgences and pardons.

The fyfte virtue of the Bulle of the bishop of Rome.
I He Pope takes upon him power and auctorytie to change vows, For money
vowcebe chau^ ged.
in to other good works, and that not frelye and for nothing, but for money:
but yet always the vows are excepted of going to saint James, to Rome, to
Hyerusalem, and also the vow of chastytie. Many things ben heretofore written
concerning vows which be nothing needful to be rehearsed here again in
this place. But if I do here demand of the Pope of Rome, that blind hedde, A
questy on concerning vows.
and begin to call sore upon him for an answer, what is the cause that he
dare dispense with certain vows only, and not with all vows indyfferentlye.
I know well enough, he knowethe not what other answer to make, then that of
the things which are vowed some are great, as for example, to live chaste:
and some again are small things and of no great wayghte, as for example to
fast bread and water. And therefore he may change the vow of little
things, but not likewise of great things / Lo how stark blind this people
of vysures is, and without either wit or brain: which do esteem and judge the
wayght and value of vows not according to the virtue and strength of gods
commandment, but according to works. But I pray the tell me, is it not an
oath as well, when thou swerest depely in a matier of three halfepens as if thou
had sworn in a matyer of an hundred talentes? Is not the Relygion and
strength of the oath in all points egall in both those things why then
should it not be egally kept both in little things and in great things:
Should it therefore be broken in a great su^me, be cause it is an harder thing
to pay an hundred talentes, then to pay three halfepens? This people therefore of
vysures is pleynlye mad, and in all points stark furyous wood, wherefore
embrace thou this substancyall and fyr me and stable sentence.

Never make thou in man's law any difference of vows as concerning the bygnes
or smalnes of the work self, as though one vow were dyspensable, and another
indyspensable. For the bond, relygyon, and strength of the vow, is of like
effycacytie and strength as well in great things as in little things, so that
the vow of living sole without a wife, may as well be dispensed with all as
ye vow to Jerusalem. For in the one, the oath, and promise is sworn, and made
as depelye and ernestly as in the other and ought therefore to be performed the
one as well as the other. This shall be more easy to perceive if we compare the
nature of man's law with the nature of gods law. The nature of gods law is
such, that it may not be dispensed with all, either in great things or little
things, as all good christen men grant. Neither does it make any dyfference
between great things and small things, saying. Thou may leave undone the
vows of little things, but the vows of great things thou shalt be compelled
to keep observe and fulfill, nor yet contrarywyse. Thou must observe and keep
the vows of small things, but as for the vows of paynfull, great, and
heuye things, thou may leave undone and be dyspensed with all. The law of
god says not so I say, but byndethe all men indyfferentlye to the
obseruacyon thereof under the pain of da^nacyon without any remedy of man's
dyspensacyon. Wherefore in man's law, whose force and strength may not be
like, the contrary must needs be true, that all other vows not contained
within the precept of god, as the vow to live sole without a wife, to vysyte
Saint James in co^postella, with all other such like, and all monkysshe,
monysshe, and freerrysshe vows, be they great or small, be clerelye
dyspensable, and may be broken as well one as an other, as well the great as
the small.

Or else must the bishop of Rome and his fautours, the lords of such vows
and laws confess and defend, their laws to be of the same nature that is
the law of god, that is to wit, that they may not be dyspensed with all, and
yt they them selves ben moreover in that point check mate with god in power,
yea in every point, where in their law is (as they say) indyspensable. And
for asmoche as nothing in any condycyon can be egall to god but that needs
that same thing also must be god, it argues then that, that sinful man of
Rome, with any such as he is, which in any degree or point shall take upon
them to be of like and egall power with god, must of necessytye make them
selves gods, all though it be but half gods, quarter gods, pesyd
gods, and patched gods, yea false gods and Idols.

Wherefore do not in any wise good reader give credence to these deceyuers.
Neither do thou trust and put confydence in those byenges and sellynges of
dyspensacyons, and commutacyons of vows. For they have none auctorytye,
wherbye they may change any vow contained with in the word of god. For
where they may change vows as in things of man's inuencyon and in things
indyfferent, there may thou thy self and any other man who soener he be do
the same. I mean betwyxte god and the, so that there rise no offense and
sclaunder thereof, and boldly dyspence for all manner vows. Forels to change
vows comprehended within gods word is nothing else, The vo: was are not to
be changed.
but to abrogate and adnull this precept of god / vouete et reddite / that is
to say / vow you and pay your vows. if the commandment of god may be
abrogated in one article: by the same right it may be abrogated in all
points. For it is a plain and a general commandment of all vows comprysed
within the lymyttes of holy scripture. For if this wyndowe be opened to the
Pope, that he has power to change such vows, whether they be small or
great / then might he forth with do the same likewise in all vows. And then it
should follow by and by after, that he may also dyspence in the first
commandment, that is to wit, that god ought not to be loved with all our
heart, and that our neighbor ought not to be loved as our own selves / And
it should follow forthwith, that he might give lyce^ce to worship an Idol with
exteryour worship / or to committee adultery with pore menes wives, although it
were never so unlawful to committee the same with great Lords wives because it
is in a great matter. Bryefly in a thousand other like, I will not say
inconuenyent and unreasonable things, but wondres, but mo^sters of errors
should follow, as soon as it shall be ones laufull to change but even one
title of any one commandment of god / So thou see now and perceyuest, that
this covetous Balaam, and these hypochrytes and vysures, do give their minds
to none other thing, then unto this only that they may for lucre and
aduayle make the commandment of god of small strength and effect. wherefore
flee, flee this Balaam / for he can in no wise change not even the least vow
that is corroborate by the word of god. But if it be so yt one vow may be
changed, I say unto the, it is free for the without any cost or charge
though thou doste pay nothing to the Romanystes, to change all manner other
vows. Here we my ghte have large matter to dyspute of concerning vows: but it
apperteyneth not to this place / For in other places it is largelye enough
spoken of, and peradventure (if need require) we shall he reafter entrete more
largely of ye same. Let these things suffyce now at this peruerte time. First
there are certain vows or promyses made unto me^. Of vows made to men.
And these vows do bind so long, as he to whom they have be made, does
exact and require ye same to be performed / and of this manner vows, we do not
speak here. Dowes made to god.
Secunda rylye there are certain vows made to god, or to his saints. And
those also are made in two manners or wise. First they are made against god
and his precepts, and those are utterly not to be observed. But those which
are not against god, are to be observed and kept. Here now ryseth a very
hard doubt, which are those vows that are made against god and his
precepts. Here it is profitable and expedyent to consider and weyghe
dylygentlye and sadlye the ten commandments / and we will begin at the
least of them all. if thou would vow to lust after the goods or the wife
of thy neighbor, A synful and a cursed vow.
if thou would vow to bear false wytnes, steal, commit adulterye, kill or
sle / bryefly if thou woldeste vow not to love thy neighbor, nor owe to him
good will: thou perceyuest well and see that such manner vow is wicked and
unlawful / and such one, as thou cannest not keep without the indygnacyon and
dyspleasure of almighty god. This thing (I suppose) is more euydent, then that
any man may deny it more over if thou woldeste vow not to obey thy father
and mother: doubtless it is euydent, that all these things are plain
repugnaunt and contrary to the commandments of god. Why are we then so
blind so obstynate, and so brutysshe, and unreasonable, that we do observe
these vows, which are so openly and euydently against the precepts of god?
Is it not against the precept of god, when the daughter is married to a man of
young or myddle age against ye will of her parents, or else without any
knowledge at all given unto them? Is it not contarye to the precepts of god /
when the sone or the daughter, against their parents will do vow to enter in
to Relygyon, or else does receive those unholy ordres, which the common
sort of priests do receyne calling them holy ordres / Has not god him
self in the.xxx. chapter of Numeri abrogated and adnulled such manner vows
or promyses? Numeri. 30. deuotes
and moreover has he not i^ this wise interpreted and declared this precept?
Again is it not against the commandment of god, when either ye husband or
else the wife does vow to go in pilgrimage to saint James? to do this thing or
that thing, namely when ye wife may not be without her husband, nor ye
husband want the presence of his wife? Come of now and tell me, The vow of
matrymony.
is this vow a gaynst the precept of god, which has enjoined to the husband
yt he should provide and set dylygently for his wife and his children, and
not to go from them, and leave them destytute of his help and succoure / And
yet for all this that Idol of Rome, and that king of vysures, makes this
vow of Pilgrimage to saint James inviolable, and such one as no man may in
any wise break in so much ye he does also in his bulle except it by name as
a thing indyspensable. Notwithstanding yt if he would show him self a very
bishop, he ought (and not without good cause) both to speak against, yea
and also to abolyshe and utterly destroy all such manner of vows. But the Pope
does in all points, as be comes such one as he is to do. For it is fyt and,
semely for him after this manner to prohybyte and forbydde that which god does
promyt and also command / and contrary wise again, to command that, which
god does forfende / and to destroy that, which god edyfyeth / and to build
that, which god does destroy. For how could he else be Pope? But O would
god these abhomynable and deuelysshe hypochrytes and vysures did err only to
the re own hurt / did lead them selves only out of the ryghtway, were evil
and wicked to their own harms alone: for the^ they might somewhat be suffered
/ or else if nedelye it pleased them in this wise to be mad, they were to
be honored worldly, as men which had deserved well of us / to be tolerated,
as hethen princes / But now for as much as they do with so incredyble furye
and woodnes seduce so many conscyences, do murdre and slay so many souls,
and with their own tradycyons do openly not only obscure and make dark and
deface the word of god, but also do scrape it out, and put it out of mind,
and utterly destroy it: no man undoubtedly that wise is and aduysed will
desire moderatyon to be used here, no man will require silence to be used in
this matter, in which no man may keep silence without abhomynable great sin
/ and without open and euydent unkindness and blasphemye against god. Pycke the
hense with thy moderacyon and silence, who soever thou be, that for fear of
men, thynkest it but a small thing openly to commit so open blasphemies
against god. Let no man here speak to me of moderacyon, of somewhat mylder
writing, and of such other vain tryfles. Let no man babble to me of reverence
to begyuen to them. Let no man prate to me of patyence and of christen
sufferau^ce here i^ this matyer It is an accursed silence which leueth these
things untouched. It is a cursed reverence, which here forbeareth and gives
place, and does as it were open a certain great door, and give occasyon to so
blodye tyrauntes, and to so cruel wolves, blodye and freely to murder and to
make hauoke of me^nes souls and conscyences. But now for as much as we have
spoken enough of these let us touch somewhat concerning the vows of
Relygyous persons. The vows of relygyous persons.
Albeit that in an other place it be treated of in a hole book peculyerlye
appointed to the same. And here first our bishops and goodly vysures shall
have both their ears ryngynge and glowyng / and here they shall first gnasshe
with their teathe. Here they shall make grievous and tragycall exclamacyons I
say you goodlye pastoures, (for I will demand a questy on here of you (come
of now and tell me, if priests, monks, freres, and nu^nes, did vow to keep
the rules and ordynaunces of their ordres in unbelief, or in supersty cyon or
in the Iudycall belefe. I pray you make answer, should they be any better
then adulterers, or those which had made a vow to corrupt and defyle their
neighbors wife? Tell me I be sech you, should not this be a plain renyenge of
Christ's faith, and to offend more greuouslye then if a man did committee
ten adulteryes? But how many are there now in all this hole sect of
priests, of monks, of freers, of nu^nes, which have not by the reason hereof
forsaken the faith of Christ, and has enwrapped and entangled him felf and
his conscience in Iudycall superstycyon? And peradventure these things seem
strange things unto ye. But I beseech ye harken what is the very christian
faith. The very christen faith is this, The very chryste^ faith.
thou doste believe ye thou art iustyfyed and saved not by any works, but
only through faith in Christ, as medyator, and by the mercy which is freely
given in him (as it is written in the first chapter to the Galathyanes) so ye
a man do despair of all his own strength and power and of all his own
enforcementes, and all his own works / and do all together and holy trust
and ha^ge upon the merytes and the Justice of an other man, that is to wit of
Christ. It is not a Iudaycall faith, to be wyllyng to be iustyfyed, to yt is to
have remyssyon of sin and to be saved by works / by their own propper
strength and merits? Roma. x. Is not the fay the of Christ by this reiecte and
refused, as of whom those holy men have no need, or at the least wise have
no great neade? Now therefore let every man even of the common people be
Judge whether a great part of prestes, of monks, freers, and nuns, do not
begin ye ordynaunces of their sect in that faith. For these goodlye
bostynge words they do use commonly and ope^lye for this intent (say they) I
do embrace and profess this manner of living: yt I may purchase some merit
unto my self above ye common manner of living of christen men / for why should
I else be a monk, or a freer / and they do ascry be yt thing to works and
ceremonies which ought to be ascribed only to Christ, and faith only I pray
you tell me, what other thing is this, then to deny Christ, and to seek
holiness and ryghtwysenes in unbelief and hypochrysie: that is to say, to be
made of christen men very Jews and paynymes / saint Petre says.

THose, which were verelye escaped, they allure and be gyle, and do keep them
stylle in error.

ANd that them selves are Jews and paynymes, Jews paynymes.
they do their own selves confess / For what intent (say they) should I be a
monk, a friar, or a nu^ne? Why should I trouble and vere my self with so many
holy obseruaunces and ceremonies: except I could by these means purchase and
get a prerogatyue, and short speed unto salvation above ye common sort of
christen men, or above worldly persons? For this is their communycacyon. Thou
herest that these are more then pharysaycall words of hypochrytes, and of men
putting confydence and trust in their own works: in whom Christ has no
manner place or work at all. Is it any doubt, that all these men do look for
that thing of the works, and I wot not what obseruaunces of their ordres:
which they ought to have looked for of Christ, and of the mercy of god
promised in Christ, wherefore it is as certain as any thing may be, that all
Collegyate churches and all monasteryes, in which there are priests, monks or
freers living in such manner hypochrysy and perylous trust and belefe: are
far more filthy and abhomynable, than any stues, then any bordell howses /
or any dens of thieves. And therefore it is also brought to pass by ye wrath
and indygnacyon of god that as it were for a sign and mark, these priests
are most polluted and defiled with all kinds welnere and sorts of flesshely
lusts and plesures. For when through such manner hypochrysie of works they do
vyolate the chastytie and purytie of the christen faith then for a
punysshement, Hypochrysye of works.
they are given in to that uncleanness, that they do also vyolate the chastyte of
their bodies / as saint Peter does say, that they do allure unto the desires
and lusts of the flesh / So all ordres, and all vows, because they are
most part of them against the first the second, and the third,
commandment of god / are to be eschewed, and fled from, as from a
pestylence. And I would hertelye aduertyse and counsel all relygyous persons
and all such manner Iustycyaryes, Relygyous persoues.
that they should here chose either the one or the other of these two: that is
to wit, either to leave and forsake this Iudaycal faith and trust in works
/ and to lean to the knowelage and the use and profit of Christ / and to
begin their life again in faith: or else rather let them, if they may not
frelye, obtain license to for sake, both their relygyous habyte, and also
their Monasteryes / and let them return unto ye symplycyte, which is in
our Sauyoure Christ Ihesu, and let them chose rather any other honest and
godly kind of living. And thou ought to do none otherwise here in this
thing, then if thou dyddest openly keep an harlot in thy company. For there,
if thou will live vertuouslye and godly: either thou must forsake thine
harlot or else marie her to thy wife. Lo here is that spyrytuall Baal, of whom
by the gift of god there is written a little book, wherein by scryptures and
arguments it is strong enough proved, that the professyon of Monastycall
vows is of it self, wicked and heretycall, and that it is a very hard
thing to bring about, that a man may use it well. And I doubt not but that
by these things good minds and conscyences, and also reason ben there by well
satyfyed so that from henseforth I hope that there shall not be so many, which
shall be begyled and perysshe thoroughe the Relygyous life and that wretched
clarkshype. And if some certain men ben therewith myscontent, as though in the
said book were preached lybertye to priests, monks, freers: and nu^nes, and
that monasteryes and temples, should be pulled down and destroyed. I do not
greatly marueyle hereof. For who can satysfy those wicked men, which will
hear nothing, but that which semethe good to them selves / and which (as
solomon says) ben setteled in their own folysshe hertes. Again on the other
side if they should be demanded a reason and cause of their tradycions, they
can do nothing else but show their purple cardynall hattes, and their bishops
myters, and with a lordly countenance break out and say, do thou not se that
I am a cardynall, do thou not know, that I am a bishop? What doste you
require the know lege of srypture, or a cause of his belefe in a bishop? What
neade has a bishop of any such small tryfles, the cure and charge whereof may
be put unto his chapleynes? And what marvel is it, yt those presumptuous men
and trusting to their selves, do use so earnest, so wayghtie, and so proud
words since it is so yt they only have ye holy ghost, i^ so much yt where
soever they be assembled and gathered to gyther, there is undoubtedly the holy
ghost? Sith it is so (I say) that they have not only the holy ghost, but even
ye most holy spryre / yt is to wit ye spryte of ye Pope, which is not only (as
Christ is called of Peter in ye acts) right uous and holy: but also is most
holy. But verily I am utterly weary to speak any more hereof those cursed abuses
and bulls of the Pope / and I will dyfferre and put of, until they happelye
do begin to grant against these things, which I have said. At this time it
is suffycient to know, that all me^ are bounden before god with his word, yea
and otherwise if they ben in just auctoryte to destroy, and utterly to
extyncte these bulls of ye popes indulgences and perdons. Besides this not
only to co^dempne and despise those hypochrytes and vysures, which do
publysshe and preche the^ as unlearned and wicked bestes: but also to shunte
the^ and to flee from them, as from wolves, and cruel Lions, according to the
doctrine of the apostles, both Peter and also Paul. And that I may ones end
these complayntes procedyng of most rightful sorrow and grefe. I beseech you
tell me, is not this also an excellent deed, and such as has not ben hard of
before in any nacyo^ or in any age or time, that our bishops by the grace of
god berynge small favor toward gods word and likewise again standing
but smally in favor, with it do not secretlye but openly forbid priests
honest matrymonyes. And (that a man may know the apostles of Satan dryued at
ones of all furyes) do they not with thretenynge of emprysonementes and of the
sword, stoutely go about this, that that holy and goodly chastytie (which
is no thing at al mynisshed nor appayred by so many thousands of harlottes by
so many monsturous kinds of lecherye) should not by wedlock, that is to wit
(as they call it) a lay and a profane thing, peradventure suffer some damage
and hynderaunce. And lord how my mind coueteth and desires here to make
rehersall by name of these cities belonging to priests, in which every where
almost thorugh out all chrystendome we do se so many and so great flocks of
unhonest women and that for none other cause but because they are kept not of
the common people, but of prestes) to be mayntayned none otherwise, then if it
were a company of honest matrones, to ye open sclau^der of the church / and
to be fed in ydlenes with delycate meats and drynkes / to have the honorable
name and tytles of families / and moreover after ye similitude and manner of
temples (as the psalmiste says) to be cladde in purple, Psalmo C. vliii.
and decked, and garnysshed with gold, peerle, and precious stones. I say I
have much a do to hold my tongue from namyng of them: but yet I will refrain
until some defender of such manner chastyte do rise, which will go about to
defend and maintain this holy contynencye of prestes, But oh peuyshe fool,
and vnmanerlye carter that I am, which dare be so bold to call such bysshoppes
baudes, and their worshypfull cathedral churches stues. But go forth on you
papists bysshoppes proceed luckely to that whereunto your virtue leads you /
and for asmoch as you think it a small thing, and not enough that all men do
dysprayse you, and speak evil of you / that are hated of the people / and
that in a manner your name is despised of every good man: encreace you and heap
you harred upon hatred / for (as he sayethe) they which ones ouerleaped and
passed the bonds of shamefastnes, Cicero in his epistles
must needs be exceeding bold and shameless for if you had not short lie as it
were, washed away this your so great favor of the people, with some new
hatred / if you were not now images and du^be blocks: it lacked not much, but
ye for excedige great love, and for so many excellent benefytes of yours, we
would have setvp your images made of gold, in ye market place / and why should we
not put you to worship, setting up images and such other monume^tes for a
memorial to be had of you: since it is so ye you) if I be not begyled (have
very well deseruyd it with your merytes / and even now also openly defendyng
the keeping of hoores both with your words and your deeds, do heap merits
upon merytes / first you are your selves more unchaste then I will rehearse,
and do wynke at so many whoredoms, and at so many stu^s and bordel houses
builded round about your churches (for what other thing are commonly all the
prestes houses?) and some of you which I could name do your selves also keep
harlottes. Secundarylye you do feed and norysshe your selves most delicately
and tenderlye in ryote and pleasures with the blood and sweet of poor men /
Besides, empoueryshynge and beggerynge the world with your guyles and
deceyptes, you do with your exco^munycacions and interdiccyons vex and toss
all things up and down, afflictynge and tormentyng poor men, both in soul,
in body, and in their goods / you do extyncte and destroy the gospelles /
and not only you your selves do no manner work belongyng to the office of a
bishop, but also you will not suffer any other me^ to preach the word of god
/ you do pursue the preachers, from city to city, (as it was prophesied in
the.xxiii. chapter of Mathue) and you do expulse the^ as knaves and vile
wretches out of al your dominions / and yet in the mean season your selves are
nothing else in co^paryson but visures, whom as unprofitable burdeynes of
darthe the world can no le^ger bear nor suffer, one les you do wax wise and
amend. Wherefore here labor and apply your selves lustelye and stoutelye ye
you do not please ye people over much / encreace your benefits and good deeds
/ give diligens lustely that there may not need any great busynes to destroy
your tyranny, whiles you do shake out your own selves, and do your own
selves wylfully ro^ne forth to your own confusyon and destruccyon / I verily
(to give you good and faithful counsel) would not aduertyse you yt you
should purchase and ger unto your selves the favor and love of the people, with
myldenes, with mercifulnes, with softnes, with pascience / and sincerite
apostolical / yt is to wit, with those virtues, with those holy means, which
saint Paul did use / go forth and hold on as you have begone / this is even
ye right and next way to undoubted destruction, whereunto you do so greatly
make have / for even so did your fathers ye Jews, into whose hypochrisie you
are succeeded, which when they had slain ye lord and authoure of life Jesus
Christ, and had by decrees promulged and publysshed ye gospelles to be forbede^
yet could they not so rest until they had provoked ye romans and so had
sought their own undoubted mischefe / which said romans at ye last setting
violently upon them, slew them up, and utterly destroyed the^ / for how could
you better observe and fulfill ye which becomes your personages to do: then if
you do go about and endeuer to prove and show your selves ye very right and
true sons and heirs of such manner pare^tes / but here (I wene) they will do
upon the^ all ye hole episcopal armoure, The hole armoure or harnayse of ye
popes bysshoppys.
that is to wit a purple Palle, and a forked mytre, upon their head, their
gloves and their rings with precious stones, to fence both their hands with
all / they shall also have their fete shode not in ye preparacyo^ of ye gospel
of peace, but of ye sa^dalle of vanite / and a silver cross hangyng down to
ye mids of their breast / and (if I be not deceyuyd) a Roman pallealso
covering their shulders / and a shepherdes staff to measure their pase / and
so then having this ar mure upon them, with a statelye and a solemn gate they
shall come forth, and say / will thou ye we should show the more plainly a
cause, why we do keep priests from wedlock: has not ye most holy father ye
pope forbeden this by his laws and holy canons: adding also a penalytie upon
ye same. For these shall be all the arguments, reasons, and syllogismes, by
which those excellent me^ and worshypfull pastors may show the cause of
their deed (with the license and favor of the most holy pope, and of his
worshipful bulls be this spoken) I verelye do nothing doubt, that the laws
exactynge this syngle life, are deuelysshe doctrine, and most gross
phantasmes of the devil / And here I ca^ not refrain, but I must needs
clearly and pleynly show, what I do think of ye contynencie of priests. Thou
shall grant me this one thing good christian reader, that I may here with bold
and scoffing words, mock and cheke these their so earnest cou^sayles and
proud words of the decretalles. Tell me I pray you, why do the poets, that
make commedyes, Writers of commedyes.
always ymagyne the men baudes and ye women baudes to be such manner ones, yt
they do retain young men with pleasures, and by certain polycie and certain
crafts do counsayll them from marriage? Doubtless it is not for any good will,
that they do bear to the young men: but because by ye mary ages of young men
they do lose a great part of their gaynes. Even so the bishop of Rome with
his clientes the aucthours of the foresaid law of unchaste contynencye have a
great part of their yearly rentes and profytes by the baudrye of priests, and
by priests hoores. For who soever will at his lybertye keep hoores and men's
wives with praise and favor: he is compelled to pay yearly to the bishop a
crown of gold. And this tradicyon is so commonly known that it is now a
common saying, that chaste persons and good lyuers are nothing profitable to
the office of a preeste (for so they call the tyranny of the offycyales) in
somoch that (as some say) the officyales do also hate the priests,
Dnprofytable to ye office of a priest.
that are chaste lyuers / I beseech you tell me, when at any time were baudes
more rich, or more honorable? When was ever baudrye more unpunished then in
the popes bysshoppes? and what marvel is it, if those holy fathers, when they
have received money, do wynke at the keeping of hoores: seeing that it is an
old saying, a proverb.
that lucre smells well of what soever manner thing it be gotten? who will
then be so vncurtayse, and so ungentle, as to blame the wisdom of the
bysshoppes, for that they do approve and allow harlottes. Who is he, but he
knows, that there are diverse crafts, and diverse means, by which merchants
do get gaynes, and that there are diverse and sondrye kinds of mercers? one
sells peper / another saffron / another clothe / another purple or clothe of
gold / what marvel is it then if bishop Kayface of Rome (least he only
should set naught by lucre) as it were in certain fayers or markettes ordained
and set up round about those goodly and gorgious churches, do selle the
flesh and the skin (I had almost spoken a fouler word) of a quycke harlot
/ for which way else should that holy father and his have a suffycyent
living, if they did not play the merchants in such honest wise? Further
more if it fortune so that at any time, that some pressed do give unto any such
manner harlotte any whytte more of his chastity then need is, so that her belie
does swelle, and she does bring forth to him the seal of his contynency,
some pretye child: then forth with encreaceth that yearly rent of the bishop
/ for then above yt yearly crowen, the bishop gets again occasy on to
exercise mercy / and to this wretched father and to the child newly borne, the^
first he sells this harlot again: and he does not suffer somoche as the
selye poor infaunt to have his own mother, which god has given to him,
frelye, and without payeng of money / lo thus this profet and gaynes, which
would scacely come syngle to the common baudes: to the bysshopps is properlye
and craftily doubled / is not this then a goodly and a gay market to sell thus
the harlottes belyes twyse every year, if fortune be their friend? is not this
a goodly marchau^dyse semely for bisshoppes and so holy officiales to get lucre
by the whoredom of other men: and so with those secret and pruye baudryes to
pass any stues? And it is no marvel if for the augmentacyon and conseruacyo^
of the goods of ye church (for the goods of the church they do call gold and
silver, the gooddes of the chutche.
contrary to the words of saint Peter (these holy fathers do busylye give
their mind to this lucre if they will not grant unto ye priests honest
wedlock, which helps nothing to the gettyng of lucre and gaynes / forlauful
wives are nothing profitable to the office and to the cofers (as I said before)
of the most reverend fathers and lords. I beseech the good reader take in
good worth these my bourdes and gestes, though they be somewhat large and
plain: which do proceed vndubtedly not of any lust or pleasure that I have
therein, but of very great grefe and sorrow of my heart. For who would not
mourn greatly? Who would not hertelye sorrow? that seethe these so abhomynable
dyspysers of the word of god which are so destytute of all wisdom, reason,
and wit / that sooner will any brute beasts, Oxen, or Asses have wit, then
these excellent herdysmen of the church. And this is it which ye lord
threteneth by Esaie saying.

I Shall give them children to be their princes, and effeminate persons shall
have dominion over them.

FOr they can here lay none other excuse for the^ selves / that all these
things are done, and do proceed of a deuelysshe covetousness and an horrible
blyndnes: it is more open and euydent then ye it may be hyd / for though they
did pass very asses in ignorance, and very stocks and blocks in dulnes and
in insensibilite: yet could they not deny, that god did never in any place
forbid priests to wedde wives / So far of it is, that he did for bid it:
that Paul has also charged the stead of god, yea or else above god. But here
again they will bark out their old song against me. The pope has
prohibited it. The pope has forbidden it. What is this that you say? O good
syrs and sweet men, as who should say, that if the pope do commau^de me, that
I should not be obedyent to my parents, likewise as he has done in the
professyon of relygyon, that I should not keep the commandments of god: it
did not belong to ye office which you do falsely profess, with all your power
and might to withstand and resyste him / and his commandments / have you
not read the words of saint Peter in the.v. of the acts of the Apostles.

WE ought to obey god, rather then men.

DO you not know, when men's tradicyo^s ought to cease all though they be
profitable
that all tradicyo^s of me^, all though they be good and profitable, yet in the
time of necessyte, and when they are intolerable, they do cease and do bind
nothing at all. Do you not know by open experyence, that this most
ungracious and very deuelyshe tradicy on of syngle life and chastyte, is
impossyble to be kept of priests and that through it the whole world is
filled with fornycacyons and adulteryes? And yet for all this you most
uncharitable persons, that ever were syns the world first began, do for most
fylthy lucre and avail constrayne and drive selye wretched consciences to
sin, and to assured destruccyon / you se and perceive plainly, yea and in a
manner you feel it, that this chastyte of syngle life can not be observed and
kept: and yet you do compel and drive me^ to keep it, without any necessytie.
O you most cruel tormentours of consciences, how do you embrue, how do you
pollute and defyle your hands in ye blood of innocent persons? O how sore
an account shall you give of your tyranny. Besides this it is euydent
enough, that all those humayne tradicyons of syngle life and forbyddyng
matrymonye are the doctrynes (as the apostle calls them) of ye deuylles / as
it is proved and declared by those places a little before alleged of his
epystles to Tite and Timothe / as in ye third chapter of ye first epistle to
Timothe.

ABysshop ought to be the husband of one wife.

THis is the instytucyon and ordinance of god. This is the constitucyon
promulged and publysshed by the apostle Paul. Wherefore it can not be
otherwise, but that all that doctrine is of the devil, what soever is taught,
or else commaundyd by any laws contrary to it. For god is not contrary to
him self neither does he prove him self a liar / likewise as the scripture
has all this in every place, and does also compelle every man, be he never
so blind, to confess it: so also every man is compelled to confess, that the
law of the pope concerning the syngle life of priests is openly against
the ordynacyon of Paul, and of god. Are not these things clear enough are
not they euydent enough to you, you blind and gydes of the blind? I say go
to search all your wits, and do the best that you can, What can you allege
or bring here for your self? What dare you even profer to speak here
against? Are not your hard forehedes of iyerne, and your brazen necks now
at the last ashamed, when it does come to your mind and rememberaunce, that
you do with so great tyranny compelle so many conscyences, to observe the
commandment and doctrine of ye devil, against the ordinance and
commandment of god? The third place of the apostle is, in the.iiii. chapter
of the first epistle to Timothe.

THe spirit speaks of a suertye that in the last days certain men shall
shrynke away from the faith, gyuynge head to the doctrynes of deuylles.

TO there the apostle calls those doctrynes of deuylles, which do forbid
matrimony / and the apostle does not there speak of the Tacianes, so as that
most wretched and folysshe writer went about to ymagyne, in that bare and
unfruitful trifelynge treatise entyteled / de loco petri / that is to say of
the place of Peter. The here sye of the Tacya^es
For the Tacianes did prohibit matrymony as a thing evil of it own nature,
and as sin. But Paul speaks of them, which do only prohybyte matrymonye,
and do not also condemn and dysalowe it as sin / likewise as the papists
do also prohybite certain meats, and yet they do not account it for sin to
eat these meats or those meats. So also the pope does not say, as ye
Tacianes did, ye wedlock is sin / neither does he say that to eat eggs or
to eat flesh is sin / but he does only prohybyte the^, to make a
deceyptfull color and hyprocrysye of great holiness, as saint Paul says.

IN hypocrysye they do speak lesynges, and of ye doctrines of deuylles,

FOr as much then as these three places of Paul, as being the word of the
sovereign majesty and of god, do abide and stand as styfly as it were a
brazen wall or a great rock, and do also effectually and myghtelye prove,
that the tradycyon of this syngle life against the ordenaunce of god, is
doctrine of deuylles, as it is plainly expressed in the words of Paul: then
it rests and remains, that the priests, which can not contain and live
chaste, with a bold mind and a very fre conscience do here betake them selves
to these words of god / yea and even those also which have no need of a wife,
yet ought now to marye a wife only to shame and scorn the devil and this his
so renomed and poisoned doctrine. And you also excellent prelates, if you had
lever be the apostles of christ, then of Satan: ought stoutely and manfully to
labor and do your endeavor, to pluck up those stues about your churches, and
that yt priests might mary / but here you will obiecte and allege for your
selves, that priests, when they were consecrated, did swear to live sole
without wives. Fair words I beseech you / have I not said here before? and
is it not proved with many arguments, in other places that all the vows,
which are made contrary to the precepte and ordinance of god, are of none
effect / and that they are to be forsaken and broken under the pain of
eternal indygnacyon and dredefull wrath of god. the vow of lyui^ge syngle.
Now that such vows of abst aynynge from matrymonye has been made and of
all men is made contrary to the precept and indyngnacion of god: it is certain
and undoubted. The prestes do vow to the pope and not to god
Besides this, the priests do not vow their vow to god, but to the pope /
but to the tradycyo^s of man / and therefore men ought to dyssolue it / For
such manner vow does never come, nor apperteyneth any thing at all to god.
Wherefore there is no ieoperdy at al of conscience in yt matyer if priests do
wedde laufull wives: but those hypochrytes maskers and mummers do of them
selves feign and ymagyne I wot not what perelles and ieoperdyes of health and
salvation even as spyders do of the^ selves make their webbes / again on the
other side, whoredom, in which are mere dangers of souls, and unchaste
places su^ptuously buelded about their churches, these things they do sell
for money / and do permytte all men to use them at their lybertye unpunished,
so that they do give, and pay somewhat. Are not these then holy pastors, and
excellent bysshoppes? They crucyfye christ, and let Barrabas the erraunt thief
go at lybertye. Woe, woe, woe, be to them, onles they amend. What can I do more?
I monysshe them, and cry unto them, and to all that do hold with them, that
they should repent and amend, and that they should take heed to them selves for
the ingement of god does not slack / god will not always suffer the contempt
of his word.

Now finally I will gentelye and hertelye here exhort al those, who soever
they be that will rebuke those mummynge and dysguysed bysshoppes with
wrytynges: that they do it openly, boldly, and plainly / according to the
doctrine of the gospel and of the apostle Paul / And that they do provoke
them, unto the law of the scryptures, likewise as I have done hitherto. For
though they be never so worshyppefull in the world, yet at the least wise in
this point we are superyours, that this common sort of bysshoppes for their
excedyng great ygnorauncye, dulnes, and ydlenes / has had these many years a
sclaunderous name among all men / and again is sore dispraysed, and has an
evil report, because they will not come forth to light / and do refuse to be
judged according to the scriptures / do fle from the place of open and not
suspecte audyence. By the reason therefore of this self same thing their
hypocrisye is now opened ones and abolisshed, and they them selves (like unto
the crow i^ Aesopes fables) having their goodly feathers plucked a way from
them, do provoke ye lokers on to laughter. There can not therefore a more
dyspleasure, nor a more paynfull thing in the world chance unto them: then
if we do resyste them openly to their face / and do provoke and call them
forth unto the scryptures / and boldly calling and cryenge on them, do
require of them to show the fundacyon, whereupon they have the very ground
of their doctrine There they can not chose but be a shamed (though they do
dissemble and hyde it never somoche) in their hertes within, and in their
conscyences so that they shall utterly hold their peace, and can allege
nothing for them selves. And if they would go about to break out with
tyranny and violence, then shall their shame and rebuke be somoch be the
greater and they shall strayghte and the sooner come unto this myschefe and
evil, which they do so greatly shunte and eschew / and by so much, the
sooner their estimacyo^ shall decay and perysshe both with god and men / for
they could not by any other mean, more help oursyde and the course of ye
word of the lord: then if they do greatly grudge and be angery, and do most
greatly rage and be rough out their dyoces boldly and purely preach the
gospel in the bysshoppes stead. Which said preachars being in danger of
persecucyons (for evermore the world shall hate the word of god) the
bysshoppes also shall asmoche as lyethe in their power lawfully to do,
maintain and defend / and bestow their blood and life, to maintain and
fortyfye the truth of the gospel, against the tradycyons of men, likewise
as Christ him self and also Paul both taught, and also gave example of the
same with their deed. Dalerye
So we read that saint Valery bishop of Hyppom. Augustine
did substytute Augustyne as preacher in his stead (before that the said
Augustyne was made bishop) and did defend him / and it was the comen manner
and custom in ye most part of the regyons and churches of ye cast and of
Greece land, ye priests did preach for the bysshoppes, in the presence of
them. Besides this, let such manner bysshoppes in especyal study by bestowynge
care and benefytes upon poor folk, to make amends for that, which is
wantynge of their part in the mynysterie of the word. What soever bishop he
be that does not, all other things set aparte, set his mind upon these
things only as greatest things and the very things belongyng to a bishop
let him not believe to be saved / for asmoche as he is a mere tyrant,
tormentour, and murderer of souls / But here they will obiecte and say, how
or in what wise can such manner care for poor folk, and the keeping of a
house and pryncely port (such as our bysshoppes for the most part do keep
now a days) stand both together the one with the other? I answer, we do not
here speak how thou may be made a prince: but how thou may be a good
bishop and be saved / for who has commanded that bishops should so play ye
gala^des, and use such pomp and gorgyousnes of ye court? Christ did openly
forbid the^ to be as the kings and princes of ye ge^tyles, where he does by
express and open words separate and dyuyde them from princes of the world,
and says.

THe kings and rulers of ye ge^tyles are lords over the^ but you shall not do
so.

THese words, that prince, of princes, ye king of kings and that lord of
majesty, will not revoke / he will not abolyshe them / ne suffer them to be
thrust out of place, and made void for thy peuysshe excuses, wherewith thou
doste in thy conscience coldly and fayntly comfort thy self / why doste thou
not rather forsake thy lordely port, be it never so plesaunt: if thou can
not execute and fulfill the office of a bishop / why doste thou for tran
sytory and most vile honor, for get thine own health and salvation? yea
moreover wyttyngly and wyllyngly do cast away thine own soul, for the most
deceyptfull pleasure of this life? Why doste thou (I say) wyttyngly and
wylfully perysshe? Even those men are scantly saved at the last which with
couragyous faith contynually wrestlynge and fighting with their flesh and
the devil, do live in a good and a virtuous kind of life. Why doste thou then
hope i^ vain, that thy self shalt be saved among so many ieoperdyes, among
so many voluptes and pleasures?

WHat does it profit (says christ him felfe) if he do possess all the
world, and all ye kingdoms: and do cast away his own soul?

But whereof or which way (will some say) should kings princes, earls, barons,
kynghtis brefely all ye nobles of ye world, provide for their younger children
if these bysshoprykes, if those cathedral and collegiat churches were not? And
therein first we may openly se the exceeding folyshnes and blyndenes of ye al
criste^dome which hitherto have boughte commonly of the Romanistes the
benefyces and prebendes founded by them selves, with the blood of their
children. Lo here I do speak unto the who soever thou art, which do
wyttyngly so cast away thy children / if any ploughman or smythe did wound or
kill thy sone, or else did defyle thy daughter or thy sister: you would for
anger and woodnes go about to do the vttermoste myschefe that thou could /
to overthrow and destroy even hole cities, to destroy hole prouynces for the
reuengyng thereof, would seem but a small matter unto the thou would think i^
thy mind it to be so high and so heinous an offense, that was done unto the.
But I beseech the, here open the iyes of thy mind, and look, whether there can
be any a more sore homycyde and murderer of thy children, any more grievous and
more cruel enemy unto them then thou art thine own self, auaunsynge and
promotynge them unto a bisshopryke or thrustyng them down in to such a church
(as they do call it) for thou make thy sone a bishop, which state (as it is
now far away from the mynystracyon of the word, the state of a bishop.
and from all godlynes) you know undoubtedly to be a deuelysshe state, in
which thy sone can in no wise be saved. Sith it is so, that thou do know
this: tell me I beseech the whether thou do not more sore rage, and use more
cruelty against him, then if thou cut him in to gobbettes, and dyddest throw
his flesh unto dogs to be deuowred / if thy sone, through ignorance or
error had stumbeled and fallen into such a certain kind and manner of
living: He means when (...) has not ye gift of co^nne^cy and can not keep
his professyon / or when the professyon is made with any wicked opynyo^ of
iustificacion to be had thereby.
thou ought with all dyligence, and with all thy power to labor and go about
(if there were any wisdom, or any point of a chryste^ mind in the) to ryd him
out of it, although thou had but only one lofe of bread to live on thy
self, whereof you should be feign to give him the one half, but here I
beseech the look upon thy self somewhat more nere and more narowly / who soever
thou art which doste cast down thy children hedlonge in to these kinds and
manners of living, and co^sydre what manner father you art only to keep thy
dominion and thy riches vpryght and from decay, only least thy gold and silver
should be mynysshed, if it were divided among many heirs: you doste thrust
down and wyllyngely cast hedlo^g thy sons and kynnesme^ in to ye deep du^geon
of hell / neither does it move or styre ye any whyt, to se thine own blood
souped and swalowed up in ye throat of ye devil, and perpetually to perysshe:
so ye thou be not compelled to mynyshe or debate any thing of thy superfluite,
or any percell of thy po^pe and royalte. Lo this most ungracious opinion this
costome is crepte in and used i^ many places, yt as often times as any great
man's sone being mete rather for any other thing, the^ for a bysshopryke, is
chose^ and elected bishop, or is brought into the temple. Than with solemn
pomp, and a solemn company set in their arraye are made cries and loud
shoutes, as it were in a tryumphe, then all the halles and courts do sound
and ring with the noise of trumpes with trumpettes / with tabrettes, then are
in every place lyghted tapers and torches then that solemn song. Te deum
laudamus is thundered out / so yt these triumphs do plainly represent unto us
ye image of those folishe kings of Israel, which did brenne up their sons
and daughters for a sacrifyce in the honor of the Idol Moloch, Mosoch.
and with ye diverse loud soundes of tru^pes did bring to pass, that the
lamentable cryeng out and waylynge of them, that were in the mids of the
fire, could not be hard. After the same manner do these excellent parents
handle their daughters and their neces, of whom they allure some by fair
means, and some full sore against their wylles / they do thruste down in to
the prysons of monasteryes / and for none other cause, but that their riches,
their possessions, and that dygnyte of their high blood may be preserved and
vpholden, they are ashamed to bestow them in marriage upon persons of lower
parentage. Howebeit yet this self same study, only to preserve their riches,
does turn unto their very great damage and loss of goods and substance /
for god does avenge and punyshe this unbelief and mystruste, so that ye riches
of dukedomes and erledomes do nevertheless decay, and all things do go
backwarde as it were by a certain fatal and predestyned destruccyon / which
thing doubtless should not be so if the wicked parents had not deserved this
wrath and vengeance of god, with their so cruel oblacyons and sacryfyces of
their sons and of their daughters to the Idol Moloch / for the innocent
blood so cruelly shed forth, for cause of most vile riches, does cry maynly
i^ to heaven, as did the blood of ryghtuous Abel, Abell.
which cry, with how attent and hedefull an care the lord does harken unto
it, he has suffyciently declared in Abell. Now to declare the thing with a
more plain and more famylyer example. Nuns.
The Nuns or sacred vyrgyns now in our time, are for the most perte lustye
damoyselles, and of florysshynge age / and created of god, to the intent that
they should wedde and bring forth children / And it is not possible for them
contynually so to contain and live chaste, at the least wise of their own
good will. For perpetual contynencye and chastyte is an high and the most
spyrytuall gift of god, Co^tine^ce
which chau^ceth but to few men. Besides this god, when he did first create
man, and did make the^ male and female. This his general law, and his word
spoken by his own mouth, he will not to be so come^ly taken away in so many
persons / or always by the gift or rather the miracle of contyne^cye tobe
abrogated and adnulled, but perpetual co^tyne^cie and chastyte is a very
seldom thing before god. if now you had a daughter or a kynsma^, which
through error had been entysed in to this manner of living as a fysshe in to a
well: thou ought rather (if you were a good man) to lose thy life and all thy
goods, then to leave this soul thus in the mouth of ye devil. But thou
least thy riches, least thy domynyon, least thy glorious tytles, least thy
dygnyte might be any thing my nyshed, will thruste down thy children with
thine own hand in to the deep dongeon of hell, yea being very loathe and
full cuyll willing. And what does then follow? Harken, and I shall tell the in
few words / verily I did never here that auricular co^fessyon of Nuns, but
yet by ye scriptures and words of the sprete of god (which do on every side
touch and most depely search ye affeccyons of the hertes) I shall easily guess
and as it were touch with a nedle / unto what end this chastyte does come / and
I know well enough, a proverb
that this my dyuynacyon and conjecture will nothing at all deceive me. First
the young damoysell, in which this high gift of chastity is not can no more
easily be without an husband and the company of man then she can live without
meat and drink, and sleep, and such other works of nature. On the other
side also young men or me^ of myddle age cannot be without a wife, for it is as
depely graffed i^ them and as naturally given unto them to continue and
encreace their kind by propagacyon: as it is either to eat or to drink. Who
soever therefore coueteth and gothe about now to stop and hold back by his
own propre might and strenth, this natural inclynacyon, virtue and force
given him of god, what other thing does he, then if one would go about to
cause and bring to pass, ye the fire should not bre^ne / or the water not make
moist, or ye a man should live without either meat or drink, Of this I do now
infer and conclude, that all such manner Nuns, how soever many there be of
them, whether they be gentle me^nes or pore men's daughters, not haui^ge ye rare
gift of chastytye, as very few have or can have do not keep chastyte with their
own goodwyl but full sore against theri wylles they are without husbands. Now
if they do contain by compulsyon and with an evil will undoubtedly they do
lose both lives / that is to say, this life, and the life eternal / for on
both sides they shall be in hell pains here in intolerable heat and brennyng
of the flesh, and there in eternal fire except repentance at ye last Lo
unto this extreme infelycyte, unto this most wreched and miserable state you
doste thine own self bring thine own children and kynnes folk: and all to
ye intent only, that thou may raygne and keep vpryght thy riches, and thy
domynyon. This is that excellent and goodly fruit of constrained and enforced
chastity, and of certain cruel princes and officers, which with so great
madness do go about to defend monasteryes and these great cruel prysons as an
holy thing / and to stop and hold back nature, which can not be stopped
it is an easy thing to persuade other folk, to compel other folk unto
chastyte: if you thy self haste a wife, and can provide for thy self against
the heates and flames of nature. But ye most wretched company, through this
enforced syngle life, does in ye mean season perisshe in the mids of the
fyers of ye flesh as it were i^ a certain hell / For where there is not
wylfull chastyte by the special gift of god: the nature be she never so much
holden back and kept under by our power and strength, yet she holds on to
do her own operacyon and work, and she contynueth even such one, as god did
create her / consydre ye rest thy self, which of truth might here be spoken,
for shamefastnes will suffer me to declare no further of the inco^uenyence and
abhomynacyon ye follows all though necessyte say the contrary, consyderyng
the blyndnes of the world. And albeit that I do of shamefastnes repress my
pen from that which ought as I said before to be declared, yet
notwithstanding those young persons both men and women aforesaid do I know
well feel in the^ selves what I mean and are thereof both ashamed, and sore
tormented, where upon it comes to pass, that not only they do curse their
parents but also god / and do dysprayse and extremely hate their condycion and
state, and do detest and cry out upon all them, which gave them counsel unto
this thing, and curse the time yt ever they were borne or gotten to live in yt
wrechydnes. Lo this was the purpose of ye devil, this was the thing that he
ente^dyd, and went about when he taught the under the color and semblau^ce of
holiness to stop and keep under nature which without this high and very
seldom gift of god can not by any means be stopped and kept under. But to
return to our purpose. I say it is a thousand parts better to leave and
forsake bysshoprykes, and al manner high offices and dignytes, and to be a
mean cytezen or an husbandman: then under the color and semblaunce of holiness
to neglecte and not regard the office of a bishop, or not to give dylygence
at the least wise that it may be executed and fulfilled by other men. For
there is no mean, and it is but vain labors to seche for an excuse.

THe word of god abydethe and contynueth perpetually. The word of god


NOt only bysshoprykes, but also heaven and earth shall pass away: but the
word of god shall not pass away Take this as an oracle / and believe this as
verelye to be true, as if god had spoken it to the mouth to mouth. if now
the pope, or his papists (so as he now does) will not suffer the to preche the
gospel purely, Prechers ought to preach. boldly
and (as Peter says in the acts) boldly: then haste you a greatter and a more
lauful cause to forsake the bysshopryche.

WE ought to obey god rather then men.

Neither do thou think, that thou haste gayly well fulfilled the office of a
bishop, or that thou art excused, if now before that thou thy self hastred
through earnestlye, and have learned the bible and the scryptures, thou do
begin to walk every where abroad throughout thy cities, and conducte or hyer
a preacher ye far less learned then thy self, to preach not the gospelles,
but men's inuencyons, and perseuerau^ce in the tradycyons of men and in the
old custom / so as a certain bishop did now of late time. When the wreched
men have suppressed ye gospel, and have taught humayne things, and now with
the only color and bryghtnes of ye episcopal name (as though so great a
prince could not teach any false things) now with persons, I say (which
god does not accept) they do go about to bleare ye iyes of men, and to break
forth with their auctoryte only. And in deed they should be wise in so doing,
if this were as sure and as a true way to amend these so great damages and
losses of conscyences, as it is an easy and an exceeding spedy way. But why do
they now to late abuse ye symplycytye of the commen people, by such manner high
and proud promyses. Why do they feed us forth with most vain promyses? we will
not (say they) refuse to lay our souls to pledge before god, that our
doctrine is true / if they will earnestly preach the gospel and ye word of
god: why do they not duly prepayre them selves unto ye office of a bishop?
Why do they not hyre a wise and a virtuous master, and take a bible in their
hands, and first do learn their own selves, that they may afterward teach
other men? I truly would make answer to such a bishop, that did with great
words promise to lay his soul to pledge, and I would say unto him, that he
should lay his soul to pledge unto other credytours that are light of gyuynge
credence. For I had lever here leave and trust unto the manifest word of god,
then to the pleage even of so great a lords soul. For what if ye devil should
bear away this pleage, be it never so precious? How should I then be
provided for, and saved harmeles? Away therefore with thine uncertain pledge
and unsure cautyon, For I would for my part have no such bishop which shall
make his soul the fundacyon of my health and salvation, to the which soul I
can not tell what shall happen, or what shall betyde it in an other world. But
I would have such manner a bishop, which shall preach the gospel unto me,
and set christ unto me for ye foundacyon of my health For here I am sure to
whom I may trust. And here I do give no counsel of amendment to that
papystycall sort that will not amend, For they do stop their ears, and do
not suffer the^ selves to be taught. But if peradventure there be any yet
among them, which have repented, and do desire to be good and christian
bysshoppes and to work ye health and sauegarde of them selves and of the
people: ye only and pryncypall office and duty of them (in co^paryso^ of
which all other things do nothing belong unto a bishop) is to take care
for the churches and congregacyon / their office and duty is to take care and
provide for poor folk / to walk about every where, and to give dylygent
labor either to preche or else to cause to be preached not the tradycyons of
men, but ye pure gospel / and ye word of god And as for those shadows and
dumb images blocks, mummers and maskers, which spend a great part of their
life in pomp and riot, and whose belie is their god, and which do set their
mind al upon earthly things: I have (if I be not begyled) largelye and
plainly enough spoken of them / I have now openly preached and showed unto
the^ that they should turn from their wicked way. What can I do more? I
beseech our lord that he will vouchsaue to help forward (...)


