THE MASSACRE of Money.

Terunteo seu vitiosa nuce non emitur. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for
Thomas Bushel. 1602.

TO THE Worshipful, virtuous, and most worthy Gentlemen, M. William, and M.
Frauncis Bedles, health, and their hearts content.
ALthough your worthiness may seem in all men's judgments to merit a more
polisht style, or better contrived plot, then you are likely to find here: yet
that my affection may be somewhat answerable to your great deseruings, I make
bold to tender you this youngling Poesy: which for the worth is not equivalent
to your dignity, yet being the first fruits of my labors, I trust will be
accepted of you; which if I find, when my riper years shall attain to better
knowledge, I will endeavor to make my proceedings answer more fully to your
merits. Till then let this slender work be a true signal of the dutious
affection I bear you, which to augment, I will endeavor continually.

Your approved friend and servant: T. A.

Proemium.
THou silent nurse of still security,
That do in hollow closets sh^^ mine eyes,
Mother of darkness, Queen of secrecy,
Pleasing grim labor, with restes liberties.
Thou that death-like enfeeblest every sense, Nox terrae vmbra.

The shadow of this earth's circumference.
Bereave my pen of all amazing fear,
Turn disturbation forth to mutinies,
Let me be bold in this dark Hemispheare,
A thought conceived dream to canonize.
And whiles pale Cinthia courts her Paramour, Mu^s amica requies.

Muse, sing my dreamed Moneys Massacre.
Dread Pallas teach me to anatomize
The hidden inside of close errors mask:
Let me descry the rank absurdities,
That Folly sets her scholars for a task.
Folly, blind Folly, is inthronized, Regmar stultiti^ (...).

And for a Queen by fools authorized.
Ye foul dissembling frye of flatterers,
Coner your faces from my speedy glance,
Ye fawning Gnathoe's, ye damned pilferers,
I will unmask your hooded countenance.
Ye gold-intombing hellish usurers, A^ari morientur amissa pecuni^.

Foresee yours, and your moneys massacres.
I am in labor, and the time expect*
To be delivered of a (...) dream,
Good fortune as a midwife I respect,
Favor a nurse to cherish my young theme.
Iudicium rerum probatio.
"True judgment in the schools of equity,
"Weigh my compendious toil and industry.
If Nicenes daughter, Curiosity,
Offer to view these youngling lines of mine,
Be bold to tell her that her critique eye
Had need wear spectacles, ere she can sign.
Nox omnia condit.
"The clowdie acoents whose birth then was found,
"When Negro night environed this round.
If Aristarchus from his withered lip,
Let fall a drop of Aquafortis ho^ie,
Or if in Satyrs oil his pen he dippe,
And in the margeant paint an envious spotte.
Vultus Index animi.
"Tell him (my Muse) if he could see his face,
"He would descry mine offered, his disgrace.
But whosoe'r from his impartialleie,
Will cast sweet looks on these laborious lines,
Weighing my accents with just equity,
And so speak of them as in them he finds,
Impareum iudicium rectissimum.
"Him as a fautour honor still will I,
"And to his praise, ere bend my poesy.
The Massacre of Money.
BEfore the heaven had put on heavens face,
Or Neptunes waves a chanel'd sea had found,
Before earth knew her now abiding place,
Or air had residence above the ground,
Or fire assumed the highest place of all, Mundus non aeternus.

To make her brightness more maiesticall.
Before the Sun knew his ecliptique line,
Or the round balls of fire their wheeling spheres,
Before the forked Moon began to shine,
Or any Comet in the air appears, Externa species rei decus.

A clotter'd Chaos, and confused mould,
Was all this glorious all, which we behold.
But natures nature, God omnipotent,
Bestowed a formal shape on all this frame,
Making each thing; erst shapelesse, competent,
Creating man to celebrate his fame.
Then did the golden age repleat with treasures, Aurea aetas.

Bring in the Cornucopia of pleasures.
No threatening law with sharp spurd punishment,
Gave out edicts to curb a lawless rowte:
Black mutiny in prison then was pent,
And outrage still was kept aloof by scowte.
No man came to the Judge with cap in hand, St^^ pro lege voluntas.

The judgment still of every one did stand.
The lofty Pines men on the mountains find,
That now are plowing up the Ocean,
No sails bigge-belly'd with the wanton wind,
Have to a far removed region.
Sua cuique regio rectissiana.
Men knew no countries but their native soil,
None offered to attempt an others spoil.
No town was circled with entrenched walls,
No trumpet gave alarm to the fight:
No sword was known, nor used: no Iron balls
From out the wherring Cannons mouth took flight.
Sine vomere Fertilis ager.
No plow did cut the entralles of the earth,
Yet all of corn did never know the dearth.
Where were your vines? (ye glutted Bacchanalls)
What winepresse had you then to crush your grapes?
Where were your iunkets? where your festiualls?
Where were your ryots? where your virgin-rapes?
Qauls placent mesioribus ignotis.
Men fed on hippes and hawes, curnels and cherries,
Sloes, pears, and bulleis, apples, nuttes, and berries.
Yet in this age was every man a king,
All freely wearing royal diadems,
Content was held the chief and worthi'st thing,
Exceeding riches, glory, gold, or iems.
Regnat quisit contentus.
All men were peace-embracers and content,
In every mind sat Prince and President.
The ground disdained the plowes uncivil touch,
It scorned all muckie putrefaction:
Yet did it yield of fruit and grain as much,
Abundantia vini dulcedme^ tolli^.
As by the plough-mans toil some function
The streams ran milk, and spacious floods of wine
Filled up the shores, oh glorious happy time.
But now Jove's father into Limbo thrust,
The silver age put down the golden world,
Pride swollen Jupiter judge most unjust,
This heap of pleasure to Auernus hurld.
Jove dimming all golds glorious rays of sunshine, Favor summorum humillima
extollit.

Silver in pride sets up her glittering moone-shine.
Before of all things was continual spring,
But now four seasons of the year are framed,
(The date is out of euer-flourishing)
Spring, Men's hominu^ mutationes auida.
Summer, Autumn, Winter they are named.
The air began with fervent heat to swelt,
And Hiems nipping cold of all was felt.
Then did the ox with weary labor hale
The rough plough-share on Tellus harmless face,
Then every man began dig on hill and dale,
And in the furrows throw the corn apace. Quid non industria discit?

The seas were filled with a frequent oar,
That never knew the weight of ship before.
The silver age now bad the world adieu,
Brass next succeeding, bears supremacy:
No sooner did the world his visage view,
But straight resigned him all authority.
Though base of metal, Aspirant humiles.
yet in impudence,
He did surpass siluers pre-eminence.
He brought the world to brazen ignorance,
He taught the soldier to manage arms,
He made true judgment stoop to arrogance,
In every ear he sounds deaths shrill alarmes.
Neighbor seeks Neighbors, Gens inuida gen^^.
Nation Nations woe,
One country lusts an others overthrow.
Iron steps in, and chaseth brass away,
Bid virtue now go seek a residence,
Error has here set up continual stay,
And who admires not errors eminence?
Placet omnibus Error.
Who loves not folly? nay we may auerre.
There is no man but willingly does err.
Treason has, built her nest amidst the clouds,
Leuelling with aspiring aim at Jove:
Violence in an ambush Envy shrowdes,
Pride is associate with lustful love.
Habet ars quid fraudi^ in autro.
Craft here sets up the art of cosening,
Ignorance there of spurblind censuring.
Even then when Avarice had spread her wings,
And covetous desire was waxen fligge,
A company of ruder underlings,
In the deep entralls of the earth began dig:
Placet mirabele cuiquam.
When (as amazed they stood) unto their sight
Appeared a woman all in silver dight.
No sooner had her beauty given a print
In the soft table of these mortal hearts;
No sooner had her favor made a dint
In their weak bosoms, but she plays her part.
Verba mouent omnes.
After her fair enticing countenance,
With witching words she puts them in a trance.
Mortals (quoth she) whose toiles deserve some gain,
If for to dig me out the massy deep
You have begun and ended all this pain,
Though ignorant who should my presence keep,
O^bem Pecuni^ regnat.
Take me, possess me, challenge me your slave,
For having me, you seem the world to have.
Out of the infernal bowels of the ground,
Near to the Stigian horror of black Dis,
Where foul Cimerian darkness streakes around,
(Amidst those clowdie shades my mansion is)
I come, Argentu^ luci^ in antro.
where Styx does dim the Fayries sight,
Where all is darkness, save my splendours light.
My beauty now approaching Phoebus rays,
Loses the beauty of her shining lamp,
Your eyes are dim your mortal judgment says.
The Sun has given me an eternal dampe.
But purge the grossenes of your lying eine, Mendax hyperbole quide^.

And you shall see me darken Phoebus shine.
Whilst that my glory midst the clouds was hid,
Like to a Jewel in an Aethiop's ear;
Or as a spot upon a crystal lid,
So did my brightness with more pride appear.
My self most fair, Terra tenc^ aurum.
opposed to clouds most foul,
Sat as an Eagle ore a formelesse owl.
Ye tonguelesse cauernes of the earth adieu,
Farewell black house of Styx-polluted ground:
My glory has been much extold by you,
In your deep holes my brightness first was found.
Now I have got th'earth'superficiall. Antiquae oblita domus.

Farewell dark Styx, black Phlegiton and all.
No sooner had her sense bereauing eye,
Bewitched with love and admiration,
The Idiot sight of this rude company,
(Oh palpable and gross illusion)
But first Auarus master of the crew, Anarus suspicax.

Beheld his followers with a jealous view.
Straight he exclaimes, ye rude Mechanicalls,
Do you not tremble at this wonderment?
Ye more uncivil then the Bacchanalls,
Do you not stand amazed at this event?
Suum ^uique pulchrum.
This is a Queen, behold her majesty,
Nay more, a goddess, see her deity.
Blessed, divine, glorious, immortal, pure,
Sacred, unspotted, and maiesticall,
Whose high supremacy stands ever sure,
Whose pedigree is true celestial,
Par loui Pecunia.
Whose power is equivalent to the gods,
Who do exceed their majesty by ods.
Still let mine eyes be glutted with thy sight,
Still let mine ears drink thy harmonious voice,
Still let mine hands erect, to thee aright,
Beg for thy presence, my desires sole choice*
Amatum visus prosequitur.
Still, oh still, let my hand, mine ear, mine eye,
See, hear, and touch thy royal dignity.
Gaze still mine eye on her, attractiue glory,
Feed on her beauty, surfeit on her grace,
Be thou in looks her due contributory,
Glut thee with view of her resplendant face,
Aurum placet oculis.
Contemplative desire let never rest,
Til thou do learn her looks be manifest.
Hark still with true attention mine ears,
When times require, perform your function,
Her voice more sweet then motion of the spheres,
Or Philomell in her Pauilion.
Auris auri sonum appetit.
Oh that mine ear mazed with such a sound,
Might in a trance lie groueling on the ground,
Hands if you durst with a small civil touch,
Be witnesses of this heavens ornament,
You would be proud your honor should be such,
To touch a goddess most omnipotent.
Suffices me that I may please mine eye, Inops oblatum respuit aurum.

Although mine hand touch not that majesty.
Goddess, erect thy beauty from the ground,
Too base a seat for such an Emperesse,
Since Lady of such honor thou art found,
Give no disparage to thy worthiness.
Assume the place of thy great dignity, Se totum Pecunia.

And be the mistress of this Emperie.
No sooner had his lips dame silence closed,
But in steps open-handed Prodigus,
He with this Lady in an humor gloz'd,
Vtt'ring more braues then minuck Roscius.
At last in words, Bona verba quaeso.
his humor to display,
Swelling in pride, to her he thus began say.
Lady divine, mistress of golden mines,
Earths precious jewel, heavens paramour,
Whose beauty brighter then fair Cinthia shines,
All able riches, sweet ambassador.
Gracious forerunner of felicity, Adulatio dabit amicos.

Constant vpholder of high majesty,
With joyful news leap to this open breast,
A receptacle for thy worthiness:
In this hot borough build thy warm dry nest,
Where being heated, thou will strait confess,
A surer covert thou have never found,
Within the massy roundure of the ground. Prodigus non habet suum.

Thou shall view countries that be far remote,
Thou shall with me to our Antipodes,
Thou shall behold the Zones, cold, temperate, hot*
Thou thousand captives shall from bonds release.
Vrbes pecunia condit.
Thou shall appoint countries that now lie dead,
With habitants to be replenished.
Thou shall a Judge bribe with a benefit,
Thou shall rich countries and whole nations buy;
Like to an Empress thou by me shall sit,
Whilst I am graced with the Empery.
Sic vole sie Iubeo.
Thy sentence as a graven law shall stand,
What case of law does not lie in thy hand?
Thou shall a pair of foes congluminate,
Yet amongst equals breed dissension;
None dares presume to be th'associate,
What Is not effected if thou wish it done?
Incendit pecunia bellum.
Nations shall fight to see thy gracious favor,
Whilst thou secure sits laughing at their labor.
Follow my colors, and thy glorious fame,
To every ear shall be a frequent sound;
All tongues with wondrous love shall speak thy name,
Thy presence in all meetings shall be found.
Tu linguas incitus.
Thy worthy name shall finish every clause,
When thou shall cease to shine, all tongues shall pause.
No sooner took his words a period,
But Liberalis steps betwixt these two:
Ill ere goes double championd against good,
Virtue we see has somewhat still to do.
No Prince that reigns, but has enemies,
Virtuti vitium.
No virtue but endangered by vice.
Lady in truth, and fair in verity,
In pomp maiesticke, in show beauteous:
In sly appearance full of dignity,
In liberal actions most bounteous.
Though in thy self lies no disaster cross,
Yet in thy usage stands or good, Re dupley vsus in omni.
or loss.
We never knew that Natures holy Nature
Created ought to a prepost'rous end,
Good in it self we know is every creature,
And from it self does good effects intend.
Yet using virtue in an evil cause, Honorat causa actum.

We guilty are of breaking virtues laws.
Silver is framed to a good intent,
To be reducted to the shape of coin,
So to buy corn, land, houses, nutriment,
If any man bribe with it or purloine,
Turning th'good creature to a wicked use, Sub tegmine vsus abusu^.

The creature's blameles: it is the man's abuse.
Give ore thy self to my tuition,
And in the Lap of virtue build thy nest,
This cottage is a secure mansion,
Void of all trouble, ever loving rest.
Follow my colors, in my ensign shine,
Joining thy virtue with this power of mine. Verba malorum haud placent.

I will adict thee to a noble seat,
Within the closure of a liberal purse:
Out of thy treasure will I give, and get
Unnumbered friends, among whom I will disburse
In lib'rall measure, Sic parce liberatis.
yet with caution,
The well got goods of my possession.
When the poor tenant fearfully does stand
Careful how to discharge his landlords rent,
When Micholmas, or Lady-daye's at hand,
Fearing for debt in prison to be pent,
Bona be^e.
How shall a portion out thy treasury
Release the poor man of his misery?
Or whenever steele-armed poverty
Feeding upon the entralls of a man,
Driving all shifts to such an ecstasy,
That either he must steal or starve anon,
Egentibus opes.
How shall a portion out thy treasury
Buy food to overcome his poverty?
Or when an Harbinger of injury
By force depriues a poor man of his right,
He being of no strong ability*
To follow law, or keep his own by might,
Argentum iura dabit.
How shall a portion out thy treasury,
Recover right, and beat down injury?
Or when a bloodlesse agues hand does press
On the weak lims of a diseased creature,
His bags being empty, bare, and monilesse,
His senses feeble, weak his corpse, frail his nature.
Thou can command Physicians help to cure,
Pecunia curat Podagram
The miseries and pangs he does endure.
Live thou with me and love my company,
Leave wantonizing with abhorred sin:
Be thou no agent in foul brothelry,
Be thou no den for vice to harbor in.
Virtuti nulla au^is aperta.
But live with me in modest merriment,
Yet if thou will not, I must be content.
Peace Puritan, Auarus gins to cry,
Fearing his worth should be rejected quite,
Plead no more fondling, this slye simpathy,
In shows like day, in truth as black as night.
Nor can thou with thy faith and troth precise, Landant quod ^mant.

Blind or deceive this virtuous Ladies eyes.
Will thou relieve a beggar at the door?
Ungracious coin, on beggars to bestow,
To let that glorious honor we adore,
Fall to the hands of a polluted shrowe, Quem quam non curat Auaru^.

To let the fingers of a common trull,
Silver out of thy open purse to pull?
It Is thou that setst idleness abroach,
Feeding the lazy humors of a slave;
It Is thou that make base men on us incroach,
Giving to all what they desire to have.
Thou art an author of lycentiousnesse, Non videt manticae quae in tergo est.

Feeder of riot, and of drunkenness.
Thou servile bondsman to a common groom,
Thou that have goods, to use them know not how,
Whose house to every runnagate gives room,
Whose ear to every puling cry does bow.
Thou that to loyt'ring churchmen often do give, Bona mali^ contempta.

More goods then I shall scrape up whiles I live.
Do think this Lady is a servants hire?
Shall churchmen have her to possession?
No, first let her be molten in the fire,
Let her down to the earth, her mansion.
Shame that her beauty so celestial,
Should be a runnagate from one to all. Pecunia sersper enn^*

Nor you the son of careless diffluence,
Brother to looseness and intemperance,
Waster of thrift, master of large expense,
Whose wealth is of an hours continuance.
Prodigus ignorant (...).
That in one day throw'st more upon the water,
Then can be gathered a thousand after.
Thou like an Idiot, loving all but one,
Hating that one thou should love best of all,
Caring for all, except thy self alone,
Who of thy love should be the principal.
Alios euehis te deuehis.
Whilst most thy friends and flatt'rers thou make rich,
All thine own wealth is buried in the dich.
Fool, love thy self, cherish thy lusty years,
Be still propitious to thy self alone,
Shake off those spaniel-fawning flatterers,
Be loving to thine own, or kind to none.
Love others, but observe this cauear,
Adj^fis amicus, ibi charus
Thy Love to others does not weak thy state.
Lady, you see their sottish fopperie,
Both dissipating what you heap together,
Abjure, renounce, reject their company,
Or you must wend through countries every whither.
Alata Pecunia volat.
What nation in the worlds circumference,
But through it in their purses thou must dance.
Appeal to me, I am your zealous fauthour,
One that will hug you in my bosoms nest:
Be you to me my comforts only author,
And in this room set up your biding rest.
Auari ar^a lemper clansa*
Though all the world after your presence gape,
Yet hid with me, you from the world shall escape.
As if thou muck-hill-scraping Claudian,
Whose gowtie fingers fit a deluing spade;
Thou ten degrees under a Gentleman,
Continual driuer of an halting jade.
Thou simple hackney to a little profit, Muka fers nulla ausers.

Yet all being done, thou art got master of it.
Thou that to get a fat cheekt benifice,
Wilt on thy knees creep (...) the antique law;
Thou that have even as much respect to vice,
As birds with poison filling up their crawe. Fratrum quoque gratia rara.

Thou that art ever cosening one or other,
Thou that for profit will deceive thy brother.
As if thy shallow bare simplicity,
Could be a pew fellow for such a Queen;
As if thy mudde-polluted company,
Were object fit of her eyes to beseen^,
Auant transformed Auar^ia, Multos suscipit auar^ia sormas.

Thou art an abject of Petunia*
Base are the thoughts that dote on thy affection,
High is the mind of this unblemished creature;
Deformed are they which make thees hei^ election,
Reformed thou see (...) lovely (...)
No hope of (...) is expected there, Non (...) nubila stellam.

Wherein there does no likelihood appear.
Thou in the dust build'st thy felicity,
She sets her pleasure in high majesty:
Thou lowly Ant upon the ground do lie,
She mounts with Eagles plumes into the sky.
Aspiring thoughts fit not humility,
Baseness and splendor are most contrary. Cupit and simia esse generosa.

If thou have skill in some sweet Syramisme,
Or thou can train thy tongue to eloquence,
Or metamorphos rugged Barbarism,
Into smoothe phrases, and fine English sense;
Plus barbae quam ingenij.
Or can transform that fustie beard anon,
Into some new devised fashion.
If thou can turn those flat venetians,
Into a pair of fair Italian hose:
If thou can prove thy hat a gentleman's,
Or change the color of thy sack-sok't nose.
If thou suppose thy reed-thackt colonie,
Baucidis tectu^ celat louem.
Be residence for this great deity,
Then it may be she will thy cottage visit,
And thou shall have the presence of this Lady;
It may be she will note the mark, yet miss it,
It may be she will deceive thee, and it may be
A^ro non pauper affinis.
Sheel'e take it for an high indignity,
That thou should offer her thy company.
But thou base Puritan, who have much wealth,
And on the poor bestow'st it friuolously,
Do keep a diet to maintain thy health,
Pray'st in the Church, and live as modestly.
Apage Cupidinis ignem.
As any maid that lies alone in bed,
Fearing the shipwreck of her maidenhead.
Thou pure Idaea of a woman's face,
Thou civil curber of incontinence;
Thou that in gesture art as full of grace,
As any Lobbe in this circumference.
Sue more nitere colinum.
Thou that in plainness have a good proportion,
Thou that can do all things without extortion.
Go bid the Clarke ring day-bell earlier,
Bid the Churchwarden mend the broken grave,
Then go consult with parish-minister,
And see the poor man's box his due to have.
Dare thou aspire to be Pecunia's keeper, Omnia non omnes.

Who then to th'ankles never wadedst deeper?
No, sweet Pecunia, set thy resting place
Within the compass of my Indian chest,
A seat convenient for such a grace,
Fair Queen, appoint there thy eternal rest.
The master of it was an Emperor, Caesaris olim.

The next possessor be my Paramour.
No more, no more leand vices ministers,
(Quoth Liberalis) silence close your lips;
No more let vice lined with those mockes of hers,
Seduce your minds with Errors doting slips.
No more let Envy in an angry frown, Virtutis inuidia non mominerit.

Attempt to throw unblemished virtue down.
No more thou marshall unto diffluence,
Feed-leaudnesse in so bounteous a measure;
No more be waster of such great expense,
Nor fondly throw abroad Pecunia's treasure.
Pamper no more the gulf of gluttony, Tandem fatur esto Milanus.

No more be Bayliffe to foul Brothelry.
It Is thou that feeds the humors of Curtezans,
Making thy self a slave to wanton lust:
Through thee whole rowtes of cunning Artizans,
Do still decrease, who on thy kindness trust.
And when age makes their limbs unserviceable,
Thou turn'st them out as drones unprofitable. Non omni tempore^ val^s

What needst thou cast away a hundred pound
Upon one suit, nakedness couerture?
What need thy knees with forty crowns be bound*
A lower prised habit were as sure:
Iudis superbia sola est.
Only because thou would be counted gay,
Thou cast'st in scorn a thousand pound away.
Why's thy cloak set with wanton winding lace,
As if a labirinth lay on the cape?
It Is not the tailors credit, nor thy grace,
But th'imitate of some fantastike Ape.
Etiam and mundus stultescet.
Oh Idiot world, to what ripe foolerie,
Now metamorphos'd is thy progeny*
The poor with weeping voice salu^e thy door,
Sighing forth accents of calamity;
Yet sorrow nere so much, gets nere the more,
Thou hate to relieve deep misery.
Gnatonem amat.
If any Gnato at thy elbow^ stand,
Thou dol'st unto him with a bounteous hand.
The Temple as a dungeon thou abhorr'st,
The Church thou never gracest with thy shadow:
Let us go kill a light-foote in the forest,
Or trace the hare along the checkered meadow.
Venantucotiosi.
Couple thy hounds, and congregate thy men,
To hunt the shepherds ^oe out of his ^en.
Have thou a hound matched in mouth like a bell,
Whose ears will sweep away the morning dew?
Have thou an horse another Bucephall?
Have thou a proved hawke, penned in the mewe?
Resonabilis Echo.
Up to the groves, mark the discording sound,
Of tatling Echo, answering each hound.
Take thou the pleasure of this apish world
To be the portion of thy happiness:
Swel yet with pride, let thy fair locks be curled,
Thy self with sweet water and musk address.
Yet take pastime: Tempora mutantur.
The day (I dread) will come
Thou will be glad to beg a mite or crumme.
Its for the foul in civil cormorant,
Who hopes in time to purchase all the earth,
And make those things which now abound, be scant,
Causing of all things a continual dearth,
Unless some power celestial do barie
Thy mortal arm to stretch it self so far. Dij prohibeant.

What profit to the commons have procured?
How does thy cou'tous humor please the land*
What pains to hinder all have not endured?
What close conueyance do thou use in hand?
How often have thou bribed the Judges with gifts, Quem non angulum pecunia.

When thou art driven to thy narrow shifts?
Like to the Ape thou kill'st with cherishing,
And thou would: hug Pecunia to death:
Thou would even choke her midst thy pampering,
And with thy kisses clean suck out her breath.
In a close chest thou mean to have her pent, Eadem arc^ est carcer auarj.

And keep her there in lasting prisonment.
But sure all we about a thing contend,
To which we every one have certain right:
Let each man take the lot that God does send,
And the possessour yet be free from spite.
Is every man contented with her choice? Quem saelis^m habebimus.

Then Lady make one happy with thy voice.
Not so (qouth she) my skillesse ignorance
Cannot divine the virtue of you all:
Nor is it wisdom to decide by chance,
That which may cause repentance to befall.
Verbis non virgis.
Each truly manifest his dignity,
Then will I judge who has the victory.
Auarus.
I labor all the day yet rest at even,
After much sorrow finding pleasures gain:
Beginning work at five, ending at seven,
Then rest is acceptable after pain.
Post labores gaudium.
I plow my land with a long tedious toil,
Yet after reap the harvest of my soil.
Prodigus.
I all the day among gallant Ladies brave it,
Or at some time-beguiling sweet delight,
No pleasure in the land but I still have it,
Harmonious lulls me a sleep at night.
No sport unless I a spectator be,
Prodigus historionem.
No mirth, unless I am in company.
Nor labor I the liue-long summers day, Liberal.

Yet still am busied in good actions:
Nor do I triflle out the time in play,
Yet still use honest recreations.
Cum corpore men's.
In mind I work, whiles body is at leisure,
In body I work, whiles my mind is at pleasure.
Auar.
Mine eyes love objects that to gains are bent,
Those shows be pleasing that are profitable:
Mine ears love sounds that are to gains intent,
A purchase or a bargain commendable.
Dilligo dolum, domum, and donum.
Mine eyes applaud a well spi'de benefit,
Mine ears a crafty voice, or sharp-ey'de wit.
Mine eyes do wish each object princely crowned, Prodigus.

A scepter or some sence-bereauing sight:
Thine ears desire a kings maiesticke sound,
High powers thundering voice, accents of might.
Mine eyes applaud a sight-of Lordly pleasure, Mihi sola voluptas.

Mine ear a musical harmonious measure.
Mine eyes a virtuous demeand Love, Liberal.

Sweet Poesy, delightful Oratory:
Mine ears are pleased with words, that truth behoue,
With some good carall in an ancient story.
Mine eyes applaud nor benefit nor pleasure, Mihi comm^da virtus.

Mine ears nor crafty wit, nor Musiques measure.
I wish each ground mine eye surueys were mine, Auarus.

Then count I thence what profit would arise,
I think a voice that sounds gains divine,
No sweeter Music then commodities.
I covet not that which is not mine own, Liberal.

I never seek that which I near have sown.
I wish each glory did belong to me,
Or my estate were far beyond compare: Prod.

I wish in me lay chief supremacy,
Or none as I so featured, and so fair.
Nor I to too much glory do aspire, Libe.

Nor too much favor beauteous desire.
I step into no spendthrifts company, Aua.

Money's incurable presumption.
I scorn the Mysers rude society, Prod.

Good fellowship's damned contagion.
I hate both spendthrifts and a mysers mind, Libe.

Some spent, some gotten, yet no less I find.
Auarus.
I do not feed a strumpet with large gifts,
The greatest of all humane misery.
Prod.
I do not use cos'nages unlawful shifts,
An upright conscience infect enemy.
Lib ^.
Nor feed I strumpets, nor use cosenage,
But hating both, both's downfall do presage.
Aua.
Gold is my life: then life what dearer is?
Gold is my heart: who does not love his heart?
Prod.
Glory's my comfort, shall I glory miss?
Glory's my love, shall love from me depart?
Liberal.
Gold's dear to me, yet farlesse dear the^ life,
Glory is good, vain glory breeds strife.
Auar.
That week's unblessed that does not help me gain,
That day's accursed that does decrease my number.
Prod.
The place is Hell, that breeds my smallest pain,
The time is fatal that does work my cumber.
A time I hope for gain, a time for grief,
Liberal.
One time breeds danger, other yields relief.
Au^r.
Lady choose me, my riches do excel,
And I will make thee mistress of them all.
Prodigus.
Lady choose me, that in the city dwell,
Near to the court, a place celestial.
Libe.
Lady choose whom thou will, content and I,
Will stand to our edict in destiny.
Pecunia.
Nor must my treasures on the waters fall,
Then will they sink and never more be found:
I must not feed a spendthrift prodigal,
Nor let my heaps of gold with him abound,
Vna dies dissoluit Craesum
Who in a day dissolueth more in cheer,
The^ the rich Indian Mines yield in a year.
Nor must I live with a nice Puritaine,
One that does fear to counterfeit or lie,
One that nere utters a word in vain,
A precise master of simplicity.
Hence diffluence, auaunt poor purity,
For I cashier you both my company. Pura ma^odiosa.

Come sweet Auarus, hug me in thine arms,
Increase my heaps by thy assiduall toil,
Keep me secure from life-pursuing harms,
Preserve my splendor from all spotting soil.
Into thy bosom will I creep my love, Quis respuit anrum?

And on thy breast lie like an harmles dove.
Embrace me, kiss me, I am only thine,
Fortune says so, who contradicts her will?
Love me, adore me, be thou only mine,
We lovers are, and lovers shall be still.
Let crab tree-might use all authority, Lex mea iura tenet.

The law through bribes shall curb his enmity.
Enraged Prodigus blushing to see
(Even among the wicked, pride has overthrow)
A clown prefe^d before his dignity,
Burning in wrath, and mad in outward show,
Drew the revenger of all given disgrace, Quo tandem iracundia*

His sword, and ran it at Auarus face.
Running, I know not what celestial power
Stopped the success of his aduenturous case;
But when his wrinckled (...) began to lowre,
And his carier had budg'd one profer'd pace,
Three Goddesses (their shapes did tell me so) An Jupiter aspicit Irum.

Prevent (...) ill occasion d^^oe.
The first was like to lives imperial wife,
Yet lesser both in name and dignity*
It Is she that has possession of the knife,
Which cuts all humanes vital thread: it is she
Sua sint cuique
That is the great commandresse of the fates,
Giver of noble worths, and low estates.
Mistress of chance, great Queen of destiny,
Ordresse of lots, causer of alterations,
The puller down of Iouiall majesty,
And high erecter of base usurpations.
Volubilis estsors.
Whose mind a tottering carries hence,
Proud of her own high valued excellence.
Her name is Fortune: on her right side stands
A Nymph, that bore her ever turning wheel;
On the other side a King, who with his hand
Held out a globe, which like a bowl, did reele.
Fortune had after her, attendants three,
Parcae ne domina pareunt.
The fatal sisters of the Destiny.
The next to her succeeds Vice swaggering,
Her face being gilded ore, homes on her head;
Her Nymphs support a fair tree flourishing,
Laden with fruit, with guilt leaves honored.
In^ertilis arbor.
In every grain, in every branch thereof,
The gazers eye might well behold a scoff.
The last was Virtue, least in estimation,
A coxecombe on her beauteous head was placed,
Before a spotless white, behind, coronation,
With crowns and lovely girlands she was graced,
Non hominem vestis.
Her robe full of bright-shining stars was set,
By hands thrust out of clouds as black as I eat.
Three Nymphs in mourning vestures all araide,
Brought out a tree, half green, half withered,
Virtue her self weeping (poor hapless maid)
To see all men upon her worth to tread.
Whiles she is proud to wear the scorn of sots, Nescit stultitia vorum.

And have her garment dight with envious spots.
Stand not amazed poor mortals at this sight, Fort.

Lift up your eyes* if my great majesty
Dampe not you oplique sense: my radiant light
Dull not your intellectual perspicacie.
Nay do not fall: Quem vult fortuna tradit.
if I begin to frown
You need not fall down, for I Will spurn you down.
See you this Globe, this little toy called world,
Lying in due subjection to my powers?
Sometimes my hand into the air it hurld,
And then create I Kings and Emperors.
Sometimes I turn it, Ex officina princeps.
and inuest a clown,
Miraculously with a Princes crown.
It Is I that tumble honor to the ground,
And in the earth hide royal majesty;
It Is I that an unconquered foe astound,
Giving an Idiot best felicity.
I set a sottish cappe on Virtues head,
I cause vice chiefly to be honored. Vertus ignota

I thrust a coward into honors chair,
And make a soldier bare-headed stand,
Whilst they sit proudly scoffing his affair,
That dare not counterview an armed band.
I lift up fools, and to the wiser send
A most perplexed life, Haud longa sunt bona.
and sudden end.
I turn fair learning out to beggerie,
And in ragg'd vestments clothe an upright wit,
I tread upon the neck of royalty,
And unto wisdom give a raining bit.
Gallo dantur iemmae.
I gild false brows with fairest diadems,
And to the dunghill cock give richest iems.
I (to conclude) am maistris of the world,
All mortal things are in my regiment:
Frown, I cross fortunes to the earth are hurld.
Smile I, good happes answer each man's content.
Ventos non Iubee*
I have the four winds tutourd in good awe,
The world her breath does from this bosom draw.
Virtue thou droop'st, the more we make thee mirth,
Vice.
The more thou turn'st away thy scornful face:
If I look up to heaven, thou on the earth,
If I on earth, straight thou on heaven do gaze.
Laugh I, thou weepest: sigh I, thou art then merry,
Flet virtus, rider vitium.
And when thou see me lusty, thou art weary.
As if this stubborn opposition
Foolish contrarying of my humors choice,
Could get thee glories commendation,
Verba ventosa sapienti videntur.
Or to thy laud bend but one only voice.
Be of my school, and honor Vices meed,
And thou shall be adored wench indeed.
It Is not this plain domesticke achornisme,
This imitation of the common lay,
It Is not this sottish habit of precisme,
Can make thee be beloved: no wench, go gay,
Flourish in new commenced fashions,
Sis nobis homo.
And thou shall work strange operations.
Because thine eyes be surer witnesses
Then thy incredulous ear, tarry and view
My well replenisht schools, true worthiness,
The sight will make thee bid precisme adieu,
And think this show far to exceed the Lay Iunonis nuptias excellit.

That honored Juno at her wedding day.
The usher that thou see, does guide the place,
Teaching their steps indenting passages,
Is Folly, lo in what conceited race
She leads them on: Vix natum ingenium extinguitur.
her usual offices
Does teach them fondness, wanton reuelling,
Lightness of mind, and wits extinguishing.
The first and primate of my school is this,
He that has won the golden prize away,
All scraping covetousness, that would have his,
All that upon the earths massy round does stay. Auaritia sinc fu^^.

Pecunia is his peculiar,
Money his god, coin his familiar.
He thinks ere long to be the worlds chief master,
To bring all wealth to his subjection;
He Is ever getting, never found a waster,
It Is he that Argentum has in tuition.
Fair Aurum's presence now the Indians mis, Se^per est pauper, tamen.

For she has sworn for ever to be his.
The second scholar is his opposite,
The eldest son to dissolution,
Borne to great lands, yet in his head so light,
That all is spent in dissipation.
Scattering that in a minute, which his father
Was his whole life's time busied to gather. Vbi diffuis diploidem*

He fathers all these new found fashions,
And patronizeth all fantastic shows:
The very Ape of imitations,
Yet wondered at, like to an owl mo^gst crows.
His servants are the Parasite and Pandar,
Danus tibi non Aedipus.
And he to all such slaves, is a commander.

More savage then was ever Mirmidon,
Lies balls of wildfire near an heap of strawes,
To burn in flambes who ere he cast it on.
Il^uidia volat.
Armed with revenge, he rangeth up and down,
Tearing his hairs from off his bared crown.
Two poisonous snakes within his fists he gripes,
As if for anger he could sting his flesh:
An Owl he keeps, to waken with her shrikes,
To work revenge even whiles his wrath is fresh.
Inuido place^t and nex and nox.
Swifter abroad then Aeolus he rangeth,
And all his plots to dire effects he changes.

His eyes sink in his head through ceaselesse sleep,
His pace keeps pace with the snayles slothfulness,
His sight does an accustomed closset keep.
Inertia quanta?
Snorting he lies all night, dreaming all day,
So idely does he pass the time away.
He is the father of those dreaming fools
That creep like worms (more ugly they then worms)
Trembling to do their office in the schools,
Frai'd with the least tempestuous winds or storms.
Heavier then lumpes of lead, or heaps of clay,
Plunbans es
Harder then mountains to be moved away.
The fifth is daintie-throated gluttony,
Whose chief employed servants be all cooks,
He studies new-deuised cookery,
Strange Iunkets, wondrous dishes:
His house is naught but kitchen, Tune coqu^^
then I fear
Himself at length will prove a kitchiner.
He loves no fellows but good trenchermen,
None follow him, but they are smel-feasts named:
A well dressed supper he full soon will ken,
Out of his house he quite has hunger shamed.
Hunger exiled, Testantur genae.
depart unto thy cell,
His very looks thy sharpest force will quell.
The sixth is Pride, clad like the morning Sun,
When mo^gst the Pine trees on th'heaue^-thretning mountains,
He seeks his Clymene, his vestall Nun,
Or else at night hard by some nuptial Fountain
Wearing a Jewel dangling at her ear, Cuius laetissima.

Worth a kings revenues every year.
Ladies upon her train attend and wait,
Like to some goddess, or some Nymph divine
Her habit shows her: in her own conceit
Her glory does obscure bright Phoebus shine.
She deemes her self fair beauties quintescence, Venusne mortalis.

Mistress of glory, Queen of Eminence.
The seventh and last of these superior rows,
Is mine own darling, hight licentiousness,
That beauteous Siren that inchants with shows,
The very soul of Virtue blemishlesse.
Enticing bayt hung on a golden hook, Piscibus sit esca.

That can bewitch each doting gazers look.
Her breasts lie open to display the nests,
Where all the Graces make their residence:
Fair smooth, dugge-rising, and descendant breasts,
Clear snow white neck hedged with a silk soft fence.
Te videmus non tua.
Thrice fairer then my tongue can render thee,
The perfect mirror of formositie.
These be the chiefest scholars that I keep,
The firm vpholders of great vices seat:
All these my fellow darlings Iy-cleape,
Cause they as I be ever fortunate.
Vilorum est ne concordia^
Their powers be great, themselves are capital,
Their states alike, most vicious, one, and all.
A rabblement of petty graduates
Fill up the other angule of my seat:
As malice cloystur'd in some low estates,
Blasphemous oaths another corner get.
Hoc lingua illud men's.
Lying sits still inuenting truthlesse wonders.
Swearing euacuateth oaths like thunders.
Virtue if thou my scholar eke wilt be,
Adioyne thy self to this society:
Race off this badge of leane-fac'd purity,
Assume to thee some princely majesty.
Te^mine tegeris.
Thy virtue thus obscured in the worlds eye,
Does give disparage to thy dignity.
Think thou the world will love a dungeon,
Whose entrance breeds no pleasure to the eye?
Although within that loathed mansion
Worlds of delights, ages of pleasure lie.
Specietne approbat.
When th'outsides ugly show men's eyes do greet,
From it, strait from it, all their love does fleet.
How are thy inward parts be beautifi'de,
Be sure without to bear a proud appearance,
Within set baseness, and without set pride,
The badge of honor is true Iouisance.
Put on some glorious beams that may inflame
The hearts of men to honor thy great name. Labeius accipe plumus.

Dear mistress (quoth the Nymphs) now be thy self,
And like thy self shine in thy glorious feature:
Chase hence this scumme, this dross, this florisht pelf,
This out-adorned, in-polluted creature.
Let the world laugh, Vitij olent intestina.
fantastic follies net
Shall now be torn, all men shall Virtue get.
Happy, thrice happy is that purer mind
Whom wisdom keeps an adopted heir:
Oh sacred patron to a wit refinde,
Valiant vpholder of a soul so fair.
Virtue I serve, Virtutime.
and serving her I find
All loose affections slaves to my pure mind.
Hapie content the curber of my will,
Teaching necessity to dance in woe:
Giving to forward thoughts a rain, to still
The fickle humors, which eu'r changing go.
Virtue on earth sole monarch thee has crowned, Sort mea contentus.

Over all petiie virtues that are found.
What a nice brawling keep these cattes precise
Of petty virtues and content of mind? Vice.

First should these hands quite race out both these eyes,
Ere Fortune me so ceremonious find.
Here Is much ado about a thing of noughts,
Concerning quiet, Parturiunt montes.
and the ease of thoughts.
Cheek^-dimpling laughture, set thy merry fool
Amidst the sadness of this drouping rout:
Show them a franklin dancing in a hoole,
Whiles his young squire singes hooby in and out.
Asinus asininum fert dominum.
Show them a long-eard Ass his master beating,
Thou standing by, and both them Asses swearing.
Show them a shaven rusticke, in whose beard
Hiems cold Ice, not Himens bloomes are rise:
His gowtie fingerels enwristing hand
The tender-ioynted roundure of his wife.
Aspice caput.
Whiles she does dally and his hairs adorn,
She plants upon his head a goodly horn.
See there a monkey (oh faire-featur'd beast)
Creep to his mistress warm laps mansion,
Where her own husband (yet scarce he with rest)
Once in one twelve month has access upon.
Bestia cum b^st^js.
Thrice happy beast that granted art that place
Which men desire, yet still kept off a space.
Show them a Dyer wedding with a Bear,
As if his colors could transform the beast,
Or to the corpse another feature rear,
Or metamorphose her rugg'd hairy breast
Vetus Asinus nunquam sapiens.
Into some smooth and amiable form,
But it is impossible, she is too much worn.
How (ah how) can mine ears (Virtue began)
Abide the hearing of these vicious evils?
How can mine eyes behold base vice to scan
The top of honor with these glorious devils?
Ignoras pudorem.
Injurious strumpet hide thy face for shame,
For heaven it self does hate thy odious name.
Think it a glory to behold those fools,
Climing by grees unto the height of sin?
Take thou a pleasure to behold thy schools
With Oceans of wit drowned sots to swim?
Thou horred map of vile inequitie, Ridet. Xanthus.

Laugh'st thou to see thine own impiety?
If I would boast, I could arrest thine eyes
With fairer objects then thou yet did see:
I could acquaint thine ears with harmonies,
Sweeter then Syrens-chaunting melody.
But who knows not that who so Virtue loves, Borum and appeto and expeto

Vice from his eyes as odious remoues.
To counterchecke thy peacock-plumed pride,
I have a scholar called Humility,
Though poor without, yet inly beautifi'de
With hidden treasure, and fair dignity.
Pride is most rich in show, but bare in mind,
But him in show poor, Simia quamuis ornata.
in soul rich I find.
To counteruaile lusts great pre-eminence,
And all the crew of those lycentious fires,
I have affection ruling continence,
Honesties mistress, Queen of chaste desires,
A holy vestall, Vestalem te iudico.
whose virginity
Parts not but with her soul from spotless body.
The mean betwixt mudde-raking covetousness,
And looseness offspring, careless diffluence,
I have this liberal sparing bounteousnesse,
Free giver, yet with equal conscience.
Virtue on both sides stands environed
With two extremes, Medina saepissime virtus.
both vices chronicled.
To contrary thy Enuies biting hate,
And all the honor of maliciousness:
I have pure meeknes, who in all estate
Is still content with humble lowliness.
Nec vis, nec lenitas.
Hating ambitious Enuies angry sting,
Loving a mild and equal censuring.
If I would lay the glory of my school
Open to every vicious gazers eye,
I should amaze the sottish doting fool,
Quite overcome with incredulity.
Nescit me mundus.
But since the world my virtue does not know,
They hate my walks, and follow vice their woe.
Whiles I alone do walk along'st the streets,
Each vassaile gins to spit at me in scorn:
The more my honor, for ere this life fleetes
He shall be bandyed, and of joy forlorn.
Te propria reijciet domina.
Be quite rejected of his proper dame,
And die a death of vnrecouer'd shame.
This is the end of all thy minions,
Most wretched, fearful, and detestable:
What Is the precedent life's progression,
When the life's end is found so horrible?
Finis acta probar.
An evil act, attracts an evil end,
And by the issue still the worth is ken'd.
The end to which each man the world does see,
Is to extol our high Creators glory:
Each of thy scholars does the contrary,
And to the devil are contributary.
Sufficet esse ^eruum.
Oh honorable service, office high,
To undertake Hobgoblins baylifry.
Who but those men whom Follyes chaunting tongue,
Has metamorphos'd unto mindlesse sots?
Who but whom Vices witching Sirens song,
Has quite transformed to witless Idiots,
Will fly from Virtue, Placent Nigerimia nigro.
souls restoratiue,
To cleave to Vice, poisons ministratiue?
Cassandra thou presaging Prophetess,
(Thrice happy, if as soon believed as heard)
Why breathest thou tidings of happiness,
Amidst a rock of Adamants vpreard?
Whose breast thy silver news cannot yperse, Bona non adminuntur.

What credit they which Virtue does rehearse.
Deformed strumpet, or if vglier name,
May to a most detested wretch be right,
Blush monster, blush agent, to stubborn shame,
The underprop of Satan's powerful might.
Seducing mischiefs, Tenebrosum est vitium.
teaching ruder wights,
That Vice does rule by day, Virtue by nights.
Though I have like a pilgrim walked some-while,
Meating by steps the earths circumference,
With looser garments ouercasting still,
The modest splendor of my Eminence, Numquam sero

Trying if any breast that Virtue loved,
Would have this lump of sin from's heart removed.
But since my virtue was but modesty,
And all my garments simple plainness deemd:
Since my companion was integrity,
Meekness my page, (baseness of all esteemd)
I Am so rejected, Quem mihi monstras
that each man (oh grief)
Loves not himself, if I him seem to leefe.
But now nor thou presumptuous impudent,
Shameless vpbraidor, tyrannizing dame.
Shall with thy sugared tongue to pleasure bent,
Slurry with scandal Virtues glorious name,
Angelus in ^oro.
Nor like an Angel canonized be,
Wiles I am beaten with deep misery.
Nor thou dame cross bliss, recling mistress chance,
State alt'ring tyrant, who impuritie
Up to the height of honor do advance,
But tread'st with envious foot on piety.
Non semper Apollo valibis
No more shall thou with mischiefs cross my darling,
No more shall Virtues servants fear thy snarling.
Learning shall flourish inaugre all thy power,
Ripe wit shall scorn thy tyrannizing front,
All shall disdain thy hearts astounding tower,
Not one shall recke thy looks; look nere so scont.
Contento placent etiam in fortunia.
Meekness with smiling censure shall disdain
The fell infliction of disaster pain.
Nor mistress Minx that hight Pecunia,
Whom Vice constraines to be her feruitour,
Fortuna's darling, the worlds Helena,
Auarus life, liefe, love, and nouriture,
Liberali non deest bursa.
Shall cause a liberal purse empty to be,
And fill the bags of infrugalitie.
Now what a railing mistress Virtue keeps,
(Quoth Vice) stand'st thou upon thy pantostes?
Or do thou think that Vice and Fortune sleeps,
And cannot hear thy railing menacies?
Men's irritas^
I Will have a bi^^e to taine that too free tongue,
Or else it will insult ore me ere long.
Nay sure (quoth Fortune) she overthrows us all,
Who knows not but that Virtue can plead well?
For she has hony'd Eloquence at call,
And Rhetoric even at her beck does dwell.
But if her pride be over peremptory, Res fustibu^ agi.

Our hands and not our tongues shall win the glory.
Virtue because thou deem'st thy power worth
Beyond the estimation of compare,
We mean to wring thy deepest power forth,
And ere we leave, leave all thy glory bare.
For why, Nolentem incitas.
these insultations do spur on
Our forward force of indignation.
The Challenge.
Vice and my self with all our followers,
Whose power we certain are thou can not daunt:
Will and command thee with thy seruiters,
Either to our injunctions to grant,
That is to yield thy self for Vices slave, Te tua manus.

Or with thy hand dig thy eternal grave.
If thou refuse obeisance due to yield
Unto these articles; with speed prepare
To meet us with an army in the feeld,
Where both shall try their powers in the war.
Arm all thy troops, Iacente sole, emicat luna.
for thou shall honor us
By making our large force victorious.
Proud Impe (quoth Virtue) these audacious words
Argue in thee a most presumptuous spirit,
Although no crab but some good juice affords,
This plot does both thy joy and mine inherit.
Wherefore ere Virtue stoop to be a slave, Nescit virtus seruitudineo^.

She Will die in field, and there expect a grave.
The fittest place for war let me assign,
(The weaker comb^tant may choose his ground)
I know thou deem'st the conquest even now thine,
Thy hundredth soldiers to my one is found.
Ne angulo fiat.
Then for pure pity let me point the place,
When I am to receive mine own disgrace.
There is an Island bordering by France,
By ancient yore y cleped Albion:
Worthy of self, whom worthyer Peers advance,
Unto the name of Honors mansion.
In^^la ^aelix.
A royal seat of Iouiall Monarchy,
Full of vnconqu'rd rule to sovereignty.
Time-honour'd Albion having lost this name,
Is by the name of England famoused:
William the conqu'rour first won the same,
Rude then, and savage, scarce inhabited.
Hi^ virtus.
His royal issue have enlarged the land,
And made it famous by their conquering hand.
Thither repair to bring thy troops with thee,
There will we try the fortune of the day:
To whom great Jove assigns the victory,
The conquered to them shall stoop and say,
Victoria certa est.
Since heavens Creator, thee the victor made,
I have my corpse at thy feet captive laid.
This said, they parted: Fortune smiling still
To think of Virtues future overthrow:
Vice merry walking with conceited will,
Laughing sometimes to think on Virtues woe.
Virtue was modest hoping victory,
Modestia vincit.
Trusting the Gods would give her sou'raigntie.
High-minded Fortune, Virtues envious foe,
Strait put a supplication up to Jove:
That on her side the peers of heaven might go,
And all from Virtue would their grace remove.
But Maya's son these Letters intercepted, Ingenium vir^uti amicum.

And others in their room to Jove directed.
As from his sister Virtue he did write,
Craving assistance against the Queen of chance;
And against proud Vice her envious opposite,
Jove smiled and said he Virtue would advance.
Nor should proud vice, Virtus non Furtunae in seruiet.
nor haughty mistress Chance
Be able to withstand her puissance.
With that he strait enjoined Mercury
With winged speed to poast to Virtues tent,
Bid her assured be of victory,
For I have vowed that Fortune shall repent
That ever she assumed Vices part, Quis non tremit frato Jove?

And swore that Virtue mistressed his heart.
Swifter then lightling Tripos flies away,
And preinformes her of what should ensue;
Virtue reviving to him thus began say,
Celestial brother I am bound to you,
For being such my Fautour unto Jove, Ioui mea omnia.

To whom I owe both zeal and duteous love.
Sweet brother give immortal thanks to him,
Whose bounty far exceeds a mortal boon;
Virtue I trust now Vices power shall dim,
And Vice lie dead that all this while has shone.
Oh blessed day, oh three times blessed hour, Vi^tus super omnia latidem.

When Jove has given Virtue celestial power.
This said, into the air mounts Ma^a's son,
When at his coming to Jove's closet door,
Fortune he spied, who then to knock begun,
But Tripos staying her from knocking more,
Non vacat exiguis Ioui.
Told her that Jove was quiet and at rest,
Charging no wight his study should molest.
Fortune departs frustrate of her pretense,
And now the day of battle is assigned:
Virtue now glitters in her excellence,
Clad in most glorious habit, all refined.
Hic est pulchritudo.
A louelyer Damosel never eye could view,
Beauty in others feigned, in her was true.
The breast plate that she wore was lively Faith,
That did repel all darts y-throwne at her:
Hope as a fortress fore her self she laith,
To keep away each vicious menacer.
Omnes haec fert testudo capus.
Her head-peece is fair Comfort, which being on,
She seems to scorn, dread, death, confusion.
Next to her succeeds Liberality,
A valiant Captain, warlike Collonell:
With many Virtues in his company,
This a Lieutenant, that a Centinell.
Vim virtus habebit.
Thus was her army filled on every side,
Whole troops of souls unto her hourly hi'de.
Yet the least wing of Vices mighty host,
Was three times more then Virtues to tall band:
Till warlike Pallas did to Virtue poast,
And promisde help with her all conquering hand.
An Palladis arma?
Virtue reioyc'd, and in most humble manner
Desired Pallas to erect her banner.
Venus saw this, and made amain to Vice,
Vowing to lend her all her woman's power:
Mars missing his sweet Venus, in a trice
Departs to Fortunes band in angry stower.
Where spying Venus, Stygias iurauerit vmbras.
strait by Styx he swore,
To follow Vices colors evermore.
Jove seeing this, took thunder in his hand,
Descending all in lightning on the ground:
Amazed and aghast does Virtue stand,
Till Jove does waken out her drowsy stound,
And bids her be of comfort, Phaebum hodie obscuras.
for this day
She should outshine in Glory Phoebus ray.
The battle joined, Vice held up conquering hand,
Till Jove disdaining further dalliance,
Scattered his thunderbolts midst Vices band,
Which clean amazed the impious Queen of chance,
To see her army groueling on the ground, Quis Ioui ne opponi^;

Scarce one alive, yet not one dead was found.
Virtue now hastes unto Vices camp,
There taking all her servants prisoners;
Now Virtue Fortunes glory quite does damp,
She and her crew be only conquerers.
Fortune was made confess, Vineuntur gigantes.
and Vice to kneel,
Both true to her, that scorned her at their heel.
Jove gave strait charge to have them closely kept,
For breaking forth to such vile outrages:
Pecunia now to Virtues lappey-lept,
Begging for pardon for her stubbornness.
Virtue forgave her, Vltionem nescit Arere.
and forthwith disburs'd her
To Liberatis charge who straighwaies-purs'd her:
Vice they imprisoned, oh would they had slain her,
For she corrupted strait the Iaylors heart;
Indeed what closest prison could detain her,
Who with such witching passions acts her part?
Vitium repit sancium.
She crept abroad, though with a mortal wound,
But in short space recouer'd and was found.
Jove now departing, Virtue did command,
In England to set up her chiefest rest;
She should find favor at Eliza's hand,
With whom fair wisdom builded had his nest.
Virtus habet Elizabetham.
The Gods ascend to heaven, Virtue departs
To Our more then mortal Queen, ruler of hearts.
Fortune now frets to see her self thrown down,
And Virtue lifted to such dignity,
Truth at the last attained due renown,
Pecunia is disposed thriftily.
Anglia aetaten^ habet auream*
England thou art Pleasures-presenting stage,
The perfect pattern of the golden age.
Never be date of this felicity,
Never be alteration of this joy.
Never, ah never fail thy dignity.
Never let Fortune cross thee with annoy.
Te sospite Anglia sospes.
Never let Virtue by Vice suffer death.
Never be absent our Elizabeth.
Ever for ever Englands Beta be,
Feared of Forraines, honored of thine own,
Ever let treason stoop to sou'raigntie.
Ever let Vice by Truth be overthrown.
Viuat Regina.
Ever grant Heavens Creator, of our Queen,
We still may say she is, not she has been.
FINIS.

