A Treatise, Touching the Liberty of a Christian.

Written in Latin by Doctor Martine Luther.

And Translated into English by JAMES BELL.

At LONDON, Imprinted by Ralph Newbery and H. Bynneman.

Anno 1579.

To the right Honorable, and most virtuous Lady, Anne, Countess of Warwick.
AFter I had finished this simple Translation for the behoof of the
unlettered, some of my welwillers conceiving well of the matter, were very
desirous that I should present the same to some noble personage: others
challenging more knowledge in Courtly affairs, persuaded the contrary, being
of opinion, that though it might in some respect seem plausible enough, yet
the present being but simple, could not deserve to be advanced to Court,
especially to place of estate. And although I supposed, and partly knew, that
the opinion of the later was but weak in judgment: yet lo, it made so much
the longer stay in deliberation, by how much I was abashed in conceit, in
respect of my rudeness, and unaptness, to satisfy the learned, and Courtly
ears. Nevertheless, having clothed my Stranger in English attire (whom I call
a Stranger, in respect of the person, who was the first Author thereof.) And
well knowing the Court, to the great fame and honor thereof, by the space of
many years now passed, to have bin the rescue of all Strangers distressed, I
could not but believe, that in the Court, this Stranger so godly, so zealous,
so learned, should be both easily accepted, and gently entertained: and
encouraged by this well known experience, I yielded my self to the first
persuasion, and finding by general report (Madame) the noble ornaments and
gifts, I speak not only of nature, but of godliness, wisdom, and zeal,
joined with singular mildness and benignity, being the fruits of grace
amongst the rest especially, to shine in your sacred breast, I was thereby
emboldned to proceed, and above all others, to presume upon your honorable
patience, and to present to your honor this my poor Stranger: In whose
commendation I dare boldly affirm, that there was never any a more trusty
servant to his Master: never any of more undaunted courage in his Masters
cause: never any that adventured, or durst adventure farther: never any that
used more constancy, magnanimity, and force, in battering the fortresses of
the enemy: never any that pierced deeper, prevailed further, and procured
larger, for the safety of poor Christians, so many hundred years oppressed,
imprisoned, impouerished, yoked, and chained in miserable captivity, through
the monstrous outrage of that execrable Nimrod of Rome, amongst many of whose
exployts, albeit there cannot any one be found, that is not able to replenish
the Spiritual and true Christian man, with such, and so great joy, as can not
with my pen be expressed, yet in my simple judgment, this one little
treatise of his, which I have now above all others selected to translate, does
far excel and surmount in ghostly consolation, wherein are entreated no
vain, childish, or trifling toys, but sweet, delectable, serious, weighty,
and matters of great importance, namely, the pure faith of a true Christian
man, the joyful union and marriage of the most amiable Bridegroom IESV Christ,
to the poor miserable abject and wretched Soul, the well ordering of
christian life, and the gladsome christian freedom and liberty. Even such a
one is this my Stranger, whom, if it may please your Honor to vouchsafe unto
your honorable patronage, I shall not only account my self most happy in my
ch^i^e, but also (acknowledging your honorable courtesy in full satisfaction
of mine English cost, such as it is employed) yield my self doubly bounden and
indebted to your Honor in any thing which my pen may endeavor, or travel
may perform. The holy ghost, the Author of all goodness, and ghostly
consolation, replenish your heart with the most joyful freedom of his grace,
to the comfort of all such as travel in the building of Gods holy temple.

Your honors most humble at commandment, JAMES BELL.

To Leo the tenth, Bishop of Rome, Martyne Luther sends greeting in Christ
Jesus our Lord.
AMongst the monsters of this world, with whom I have bin in continual combat
these three whole years and more, I am enforced now at the length to turn
mine eyes unto you, and to have you in remembrance (O most holy father Leo)
yea, for as much as you only be accounted the very cause of this my turmoyle,
I cannot choose but be always mindful of you. And albeit I have been
constrained, through insatiable cruelty of your wicked Sicophants, raging
against me without desert, to appeal to the next general Counsel, little
esteeming the most vain decrees of your predecessors, Pius, and Julius, The
Decrees do prohibit to appeal to the general Councels.
who of a foolish tyranny have prohibited such appellatio^ to be made from the Sea Apostolic. Yet did I never mean whiles so estrange mine affection from
your holiness, but that I have with all mine heart wished all felicity and
happiness to you and to your See, and in my daily prayers with tears and
sighs, even to the uttermost of my power, have heartily besought God for the
same: But as for those which have hitherto practiced to terrify me with the
authority and majesty of your name, I have now begun almost to contemn and
account them of no force: only one thing yet remains, which I may not
despise, which occasioned me at this present to address my letters to your
holiness. And this it is, The cause why Luther wrote these Letters to the Pope.
because I perceive that I am accused unto your holiness, and very grievously
blamed for my rashness, in that I am supposed to have no consideration of your
personage.

Wherein, to confess the truth plainly, I am privy in mine own conscience,
that wheresoever behooves me to make mention your of person, I did never speak
thereof without all honor and reverence: the contrary whereof if I had attempted
at any time, I might not have been able to justify, and would by all means
possible have subscribed unto their judgments, conceived of me herein, and
withal would have applied to nothing more willingly, than to make open
recantation of this my temerity, and misdemeanour in that behalf: I have named
you a Daniel in Babylon: How Luther behaved himself toward the Pope.
and your notable innocence with how earnest affection I have defended against
your slanderous enemy Syluester, every reader does sufficiently understand,
namely, that the opinion and report of your unreprovable life, resou^ding in
each coast throughout the whole world, by the testimony of so many and so
notable personages is m^re famous and renoumed, than that it may be impeached
by the sinister practice of any man, though never so great a potentate. I am
not so void of reason, as to defame him whom all men commend, so also have I
been ever of this mind, not to seek the defacing of any one, though
otherwise infamous by report of al others for I rejoice not at another man's
blemish, who am my self a sufficient witness to mine own conscience, of mine
own great beam in mine own eye: nor can be the first that may cast a stone
at the woman taken in adultery.

Indeed I have accustomed my self to inueigh against wicked doctrines, Why
Luther was so vehement against his adversaries
somewhat sharply: and have pinched mine adversaries, not for their licentious
lives, but for their irreligious doctrines, somewhat earnestly: whereof it so
little repents me, that I am fully persuaded, without all regard had of men's
censures herein, to persevere in that vehemence of zeal: enduced hereunto by
the example of Christ, who according to the same zeal, spared not to call his
adversaries Vipers brood, blind Hypocrites, and children of the devil. So
does Paul accuse Simon Magus to be the child of Satan, full of fraud and
malice. Paul and the Prophets be sharp against the tenderlings.
And some others he reproves openly by the name of Dogs, Deceivers, and
crafty Simonists. Of whose sharp words, if nice delicates may be admitted
Judges, nothing shall be supposed more nipping and uncivil. What can be more
vehement than the Prophets? certes the manners of our age, The delicate manners
of our age.
are become so tender through the furious swarm of clawbacks, that we can no
sooner feel our soars a little discovered, but we exclaim forthwith that we
are launced: and being not able to crack the credit of the truth by any
cauillation, we flee from her, condemning her of currishnesse, impatience, and
modesty. How shall salt season if it be not sauory? what avails the edge of a
sword if it cannot cut? cursed is the man that does the Lords work
fraudulently. Wherefore I humbly beseech you (my reverend Leo) vouchsafe these
my letters for mine excuse, and withal persuade your self, that I never
conceived any evil of your personage. Then also, that I am so affected toward
you, as that I could heartily wish unto your Holiness all felicity for ever.
Luthers variance.
Moreover, that I am not at variance with any man, for conversation of life,
but only touching the only word of truth. In all matters else whatsoever, I
will give place to others, but the word, neither can I, nor will I forsake or
deny. Who so that judges of me otherwise, or has conceived otherwise of my
writings, does not judge truly, nor conceive thereof aright.

The Court of Rome.
But your See (which is termed the Court of Rome, and which neither you, nor
any man living can deny to be more filthy than Babylon and Zodome, and as
far forth as I can conceive, grown to most lamentable, forlorn, and most
shameless impiety) I have detested indeed, and have taken it very grievously,
that the people of Christ should be deluded under the countenance of your name
and your holiness, and under the pretense of the Church of Rome: and herein
have resisted, and will resist the same, as long as the spirit of Faith shall
live in me: not because I dare think to atchieue impossibilities, or that by
mine only endeavor, I may hope for any amendment in this most confusely
disordered Babylon, being circumuented with such a rabble of brainsicke
blaunchers: But because I do acknowledge my self indebted to my poor
brethren, whose safety I ought to regard; that the loss of them that perish
may be abridged, or at the least less infection may spread abroad from those
Romish botches. What stuff has issued from Rome into the world.
For these many years now Rome has surrounded the whole world with nothing
else, (whereof your holiness is not ignorant) but with utter destruction of all
things, of bodies, of souls, and with most pestiferous patterns of al mostrous
wickedness: which does rage at this day in the sight of all men, more manifest
than the Sun in midday: The Church of Rome.
And the Church of Rome which was sometime the most holy of all other, is
become the most licentious den of thieves, the most shameless Brothelhouse
of all the world, the kingdom of Sin, Death, and Hell, in so much that it
passes all reach of man to devise any abomination, that is not haunted there,
no though Antichrist himself were come.

In the mean time you (right reverend father Leo) sit as a Lamb in the
midst of Wolves, as Daniel a midst the Lions, and are with Ezechiel
conversant with Scorpions. How can you alone be able to w^thstand all these
monsters? Guard your personage with three or four Cardinals excellent in all
learning, and most virtuous in manners: what shall this handful do amongst so
great a troop? you shall all be sooner swallowed up with poison, before you
may dare attempt any reformation. The Court of Rome is utterly undone, the
wrath of God is bent against it even for ever and ever. It hates counsels, it
fears to be reformed, it is not able to restrain the furiousness of her
impiety: and it accomplisheth the prophecy of her mother, of whom it is written
on this wise: We have cherished Babylon, and she is not recovered, let us
forsake her. Indeed it belonged to you, and your Cardinals, to have cured those
plagues: but this gout scorneth the Physicians drugges, and this cart will not
go driven nor led. Moved therefore with remorse, herein I sorrowed always
(right reverend Leo) because you were enstalled Pope in this wicked age, whose
worthiness deserved a better time: For the Court of Rome is not worthy to be
possessed of you, and such as you are, but rather of Satan himself, Satan
raighneth at Rome, not the Pope.
which in truth does reign in this Babylon, more tha^ you. O would to God you
could content you self rather with some private benefice, or with your parents
patrimony, renouncing this portlinesse, wherewith those flatterers your most
detestable enemies, do vaunt you to be glorious, with which glory none are
meet to be glorified, but traiterous Iscariots, the impes of perdition. For
what commendation else do you get in that Palace (my Leo) but that by how much
any Teacher is more wicked execrable, so much the more safely he may shroud
him under your name and authority, to rob men of their money and souls, to
heap mischief upon mischief, to oppress Faith, Truth, together withal the
Church of God? Oh most unfortunate Leo, doubtless enthronized in a most
perilous place of renown: Eugenius was Pope, sometimes Scholar unto Bernard.
for I tell you the truth, because I do wish well unto you: For if Bernard
took compassion of his well-beloved Eugenius, when as yet there was some better
hope of the Sea of Rome, (though then also it was filthily emperious,) whereof
may we complain first, who have weltered these three hundred years now in
stench and destruction? Is not this true, that under the whole outstretched
face of the heavens, there is nothing more co^tagious, more pestiferous, and
more odious, tha^ the court of Rome? for it is more incomparably execrable,
than the turkish impiety, so that true it is indeed, that the same which was in
times past the gate of heaven, is now become a certain gaping gulf of Hell,
and so insatiable a gulf, as cannot possibly be satisfied, the wrath of God
being fully bent against the same. One only remedy remaining in the corrupt
Romish Church.
One only comfort remains for the poor wretches, if we be able to reclaim
and preserve some few at the least, from this wide gaping jaws (as I said
before,) Behold (my holy father Leo) by what inducement, and by what reason I
have inueighed against this chair of pestilence: for it is so far off from
my thought to grow in outrage against your personage, as that I would hope to
obtain your favor, and be deemed a stout patron of your safety, if I would
manfully, and valiantly crush in pieces the Gates of this your dungeon, or of
this your Hell rather: for howsoever the general force of all policy can
possibly imagine to work the utter ruin of the most horrible Court of this
age, the same shall redound al to your person, to the preservation of your
estate, and to the safety of many others together with you. Such as do work
her confusion, do execute your function. They do advance the glory of Christ,
which do by all means possible detest her. To conclude, they be right
Christians which are least Romanists.

But to speak hereof more at large. There never came any such thought into my
head, as to enueigh against the Court of Rome, or to discourse thereof any
thing at all: For when I perceived that all preservatives were medicinable to
procure her amendment, I withdrew me from her, and delivering her a libell of
divorce, I spoke unto her in this wise: He that is filthy, let him continue in
his filthiness still, and he that is unclean, let him continue in his
uncleanness still, yielding my self over to the calm and quiet study of holy
Scriptures, whereby I might be able to profit my brethren dwelling round about
me. Here now when as I could very little avail, Satan began to open his
eyes, and to prick forward his trusty servant John Eccius, Who did provoke
Luther to pursue the trecheries of the false deceivers.
a notorious enemy of Christ, swelling with a certain outrageous
licenciousnesse of glory, chalenging me to a combat unlooked for, tripping me
for one very little word escaped me unawares, touching the Supremacy of the
Church of Rome. This same proud prauncing Thraso, frushing in his Fustian
fumes, vanted lustily that he durst attempt all things for Gods glory, and the
honor of the holy See Apostolic: And being puffed up with saucy malapertnesse
of abusing your power, made no surer account of any thing, than of present
conquest, seeking thereby not so much the prymacy of Peter's chair, as his own
primacy peerless amongst all the Divines of this age, for the better
atchieuing whereof, he perceived that to lead poor LVTHER Captive, would be
not the least bravery of his triumph, which enterprise, because it happened
unluckily and contrary to the exhortation of the foolish Sophister, the man
waxed incredibly furious: for he perceived, that whatsoever infamy was raised
by me, against the Romish Church, was procured by his own only temerity and
rashness.

Vouchsafe here I beseech you (right reverend Leo) that I may here once defend
mine own cause, and discover your very natural enemies: It is not unknown
unto you, (I suppose) how your Legate the Cardinal of Saint Sixtus did deal
with me, Cardinal Caietane.
an indiscreet man, and uncivil, nay rather a false man: Into whose protection
when I had yielded my self and all mine estate for the reverence that I bear
to your holiness, he endeavored not to conclude a quietness which he might
even with half a word have established easily, when as I then promised to
keep silence, and put up my quarrel, so that mine adversaries might be
enjoined to do the like. But this glorious man, not satisfied with these
conditions, began to authorize mine adversaries, to give them free liberty, and
to enjoin me to recant, which was no parcel of his commission. Certesse,
when here the cause was yet in very good plight, through his immoderate
handling, it began to fester worse and worse, whereupon, whatsoever fell
afterward, was to be imputed, not to Luther, but to Caietanes vndiscretenesse
altogether, who would not permit me to be silent, and to remain in quiet,
which I did at that time most earnestly desire, for what might I do more?

After him came Charles Militius, Charles Militius.
and he also Legate of your holiness, who traveling many and sundry ways,
poasting here and there, forth and back, and omitting nothing that might
appertain to the redress of the state of the cause, which Caietane had rashly
and proudly disordered, could scarce at the length bring it to pass, (though
countenanced herein by the most renowned Prince Frederike the Elector) that he
might have once or twice some familiar conference with me, Judges of Luthers
cause chosen.
where I once again yielded to your authority, contented to hold my peace,
not refusing either Archbishop of Tryers, or the Bishop of Numburgh to be judge
in the cause, which was concluded and obtained. Whiles these matters proceeded
thus very orderly, behold the other, yea, a greater enemy of your estate,
Eccius. The disputation at Lypsia.
Eccius rusheth out with his disputation at Lypsia, which he had then
published against D. Conolastadius, and picking a new quarrel of the supremacy
of the Pope, bends his shot against me at unawares, and utterly dissolueth
this conclusion of Peace. In the mean time Carolus Militius attends the
success, Disputation begins, Judges are chosen: yet nevertheless, hitherto
nothing was determined, and no marvel, forasmuch as through Eccius false
lying, disse^bling, and false packing, all things were full of unquietness,
abounded in all melancholy, and fraught of all parts with confused disorder,
so that which way soever Judgment were given, greater storms would be raised:
for he sought for Glory, and not for the Truth. And here also I omitted no part
of duty that behooued me to do.

And I confess, that this was not the least occasion of the discovery of the
Romish trumperies: yet such as it was, if any offense grew thereby, it was
altogether to (...) imputed to Eccius, which undertaking (...) enterprise above
his reach, whiles he gaped ouer-greedily for his own glory, did display abroad
to the view of the whole world, the infamous estate of Rome. This, The
flatterer Eccius did hurt the Court of Rome more than the most mightiest enemy
else could do.
even this same Eccius is your enemy (my Leo) or rather the enemy of your
Court, by whose only example, a man may learn sufficiently, that there is
none more pestilent an enemy, than a flatterer, for what gained he by his
blaunching else but a mischief, which no earthly King nor Potentate could
bring to pass? for the name of the Romish Court does stincke now over the
whole world, and the Papane authority is very much crased, notorious ignorance
is generally cried out upon, whereof we should not have heard any one word at
all, if Eccius had not turmoyled the peace agreed upon betwixt Charles and me,
which now himself perceives plain enough, all too late, and in vain,
storming against the imprinting of my Books. Thus much behooued him then to
have thought upon, when like a wild untamed Colt, he raunged wholly for
glory, and when he sought naught else but his own advancement, under the
color of your holiness, to your marvelous detriment and danger;
notwithstanding the foolish vain man hoped, that I would have surceased, and
kept silence, being afraid of the sound of your authority (for of his wit and
learning, I do not believe, that he was so foole-hardie) and now perceiving
that I have taken courage, and my writings scattered abroad too much, being all
too late sorry for his unadvised wilfulness, he does understand, that there
reigns one in Heaven, who resists the proud, and casts down the haughty
of mind, if at least yet he conceive so much.

Therefore, when as by this our disputation, nothing was wrought but a greater
confusion of the Romish cause, Charles Militius makes now his third repair to
the elders of the order, being assembled in the Chapter house, desires advise
how to qualify the contention, which was even now grown to great trouble, and
wonderful peril: from whom (for as much as there was small hope now to
overthrow me, Gods mercy assisting me) some of the greatest pesonages were sent
unto me, to entreat, that I would have consideration of the estimation and
honor of your holiness, and that I should in humble letters, excuse both your
innocence, and mine own, declaring that the matter was not yet grown to so
despaired a case, as to be without hope of recovery, if Leo the tenth would of
his natural inclination to lenity, vouchsafe his aid thereto; here now as
one that has always both offered, and wished for tranquillity, that I may the
better apply my self to more quiet, and more profitable exercise, whereas I had
so vehemently turmoyled my self to this end, that in mightiness and force, as
well of words, as courage, I might suppress the insolency of them, whom I
perceived to be far unequal to match with me, I did not only yield
willingly, but with joy also and thankful mind, embraced the request, as a
most acceptable benefit, if it may prove according to our expectation.

Luther will not recall any thing.
In this mind I come now (oh holy father) and falling prostrate at your feet,
do most humbly beseech you to grant your assistance herein, and to restrain
(if it be possible) the outrage of these flatterers, the very cankers of
Unity, though masking under the vizor of peace. But to wish me to revoke that
which I have written (most holy father) it booteth not for any man to hope for,
unless he be desirous rather to have the matter to be more largely blown
abroad.

He will not suffer the thieves to make laws for interpreting Gods word.
Moreover, I do not allow these laws concerning the interpretation of Gods
word to be restrained to the Church of Rome, or tied to any place, for as much
as the word of God (which teaches freedom of all things else) ought not to
be straighted, and abridged of her freedom. The two conditions reserved,
there is else nothing but that I can both do, and suffer: yea, will most
willingly yield unto: I do late hate contention: I will challenge no man, and
I will not be challenged again, but if I be teazed, I will not hold my tongue
in my master Christ his behalf, for it is an easy matter for your holiness
to command silence, and quietness on both parts, the quarrels being summoned
before you, and determined, which I have always desired earnestly to hear.

Beware therefore (my holy father Leo) that you hearken not to these
enchanters, He councelleth the Pope not to he are flatterers.
which make you not a natural man, but half a God, and would enduce you to
believe, that ye are able to command, and exact whatsoever you list. It will
not be so, neither shall you prevail, you are the servant of servants, and
placed in the most dangerous estate of all others. Let them not beguile you,
which imagine you to be the Lord of the World, which will not permit any man to
be a Christian man; unless he be subject to your authority, which do chatter
and iangle, that you are of power to command in Heaven, in Hell, and in
Purgatory. Those, even those be your enemies, and seek the destruction of your
soul, as the Prophet Esaias does witness, O my good people, such as do praise
thee, even those do deceive thee. They are out of the way, which do extol
your majesty above the Council and universal Church. They are out of the way
which do inuest you only in the right of interp^^ing Scriptures, for such do
practice to establish in the Church all their own impieties, under your name.
And alas for woe, by the means of those persons, Satan has prevailed much in
your predecessors. To be brief, believe none of them that do magnify you,
but such as do humble you, for this is the judgment of God, He has thrown
down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and meek.
Behold what inequality there is betwixt Christ and his successors, when as they
all notwithstanding will be accounted Vicars of Christ. And I fear much, lest
many of them be his Vicares in deed a great deal too earnestly: for a Vicar
is he that does present the person of his Prince being not in place. What a
Vicar is.
Now, if the Pope do bear dominion whiles Christ is not present, nor resiant
within his heart, what is he else, than the Vicar of Christ? But what manner of
Church is that then else, but a rude multitude without Christ? And what manner
of Vicar is this else, but Antechrist, and an Idol? How much more truly spoke
the Apostles, who named themselves the servants of Christ being present, and
not Vicars of Christ being absent.

Peradventure, I shall be accounted a shameless fellow, that dare presume to
teach so mighty a potentate, from whom all others ought to be instructed, and
from whom all judicial Courts ought to fetch definitive sentence (as your
pestiferous clawbackes do arrogantly vaunt) but I follow the example of
Bernard, in his Book entitled De co^sideratione ad Eugeniu^ a necessary Book
for all Popes to know by heart. Neither do I take this upon me of any greedy
desire to teach, but of dutiful affection, in a pure and faithful zeal,
which does enforce us to be afraid, even of the most plausible things in our
neighbors: and being altogether exercised in the perils and profits of other
men, will not admit any respect to be had of the worthy or unworthy: for in as
much at I know, that your holiness is troubled, and tossed at Rome, that is to
say, in the maine sea of all sides environed about with infinite dangers, and
that you swim now in succourlesse waves miserably, as that you stand in need
of the meanest help of any your poorest brethren: I judged it a point of no
great absurdity, if I did lay aside the remembrance of your majesty for a
time, until I had executed the duty of Love. I will not flatter in so weighty
and perilous a cause: in which doing, if I be not conceived to be most
friendly, and most humble unto you, there is one that does conceive and judge.

To conclude, because I would not seem to come empty handed unto your
holiness, I bring with me this little Treatise, published under your name, as
a pledge of truce to be concluded, and of good success: wherein you may
somewhat conceive in what kind of studies I can, and am very desirous to
employ my time, more fruitfully and commodiously: if I heretofore might, or
hereafter may now conveniently be free from your wicked flatterers. The matter
is small, if you regard the outward coat, but if you comprehend the thing is
self, it is (if I be not deceived) a most notable pattern of a Christian
life, briefly co^piled. Neither have I ought else being a poor man to gratify
your holiness withal, neither need you any other present, than spiritual
consolation wherewithal I do recommend my self wholly to your fatherhood,
and holiness. Which I beseech Christ Jesus to preserve for ever. Amen.

At Wittenberge the sixth of September, in the year of our Lord, 1520.
A Treatise of Martyne Luther touching Christian liberty.
MAny men have been of opinion that Christian faith is an easy matter, yea of
them also not a few have accounted it in the number of Virtues, even as a
companion of virtue it self. And this have they done, because they have had no
trial thereof by any proof, nor have at any time tasted of what force and
power it is: whereas it cannot be possible that any man may be able to write
pithily, or understand effectually the things that are written concerning the
same truly, unless being pinched at some one time or another with some cross
of tribulation, he has felt the inward spirit thereof: But who so has had but
a mean taste of the same, can never possibly be satisfied with writing,
speaking, thinking, and hearing thereof. For it is a lively spring unto
everlasting life, John 4.
according as Christ calls it in the fourth of John. Wherein my self, albeit
I make no vaunt of my store, and withal do acknowledge the weakness of mine
imbecility, yet do nevertheless trust, that by means of sundry and grievous
temptations wherewith I have bin turmoyled, I have attained no small dram of
Faith. And that I am thereof able to treat (though not so eloquently, yet
certes more substantially) than those literal and over subtle schoolmen have
hitherto yet disputed, as men altogether ignorant in the things which
themselves have written. To the end therefore I may discover a more easy way to
the unlettered to wade herein (to whose capacities I do only apply my self) I
do set down first these two propositions touching the freedom and bondage of
the spirit.

The popositions.
1 A Christian man is a most free Lord of all, subject to none. 2 A Christian
man is a most dutiful servant of all, subject to all.
Although these two propositions so me to be mere contraries, yet when they
shall be found to have in them a certain sweet agreement, they will avail
very much for our present purpose. For Saint Paul is the Author of them both,
namely, in his first Epistle to the Corinths the twelfth Chapter, Being
otherwise free, 1 Cor. 12.
I made my self servant of all. And in the thirteenth to the Romans. Romans 13.
Owe nothing to any man, but that ye love one another. But love is naturally
dutiful, and humbly obedient to the thing that is loved, Even so Christ,
though Lord of all, yet being borne of a woman, was made under the law, both
free altogether, and a servant, at one self time in the shape of God, and in
the shape of a servant.

Let us enter into some higher and more deep consideration of those sayings.
Man does consist of two natures, to wit, spiritual, and corporal. In respect
of the spiritual nature (which some do term to be the soul) he is called
spiritual, inward, and of the new man: In respect of the corporal (which some
call the flesh) he is called the carnal, outward, and the old man. Of the
which the Apostle in the second to the Corinthians, 2 Cor 4.
the fourth Chapter. Although our outward man be corruptible, yet our inward
man is renewed day by day. So that it comes to pass through this diversity,
that in the Scriptures two contraries are affirmed of one self same man,
because that these two men being within the same one man, do keep continual
battle against each other, Whilst the flesh does covet against the spirit,
Gala. 5.
and the spirit against the flesh, as in the Epistle to the Galathians the fifth
Chapter.

In what things Christian liberty.
First therefore let us examine the inward man, and see by what reason he may
be made just, free, and a true Christian, that is to say, spiritual, new, and
an inward man. And it is certain, that no external thing at all (how glorious
title soever it bear) is in any respect auayleable to the attayning of
Christian righteousness, or freedom, as neither of any value to the procuring
of unrighteousness or bondage, which is proved by a very easy demonstration.
For what avails it to the soul, if the body be in good lyking, health, and
full of life: If it eat, drink, and do freely what it lists, when as even
the most wicked abiectes, bondeslaues of all mischief, do enjoy the same?
Again, what loss does the soul sustain by sickness, imprisonment,
scarsitie of food, thirst, or by any other external disadvantage, when as the
very reprobate, and such as be clear void of all good conscience, are
molested with the same. None of all those external casualties do extend to
the freedom, or bondage, of the soul. In like manner it shall be to small
purpose, if the body be garnished with gay Coapes, such as Priests do wear,
or be conversant in holy sanctuaries, or be exercised in holy Mass and
Mattens, or if it pray. fast, abstain from certain meats, or do inure it
self to what so ever exercise wrought and possible to be wrought by the body
and in the body. To the freedom and righteousness of the soul is requisite
matter of far greater importance, whereas those external things aforesaid,
may happen unto the most wicked, by practicing of the which, they become no
better than plain hypocrites. Contrariwise, it shall nothing prejudice the
soul, to have the body clad with unhallowed garments, to frequent profane
places, to eat and drink of all sorts of meat without choice, not to bleat out
prayer by note, yea to pass over all those works aforesaid, which may be
performed by the very Hipocrites.

Be it also that we reject all things, yea, even speculations, meditations,
and whatsoever may be done by the endeavor of the soul, it profits
nothing. One thing, Gods word necessary for the soul.
yea and that only and alone is needful to the attainment of life,
righteousness, and Christian liberty, which is the sacred word of GOD the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, according to the Testimony of Christ himself in the
eleventh Chapter of John. I am the resurrection and life, John 11.
he that believes im me, shall not dye for ever. And in the eighth Chapter of
John. If the Son make you free, John 8.
you shall be truly free. And in the fourth Chapter of Matthew. Matthew. 4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Let us therefore take this for a strong and an undoubted
Bulwark, that the soul may want all things except the word of GOD, without
the which nothing in the world can preserve her in safety: But having the word,
she is rich, destitute of nothing, for as much as the word of GOD is the word
of life, of light, of peace, righteousness, salvation, joy, freedom, wisdom,
power, grace, glory, and inestimably the treasure incomparable of all
goodness. And this is it that moved the Prophet in all his Octonary and in
many other places, David.
with so many deep sighs and gronings to skriche out, and to call upon the
word of God. Famine of Gods word an horrible plague. Amos.
Again, neither is there any more horrible a plague of Gods wrath, than whiles
he sends famine of hearing his word. As he speaks in Amos: as neither is
there any greater grace than if he spread abroad his word, as is specified in
the 107 Psalm. Psalm. 107.
He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destruction.
Neither was Christ sent to any other ministry, then the ministry of the word,
nor is the Apostolical Bishopric, and whole order Ecclesiastical, called
and instituted otherwise, than to the ministry of the word.

Which is the word of God.
But thou will demand, what word of God is this, and after what manner must it
be used, considering there be so many words of God? I answer, the Apostle in
the first to the Romans does express the same, Romans 1.
namely, the Gospel of God concerning his son incarnate, crucified, risen
again, and glorified by the holy Ghost the sanctifyer. For Christ has
preached, that is to say, has fed the soul, has justified, delivered, and
saved the soul, if she believe his doctrine, for Faith only is the safe and
effectual use of Gods word, as to the Romans the tenth. If thou confess with
thy mouth, and believe with the heart, Romans 10.
that GOD has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And again, The
end of the law is Christ, unto righteousness to all them that do believe. And
to the Romans the first, Romans 1.
The just man shall live by his own faith, for the word of God cannot be
comprehended and embraced by any works, but by faith only. Even so it is
manifest, that as the Soul has need of the only word, to obtain
righteousness and life, Faith only justifies.
even so it is justified by only faith, and no works; for if it might be
justified by any other means, then should it not stand in need of the word,
and so consequently no need of faith. But this faith cannot consist altogether
with works, that is to say, if thou presume to be justified together with
works, whatsoever they be, for this were even to halt on both legs, to
worship Baal, and to kiss the hand, which of all other is abominable, as
witnesses Job. Therefore, Job.
when thou beginnest to believe, thou do learn withal, that all things in
thee are altogether blameworthy, sinful, and damnable, according to that
saying of the Apostle in the second to the Romans, Romans 2.
All have sinned, and have need of the glory of God. And to the Romans, 3.
There is none that does good, all have declined out of the way, they are
altogether become unprofitable: for if thou know this once, thou shall know
that it is necessary for thee to hold fast Christ, that believing on him, who
has suffered for thee, and is risen again, thou may be made another man
through this faith, being made free from all thy Sins, and justified by the
merits of Jesus Christ only.

Therefore, for as much as this faith cannot bear dominion in any, but in the
inward man, according to the testimony of Paul in the tenth to the Romans, Romans
10.
With the heart we do believe unto righteousness. And for as much as this
faith only does justify, it is evident that the inward man cannot in any wise
be justified, made free, Man is not justified by any external thing.
and saved by any external work or exercise, and that works whatsoever,
avail nothing thereunto, as on the contrary through impiety, and only
unbelief of the heart, man is made guilty, and the bondslaue of sin, and not
by any external sin or work. And therefore the first and principal care of
every Christian man ought to be in this especially, that setting aside all
vain confidence of works, he strengthen his faith more and more, and by
daily increasings grow in knowledge, not of works, but of Christ Jesus crucified
for him, and risen again, as Peter in the last of his first Epistle teaches,
for as much, 1 Pet. ult.
as none other work does make a true Christian man. So Christ in the sixth of
John, when the Jews asked a question what they should do to do the works of
God? excluding the multitude of works, wherewith he perceived them to swell,
and puffed up in pride, did prescribe unto them one only rule, saying, This is
the work of God, John 9.
to believe on him whom he has sent, for him God the father has sealed. From
hence right faith in Christ duly proceeding, Faith a treasure inestimable.
is a treasure inestimable, containing in it self all salvation, and
preserving from all evil, as in the last of Mark, Mark. 16.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, he that believes not,
shall be damned, which treasure Esaias inwardly regarding, did in the tenth of
his Prophecy say, The decreed consumption ouerfloweth with righteousness, and
the Lord of hoasts shall perfectly fulfill the thing that he has determined in
the midst of the whole world, as if he had said, Faith which is a brief and
summary fullness of the Law, shall replenish the believers with so great
righteousness, that they shall not have need of any other help to attain
righteousness: and the same does Paul testify in the tenth to the Romans,
Romans 10.
For with the heart we believe unto righteousness. But thou do ask by
what means it comes to pass, that faith only may justify, and give such a
treasure of so great goodness without works, seeing that ye whole scriptures
do prescribe unto us so many works, so many ceremonies, and so many laws? I
do answer, above all things be mindful of this chiefly that has bin spoken
of before, to wit, yt only faith without works does justify, does deliver, and
does save, which we will make more manifest hereafter. In the mean time seal
up this, that the whole Scripture of God is divided into two branches, namely,
The Scriptures have commandments and promises.
commandments and promises. Indeed the co^mandeme^ts do teach good things, but
ye things that are taught by the^ are not forthwith performed, for they do
pronounce what we ought to do, but do not give power to do the same, but are
instituted to this end, to discover man to himself, by means whereof, man may
know his own disability toward the good, and so despair of his own strength:
and for this cause they are called the old Testament, and so they be indeed. As
for example, Thou shall not covet, is a Commandment, by the which we are
convinced all to be sinners, because man cannot choose but covet, whatsoever
his endeavor be to the contrary, And therefore, that he may not covet, and so
consequently fulfill ye commandment, he is compelled to despair of himself,
and to seek elsewhere for help of another, which he is not able to find in
himself, Osee.
as Osee says, Thy destruction comes of thy self, O Israel, and thy health
only from me. All the commandments be equally impossible to be accomplished by
us.
The observation of which one commandment, is general to be observed in all
ye rest, for all ye co^mandeme^ts are in all respects alike impossible unto us,
and beyond our reach. Now when man is taught his own weakness by ye
commandments, and thereby brought into perplexity, how he may be able to
accomplish ye law, knowing yt the law must be so of al parts accomplished, yt
no one jot so much, The Law must be satisfied.
or title thereof may be pretermitted, otherwise in danger of eternal
damnation irrecouerable, being the^ truly humbled, and embased to naught in his
own eyes, he finds nothing in himself, whereby he may be justified, and
come to salvation. Lo, here comes the other branch of the Scripture, namely,
the promises of God, which do bring the glad tidings of the glory of God, and
speak on this wise. It thou will fulfill the Law, and not covet, as the Law
requires, behold here a remedy, Believe in Christ, in whom be promised unto
the, grace, righteousness, peace, freedom, and in whom thou shall have all
things if thou believe, and without whom thou shall lack all things if thou
do not believe, for that which is impossible to thee in all the works of the
Law (which be many, and yet vnauayleable to salvation) thou shall very easily,
We accomplish all by faith.
and briefly atchieue and bring to pass through faith, because God the father
has so established all things in faith, that whosoever have faith, may
possess all things, and whosoever lacks faith, may possess nothing, Rom 11.
for God has shut up all things under unbelief, that he might have mercy on
all. God only commands, and performs.
On this wise the promises of God do give freely unto us, that which the
commandments do exact of us perforce, and do fulfill that, which the law
does straightly command: that so all things may belong unto God only, as well the
commandments, as also the performance of the same. Only God commands, only
God performs, and therefore Gods promises have relation to the new Testament,
yea rather are the new Testament it self.

For as much therefore as the promises of God be holy words, true, just,
peaceable, and full of all goodness, it comes to pass, The first arm of
faith.
that the soul which does cleave steadfastly to the same, with an unshaken
faith, is become so united unto them, yea is also wholly so swallowed up of
them, that it does not only partake thereof, but is thoroughly gorged, and made
drunken with all the power and force of the same: for if the touching of Christ
did give health, how much more shall a very tender feeling of the word in the
spirit? nay rather a through swallowing down of the word, communicate to the
soul all things that appertain to the word. By this means therefore, the
Soul through faith only without works, believing in the word of God, is
justified, sanctified, pacifyed, delivered, and replenished with all goodness,
and it is truly made the daughter of God, as it is said in the first of John,
He gave the^ power to be made the sons of God, John. 1.
even them that do believe in his name.

By this it may be easily perceived, from whence says has received so great
force, and why neither any one, nor all good works are comparable unto her,
because no work can cleave fast unto Gods word, nor be within the soul,
wherein faith only, and the word, do reign and govern, for such as ^word is,
such becomes the soul, made by force of the word, even as a fiery plate of
iron does glimmer like unto fire, by means of uniting the fire and the plate
together, so that it is manifest, that to a Christian man faith suffices only
for all, and that he needs no works to be justified by. Now if he need no
works, the^ also he needs not the law: if he have no need of the law, surely
he is then free from the law. So this also is true. The law is not made for the
righteous man, and this is ye same Christian liberty. Our faith which does
work in us, not to be idlers, nor to give our selves to lust and evil life,
but that we be not tied to a necessity of observing the law, or doing works,
to ye end to obtain righteousness, Another arm of faith.
or salvation thereby. Let this be the first arm of faith, and let us see
another, for this also is the duty of faith, that it reverence him on whom it
believes, with a most godly and earnest bent affection, to wit, that it
account him true, and worthy to be believed, for there is no honor like unto
the opinion conceived of truth and righteousness, The greatest honor
wherewith we do most highly esteem of him whom we do believe, for what are
we able to ascribe to any person, more tha^ truth, righteousness, and goodness,
of all parts perfect and absolute? Contrariwise, it is a detestable reproach,
to conceive a secret opinion of a man to be false, The greatest reproach.
faithless, and wicked. So the soul, as long as it believes steadfastly in
God that makes the promise, does account him true and righteous, than which
opinion can nothing be more acceptable to God. This is the highest honor of
God, to ascribe unto him truth, justice, and whatsoever else ought to be
yielded to him whom we do believe: this man yields himself ready to execute
all his will: this man does sanctify his name: this man suffers himself to
be exercised, Perfect obedience.
according to the will and pleasure of God, because cleaving firmly to his
promises, he doubts not but that he is true, just, wise, and will do, dispose,
and govern all things for the best: but is not such a soul by the same his
faith most humbly obedient to God in all things? what commandment remains
then, which this obedience has not sufficiently satisfied? what fullness can
be more absolute, than all manner of humble obedience? but this obedience
comes not by works, but by faith only, and believing the promises. On the
other side, what Rebellion? what impiety? Rebellion.
what greater reproach can there be unto God, tha^ not to believe him when he
promises? for what is this else, than either to make God a lier? or to be
doubtful of his truth? that is to say, to ascribe truth to himself, and to
condemn God of vanity and lying? wherein does he not deny God, and make to
himself an image of himself in his own heart? what avail deeds (I pray you)
wrought in this unbelief? though they seem never so Angelical, or
Apostolical? And therefore very well did God conclude all, not in wrath and
lust, but in unbelief, lest such as feign that they have fulfilled the law
through chaste and meek works of ye law (such be virtues humane and civil)
should presume upon their salvation, when as being shut up in the sin of
unbelief, they must either seek for mercy, or to be damned through justice.
But when God does see truth to be ascribed unto him, God does honor them that
believe on him.
and that he is worshipped with the faith of our heart, which is as much honor
as he desires, then does he honor us again, and imputes unto us truth and
righteousness for this faithes sake: for faith, in yelding to God his own, does
work truth and righteousness, and therefore God does recompense our righteousness
again with glory, for it is true and just, yt God is true and just. So also, to
ascribe unto God justice and truth, and to confess ye same, is to be true and
just. 1 King 5.
To this effect we read in the 1 of the Kings, the 5 Chapter, Whosoever does
honor me, I will glorify him: and whosoever does despise me, shall be naught set
by. The same also pronounces Paul to the Romans, Romans 4.
the 4 Chap. That to Abraham his own faith was imputed unto righteousness,
because through the same he gave unto God ye glory most absolutely, and that if
we believe, faith shall be imputed for the same cause unto us for righteousness.
The third arm of faith, The third arm of faith.
which is a jewel inestimable, is this, that it coupleth the soul with
Christ, even as the spouse with her husband. The uniting of the soul unto her
spouse
By which sacrament (as Paul ^eacheth) Christ and the soul are made one flesh.
If they be one flesh, then is there a ^rue marriage betwixt them, yea, rather, a
marriage of all other most perfect, abso^utely accomplished betwixt them (for
the marriages betwixt man and wife be but slen^er figures of this union)
whereupon it fol^oweth, that all things are common betwixt the^, as well good
as bad, so that whatso^^er Christ does possess, the faithful soul may boldly
presume upon the same, and triumph over them, as though they were his own.
Likewise, whatsoever appertains ^o the soul, the same may Christ challenge
unto himself, as if they were his own. Let us compare these together, and we
shall perceive inestimable treasure. Christ is full of all grace, life, and
saving health the soul is fraught full of all sin, Behold inestimable
treasures.
death, and damnation. Now let faith come betwixt these two, and it shall come
to pass, that Christ shall be laden with sin, with death, and with hell,
but unto the soul shall be imputed grace, life, and salvation, for it
behooves Christ, if he be the husband, to accept, and jointly possess the
things appertaining to his spouse, and withal, to communicate to his spouse
the things that appertain to his possession, for he that gives unto her his
body, and himself wholly, how can it be, but that he must give her all things
else withal? and he that is possessed of the spouse, how does he not withal
possess also the things appertayning to the spouse? Here comes lo to the
view, a most sweet spectacle, not only of communion, but of a comfortable
battle of victory of salvation and redemption.

For in as much as Christ is God and Man, and such a person, as never yet
sinned, never dies, nor is damned, yea such a one, as neither can sin, no^
dye, nor be damned, and that his justice his life, his saving health, is
vnvanquishable, everlasting and omnipotent, when as (I say) such a person does
communicate to himself, yea rather does wedde (as his own) the sin, death,
and damnation of his spouse through the weddid King and union of Faith. And
that the case now stands none otherwise, then as if they were his own proper
peculiar, even as it himself had sinned, were traveling, dying, and
descending into hell, to bring all things in subjection: And that sin, death,
and hell could not swallow him, being all of necessity clean swallowed up in
him by a miraculous conflict (for his righteousness is greater than the sins
of all men: his life surmounteth in power all death, his saving health is more
victorious than all hell) even so the faithful soul, through the assuredness
of her faith in Christ her husband, is delivered from all sins, made safe
from death, guarded from hell, and endowed with the everlasting righteousness,
life, and saving health of her husband Christ. On this wise Christ does cople
her unto himself a glorious Spouse without spotte and wrinckle, clensing her
with the fountain in the word of life, that is to say, through faith, the word
of life, of righteousness, and of salvation. Even so does he marry her unto
himself in faith in mercy, and compassions, in justice and judgment, as he
testifies in the second of Osee. Ose 2. The Majesty of this royal marriage.


Wherefore who is able to value the roialtie of this marriage accordingly? who
is able to comprehend the glorious riches of this grace? where this rich and
loving husband Christ does take unto wife this poor and wicked Harlot,
redeeming her from all evils, and garnishing her with all his own Jewels. For
it is impossible now, that her own sins should destroy her, since they are
laid upon Christ's shoulders, and swallowed up in him, since also it does now
possess the same righteousness in her husband Christ, of the which she may
now embolden her self, and presume upon them as in her own right against all
her own sins, against death and hell, and may with confidence encounter the
enemy, and say, if I have sinned, yet my sweet husband Christ, in whom I do
believe, has not sinned, all whose riches are mine, and all mine are his: As
in the Canticle of Solomon. My well-beloved husband to me, and I unto him This
is that Paul speaks of in the first to the Corinths the fifteenth Chapter.
Cor. 1. the 15. chapter.
Thanked be God which has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord: Even
the victory over sin and death. And in the same place he brings in, that
sin is the sting of Death, but the force of sin is the law.

Hereof therefore you do understand again, For what cause faith is so much
esteemed.
what the cause is that faith is so highly commended: that it is able alone to
fulfill the law, and to justify without any help of works: For thou do
perceive how the first commandment, The true worship of God.
Thou shall worship one God only, is now accomplished by Faith only: For if
thou were nothing else from the sole of the foot, to ye crown of the head but
good works, yet should thou not be just, nor should thou worship God, nor
fulfill the first commandment, for as much as God cannot be worshipped,
unless the praise and glory of all truth and all goodness be truly ascribed
unto him: but this cannot works bring to pass, only the faith of the heart
must atchieue this. For we do glorify and confess him to be true, not by
working, but by believing. In this respect Faith only is the righteousness of
a Christian man, and the accomplishment of all the Commandents: For he that
does accomplish the first Commandment, does fulfill all the rest with no
labor at all. For works being things without sense, cannot glorify God, though
they may be practiced to Gods glory, being joined with faith. But we, at this
present, enquire not the works wrought, of what quality they be: but we do
enquire of the person that makes ye works, that glorifieth and brings forth
the works: Faith maeeth works
And the same is the very Faith of the heart, the head and substance of all our
righteousness: whereupon it follows, that the doctrine that teaches the
satisfaction of the law by means of works, is blind and perilous, for as much
as before all works, it behooves that all the Commandments be accomplished,
and that works do follow after this fulfilling of the law, as we shall hear
more at large afterward.

But to the end we may more manifestly behold this grace which this our inward
man does possess in Christ, it is to be observed, that in the old Testament,
The prerogative of the first birth.
God did sanctify to himself the first borne of every mankind, and the first
brith was wonderfully esteemed, surmounting all other in double honor: Namely,
in the Priesthood, and in the kingdom, for the first begotten brother was
Priest and Lord of all other: under which shadow Christ was prefigured unto us,
the true and only first begotten of God the Father, and of the virgin Mary, and
the true King and Priest: Whereof the kingdom of Christ does consist.
but not according to the flesh and the world, for his kingdom is not of this
world, he reigns and sanctifies in spiritual and heavenly things which are
righteousness, truth, wisdom, peace, salvation, etc. Not as though all things of
this world and of hell, were not also in subjection unto him (otherwise how
could he preserve and defend us from them all) but because his kingdom does
consist neither in them nor of them. Even so neither his Priesthood does
consist in outward pomp of apparel and gestures (such as the humane
Priesthood of Aaron was, Christ's Priesthood.
and as our ecclesiastical Priesthood is at this day) but in spiritual
things, by the which he does make intercession for us unto God the father in
heaven, by a certain invisible office, and there does offer up himself, and
performs all things that behooued a Priest to do. Priestly office. Paul to
the Hebrews.
Even as Paul does describe him by a figure of Melchisedech in his Epistle to
the Hebrews. Neither does he only pray, and make intercession for us, but also
does teach and instruct us, inwardly in spirit with the lively doctrine of his
spirit, which two are ye peculiar properties of a Priest, which also is figured
in carnal Priests by prayers and visible preachings. How it is to be taken
that faithful Christians be Priests.


And even as Christ by his first birth did obtain these two dignities, so does
he impart and communicate the same to every his faithful spouse, by the right
of the foresaid marriage, whereby they are al spouses, whosoever are espoused to
ye husband. And hereof comes it, that we all that believe in Christ are
Priests and kings in Christ, as in the first of Peter the second Chapter, You
be a chosen kindred, 1 Pet. ^.
a people of adoption, a kingly priesthood, and a priestly kingdom, to the end
you should show forth his power, who has caled you from darkness, into his
marvelous light: which two are thus to be taken.

First as concerning the kingdom, Christian kings.
every faithful Christian through Faith is so advanced above all other things,
that in spiritual power he is become Lord over all, so that none of all the
creatures can do him any harm at all: Nay rather all things are made subject
unto him, and compelled to serve for his safety, according to the testimony of
Paul in the eight to the Romans. Romans 8.
All things do work together to the elect to good. Likewise in the first to
the Corinthians, the third Chapter. All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.
whether it be life or death, things present, or things to come, Note.
but you are Christ's. Not that to every Christian, all preeminence is given in
bodily power to possess and rule over all things (which furious frenzy has
bewitched many our Prelates every where) for this dominion is proper to Kings,
Princes, and Potentates of the earth: whereas the very use and manner of our
lives, does sufficently teach us, that we are subject to all, that we do
endure many tribulations, yea, and even die ye death. Nay, rather, by how much
a Christian does excel in Christianity, by so much the more is he subject unto
all inconveniences, vexations, and deaths, as we may easily see in the very
flower of ye first borne Christ himself and all his holy brethren. The
spiritual kingdom.
This power is spiritual, which does bear dominion even in the midst of
enemies, and is mighty even amiddest the very tortures, which is nothing else
in effect, but that power is made perfect in weakness, and that in all things
I may make gain for my safety: insomuch, that the cross and death it self
may be compelled to serve for my behoof, and to work my salvation: and this
is that high and notable dignity, yea, that true and omnipotent power, the
spiritual kingdom, wherein nothing is so good, nothing so bad, which shall
not work to my good, so that I believe. And yet have I need of nothing
(since only faith does suffice to salvation) but that faith may in the same
exercise her force, and the dominion of her liberty. Behold now this is that
inestimable power and liberty of Christians.

So also we be not only most free kings of all other, but we be Priests also
for ever, We be Priests for ever.
which does far surpass all kingdoms: For through our Priesthood we are
made worthy to appear before God, to plead and pray for other men, and one to
instruct the other the things that are of God. For these be the offices
peculiar unto Priests, which can in no wise be committed to any unbeliever.
Such a prerogative has Christ obtained for us, that as joint brethren,
coheires, and ioyntkings, so also we should be unto him ioyntpriests, presuming
boldly with confidence through the spirit of Faith to preach unto the presence
of God, and to cry unto him Abba Father, and to pray for each other, and to do
all things yt we see to be executed and figured by the visible and corporal
function of the Priests But unto the unbeliever nothing serves or works unto
good, All things evil to the unbeliever.
but he is become servant of all other, to whom all things turn unto evil,
because he does wickedly employ all his endeavor for his own behoof, and not
to the glory of God. And by this means he is neither Priest but profane,
whose prayer turns unto sin, nor does appear before God, because God does
not hear sinners. Wherefore who is able to comprehend the pre-eminence of
Christian dignity? which through her own kingly power executes dominion over
all things, over death, life, sin, etc. and which through her priestly glory
is able to work all things in ye sight of God, because God does bring to pass
ye things for the which he does pray and wish, as it is written, He shall work
the will of them that fear him, and shall hear their petitions, and shall
save them, To this glory surely is no possible access by working, but only by
faith and belief.

By the premises may every man easily perceive, The liberty of Christians.
by what means a Christian man is free from all, and Lord over all: so that to
become just and saved, he shall not need any works at all, but through faith
only obtains all those things sufficiently: who if he would be so mad, as to
presume to be made a just, a free, and a safe Christian, by force of any good
work, he should surely lose his faith forthwith, together with all his good
works, which folly is aptly moralized in that fable of Esop, where the Dog
swimmeth in the water, and carrying flesh in his mouth, deluded with the shadow
of the same flesh glittering in the water, whiles gaping with open mouth, he
snatcheth after the shadow, he both loses the true flesh, and the shadow
withal.

Here you will ask of me, If all be Priests that be in Christ's Church: by
what title then may they (whom we call commonly Priests now) be discerned
from Lay men? I do answer: There is a great injury committed against these
words, to wit, Priest, Clarke, Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, whiles they be
translated from all the rest of the Christians, and be abridged to these few,
which through evil custom are termed Church men: For holy scripture does
make no difference betwixt them, saving that it entituleth them by the names of
Ministers, Servants, and Stewards, which do now vaunt themselves to be Popes,
Bishops, and Lords, which ought to minister to others in preaching the word,
to teach the faith of Christ and Christian liberty: For albeit this be true,
that we be all Priests indifferently, yet can we not all, nor yet ought we
all minister and teach publicly, though we were all able to do so: For so
does Paul teach in his first to the Corinths, the fourth Chapter. Let men so
esteem of us, 1 Cor. c. 4.
as ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God.

To what issue the ministry Ecclesiastical is come.
But this Stewardship is now enhaunced unto so mighty a Potentate and pomp of
power, and unto a certain terrible tyranne, that no kingdoms of the Gentiles,
ne yet any Empyres of the whole world are not able to counteruaile the same in
stateliness. As though lay people were a certain somewhat besides and no
Christians at all. Through which perverseness it is come to pass, that the
true knowledge of Christian grace, Christian faith, and Christian liberty, yea
of Christ himself, is come wholly to utter ruin, whiles, in the mean space,
an importable clogge and intolerable bondage of men's works and traditions are
crawled up in his place, and we (according to Ieremies lamentations) are become
vassalles of the most vilest varlettes of the world, which do abuse our misery
to work all infamous filthiness, and shameful reproaches of their beastly
licentiousness.

But to return to our purpose again. How Christ ought to be preached.
I suppose that by the foresaid demonstrations it is made manifest, that it
suffices not to a true Christian man to preach the works, life, and doctrine
of Christ, after an historical manner, and utter the same, as in telling of
tales, as though to know them to be patterns of framing our lives, were
enough (like as they use to preach which are now accounted the best) much less
if it be utterly concealed, and insteede thereof men's constitutions and
traditions be taught to supply the place. There be some now a days, and they
not a few, which to this purpose do preach and teach Christ, that they may
move the affections of the people to bewail the passion and torments which
Christ suffered, and to be displeasant against the Jews, and such other
childish and fond matters of no great importance. But Christ ought to be
preached to this end, that faith in him may increase, that it may appear, that
it is not enough, that there is a Christ, but that he may be a Christ (which
is a Savior) unto thee and unto me: And that he does work the same in us,
which is mentioned of him, and is agreeable to the name whereby he is named:
which faith springs, florisheth, and is preserved by this, if the preaching
do notify the cause wherefore Christ came, what he brought with him, what he
gave, and to what use and purpose he is to be embraced. And this comes to
pass, where Christian liberty (which we do attain by him) is truly taught:
and by what means all we Christians are Kings and Priests: wherein also we
be Lords over all: and upon what this our affiance (that whatsoever we do is
well pleasing and acceptable to GOD) is grounded, as I have said before.

For whose heart hearing these things will not melt for very joy, The fruit of
true preaching
and wax ravished in love of Christ, having received so great a consolation?
to the which love he can never possibly attain by any laws or works at all:
what is he that can hurt such a heart, or may apall the same with fear? If
conscience of sin do rush upon him, or horror of death amaze him, lo, it is
ready to trust in the Lord, nor is afraid for any such evil noise, nor is
disquieted, until it do despise the enemies, for it believes that Christ's
righteousness is become his own righteousness, and that his sin is now no
longer his own, but Christ's sin. But it behooves that all sin be
swallowed up at the very sight of Christ, through the faith of Christ, as has
been declared before, and learn now with the Apostle, to tread upon, and
triumph over sin and death, and to say, Death, where is thy sting? Death,
where is thy victory? the sting of Death is sin, but the power of sin is
the Law. God be thanked, who has given us victory through Jesus our Lord, for
death is swallowed up through the conquest, not of Christ only, but our own
also, because it comes to pass by our Faith, that the conquest is made ours,
and that in the same we do overcome.

Let this suffice touching the inward man, touching his freedom, and touching
the principal righteousness of Faith, which neither need th^awes nor works,
which will turn to his destruction that dare presume to be justified by them.
Now let us return to the other part, to wit, the outward man: For in this
treaty answer shall be made to all them, The demand of them which do not
conceive Luther, yea rather which do not conceive what faith is.
who being offended with the word of Faith, and with the things that have been
spoken of before, do reply on this wise against us. If Faith do accomplish
all things, and if Faith be only and alone sufficient unto righteousness, to
what end then are we commanded to do good deeds? we may go play us then,
and work no working at all, being furnished sufficiently with faith, I do
answer, Not so ye ungodly, not so. In deed this matter would even so fare,
as you say, if we were perfectly and altogether the inward and spiritual men:
which we cannot be in any wise, before the last day at the rising again of
the dead. So long as we be clothed with this mortal flesh, we do but
begin and proceed outward in our course toward perfection, which will be
consummated in the life to come. And for this cause, the Apostle in the eight
to the Romans, Romans 8.
does call this the first fruits of the Spirit, which we do enjoy in this
life, the tenth and fullness of which spirit we shall receive in the life to
come. To this belongs that whereof we spak before, namely, that a Christian
man is servant of all, and subject to all, for in this that he is free, he
works nothing, but in this, that he is a servant, he works all things. Now
let us see how these two will stand together. Albeit man be sufficiently
justified by faith in the inward Man Spiritually, as I said before, enjoying
all that he ought to have, saving that he must by daily encreasings enlarge
this same faith, and riches of grace, until he be unclothed of his flesh, yet
remains still in this mortal life, upon the face of the earth, wherein he
must of very necessity nourish his own body, From whence works take their
beginning
and be conversant amongst men. And even here now works do begin to take their
entrance. Here we may not give our selves to idleness. Here now we must apply
our selves earnestly to exercise this body with fastings, watchings, labors,
and other moderate disciplines, to bring it in subjection to the spirit, that
it may become obedient to faith, and conform it self to the inward man, and
yt it rebel not, nor hinder the spirit, following therein his own natural
inclination, if it be not otherwise tamed: for the inward man being alike
fashioned unto God, and created after the image of God, through faith, is both
joyful, and comfortable, for the love he has to Christ, The only work of the
inward man.
in whom he is endued with so many good things, whereupon in this only does it
occupy it self, namely, to serve the Lord with a free love, with joy, and
thanks.

Now whiles it is exercised in this course, behold in her own flesh it finds
a contrary will, which trauelleth altogether to serve the world, and to seek
the things that are her own, which the spirit of Faith cannot away withal,
nor is able to endure it, and therefore with valiant courage attempteth to
subdue and tame this rebellious will, as Paul witnesses in the seventh to the
Romans, I am delighted with the Law of God in mine inward man, but I see
another Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading
me captive into the law of sin. And in another place, I do chastise my body,
and bring it into subjection, lest whiles I preach to others, I my self may be
found a castaway. And in the fifth to the Galath. Galath. 5.
They that are of Christ have crucified the flesh, and the concupiscences
thereof.

Of what mind we ought to be in doing good works.
But neither we may do these works in any wise, being of the opinion that man
may be justified through them in the sight of God. For this false opinion is
not tolerable in ye eye of Faith, which Faith is the only righteousness before
God. But in these works we must be of the mind, so to bring the flesh into
subjection, and to cleanse the evil concupiscences thereof, that it may not
bend the view of the eye to any thing else, than to the mortifying of evil
concupiscence and lust: For when the soul is washed clean through faith, and
made the dearling of Christ, it would also desire that all things else, yea,
and her own body chiefly might be purged together withal, to the end all
things in her might love, and glorify God together, whereby it comes to
pass, that man through an enforcing necessity of the flesh, may not give
himself to idleness, and for that cause is constrained to do many good
things, to the end he may bring his body into subjection. And yet these works
are not of such power, as to be able to work man's justification before God.
But man of a very pure love, does work the same, to the service and obedience
of God, beholding in them nothing else than Gods good will, unto the which he
would most willingly and dutifully yield alhumbie obedience in all things.

By this means every man may easily direct himself, How the body ought to be
chastised. Note.
how he ought most orderly (as the saying is) and most commodiously attemper
his own body, for he shall fast so much, watch and labor to much, as shall
seem most expedient, for the taming of the wantonness and licentiousness of
his body. But those that do vaunt to be justified by works, do regard not ye
mortificatio^ of ye flesh, and the lusts thereof, but the works themselves,
being of opinion, that if they do very many, and great good deeds, they are
thereby in good case, and are become just therewith: sometime hurting the
brains, and destroying nature utterly, or at least making it unprofitable. And
this is a wonderful folly, and gross ignorance of Christian life, and of
Christian faith, to have a will to be justified and saved by works without
faith.

A notable similitude.
But to the end that which we have said may more easily be conceived, let us
make demonstration thereof by similitudes. The works of a Christian man being
justified and saved through his own faith, by the mere and free mercy of God,
ought to be of none other value and estimation, than the works of Adam and
Eve, and all their children should have bin in Paradise if they had never
sinned, of whom God spoke in the second of Genesis on this wise, Genesis 2.
God did place man, whom he created, into Paradise, that he might work and
manure the same. But God created Adam just and perfect, and without sin, so
that he should not have need to be justified and made perfect by any his own
work, endeavor, and safe keeping. But to the end he should not be idle, God
enjoined him this work, to manure Paradise, and to keep it, which works had
bin truly most free, wrought in respect of nothing, but of Gods good pleasure
only, and not to procure righteousness thereby, wherewith he was fully endued
already, and which also should have bin jointly in the creation of us all.

To the same effect be the works of the faithful believer, Faith does
restore into Paradise.
who through his own faith being restored again into Paradise, and created
again of new, needs no works to become, or made just thereby. But because
he should not be idle, but manure his own body, and keep it, he must do
such works of freedom in respect of Gods good will only, saving that is not
yet fully created again anew with perfect faith and love, which behooves to
be increased daily, yet not by force of works, but of their own strength.
Take yet another example. Another examples
An holy Bishop consecrating a Church, Bishopping children, or executing some
other parcel of his function, is not himself consecrated a Bishop by force of
those exercises, nay rather unless he had bin a consecrated Bishop before,
none of al these works could have been to any purpose, but accounted rather
childish, altogether foolish and apish. Even so a Christian man, being first
consecrated by his own faith, does work good works indeed, yet is he made
thereby never a deal the more holy, or the more a Christian, for this is the
work of faith only, yea rather, unless he did first believe, and were a
Christian before, all his works would not be worth a straw, but rather very
wicked, and damnable sins.

And for this cause these two sayings be true, Two notable sayings.
namely, Good works do not make a good man, but a good man does make the
works to be good. And evil works do not make an evil man, but an evil
man does make the works to be evil, so that it behooves always, that the
substance or person be good first, before all good works, and that good works
follow then by order, and proceed from a good person, as Christ himself
witnesses. An evil tree does not bring good fruit, and a good tree does not
bring evil fruit. For it is evidently known by experience, that the fruit
does not bear the tree, and that the tree does not grow in the fruit, but
contrariwise, the trees do bear the fruits, and the fruit does grow in the
trees. Therefore, as it is necessary that the tree be first before the fruit,
and that the fruit does not make the trees good or evil: But contrarily, such
as the tree is, such is the fruit, so is it necessary, that the person, or man
himself be either good or badde first, before he make a good or bad work,
and that his works make him neither good nor badde, but the man himself
makes his own works good or badde.

Semblable heereunto may we see in all occupations. Another example.
An evil house or a good house does not make an evil or a good Carpenter, but
a good or bad Carpenter makes a good or badde house. And so generally in all
kinds of manual occupations and sciences, no piece of work does make the
Artificer good or bad, but such as the Artificer is, such work makes he: even
so fares it in the case of men's works. Such as the person is either in faith
or in unbelief, such is his work, if either done in faith, and so good, or
done in unbelief, and so evil. But contrariwise, it is not so, to wit, such
as the work is, such is the person, made in faith or unbelief, for as works
do not make a man to be a believer, so neither do they make a man righteous.
Only faith justifies.
But faith, as it makes man believing and righteous, so does it make his works
to be good. For as much therefore as works do not justify any man, and that
it behooves man to be righteous before he work any good work: it appears
most manifestly, that faith only by the mere mercy of God through Christ Jesus
in his word, does make worthy, and sufficiently justify, and save the person:
and that a Christian man needs no work nor law at all, thereby to attain
salvation, for that through faith he is free from all law, and does freely
work all things that he works of his own mere good will, respecting therein
neither profit, nor salvation, but only the good will of God, for as much as he
is now already fully replenished, and made safe by the grace of God through his
own faith.

Even so no good work avails to righteousness and salvation to the
unbelieving person. On the other side, The unbelieving person is not made evil
by works.
no evil work makes him evil or damnable, but his own unbelief, which
both makes the tree evil, and withal, makes the works evil and damnable,
whereupon in this, that any person is made good or badde, he does not receive
this being good or badde by works, but this his good or evil takes beginning
from the root of faith or unbelief, as the wise man records, The beginning
of sin is to fall from God, which is in effect, to be unbelieving. Heb. 11.
And Paul in the 11 to the Hebrews, It behooves him that comes to God, to
believe. The same also speaks Christ, Either make the tree good, and the
fruit thereof good, or make the tree evil, and the fruit thereof evil, as if
he might say, who so will make good fruits, must begin at ye tree first, and
plant upon a good stock, so who so will make good works, must begin, not at the
working, but at the believing, which belief does make ye person good, for
nothing makes the person good, but faith, nor any thing makes him evil, but
unbelief. Works do make a man good, but that is in the sight of men. Matthew 7.
Indeed this is true, that by works man is made good or evil in the judgment
of men, but this is as much in effect, as to do it to understand, and let it
be known who be good, or who be evil, whereof Christ speaks in the
seventh of Matthew, You shall know them by their fruits. But this knowledge
consists only in show, and outward appearance, and semblance, wherein many
are deceived that presume to teach and prescribe, whereby men may be justified
in the mean time, making not once so much mention of Faith at all, masking
still in their own mismaze, The original of some men's error.
always deceived, and deceiving others, going forward from worse unto worse,
blind guides of the blind, wearying themselves with a multitude of works, and
yet never attaining to true righteousness, of whom Paul writes in the 1. 1 Timothy
3.
to Tim. the 3. Chap. Having indeed an utter show of holiness, but denying the
power thereof, always learning, but never attaining to the knowledge of the
truth. Therefore behooves him yt will not wa^der out of the way, with these
blind guides, to enter into a deeper consideration, tha^ the utter show of
works, of laws, and doctrines of works, but must rather with a quite
contrary aspect pry into the person, and note diligently the reason, whereby
man is justified: and here shall he find, that man is justified and saved, not
by works, nor by the law, but by the word of God, that is to say, by the
promise of his grace, and by faith, that so the glory thereof may redound to
the majesty of God, Who has saved us that believe, not by the works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his own mercy, through
the word of his own grace. Rules to understand the doctrines of many.


Whereby it remains easy to be known in what respect good works are to be
rejected or embraced, and in what sense all ye doctrines of men touching works
ought to be understood: for if works be compared to righteousness, and be
practiced by a perverse Leuiathan, and of that false persuasion, to presume
upon ye obtaining true justification thereby, they do now enforce a necessity
unavoidable, and do utterly extinguish liberty and faith withal, and so even
by this means are now no more good, but merely damnable, for they be not now
free, but blasphemous to the grace of God, whose only property is through
faith to justify and save, which things works do affect to bring to pass,
not of any their ability, but by a wicked foolehardinesse only, issuing from
our own gross ignorance: by reason whereof they do violently rushe, and
intrude into the office of grace and the glory thereof. The reason of Luthers
Doctrine.
For this cause therefore we do not reject good works, but rather do most
heartily embrace and teach them: Neither do we condemn them in respect of
themselves, but in respect of the wicked addition given unto them, and perverse
opinion conceived of them, in thattayning of righteousness: whereby it comes
to pass, that they appear good only in show, being not good in deed, and in
truth, thereby being themselves deceived, and deceiving others also, as
ravening wolves clothed in sheep skins.

And this Leuiathan and perverse opinion in works cannot possibly be
reclaymed, where pure faith wants, The work of Leuiathan.
nor is remoueable from these holy workmen before that Faith the vanquisher
thereof come in place and bear dominion in the heart. Nature is not of it
self forcible enough to expel it, no not so much as to take notice thereof,
but esteems it in place of a most holy will: whereas if custom prevail, and
take deep rooting in this perverseness of nature (as is already brought to
pass through wicked teachers) it is an incurable disease, and leads astray
innumerable people into destruction unrecoverable. And therefore albeit it be a
commendable thing to preach and write gloriously of repentance, confession, and
satisfaction, yet if they surcease here, and proceed no further, even to ye
instructing of faith: such doctrine doubtless is deceivable and deuilish: For
even so Christ with his beloved John did not only say, Repent ye of your
sins: But added also the word of faith, For, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Preachers must exhort to Faith.
For the one part of Gods word ought not to be preached alone but both together
must be taught: both new and old must be delivered out of this treasury, as well
the voice of the Law, as the word of Grace. The voice of the Law must be
uttered, that the people may be terrified, and framed to know their sins, and
thereby be turned to repentance, and amendment of their former life. But here
forthwith must not stay be made: for this were only to wound, and not minister
plaster: to lance, and not to heal: to kill, and not to quicken: to lead unto
hell gates, and not to deliver from thence: to throw down altogether, and not
raise up. Wherefore the word of grace also, and the word of promised
forgiveness, ought likewise to be preached, to instruct and raise up the faith,
without the which in vain is the doctrine of the law, of contrition, of
repentance, and of all other things also practiced and preached.

Indeed there remain as yet certain preachers of Repentance and Grace, From
whence repentance or Faith do proceed.
but they do not disclose the law, and the promises of God, in that lively
spirit and force as others capacities may attain to the true fountains and
spring head of Repentance and Grace. For Repentance proceeds from out the law
of God, but faith or Grace does issue from Gods promise. As the Apostle
witnesses in the tenth to the Romans. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.
but hearing comes of the word of Christ: Wherefore it comes to pass, that
man receives consolation, and is raised up through Faith of Gods promises, who
otherwise through the threatenings and terrors of Gods Law, is brought low, and
thrown down into the knowledge of himself. Psalm. 29.
Whereof the Psalmist in the xxix. Psalm. Mourning shall dwell until the
evening, and ioyfulnesse until the morning.

Let this suffice to have been spoken of works in general, Of works toward
our neighbors.
and of those works also which a Christian man does exercise toward his own
body. Lastly, we will speak of those works which ye Christian does employ to
the use of his neighbor. For man does not live unto himself only in this
mortal body, to work in the same, but to all men generally upon the earth,
Nay rather man lives only to other men, and not to himself: For to this end
does he keep his body in subjection, that he may thereby more sincerely and
freely serve to the necessities of others. As witnesses Paul in the 14. to the
Romans. Romans 14.
No man lives to himself, and no man dies to himself. For he that lives,
lives unto God, and he that dies, dies unto God. It is not possible
therefore, that in this life man should be idle and unfruitful toward his
neighbors. For of very necessity he must talk, work, and be conversant
amongst man. Even as Christ made to our likeness in properties, Baruch. 3. A
Christian must apply himself to all men.
was found to be as man, and conversant amongst men. as Baruch testifies in
his third Chapter.

And yet he needs none of all these to procure righteousness and salvation.
And therefore in all his works behooves him to be so framed in mind, and to
direct his whole affection only to minister to the necessities of others, to
seek the commodity of others, in all his deeds, having regard to nothing else,
than to the behoof and profit of his neighbor. For even so ye Apostle
commands us to work with our hands, that we may have wherewith to relieve
the necessity of our brethren: whereas otherwise he might have said, To what
end the body must be cherished.
to have wherewith to cherish our own bodies: but let him give (says he) to him
that is in need: For the property of true Christianity is, to regard the state
of his own body, to this end, that through health and well preserving the
same, he may be able to labor to gain riches, and to employ them to the
relief of the needy. That so ye strong member may help the weak member, and
that we may be the sons of God, careful, and traveling each for other,
bearing one another burden, and by this means fulfilling the law of Christ.
Behold here the true Christian life, this is the natural lively faith, The true
Christian faith.
effectual through love: that is to say, when it breaks forth into the work
of most free service, with joy and love, wherein he does freely and of his own
accord, minister to others, reknowledging it self fully satisfied with the
abundance and riches of his own faith.

After the same manner when Paul had made evident to the Philippians, how rich
they were made through the faith of Christ, in ye which they had received
plenteousnesse of all things, he gives unto the^ another lesson, and says, If
you have received any consolation of Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the holy ghost, fulfill then my joy, that ye may be al of one
mind, and be endued all with the like love, being alike minded, and thinking
all one thing, esteeming nothing of your selves through contention or vain
glory, but striving to excel each other in humility, every one regarding not the
things of his own, but the necessities of others. Lo here by this rule of the
Apostle, we see plainly the life of true Christians to consist in this, that
all their works be directed to the commodity of others, for as much as every
person does so much abound through his own Faith, that all other works, and
all his whole life, does ouerflowe unto him, wherewith he may be able to
minister unto, and profit our neighbor, of a free, and voluntary good will,
and benevolence.

And to this effect he exciteth unto them Christ for an example, saying, The
deprauers of the Apostles doctrine.
Let the same mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, who when he was in
the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Nevertheless he
made himself of no reputation, taking upon him the shape of a servant, and
became like unto men, and was found in apparel as a man, he humbled himself
and was made obedient even unto the death. For this most wholesome word of the
Apostle have they hidden in darkness from us, which were altogether ignorant
in the speeches of the Apostle, namely, The shape of God, the shape of Servant,
apparel and the likeness of men, and did apply the same preposterously, to
the natures of divinity, and humanity: whereas Paul's meaning was, that whereas
Christ was fully beautified with the shape of God, and abundantly flowing with
the store of all good things, so that he needed not any work, nor any passion
to make him righteous and saved (for he did absolutely possess all those
things, eue^ from the first beginning of himself) yet was he not puffed up in
pride with these, nor was lift up above us, nor did challenge to himself a
certain power over us, albeit he might in his own right have claymed the
same: But contrariwise, did so behave himself in labor, in works, in
suffering, and in doing, that he might be like unto other men, both in apparel
and countenance, none otherwise, than as man, even as if he had needed all
these, and had possessed no parcel of the shape of God: all which
nevertheless he undertook for our sakes, to the end he might minister unto
our necessities, and that all things might be made ours, which he should
bring to pass in this shape of a servant.

Even so a Christian man being full and abounding through his faith like unto
Christ his head, A Christian ought to conform himself to Christ.
ought to be contented with this shape of God obtained through Faith (saving
that he ought to increase the same Faith, as I said before, until it be made
perfect) for this is the life of man, his righteousness, and salvation, both
saving the person, making him acceptable, and furnishing him with all things
whatsoever Christ does possess, as is before mentioned, which also Paul in the
first to the Galathians does confirm, saying: But in this that I live in the
flesh I live in the faith of the son of God. Gal. 1.


And although he be on this wise free from all works, yet in this freedom
ought be nevertheless to make himself of no reputation, and put on the shape
of a servant, and to become like unto men, to be found in apparel as a man,
and to minister, and to help, and by all means possible to work his neighbors
commodity, even after the self same manner as he feels, that God has done,
and daily does for him through Christ, and this also he must do Gratis without
all respect, saving in respect of Gods good pleasure, and even after this
manner must he think unfeignedly.

The confidence of a Christian man.
Behold my good God has given unto me most unworthy and damned caitife, beyond
all desert, of his mere and free mercy, in Christ Jesus, all the treasures of
righteousness and salvation, so that henceforth I shall not stand in want of
any thing at all, but of Faith, which may firmly believe in Christ: Wherefore
to this so loving a father, who has overwhelmed me with these his inestimable
riches, why should not I frankely, joyfully, with all my heart, and with all my
most loving and willing soul, yield all service whatsoever I do know to be
well pleasing, and is acceptable in his eyes.

Wherefore I will give my self wholly a certain Christ unto my neighbor, even
as Christ gave himself unto me, and will do nothing in this transitory life,
but that which I shall perceive to be necessary, commodious, and profitable for
my neighbor, in as much, as I am sufficiently enough enriched with all good
things in Christ through Faith.

Lo here out of Faith flows Love, The fruit of Faith. Behold gentle Reader
how worthily is Luther reproched.
and rejoicing in the Lord, and out of Love flows likewise a cheerful,
liberal, and free heart to minister to the necessity of thy neighbor,
frankely of thy own accord, so that here now is no consideration had of
gratitude, or ingratitude, of praise or dispraise, of vantage or of loss: For
neither does he apply hereunto to win the favor of men, nor makes any
difference betwixt friends or foes, nor respects the thankful or
unthankful, but most frankely and with most gladsome cheer does yield
himself wholly, and all that he possesses, without regard whether he lose the
same in the unthankful, or employ it on the deserving: For even so his father
does, disposing all things to all abundantly and most freely, making his sun to
shine upon the good and the wicked. In like manner, the son does work and
suffer nothing but of a free and cheerful joy, wherewith through Christ he is
delighted in God the giver of so great and inestimable treasures.

We ought to know how great things are given us.
You see therefore, if we acknowledge all those things which are given unto us,
of greatest and highest price (as Peter says) ye forthwith love is poured
abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, whereby we are free, cheerful,
omnipotent, doers, workers, and conqueror of all tribulation, servants of our
neighbors, yet Lords of all things notwithstanding. But such as do not know
the gifts given unto them through Christ, to them Christ is borne in vain:
such wander in the way of works, and shall never attain to the taste and
feeling of those things. Therefore as our neighbor is pressed down with
necessity, and wants of our store and abundance, even so were we overwhelmed
with necessity in the sight of God, and needed altogether his mercy. Wherefore
as our heavenly father did succor us in Christ Jesus freely, even so ought we
help our neighbor freely by our body and by our works, and every of us must
be made a certain Christ each to other, that we may be made debtours of
Christ, and that Christ may be one and the same in all, that is to say, that
we may be true Christians.

Who is able therefore to comprehend the riches and glory of a Christian life,
which is able to do all things, The glory of a Christian life.
possesses all things, and needs nothing, an Empress and Conqueresse of
sin, death, and hell, and withal an handmaid nevertheless, serviceable and
profitable to all? but the more is the pity. This Christian Justification is,
at this day, altogether unknown in the whole world, neither is it preached,
nor procured, in so much, that we are our selves ignorant of ^^eir name, and
for what cause we be ^^^eemed and called Christians. True (...), In what
respect we be named Christians
we have received our denominatio^^ of Christ, not being absent from us, (...)
dwelling within us. That ^s to say, whiles we believe in him, and ^e jointly
and mutually a certain Christ each to other, applying our selves to our
neighbors, even as Christ has given himself to us.

But in these our days we are taught by men's doctrines to seek after naught
else but deseruings, and merits, and the things which are our own, and have
made of Christ naught else, but a sharp Lawmaker, much more austere than Moses
was.

The holy Mother of Christian example of Faith. Luke 2.
Semblably, the blessed virgin Mary did exhibit her self a singular president
of the Faith above al others, whiles after the manner of all other women she
was purified according to Moses Law (as it is set down in the 2 of Luke)
whereas being notwithstanding not bound to any such law, nor needed to be
purified in any such wise, yet she yielded her self to the law of her own
accord, and of a free love unto the law, being made like unto other women, lest
she might seem to offe^ (...) or despise them. She was not therefore made
righteous for that work, but being righteous before, she did this deed
surely, and without coactio^. In like manner ought our works to be put in ure,
not to the ^^nd to be justified by them, for as much as being justified first
by Faith, it behooves us to work all things freely and cheerfully for our
neighbors sake.

So also Paul did circumcise his scholar Timothy, Paul does teach works.
not because Timothy needed to be circumcised unto righteousness: but left he
might offend or despise the Jews that were weak in Faith, and which as yet
were not capable of the freedom of Faith. But contrariwise, when as the Jews
did urge a necessity to be circumcised to righteousness, setting at naught the
freedom of Faith, he did withstand them, and would not permit Titus to be
circumcised, Galath. 3. Gal. 3.
for as he would not willingly offend or contemn the imbecillitie or
weakness of others in the Faith, applying himself to their capacity for a
time so likewise, would he not give place to the will of stiffenecked
Insticiaries, when the liberty of Faith was like to suffer reproach, or be
despised, keeping the midway, bearing with the weak for a season, and always
setting himself against the indurate, to the end he might convert all in
generality to embrace the liberty of Faith. With like affection must our works
be employed, that we tolerate the weaklings in Faith, as the Apostle teaches
in the 14. to the Romans, but that with courage we resist the inflexible
vrgers of works, of the which we will treat more at large hereafter.

Likewise Christ in the 17. of Matthew, when tribute was demanded of his
Disciples, An example of our Lord Christ.
asked the question of Saint Peter, whether the children of the Kingdom were
exempt from paying Tribute, and Peter affirming that they were, did command him
notwithstanding to go to the Sea, speaking these words, Lest we give them
cause of offense, go, and the Fish that first comes to thy hands take, and
opening his mouth, thou shall find a groate, take the same, and give it for
thee and me.

This example is very much auayleable for our purpose. In the which, Christ
does call himself and his Disciples free, and Kings sons, which stand in
need of nothing, and yet of his own accord submits himself, and pays
Tribute.

Therefore, by how much this work of Christ was necessary to Christ, and
profitable unto righteousness and salvation, even so much are all the works
of his elect and faithful available to righteousness, whereas they be all
following after righteousness, and freely performed only to the necessity and
example of others.

Of the same condition are the works prescribed by Paul in the thirteenth
Chapter to the Romans, Take hold of Luther all ye Religious, and admit him to
be your teacher.
and in the third to Timothy, That men should be subject to the higher powers,
and prepared to all good works, not because they should be justified thereby,
where as they be righteous already through Faith, but that by these they might
both be subject to others, and to the higher powers, add of a free love yield
humbly obedience to their will in the freedom of the spirit.

Of this same sort ought the works of all Colleges, Monasteries, and Priests
have been employed, that every of them might have performed the works of
their profession and estate to this end, that by these, every of them might
exercise not righteousness, but the taming of his own body, yielding thereby
example to others, who have themselves also need to chastise their own
bodies. Then also, that they might express humble obedience to others,
applying themselves to their commandment, of a free love, having nevertheless
a special regard always to this only, to wit, that through vain
confidence, none of them presume to be justified, to merit, or to be saved by
them, which thing is the proper and peculiar office o^ Faith only, as I have
often said before.

The knowledge of a true Christian.
Therefore, who so were furnished wit^ this doctrine, might easily without
danger wade in these infinite impositions an^ traditions of the Pope, of
Bishops, o^ Mon^keries, of Churches, of Princes an^ Magistrates, the which some
foolish pastors do so obtrude upon us, as though they were of an unavoidable
necessity to be performed, for the obtaining of righteousness and salvation,
calling them commonly the injunctions of the Church, being in deed nothing
less. For a Christian man may deba^e with himself on this wise, I will fast I
will pray, I will apply my self to all whatsoever is commanded by men, not
because I need to do any of these, to procure righteousness or salvation by
them: but because I will express mine obedience herein to the Pope, to the
Bishops, to the Potentate, and to the Magistrate, or to my neighbor for
example sake, for this cause I will do and suffer all things, even as Christ
did work and suffer many greater things for my sake, whereof he needed not to
do any one, being made for my sake subject unto the law, when as in deed he
was not under the law. And although these things be exacted of me through the
tyrannous force, and injurious tyranny of the Magistrates, yet shall they be no
prejudice to me, so long as they be not against the glory of God.

The premises considered, it is an easy matter for any man to judge
certainly: The difference betwixt the good and the evil pastors.
betwixt the difference of all works, and al laws, and know skilfully who be
blind, and witless Preachers, and who be true and faithful pastors. For
whatsoever work be not directed to this only mark, namely, to be employed to
ye chastisme^t of ye body, or to ye dutiful consideration of ye neighbor (so yt
it enforce not any thing directly against Gods glory) surely ye work is neither
good nor Christianlike. And this is the cause, yt I fear me much, very few
Colleges at all, any Monasteries, Altars, or any Ecclesiastical exercises at
this day, be not truly Christian, and that also as well those proper and
peculiar fastings, as ye petty prayers to certain Saints be not Christian I
fear me much (I say) yt in all these things regard is had of naught else, but
yt which appertains to our selves, whiles we be thus minded, yt by means of
these exercises, our sins are cleansed, and salvation obtained thereby, and so
Christian liberty is overthrown the cause whereof proceeds from blind
ignorance of ye true Christian faith, full of al freedom. Which gross
ignorance and suppression of liberty, very many blind and bussardly pastors do
earnestly maintain, whilst they do greedily persuade, and urge ye people to
such exercises, adua^cing them above Moon and Stars, and glorifying the^ with
their pardons, but of faith never uttering so much as one word. But I would wish
thee to be well advised, that if thou have will at any time to pray, to fast,
Good advice.
or to found Churches (as they term it) to beware thou do not this to ye end
to procure to thy self any temporal or everlasting commodity therewith: for in
so doing, thou shall be prejudicial to thy faith, which only does minister all
things unto thee, Only faith must be attended unto.
and therefore ought only be attended unto, yt it may be increased, whether it
be occupied in works, or exercised with afflictions: but give freely without
hope of requital, whatsoever ye give, that others may be relieved, and grow
in well doing through thee, and thy liberality, for this is the way to make
thee a good and a true Christian man. For what shall avail thee, thy goods,
and thy works, whereof thou art endued with a surplus, over and besides those
which do serve to the necessary chastisement of the body? when as thou art
sufficiently enriched for thy necessities, through the Faith, in the which God
has endued thee with all plentiful store.

Behold, by this rule it behooves us to pour out each upon other, and to make
common each unto other the goods which we have received of God, and that every
man cloth himself with his neighbors estate, and so apply himself to his
neighbors necessities, even as if we were in ye like necessity our selves: A
rule touching brotherly love.
out of Christ's storehouse they ouerflowed, and from him slow daily unto us,
who has so taken our necessities upon himself, and so performed all things
for our sakes, as if himself had been the same that we be. They flow
likewise from us, unto them who stand in need of them, in so much, that I am
bound to pour out before God my faith, and my righteousness, to cover and
entreat for the sins of my neighbor, the burden of whose sins I must in
mine own person sustain, and so travel and be afflicted in them, as if they
were mine own sins, for on this wise was Christ afflicted for our sakes, for
this is the very true love, this is the rule of a pure Christian love, which is
in them very natural and pure indeed, in whom dwells a pure and sincere
Faith indeed, whereupon, the Apostle in the first to the Corinthians, the
thirteenth Chapter, does give this singular prerogative to love, That it
seeks not the things that are her own.

And therefore we do conclude, that a Christian man does not live in himself,
but in Christ, 1 Cor. 13. A Christian man does live in himself, and in his
neighbor
and in his neighbor, or that to be a Christian man, is to dwell in Christ by
Faith, and in his neighbor by love.

Again, a Christian man is raised up above himself to Godward by Faith, and
is thrown down beneath himself, toward his neighbor by love, dwelling
always nevertheless in God, and in the love of God, according to the saying
of Christ in the first of John, Verily, verily, I say unto you, from
henceforth you shall see the heavens opened, and the Angels of God ascending
and descending upon the son of man. And thus far sufficiently concerning
Christian liberty, which is (as you see) spiritual and true, making our hearts
free from all sins, from all laws, and commandments (as Paul witnesses in
his first Epistle to Timothy, the first Chapter, The Law was not made for the
just man) which liberty does as far surmount all other outward and external
liberties in excellency, as the Heavens does surpass the Earth, which Christ
grant us to understand, and enjoy to our comfort, Amen.

In fine, to satisfy those persons, who can never hear any thing, be it never
so well spoken, but that they will deprave it by evil conceiving, somewhat
must be annexed, if that at the least they be able to conceive the same.
Against the liberty of the flesh.
There be very many, who hearing the doctrine of this Christian liberty of
Faith, will by and by take occasion thereof, to maintain the liberty of the
flesh, supposing forthwith that they may lawfully attempt all things, nor will
express their liberty and Christianity in any one thing else, than in
despising, and reproving of Ceremonies, of men's traditions and constitutions,
as though they ought for this cause to be deemed Christians, because they do
not fast in the days appointed for fasting, or because they eat flesh,
whylest other do abstain from flesh, or because they do not frequent Masses
and Mattene, or other usual service in the Church, disdainefully scorning and
scoffing at the ordinances of men, utterly setting at naught all other things
appertaining to Christian Religion. Against whom, Against the confidence in
works.
there is another sort that do with tooth and nail bend their force, which
contrariwise, do endeavor to attain salvation, by the only observation and
reverence of Ceremonies, as though they should for this cause be saved, because
they fast on the fasting days, or abstain from flesh, or inure themselves to
certain prayers, excessiuely vaunting the traditions of the Church, and of the
fathers, yet otherwise not esteeming the things that are proper and peculiar to
our Christian Faith, worth a rush, both which sorts of people are surely
altogether much blameworthy for as much, as passing over matters of great
importance, and carelessly neglecting the things necessarily belonging to
salvation, they turmoyle themselves in so great outrage about those trifling
toys, being altogether unnecessary and unprofitable.

How much more soundly does Paul teach to keep the midde way, condemning both
those by paths, saying, He that eats, let him not despise him that eats
not: and he that eats not, let him not judge him that eats. Here you see,
that such as do neglect, and condemn the ceremonies, not of devotion, but of
mere contempt, be accounted blameworthy, whereas the Apostle teaches them
not to despise, for knowledge does cause to swell, and to be puffed up. Again,
he exhorts the obstinate, that they judge not others, for neither of them
does observe charity, edifying one another, wherefore in this perplexity,
council must be sought out of Scripture, which does teach us, not to decline
on the right, nor on the left hand, but to ensue the right judgments of the
Lord, quickening the hearts: for as no man is righteous, because he humbles
himself, and is addicted to works, and rites of ceremonies, so neither shall
any man he accounted for this only cause righteous, because he does omit and
contemn them.

For we be not freed through our Faith in Christ from works, but from the
opinions of works, that is to say, from the foolish presumption conceived of
Justification, purchased by means of works: for Faith does redeem our
consciences, (...) ^^^erly keep and preserve the (...), whereby we attain this
knowledge, that righteousness consists not in works, albeit works neither
can, nor ought to be neglected As we cannot live to this world without food
and sustenance, nor without the general preservation of this mortal body, yet
is not our righteousness selled in these, but in Faith, for the which, the
other things notwithstanding may not be despised, and utterly shaken off. So
in this world, we be fast chayned to the necessary preservation of the life
of this body, yet are we not thereby made righteous, My kingdom (says
Christ) is not from hence, nor of this World, but he said not, my kingdom is
not here, nor in this world. Likewise Paul, Albeit we walk in the flesh, yet
our warfare is not according to the flesh. Gal. 1.
And in the first to the Galathians, Whereas I do live in the flesh, I live in
the faith of the son of God. Even so in this that we work that we live, and
that we are exercised in works and ceremonies, the necessity of this present
life, How we ought to deal with the obstinate.
and the careful regard of governing our bodies, does exact it of us, yet are
we never a deal righteous by them, but in the Faith of the Son of God.
Therefore, a Christian man must keep his course in the midde way, and must
pass away from those two sorts of people, for either he shall meet with those
perverse frowardes, being indurate with these Ceremonies, which, like deaf
Serpents, Aspides:
will not hearken unto the liberty of the truth, but magnify their Ceremonies,
command and enforce the observation of them without Faith, as necessities of
Justification, such as the Jews were in times past unwilling to come to
knowledge thereby, to walk aright. Such behooves us to resist, to impugn
them, and to offend them stoutly, lest by this their wicked opinion, they draw
together with themselves many, into their false illusions. In the presence of
such it is convenient to eat flesh, to break fasting days, and for the
maintenance of our liberty in faith, to do other like things, which they reckon
in place of most grievous sins. And in this manner must we speak of them,
Let them alone, they be blind themselves, and blind guides of the blind,
for in this respect Paul would not suffer Titus to receive Circumcision, though
they stiffely urged hereunto. So did Christ also defend his Apostles, when as
they plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, and many such like.

The simple.
On the other side, we shall meet with the simple, unlearned, ignorant, and weak
in Faith (as Paul calls them) whose capacities are not yet able to comprehend
this liberty of Faith, though they have a will thereunto. Such must be borne
withal, lest they be offended: and their weakness must be favored, until
they may be more fully instructed. For whereas those persons do not observe
such ceremonies of any grounded malice, nor are wilfully obstinate in
judgment, but conceive of them according to the imbecility of their Faith
only, fastings, abstinence from choice meats, and such other ceremonies,
which they do suppose to be necessary, must be observed for avoiding offense
in them. For this does Charity exact of us, which hurts no man but helps
us. For such continue not weaklings through their own default, but through the
negligence of their pastors, which with their cramps and grapling yrons of
traditions, have entangled evil handled, and deadly wounded them, who otherwise
ought to have been delivered, made whole, and revived with the doctrine of
Faith and Christian Liberty. The same does the Apostle teach in the fourteenth
Chapter to the Romans If my meat do offend my brother, Romans 4.
I will not eat flesh for ever. And again, I know that in Christ there is
nothing defiled, but unto him that thinks it to be defiled, but it is evil
to the man that eats to the offense of his brother.

Therefore, Against the laws and lawmakers.
although we must stoutly withstand those teachers of Traditions, and sharply
inueigh against the constitutions of Bishops, wherewith they ouerrunne the
people of God, yet regard must be had of the timorous weaklings, whom those
cruel bloudsuckers, do cruelly detain captive with those traditions, until
they be set at liberty. On this wise encounter manfully against the Wolves, but
for the Sheep, and not against the Sheep also, which thou shall the better
do, if thou bend thy force earnestly against those Laws and Lawmakers, and yet
withal thy self observe them in the sight of the weak, lest they become
offended through thee, until themselves may know that Tyranny, and understand
their own liberties. And if thou will enjoy thine own liberty, use it to thy
self in secret (as Paul teaches thee in the fourteenth to the Rom.) Keep thou
the Faith which thou have unto thy self before God, Romans 14.
but beware that thou use it not before the weak. Again, before Tirants and
obstinate frowards, use the same in despite of them, yea, and that most
manfully and constantly: That they also may understand their own wickedness,
and their Laws to be nothing available to righteousness, as also that they
had no authority to make such laws.

For as much therefore, To the young in years.
as the society of this present life cannot be maintained in due order without
ceremonies and works: Yea rather, forasmuch as the raging and rude age of young
persons has need to be restrained and bridled with such raines, as it were
with a Snaffle, and that every man ought to chastise his own body: with the
same exercises, it behooves therefore the Minister of Christ to be prudent and
faithful, that he may so instruct and guide Christ's flock in all these
things, that their Conscience and Faith may not be offended, and to be
circumspect, that no unsavory opinion, nor bitter smatch of loathsomeness may
take root in them, by means whereof, many may be infected, (whereof Paul did
forewarne ye Hebrews) that is to say, lest loosing their faith utterly, they
begin to be defiled with vain presumption of works, as though they were to
be saved by works, which is a speedy contagion, and does pierce deeply into
many, unless faith be busily and seriously enforced withal, but the disease
is unavoidable, where faith being put up to silence, only traditions of men
taught to be retained, as has been hitherto through ye pestiferous,
detestable, and soule-slaying traditions of our Prelates, and vagarant opinions
of our Divines, haling infinite souls to the Devil, with these intricate
fetters, which by plain demonstration does denounce very Antechrist himself.

Danger in the ceremonies.
To conclude, such as is poverty in abundance, painfulnesse in authority,
humbleness in honor, abstinence in feasting, chastity in valliance, even so
righteousness of faith is dangerously beset being joined with ceremonies: May
a man carry fire in his bosom (says Solomon) and not burn his garments? And
yet as in riches, in authority, in honors, in dalliance, in banquetings, so
must we be conversant in ceremonies, that is to say, in dangers: yea rather as
it is needful for young boys to be nursed and cherished in the laps and arms
of maidens, lest they perish, in whom being grown to riper years, were no
small peril of safety to frequent the company of maidens: Even so is it
requisite to lock up ye ranging years of licencious youth within the
Cloisters, yea, within iron clossets of such ceremonies and exercises, whereas
they may be restrained and abide correction, lest their insolent courage draw
them headlong into wickedness. Which ceremonies do nevertheless procure death
unto them, if they persevere in opinion to be justifiable by them, whereas
they ought rather to be instructed, that they were clogged with such
restraint, not for any such cause as to be made righteous, or to merit much
thereby, but to the end, they should not rush wilfully into vices, and so be
the more tractable trained to the righteousness of faith: which they would in
no wise endure through the outrage of their youth, unless the same had been
tamed and brought low.

Of what estimation ceremonies be.
Which does argue, that ceremonies ought not to be of any other price and
estimation in the life of a true Christian man, than as amongst Carpenters and
Artificers, certain old posts, logges, or platformes, are framed to direct
and raise up buildings by: which be not made to the end they should serve and
remain to any special use, but because without such by-helpes, buildings and
works cannot easily be raised, for when the work or building is finished,
those devises are laid aside.

So that here you see, that ceremonies are not utterly abrogated, but rather
earnestly required, but the vain persuasion and presumption of them is
contemned, because no man accompteth them to be a true and permanent building.
If any man would be so notably senseless, as to regard nothing else in his
whole life, but to direct those preparatiues, with all honor, with all
diligence, with all continuance, and would never bend his cogitations to the
very building it self, stroking, smoothing, and vaunting himself in these
preparatiues, and vain rotten proppes, would not all men lament his madness,
and think within themselves, that whiles he employed this cost to no purpose,
he might have builded some matter of better substance? So now we do neither
abando^ ceremonies, nor works, but rather do allow them, nevertheless we do
utterly abhor the vain opinion conceived of them, lest that any man persuade
himself, that to observe them is the true righteousness, as Hypocrites do,
which do abuse and mispend their whole life in these exercises, and never
reach unto the substance, in respect whereof they are practiced, or as ye
Apostle speaks: Always learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the
Truth: For they seem as though they had a will to build, and always prepare
themselves thereunto, and yet they never build, persisting always in the
glittering shadow of godliness, but never attain to the power and substance
thereof.

Against them that be notably suspicious.
Yet do they wonderfully flatter themselves in these exercises, presuming also
arrogantly to judge all others, whom they see not glittering in the like
bravery of works, whereas they might otherwise be able to atchieue matters of
greater importance, to the singular comfort of themselves and others, with this
vainly employed ostentation, and abuse of Gods gifts, if they were endued with
a right and true faith. But whereas the nature of man and reason (as they
term it) natural, is naturally inclined to superstition, and pursuing all
Laws and works, is prove of herself to fall into vain presumption of
obtaining justification through them: add moreover hereunto, because it is
accustomed and inured to conceive so highly of the same works, through the
usual admiration of all earthly lawmakers, it is not possible surely of her
own strength, to clear it self from this servile bondage of works, and to
bend her force to know the liberty of faith.

Therefore it is requisite, From whence the law of wisdom does proceed.
that we flee to prayer, that the Lord would vouchsafe to draw us and make us
instructed unto GOD, that is to say, apt Scholars for God, and that himself
will vouchsafe to write his Law in our hearts (as he has promised) otherwise
we do all come to confusion. For except he do engraffe in our souls this
marvelous Wisdom hidden in a mystery, Nature cannot choose but condemn it,
and adiudge it for an Heretic, because she is offended (...), and appears
foolish in her eyes. Even as we saw to have happened in times past to the
Prophets of GOD and the Apostles, and even as the wicked blind Prelates, and
their false flatterers do now unto me, and others like unto me, unto whom,
and to us also, GOD be merciful, and show the light of his countenance upon
us, that we may know his way upon the earth, and his saving health amongst all
generations. Who be blessed for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

