A Methodicall Preface prefixed before the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans,
very necessary and profitable for the better understanding of it.

Made by the right reverend Father and faithful servant of Christ Jesus,
Martin Luther, now newly translated out of Latin into English, by W.W. student.

Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Come, and see. John. 1.46.
Imprinted at London, for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the Sign of the black Bear.

To the English Christian Reader, W. W. wishes grace, mercy, and peace, with a
true and lively knowledge of our only Lord and omnisufficient Saueour and
Redeemer Christ Jesus.
I Do offer and present unto thee (gentle Reader) here published in Print,
this little treatise, Aristotle say^ that a good thing, the more comm^ it is
made, the better it is.
first written by that famous and godly learned Doctor in Christ's School,
Martin Luther, in the Germane or Duche tongue, for his own Countrymen:
afterward translated into Latin, by a learned man, named Iustus Jonas, that
it might be common to more then it was before: now also though plainly, yet
faithfully turned into English, for the benefit and commodity of this our
Israel, by one most studiously careful, The use of this Preface.
and zelously desirous of thy profit. This excellent Preface will lead thee
as a Lantern of light to the better understanding of that most precious, most
fruitful and profitable Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, which when thou
can well and wisely understand, first it will make thee ready armed, well
furnished and instructed to withstand and answer all the popish Romanistes
(Cods greatest adversaries, and enemies to his Gospel) who stoutly mainteyne
and defend that man's works do merit and deserve salvation, and so present
us just and righteous before God: Secondly it will teach thee a Christian life
and conversation: namely how thou ought to bring forth the worthy fruits
of Faith, which alone does justify us before God, because it is (as it were)
the hand whereby we apprehend and take hold fast of the merits of Christ's
blessed Passion to be ours. Other branches of doctrine and manners there be in
that notable Epistle good store. Use and peruse this prologue, and then it
willighten thine understanding very much in this weighty matter of our
salvation in this chief and principal point of Christian religion: This high
myterie of our salvation dou^ed of, and de^^ed by the Papists.
to wit, whether we be justified by the works of the Law, or by the mercy of
God only, for the mediation of his son, who was made a slain sacrifice upon
the Cross for us most wretched and miserable sinners. After that thou do
fully and perfitly attain to the true meaning of it, I doubt not but thou will
(by the help of Gods holy spirit woorking mightily in thee) persevere and
continue faithful unto the end, in this doctrine of faith taught here by the
Apostle. Only be strong in the Lord, 1. Timoth. 1.19
fight a good fight, keeping faith and a good conscience: then surely this
godly doctrine will prepare thy heart in a strong defense, that the fiery
darts of the Dyuels Ministers by errors and falsehood shall not wound thee.
Wherefore (gentle Reader) use this Introduction to thy comfort and commodity:
Read and regard it, and give God the glory, who be praised for ever and ever.
Amen. Farewell in the Lord, and pray for me, as I daily do for thee.

EPHESIANS. 2. VERSE. 8. and. 9. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not
of your selves. For it is the gift of God, and comes not of works: least
any man should boast him self.

A Methodicall Preface prefixed before the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans,
written by Martin Luther: and Englished by W. W.
Seeing that this Epistle of S. Paul written unto the Romans is the Method of
the whole Scripture, and the most absolute Epitome or Abridgement of the new
Testament, that is, of the Gospel (which verily alone it does briefly and most
purely set out unto us) I account it worthy not only of all Christians to be
known from their childhood, yea and learned without the book, The excellency
of this Epistle.
word by word: but also (being by daily and continual meditation as it were
chewed and concocted) even as well digested meat to descend and enter into our
innermost bowels. This Epistle is such a rich treasury of spiritual wealth,
and as it were a most plentiful Copiae Cornu, that he that reads it a
thousand times, shall always meet with some new thing not perceived before.
In so much that the reading of this Epistle is most profitable of all other,
because it does (as it were) ascend higher in the doctrine of holy things, in
the knowledge of Christ, in learning the nature of faith, and in the knowledge
of all spiritual affections: yea, the more it is handled, the greater it
grows, more pleasant and delightful, more precious and plenteous it shows
and seems then before. Wherefore I thought it labor well bestowed, if
(according to that measure of grace which I have received of God) I might put
to my helping hand, and by this brief Preface prepare an enery into it: to the
end that it might more easily and plainly be read and understood of all.
Chiefly knowing that this Epistle (which one alone ought to be accounted the
Index and Method of all the Scriptures) has been so obscured and darkened by
certain men's foolish Commentaries, Gloses, and vain subtilties, that very few
Writers in many ages past have perceived the drift, scope, meaning, and
intention of the Apostle, which notwithstanding of it self is most easy and
plain.

First of all we must diligently search out and labor to know the nature of
words, and figurative speeches which the Apostle uses. And before all things
we must learn to know what S. Paul means by these and such like words: The
Law, Sin, Grace, Mark these words.
Faith, Righteousness, Flesh, Spirit. etc. Otherwise though thou read
diligently, thou loosest all thy labor.

This word Law, 1. ^awe what it (...), and how it (...) to be vn^erstoode.
must not here be taken after the usual manner of the Philosophers, or according
to common reason: namely, to be defined a Doctrine which teaches men what to
do, and what to leave undone. For humane or man's laws are satisfied, if a man
do the external and outward work only, though in his heart he do it
unwillingly. But God, seeing he knows the heart, judges according to the
secret and internal motions of the heart. Therefore the Law of God requires the
heart and affections, or inte^tions thereof, neither is it satisfied by the
external deed dooyng, unless they be done with a cheerful heart willingly, and
with all thy affection. Insomuch as it does reprove and rebuke nothing so
vehemently, Pharisaicall works.
as those glorious and fained works, that is, Hypocrisy, Lying, and the deceyt
of the heart.

Hereupon it is that the Prophet says in the.115. Psalm, All men are liars.
Wherefore by nature they cannot fulfill the Law. For all men naturally are bent
and inclined to evil, and therefore hate the Law. Now whersoeuer there is not
a cheareful and ready will to God and his law, there is sin and the wrath of
God, though by such hypocrisy thou do the external work.

Upon these Paul infers in his second Chapter, that all the Jews (although
in external works they make semblance to fulfill the Law) are sinners and
transgressors of the Law. For (says he) not the hearers of the law, but the
doers thereof shall be accounted just before God. Whereby he does intimate unto
us, that no man can fulfill the Law by doing the outward work. Thou say,
Paul speaks to the Jews.
that a man should not commit adultry, and yet thou thy self committest
adultry. In this that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thine own self.
For thou that iudgest, do the very same things. As if he should say, Thou in
deed after a glorious kind of hypocrisy, walk in the external works of the
Law, and thou iudgest others which walk not so. In deed thou teach other
men, and thou see a mote in thy neighbors eye: but thou see not the beam
which is in thine own eye. For though thou seem to fulfill the Law in thy
external actions, either for fear of punishment, or for love of thy self: yet
notwithstanding thou do all these things with an unwilling mind, with an hard
stubborn heart, without al love and good affection toward God and his law.
Insomuch that thou had rather there werneyther Law nor law geuer at all:
that so thy lust and concupiscence might not be repressed.

Wherefore it is manifest, that though in outward work thou dooest
counterfeyt the Law, yet in very deed thou do hate and abhor it. So the
Apostle speaks: What is thy righteousness worth (says he) if thou teaching
other men not to steal, yet in thy heart thou art inclined tostealyng: which
affection out of all doubt would break out into the deed doing, but that thou
art afraid of punishment to ensue. For the external work for the most part
will break out at length, though it be for a time dissembled: this oftentimes
follows in such hypocrites. Wherefore (as he says) thou which teach
another, teach not thy self, that is, thou art ignorant thy self what thou
teach, because thou art ignorant of the meaning of the law, how that it is
not satisfied but with the inward affection and motion of thine heart. The Law
being done in the outward work only, is so far from justifying, The Law
oncreaseth syn.
that it rather increases and augmenteth our sin, as Paul says in the.v.
chapter of this Epistle. Wherefore, the better thou understand the Law, the
less thou love the law: because it does exact and require of thee so many
things quite contrary to thy affections, and altogether repugnant to thy
nature. Hereupon it is that in the.vii. chap. he says: The law is spiritual:
as if he should say, If the law were carnal or moral doctrine only, then it
would be satisfied by the external work. But seeing that now it is spiritual,
that is, requiryng the affect and spirit: it follows, that no man can fulfill
it, unless he does those things which the law commands, with a cheerful
heart, with a certain ardent feruencie of mind, and with all his affection.
Such a new heart, and such a fervent and cheerful affection of the heart thou
can not obtain of thine own strength, or by thine own merits: but only by
the operation and secret instinct of the holy Ghost.

For it is the spirit of God only that gyues a new heart, and that makes a man
spiritual: that so he being made spiritual, he may love the Law which is
spiritual, and may fulfill it, not for fear, or love of commodity, but with
a cheerful and wyllyng heart, and that he may be carried violently (as it were
with a certain force) to do those things which the Law commands, freely,
and of his own accord. So is that saying to be understood. The Law is
spiritual, that is, the Law is not fulfilled but by the spirit, but by a heart
renewed by the Spirit. Therefore where there is not that renouation of the heart
by the spirit, there remains that grievous hatred of the law, (which law
nevertheless of it self is just, holy, and good) so far is it from
fulfilling it.

Wherefore accustom and acquaynt thy self with this Phrase and manner of
speaking which the Apostle here uses. It is one thing to do the work of the
law, and another thing to fulfill the law. For it is a work of the law when
without grace, works of the Law.
without the Spirit we begin to work well, and when we labor to fulfill the
law by our own proper strength and power of our free will. But seeing that
there always remains in the heart certain servile fear and a most deadly
hatred of the law, sure it is that such works are sin and heinous factes
against the law and so do not please God. So the Apostle says in the.iii.
Chapter: By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight.
Here therefore we may know and acknowledge how the Sophisters and school
doctors are far wide from the the truth, who teach and affirm this wicked
and blasphemous assertion: that by our works we may prepare the way unto
grace. But how can I prepare for my self a way to grace by that work which I
do with a stubborn, froward, and untoward heart, and with a repugnant
affection: How can that work be acceptable to God which I do not willyngly
but with great grief of harre, yea with extreme hatred of the law:

To fulfill the law, Fulfyllyng of the Law.
is to do those things which the law commands with a cheerful and
willing heart, that is, freely and of thine own accord to live unto God, and
to work well, though there were no law at all.

Such a cherefulnes, readiness, willingness and ardent affection cannot come into
our hearts but by the quickening spirit and his lively impulsions and
agitations in our heart, as the Apostle says in the.v. Chapter. Chap. 1. verse.
16.
Now the Spirit is given only by faith in Jesus Christ, as the Apostle said in
the beginning. Faith comes through the hearing of the Gospel, through which
word Christ is preached unto us, to have dyed, to have been buried, and to
have risen again from death for us, as he says in the.iii. iiii. and.x.
Chapters. Therefore our whole justification is of God: Faith also and the
Spirit are of God: they come not of our selves. Wherefore let us conclude that
Faith alone iustifyeth and that Faith alone fulfilleth the law. For Faith
through the merit of Christ obtayneth the holy Spirit, which spirit does make
us new hearts, does exhilarate us, does excyte and inflame our heart that it
may do those things willingly of love which the Law commands, and so at
the last good works in deed do proceed freely from the faith which works
so myghtily, and which is so lively in our hearts. This is the meaning of the
third Chapter. For whereas he had utterly damned the works of the law, and
might have seemed to have disanulled and abolished the law by teaching the
doctrine of faith, he preuenteth that objection in these words. We do not
(says he) destroy the Law, but rather establish it. That is, we teach how the
law may truly be fulfilled by faith.i. by believing in Christ Jesus.

Now it remains that we show how this word (Sin) is taken in the
Scriptures. Sin what it is.
Sin in the Sriptures signifies not only the external work: but that
whole force and native operation incredulity, as that wickedness which we have
by lineall descent (as it were) from our great Graundfather old Adam, which
even violently carries us headlong to sin, namely that wicked heart and al
our reason, with all (yea even his best and chefest) his strength and power
wherewith we can do nothing else but sin: so that then we are said to commit
sin, when by the efficacy of this original sin (as with a certain vyolent
force) we are carried headlong to do evil. There is no outward sin done
but first by this natural force and impulsion a man is wholly and with all his
affection carried roundly away to sinnyng. The Scripture and God him self,
when they speak of sin, they have respect unto this wickedness of our hearts,
unto this natural inclination, that is, this vice of incredulity, as to the
fou^teyne of all other sins. Like as therefore Faith alone does iustifye,
and alone does obtain the Spirit and power to fulfill the Law, and to do
those works in deed which are only good: so only incredulity and unbelief
causes sin, and exciteth and kindles the flesh to sin, and to commit evil
works, as we see it happened to Adam and Eve in Paradise. Genesis. 3.

Wherefore Christ also in the Gospel calls only and chiefly incredulity,
Sin is principally termed unbelief.
sin. John. 16 The Spirit (says he) shall reprove the world of sin,
because they have not believed in me. Those works which be truly good, even
as good fruits cannot proceed and spring but of a good tree, that is, of
faith working in the heart: as contrariwise evil fruit can not come but from an
evil tree, that is, incredulity of the heart.

Therefore this wickedness and incredulity in the heart is every where in the
Scriptures called the head of the Serpent and of the old Dragon, Genes. 3.
which was to be broken by that blessed seed of the woman, namely Christ.

But now to proceed: Grace what it is.
As concerning these two words Grace and Gift, they differ thus. Grace is the
favor, mercy, and free good will and benevolence of God toward us.

Gift is the holy spirit him self whom Gift what it is.
God does send into their hearts whom he has taken mercy upon, and whom he
favors: as very well appears in the.v. Chapter: where he distinguishes
gift from grace. Although now we have not the fulness of this gift or of the
Spirit (because in this life there will always remain in us remnaunites of
sin which fight against the Spirit, as the Apostle says in the.vii. Chapter
and the.iii. to the Galathians, as also Moses says in the iii. of Genesis:
that there will be a conflict betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of
the Serpent) yet grace works this in us, that the relics of sin shall not
be imputed unto us: but that we shall be reputed and accounted before God as
men fully and perfitly just. Neither is the grace and favor of God so
imperfectly bestowed upon us, as we said the gift was. For God rather does
love ande embrace us with a full favor and a right perfect good will for
Christ's sake, who is our mediator, earnest penney, and the first finites of
the Spirit. Therefore though remnaunts of sin do daily glister and shine in
us: yet never theles we are just before God, and syil is not imputed unto us
through faith which daly strives and wageth war against the flesh.

So then you may understand that place in the.vii. Chapter: where the Apostle,
though he was justified in the Spirit, acknowledges himself yet to be a
sinner: and yet notwithstanding he says in the.viii. Chapter: there is now no
condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus. As many therefore of us as are
through faith justified in Christ, we are both sinners and just. Sinners by
reason of the imperfect mortification of our flesh, and for that in this life
(the relics of sin remaining in us) we cannot have or attain the fulness of
the Spirit. First because we have through faith the first fruits and earnest
of the spirit: so that for our faith in Christ, God fatherly favoring us, does
not impute unto us that sin which remains in our flesh: neither does
judge us until that sin by death be quite broken, banished, and abolished.

But now let us speak somewhat of faith. Faith what it is.
Faith is not a certain cold opinion or a wandering cogitation of a man's mind,
such a one as any man (hearing the historye of the Gospel) may foolishly
imagine him self to have.

For certain men (hearing many things preached of faith, and seeing that they
can dispute many things of faith and of Christ, and yet for all that by that
knowledge, cogitation, or diligent meditation, perceive them selves not to be
forthwith incited to do good works) fall into that wicked and impious error,
that they stoutly deny man to be justified by faith alone: but that also
works are required. These men in deed hearing the Gospel, feign unto
themselves a certain opinion, and they reuolue in their minds certain cold
cogitations of Christ, thinking then that faith is nothing but the dream of
their own mind and those vain cogitations. A feigned faith.
And these men now and then boult out these excellent speeches. O (say they) if
faith only justifies the^, I pray you what say you to this: Behold I have
heard the Gospel preached: I remember the history of Christ: Lo, I believe, and
yet I am not justified. True ^t is, for because this thy Faith is nothing but
thine own bare and naked imagination and cogitation of faith which does ^ot
innouate thy heart, and which does move ^hee nothing at all, there follows no
newnes ^f life, no works of faith.

But a true faith is the work of God whereby we are regenerate and borne anew
by his Spirit. John. 1. Chapter: whereby also our old Adam is quelled, and we
being wholly transformed, we are made (as the Apostle says) new creatures to
Christ, the holy Ghost being the life and gonernment of our hearts. Faith is
lively and not idle.
Wherefore faith is such an effectual, lively, quick, and mighty operation in
our heart, that it cannot be idle, but must needs break out and show it self
by good works.

Neither does he that has this Faith care greatly whether good works be
commanded or no. For though there were no law at all, yet by this lively
impulsion working in his heart he is of his own accord forced and carried to
work true and godly Christian works.

He that does not his good works of such a lively affection of the heart, is
wholly in unbelief, and a stranger and aliant from the faith, as many of those
be which in schools dispute and iangle much of Faith and good works, not
knowing what they speak, or what they hold and affirm. A true definition of
faith.


Faith therefore is a constant trust and a sure confidence of the mercy of God
toward us, which is lively, and works myghtely in our hearts, whereby we
commit our selves wholly to God, casting all our care upon him: leaning and
trusting assuredly to this faith, we are not afraid to dye a thousand times.
For this so bold an assurance of the mercy and favor of God does make our
hearts merry, glad, and light: does also erect, raise, and even ravish us with
most sweet motions and affections toward God: yea and does so embolden the
heart of the true believer, that trusting to have God on his side, he is not
afraid to oppose himself alone agayust all creatures. But it is the Spirit
of God which gives us this heroical heart and stout stomach through faith,
which working effectually in our hearts, does incyte and inflame us to do
good. Now we have this cheerful towardnes and forwardnes, to the end that
we might be most prompt and ready willingly and of our own accord to do,
tolerate, and suffer all things, whereby we may be obedient to so gentle and
favorable a father, who through Christ has inryched us with so great
abundance of his graces. It can not possibly be but that in whom soever this
efficacy and life of faith is, it should daily work, A lively comparison.
fructifye, and give increase to God. Even as it is impossible that a fire
being kindled and flaming, should not give light and cast forth brightness,
wherefore watch thou and take heed that thou do not believe either thine own
vain songs and soimdes of faith, Fancyes.
thine own fonlish imaginations, or the vain trifling stuff of Sophisters.
Blind papists.
For these Sophisters have neither wit nor wisdom. They are belly beasts
borne only to those feasts of schools. But pray thou unto God (who
commands by his word that light should shine out of darkness) that he
would shine bryghtly in thine heart, and that be would create a true Faith in
thee: otherwise thou shall never believe truly though for the space of a
thousand years thou did labor and study about such cogitations and
imaginations, either of a faith heretofore gotten, Righteousness.
or hereafter to be sought for. This faith now is, that true justice which the
Apostle calls the justice and righteousness of God, that is, which only is of
force auaylable and can stand before God: because it is the meregyft of God.
And this faith does transform the whole man and makes him such an one, that
(according to that common definition of civil justice) he is ready to give and
render to every one that which is due unto him. For seeing by that faith we are
instified and endued with the love of the law of God, then surely we (so
magnifying God and the law) do give that glory unto God which is due unto
him. Also seeing by that faith we do believe firmly that we are justified
freely, and reconciled unto God through Christ, who every where is ready to
save us, then by course we serve for our neighbor, and so again render and
attribute to every man that which is his. This ryghteousnes of the heart we can
not obtain by any endeavor of our own free will, or by our own strength and
merits. For as no man can see that lively operation, that is, faith of our
hearts, but only God: so no man can repel from himself that wickedness and
incredulity of the heart but only by grace and the Spirit of God: so far we
are from being able to deliver our selves from sins by our own power.
Therefore though works do seem to show gallantly and gloriously: yet
notwithstanding whatsoever is not of faith, is hypocrisy and sin.

Now as concerning flesh and spirit which often are used in this Epistle: you
must not take flesh to be (after the common manner) the desires and lusts of
the flesh only, neither must you call the spirit only those things which are
done spiritually in the inward corners of the heart. flesh what ^t is.
For the Apostle Saint Paul (as also Christ himself in the.iii. Chapter of John)
do call flesh, whatsoever is borne of the flesh, that is, the whole man body
and soul, al man's reason wholly with all his cheifest and best powers: Because
that all these things do savor of nothing but flesh, and seek after nothing
but fleshly things. Wherefore thou shall eall all those works flesh, which
seem to be good, and make a beautiful show of holy works, and yet are done
without the grace and working of the holy Spirit of God in the heart. Which
thing is plain and evident by the.v. Chapter to the Galathians: where Paul
reckeneth and counts heresies and sects amongst the fruits of the flesh. And
in the.viii. Chapter to the Romans, he says, that the law is made weak, by
reason of the flesh, which thing ought to be meant not only of the unchaste
lusts of the flesh, but also of the whole mass of corruption and wickedness:
yea breisly and chiefly of incredulity or unbelief, Incredulity the ground
all sines.
which is the most secret and chief sin of all.

Contrariwise, Spirit what it is.
thou shall call the Spirit those spiritual things, even those external works
which proceed from a spiritual man, or from a heart innouated and made new by
the holy spirit. That washing of the feet which Christ did to his Disciples,
though it was an outward work, yet it was spiritual.

Peter's fishing, to which he returned being now justified in the spirit, was
also spiritual. Therefore that is flesh, whatsoever a man does, seeking and
savoring only carnal and fleshly things. And that is Spirit, whatsoever is
done within or without, wherewith a man exercising faith and Charity, does
seek spiritual things. Unless we take these words in this sense, we shall
neither understand this Epistle of S. Paul, nor any other books of the divine
Scriptures. Therefore whether it be Jerome, or Augustine, or Ambrose, or
Origin: briefly what writers soever they be that use these words otherwise,
let not the authority of men move thee any thing at al, but rather flee from
them al as from the plague and pestilence. But now set us come to handle the
Epistle it self.

Seeing therefore it is the duty and office of an Evangelist or preacher of
glad tidings, (...) godly in^^^uction for ^eaders.
first of all to preach the Law and to show how that all men (which are
without the circuit and compass of grace and faith in Christ) are the sons
and children of wrath, are sinners, and can do nothing but sin, that so they
acknowledging their miserye and wretchedness with an humble and contrite heart,
might thirst after grace, the Apostle S. Paul in this first Chapter does
first of all find fault with the unbelief, The manner of S. Paul's doctrine.
as were the Idolatry and such gross sins of the Gentiles: as also are of
those me^ which at this day being ignorant of God, void of grace, and without
the Spirit, do live in blyndnes and darkness. The wrath of God is revealed by
the Gospel (says the Apostle) from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men which withholde the truth in unrighteousness. For though
man might know by the Creatures that there was a God: yet notwithstanding his
nature is evil and wicked, insomuch that it does not glorify him, nor give him
thanks, but being blinded does always give over it self to worse and worse,
until they do not only commit idolatry and all kind of wickedness, but also
favor them that do them, and give their consent and agreement to those which
commit such things.

In the second Chap. he does more at large show that eue^ those little holy
ones, The Jews ^yll or worse sinners than the Gentiles.
and those glorious hypocrites (as namely the Jews then, and now in these
days all the Iusticiaryes which go about by their own strength and power to
fulfill the law) are also sinners, who doing outwardly the good works of the
law: notwithstanding inwardly nourishing that grief of their heart, do hate
the law.

And these (as right hypocrites commonly use to do) are very quick to
condemn and judge other men, counting themselves holy and pure when as they
are full of malice and envy, fraud, deceyte, and all kind of fylthines and
uncleanness, as Christ says, Math. 23. And these are they which fayning
themselves holy, contemn and despise in very deed the great goodness of God,
and according to the hardness of their hearts, heap and treasure up unto them
selves wrath, against the day of wrath. Paul therefore as a true Evangelist
first of all preaches the Law, (...) are sinners
conclucludyng all men alyke to be sinners, and denouncyng to all the wrath of
God. Wherefore they which mark well, by the power of their own nature or
free will, are so far from being any better than those gross and open
sinners mentioned in the first Chapter: that the Apostle calls them
obstinate, stubborn, men that cannot repent, aliantes, and strangers.

In the third Chapter he declares that both the Jews and the Gentiles are
alyke sinners before God: Difference betwixt Jew and Gentile.
notwithstanding that the Jews are preferred and excel the Gentiles in this
prerogative, namely, for that the promises of God did belong to them, and also
for that the words and Oracles of God were committed unto them. And though
some of the Jews did not believe, yet for all that their unbelief made not the
faithful truth of Gods promise vain, void, or without effect: and to prove
this, he allegeth that place of the. 51. Psalm: as it is written (says he)
That thou might be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art
judged. After this he returns again to his cause and purpose, and proves by
the Scriptures, that al are equally sinners without any exception, and that no
man is justified by the works of the law: but that only by the law comes
the knoweledge of sin. Finally he teaches the true and right way of
righteousness and salvation. All (says he) have sinned, The hye way to
righteous^nes, is by fait^ in Christ.
and are destitute and deprived of the glory of God: but they are justified
freely by his grace, thorough the redemption that is in Christ Jesus whom God
has set forth to be a reconciliatio^ through faith in his blood. And a little
before: But now (says he) is the righteousness of God made manifest without the
law, being approved by the Testimony and witness of the law and the Prophets,
to wit, the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all and
upon all that believe. So then the law is established through faith,
although woorks and glorying in the works of the law are excluded by faith.

Seeing therefore in the three former Chapters, he has taught, that all men are
sinners: and also has showed that only faith in Christ, is the way unto
righteousness, and means to justification, he answeareth to certain objections
and cauils. As for the most part, when Christ or faith is taught (that is, that
our works are nothing, that we are only justified by faith) straight ways
certain Iusticiaries object: If faith alone does justify, then we must cease
altogether to do good works, then good woorks are to be omitted and left
undone. The Apostle answeareth, proposing the example of Abraham: What shall
we say then, that Abraham our Father has found concerning the flesh? Did he
merit nothing at all by his woorks? He concludes, that Abraham was justified
only by faith without any woorks, insomuch that the Scripture says, that
Abraham (before he was circumcised) believed God, and it was counted and
reputed unto him for righteousness. Genesis. 15.6. If therefore the work of
circumcision which God commanded (which was a precious work of obedience)
profited Abraham nothing to iustificaton, then it is most sure and certain,
that there is none other work which is auaylable to justification. But as
circumcision being an outward sign, (...) apt simili^de.
was unto Abraham a seal of his righteousness by faith: so good woorks are
only an external sign, which does not justify, but which does signify
unto men, that a man is inwardly justified before God, and they do testify
and approve as certain signs and fruits, that lively faith, which works in
the heart. By this, as by the most grave, weighty, and authentike example, the
Apostle does confirm, and build out of the Scriptures his doctrine of faith
delivered out, and taught in the third Chapter. Furthermore the Apostle
allegeth the testimony of David in his 32. Psalm. to prove this matter. Also in
most plain words he affirms that a man is justified by the imputation of
righteousness, without works: although (as I have said before) works do
follow those that are justified by Faith. Moreover he dilateth and amplyfieth
the example against all other woorks of the law, inferring that the Jews are
not therefore streightwaye the true heirs of Abraham, because their stock and
pedigrue is derived from the circumcised Abraham, or because they received the
law, unless they tread and follow the steps of faith, Abraham's children must
have Abraham's faith
and believing in Christ, imitate the faith of Abraham: specially and chiefly,
seeing that Abraham before the law (whether it were of Moses or of the
circumcision) was justified only by faith, and called the father of many
nations, that is, of al believers. Finally he concludes thus: Seeing that the
law cannot give that effectual working, whereby it may willingly and cherfully
be satisfied: also seeing that the grudging and murmuring stirred up by the
law, abides and remains in us, and disdayneth and takes it grievously that
there should be any positive law set down for her, I say that this hatred
against the law, and the lawgeuer God himself still continuing, it cannot de
that the works of the law should please God: Nay rather seeing they proceed
from a heart that abhors the law and God, they are nothing else but sin, and
do always incense and kindle the indignation and wrath of God. Wherefore Faith
only does obtain the blessing and grace promised to Abraham. Now it is not
written for him only, but also for us (as Paul says in the latter end of this
Chapter) that faith might also be imputed and reckened to us for righteousness.

In the fifth Chapter, he entreats of works, and of the fruits of faith
which be these: peace, joy of conscience, love toward God and our neighbor: a
profitable, courageous, and bold confidence: and a stout and manfull
perseverance and patience in tribulations and afflictions, for straight way
these fruits follow, wheresoever this true faith is in the heart. Surely that
most excellent riches, and abundant wealth of the grace of God offered, and
exhibited to us in Christ (whom God would have dye for us, when we were as yet
weaklings, yea enemies to God) if so be, by faith it be known and acknowledged
of us in our hearts, it cannot but inflame us, and make us strong and able to
do most willingly, cherefully, and readyly, all those things which we know
will please this our most gentle father. Therefore the chief sentence, drift,
and scope of this Epistle stands steadfast and sure, namely, that by faith alone
we are justified, without works, and yet for all that good woorks are not
condemned. For those wookes that in deed, and truly may be called good, and
those good fruits do follow faith, and wheresoever faith is, it cannot
choose but work: Like as the flame can not but give good light. Of these that
be truly good woorks, the Iusticiaries (who have nothing so rife in their
mouths, as works, works, works) know nothing at al: They do but only imagine in
themselves, certain cold woorks, which because they have no spark of faith in
them, are void of all spiritual affections: as joy, peace of the conscience,
and that bold trust and assurance in God, and are rotten fruits of a rotten
tree. After this the Apostle makes a pleasant digression, showing how sin
and righteousness, also how death and life came upon us. And there he compares
those two, Adam and Christ. Wherefore he reasons thus: The Apostles argument.
It was therefore needful and necessary, that Christ should be sent, who
should make his righteousness to be ours, by the new birth or regeneration in
faith and the spirit, even as the old man Adam by propagation left us his
sin, through that old generation, according to the flesh. Again, by this
argument another proposition is surely grounded, namely, that no man by his
own strength and power, is able to deliver himself from sin, or to justify
himself. For it was not in our choice to be borne, or not to be borne of the
old Adam, and according to the flesh, which by other Arguments, is evident
and clear inoughe. For if the law of God (which surely, if any other thing in
the world might have justified, ought to have prevailed and auayled for
righteousness) does not only not justify, but rather increases and
augmenteth sin in us, namely, that grudging and fretting of our nature, daily
stomacking and murmuring at God: yea the more it does press us, the more it
styrreth up sin in our nature, which goes against all, whatsoever is
forbidden. Nitimur in vetite semper cu^ pimusque negata.
Therefore the more perfitly we know the law, the more misery we behold in our
selves, and we see the better how that we have more need of Christ.

In the Sixth Chapter he handles that great and chief work of our faith, to
wit, The warfare of Christians.
For the flesh sighteth always agayust the spirit, and the spirit wageth
war against the flesh, to the end that the desires of the flesh, and
relics of sin, which remain in us after justification, might be quite
suppressed, quelled, and quenched in us.

And in this Chapter the Apostle teaches, that we are not so justified and
freed from sin, by faith, that sin is quite taken away, and altogether
abolished in us: ^^liques of ^^nne.
but that the relics of sin as yet remain in us. Nevertheless, those
renmaunts of sin are not laid to our charge, by reason of faith, which
continually wrastleth with the desires of the flesh. Wherefore as yet, because
wh live in the flesh, that strife and combat endures in us, and they that
are already justified, have inoughe to do, and have labor inoughe to turn
them unto: yea all their life time they may toil until they sweat again, by
endeavoring to tame their flesh, to repress the lusts of it, Mortification.
and to make it subject unto the Spirit. And by that mortification of our
flesh, and newenes of our spirtuall life, we express the Death and the
Resurrection of Christ, as also that sign of mortification in Baptism, which
does signify and represent unto us no other thing, but this continual
mortification of the flesh, and daily vivification and quickening of the
spirit. For Baptism, that is, this mortification, does work in us so long,
until sin being abolished and abandoned by the death of our bodies, we rise
in our bodies with Christ, and raygne with him for evermore.

And this thing (namely, the daily mortification of our flesh) we may
perform, because we are not under the law: but under grace. Now what it is,
What it is, not to be under the Law.
not to be under the law, he himself expounds. For not to be under the
law, must not to be so understood, as though it were lawful for us to do
what we list: but not to be under the law is this, that our hearts are so made
new by the spirit, through faith, that freely, willingly, and of our own
accord, we may do that which the law requires, though there were no law at
all. For grace does endue us with the love of the law. Wherefore we being
justified, have no more the law against us, What it is to be under the Law.
but agreeing with us. To be under the law, is to work without grace, and not
to be able to fulfill the law, where there cannot chose but be sin.

And this now at length is the true liberty and freedom from the law and
sin, of which the Apostle here disputes, even unto the end of this
Chapter. As for this liberty it is such, that we may willingly from our hearts
do good without any exaction of the law. Therefore it is a spiritual
liberty which does not take away the law: but gives and imparteth a
certain power, and spirit to fulfill the law: namely, a cherefull mind, a
ready will, and fervent desire to work well, whereby it does then satisfy
the law: iusomuch that it has not any thing to exact at his hand, or to
charge him wythall. A fyt and apt similitude.
Even as if thou were endebted to a certain creditour of thine, and did owe
him a great Sum of money, thou might after twod ways satisfy him, and so
discharge thy debt: First by a free forgeuenes of the debt, and cancelling of
thy handwriting. Secondarily, by surety of another man, who will give his
faith and truth for the, promising to stand to the payment of all the foresaid
money, and so by his word and Faith given for the obligation, wherewith thou
wast bound, may be blotted and cancelled, as void, and of none effect.
Likewise Christ has delivered us from the law, as from a creditour. Wherefore
that liberty is not carnal, whereby it is lawful to do what thou will: but
is altogether laboursome and paynefull, which willingly does good works: so
that it needs not any exaction of the law.

In the Seventh Chapter, this by a certain similitude of marriage, between the
husband and the wife. A similitude to prove the liberty from the Law.
For even as the woman, if her husband be dead, is delivered from the law of
the man: not so freed that she may not marry but, rather contrary: now first
of all she is freed in deed and truly, that she may marry another man, which
she could not do before she was delivered from her former husband: so also
our conscience is dead to the law, as long as old Adam lives in us. But
when this old Adam is mortified by the sctirit, there is then liberty for both
parties, like as I have said there was betwixt man and wife: But the conscience
is not free, so that it cannot at all do any work: but rather so that now
he begins to cleave unto another, even unto Christ, that it should bring
forth fruit unto God.

After this, he does at large explicate the nature of sin, and of the law:
sheewing the law to be the force and power of sin. For the old Adam or
nature, The nature of sin.
how much more it is pressed down by the law, which of his own strength he
cannot fulfill) so much the more it does fret and fume against it. And no
maruayle, seeing it can do nothing of it self, but sin. Therefore the law
is unto it a punishment, and death: not that the law is evil: but this is done
through the fault of our own nature, which takes it grievously, that any good
should be exacted of it which she cannot fulfill: not unlike a sickely and
weak man who is heauely displeased, if any man require of him to do those
works, or that main strength which is in a sound and strong man.

Wherefore Paul here infers, The nature of the Law.
that the law, the more exactly and thoroughly it is known, does work in us
nothing else, but this, that it does the more show our sin and increase it:
by which it does slaye us, and make us guilty of eternal death, and of the
wrath of God. But of this matter no man can dispute better then he, whose
conscience has felt and had trial of the terror of the law: whose conscience
has feel that shaking and quaking (as it were) the very fou^dations of the
earth, and who has well perceyned it at some time, or other to have caused a
great tumult in his heart. Therefore we have need of a more effectual and
myghtier force in our hearts, to justify us than the law is. Truly they that
have not so known the law, they are altogether blind, and walk in this life
in a certain bold confidence, thinking that they can fulfill the law by
their woorks: not considering at all, how that the law does imperiously
require the whole heart, and all the affection. Wherefore these men behold not
the end of the law: only they vewe the covered and hid face of Moses without
grace, who are like perpetually to perish in their vain woorks.

After these matters, The strife betwixt the flesh and the spirit, even in the
regenerate.
the Apostle sets forth, how the flesh and the Spirit in one and the same
man does stryne and wrestle together: and he exhibiteth himself unto us, as
an example (though he was instifyed.) Whereby we might learn this
mortification of the remnaunts of sin. Now he calls both the Spirit and
the flesh, a certain law. I have found (says he) a law in my members
contrary and repugnant etc. For like as the law of God does urge and exact
those things to be done of us, which God would have done: so the Law of the
members or of the flesh, does incite and compel us to carnal things,
contrary to the spirit. Again on the other side, the spirit does labor
myghtely against the flesh, moving us to spiritual things. And this conflict
and combat dureth so long as we are clothed with this flesh. In this man the
strife is stronger and myghtier: in that man more remiss and fainte: in every
man accordingly as the spirit or flesh is in him, stronger or weaker:
notwythstanding one and the same man is that flesh and spirit, which so
stryueth and wrastleth with himself, until (Sin being quyte abolished) he
become spiritual.

In the eight Chapter, A comfort for the afflicted conscience of the godly.
Also he declares that the relics of sin cannot hurt us: that there is no
condemnation to those which are in Jesus Christ, which walk not after the
flesh, but according to the spirit. Furthermore, he does explicate at large
the nature of the flesh and the spirit, showing that the spirit is given to man
only by Christ. He that has not the spirie of Christ (says he) the same man
is none of his. Again, as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God. For it is the Spirit alone which does innouate and renew our
hearts, which does make them spiritual, which does encourage us with sweet
and loving affects and motions: lastly which does give testimony and bear
witness unto our spirits, that we are the very sons of God, teaching us that
we (although sin does boil with rage within our flesh) have God for our
father, and may account our selves his Sons, if so be that we do daily by
the spirit wrestle against the flesh.

Now because nothing is more profitable to the mortifying of the old Ada^ the
flesh, the^ the cross, tribulation and affliction that is, the Apostle does
here comfort us in those tribulations, affirming that the Spirit does make
intercession and request for us with sighs, which cannot be uttered and
expressed: also that all the creatures, being subject to vanity and abuse, do
even groan and travel in pain together with us, until this body of sin be
abolished, and the glory of the sons of God be revealed. Thus we see that
these three last Chapters, do urge nothing so much as this only and chief
work of our faith, namely, the mortification of our old Adam, which is the
flesh.

In the.ix. x. and.xi. the world, and who should not, who should believe, and
who not, who should be freed from sin, who should be blinded, who should be
damned, and who should be justified. Seeing therefore that both the sending out
of the preachers of the Gospel, and the word it self be of God, it is
certain that it lies only in Gods hand to justify us. Predestination must
be taught and preached.
And surely this stable sentence and immouable necessity of predestination, is
a most necessary doctrine to be taught. For we are so weak that if it were in
our hands, very few or rather none should be saved. For the dyuell would
overcome us. Yet now seeing this sentence and decree of God is most sure and
certain, so that it cannot be changed or altered by any creature, we have
then good hope to overcome at the length those relics of sin, although that
now they rage in our flesh.

But here those curious men (who before they have learned Christ, A Caneat for
curious Christians.
and the virtue of his Cross, do search the profunditie and depth of
predestination, laboring in vain to inquire whether they are predestinate to
life or death) must be rayned, strayned and kept back with some holy Bridle.
For without all doubt, these men by this their foolish curiosity, will lead
and learn to cast them selves headlong into the confusion of their conscience,
or into the bottomless pit of desperation. But thou (dear Christian) see that
in reading and learning holy things thou follow the order and Method set down
here in this place by the Apostle. Learn this godly Method.


First of al learn the knowledge of Christ, that thou may acknowledge that
all thy strength and power avails to nothing, but to sinning. Furthermore
that by faith thou may daily wrestle with thy flesh, as he has taught thee
in the.vii. first Chapters. Finally, after that thou be come to the.viii.
Chapter, that is, after that thou have tried the Cross and trybulation, after
thou have had experience of this wholesome mortification, often to be repeated,
then first of all will this necessity of predestination, wax sweet unto them,
then thou shall first feel in the.ix.x. and.xi. Chapters, how full of comfort
and consolation this doctrine of predestination is. For unless thou have had
experience and trial of tribulation: Predestination only comfortable to those
which are well exercised in afflictions.
unless thou thou have felt thy self to have been brought sometime even unto
the gates of hell (as we see in David and other Saints) thou can not bear or
brook this doctrine and sentence of predestination without peril and danger,
without a certain murmuring and grudging of nature against God. Therefore it
is needful and necessary that old Adam should first be mortisied, that the
sense of the flesh should be beaten down, that the sucklings should first
grow up in Christ before they drink of this sweet Cup of wine. For even
here also there is in every one a certain infancy and childhood, who has in
the mean time need to be fed with Milk, until he be accustomed to eat
stronger meats.

In the twelfth chapter he does annex and adioyne certain admonitions and
precepts. The second patt of this Epistle concerning christian conversation.
that first he does teach Christ and Faith: afterward he does exhort to
good works, and a continual mortification of the flesh. Wherefore he does
teach here good works in deed, and the true worship of God. And here he
makes all Christians to be Priests, commanding them to offer not money,
either Oxen or Gotes (as it was the custom of the Law) but to offer
themselves a spiritual sacrifice, A spiritual Priesthood.
mortifying the old Adam. Furthermore he does deliver out most briefly unto us
the institucion and instruction of Christian manners: as how we should teach,
preach, rule, and govern, namely in the church: how we should serve our
neighbor, how we should suffer tribulations: to be brief, how it behooves a
Christian to behave himself toward his friends and enemies. And these are
truly good works of a Christian man, which do slow out of Faith as from a
fountain and head spring. Yea which do even make a violent eruption. For
faith (as I have said) is not idle: Papists works what they are
But the works of the Iusticiaryes which are done without this lively flame of
Faith in the heart, are but hypocrites purple show, and feigned colors,
wherewith they paynt themselves outwardly, when as inwardly they are full of
hatred, avarice, filthiness, and deceyte.

In the.xiii. Chapter he teaches us to be obedient to earthly and worldly
Magistrates, Obedience to the Magistrate.
seeing that al power is of God. For though the administration of the sword,
and those political and civil Laws do help nothing to the justification of
the heart: notwithstanding because that power and authority is ordained and
appointed of God, to the maintenance and preservation of the peace of the
common wealth, that malefactors might be punished, and good men defended:
therefore it is to be reverenced and honored even of the Saints of God and
righteous men, which otherwise stand not in need of that authority. Love is a
short sum of all Christian duenes.
At the last he comprehends summarily all duetis in this one word love. And
whereas he proposed Christ as the cause and author of our righteousness, now
here after another sort he proponeth and setteteth him forth as an example:
namely that we imitating and following Christ, should so serve our neighbor,
as Christ has served us.

In the.xiiii. Patience,
ought to be patiently tolerated and borne withal through love: also how we
ought to use that liberty not to any offense, but to the instruction and
edifying of the weak conscience of our neighbor. For unless the offending of
the weak be diligently and warely avoided, there will follow a discord and
contempt of the Gospel: whose dignity and renoune it stands us greatly upon to
conserve and keep inuiolate. wherefore it were better to yield for a time to
the weak in faith, until they be confirmed, than that the Gospel should be
contemned or suppressed. And this is the cheifest work of Christian love and
Charity, which very many in these our days have need of, who abuse their
liberty by eating of flesh, and by other means, hurting weak consciences,
yea making them to stumble as it were in the entry and door of Christianity,
before they know the liberty of Christ, and the way of ryghteousnes.

In the.xv. VVeake brethren ought to be considered.
unlearned, rude, and unskillful, or those which otherwise are evil mannered,
or of naughty conditions. For even these are not streyghtway to be contemned,
but rather to be tolerated and suffered until they be better amended. So our
savior Christ (as we see in the Gospel) did bear with our sins and
offenses: yea and at this day does tolerate our sins, errors, and
imperfections, ever reaching his right hand to help us, ever ayding us through
his unspeakable mercy.

Moreoner he prays for the increase of their faith, peace, and joy of
conscience, also praising them, and committing them to God: yet once again he
commends also and maginfieth his office, namely how he may glory in that
he handles and medleth with Gods business and matters, how that he does and
has preached through the grace which he has received of God, being also
called from heaven by God, and not by any man. By and by after, Alms to be
given to the poor Saints.
(setting before them the example of the Macedonians in sted of a little
Exordium or insinuation) he does very ciuilly take an occasion to beg and
crave alms of them for the poor Saints in Jerusalem. To be breife,
whatsoever this most Apostolical breast does, or speaks, it is mere Charity
and love, mere works of faith and of the Spirit.

Thus thou have (gentle reader) here in this Epistle most fully and absolutely
set out whatsoever appertains any way either to Christian life, The Epistle
to the Romans a sufficient doctrine for a Christian man
or justification: what Christians ought chiefly to learn, namely what the
law is, what the Gospel is, what syn, grace, faith, justice or righteousness,
Christ, God, good works, charity, love, and hope is: briefly in what thing
the sum of all Christianity does consist: how a Christian ought to behave
himself toward his neighbor, whether they be good or bad, weak or strong,
freindes or foes. Last of al how we should behave our selves cowards our
selves, the Apostle does so diligently fortify and strengthen all these things
by Scripture, and so confirm them by his own example, and the example of the
Prophets, that thou can not here desire or wish any thing more, or more
plain and manifest. For (no doubt) it was the Apostles mind to comprehend in
this Epistle summarily, and to handle compendiously the whole Gospel, and
whatsoever belongs to Christian learning and instruction, also to prepare a
Method and brief introduction unto all the writings of the old Testament,
namely, Moses and the Prophets. For whosoever has red this Epistle well and
thoroughly digested it in his mind, that man has a most sure and certain
Method to all the old Testament. A profitable exhortation.
Wherefore as I admonished before, so here now again I do exhort you, that
you would (as Moses does in the.xi. Chapter of Deuteronomie) lay up these things
in your hearts, and teach them your children, to the end that by a continual
recording and repeating of them, they may be made by all means most familiar
unto you.

The last Chapter contains salutations or commendations: ^raditions ^ot to be
re^yued.
For the Apostle foresawe in the Spirit, that there should arise and spring
certain Romanistes (for they are not worthy the name of Romans) out of Rome,
and Romans: who by their wicked and blasphemous, most diuilish and sathanicall
decretals, and their whole den of man's laws and traditions, as by a most wast
floude and huge delight, would labor to drown, extinguish, and destroy not
only this excellent Epistle, but even the whole body of Scripture: yea all
the doctrine of faith, and of the spirit: insomuch that they should leave us
nothing but this Idol our belly, Papists belly gods. Philip. 3.18
whose worshippers he does call them here, and most plainly in the Epistle to
the Philippians. For (says he) there be many walk, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you weeping, they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ
whose God is their belly and their glory, to their shame, they are worldly
minded. The God of all peace bruise and beat down Satan and his Kingdom
under our Foot. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, for Thomas
Woodcock dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the black Bear.


