:This little treatise compendiously declares the damage and Destruction in
Real mes / caused by the Serpente of Division.

depiction of castle and knights

WHylome as old books makes mention: when the noble and famous Cite of Rome:
was most shynynge in his felicite and flouring i^ his glory / like as it is
remembered in the books of old antiquite: in the pryme te^ps of his foundation
when the walls were reised on hight by the manly and prudent diligence of
Remus and Romulus: the Cite stood under governance of kings till unto the
time that Tarquine: son of Tarquine the proud: did the great outrageous
offense unto Lucres / wife of the worthy Senatoure Collatine. In punysshyng of
which trespass by the ma^ly pursuyte of Collatynes kynred and full assente of
all the Senate: the name of kings ceased i^ the Cite of Rome for ever more /
and all the royal stock of the foresaid Tarquyne was proscripte and put in
exyle. And after by the prudent advise of the Senate: the Cite was governed
between Counseylers / and so continued unto the time that Pompey the proud was
repaired home again from the conqueste of Tire / which by force he had made
subject unto the empire of Rome: where as with great worthiness of fame he was
received. So that for his great noblesse he was chosen one of the three for to
govern the Cite: assygned to him other two full renomed of knyghthode: Julius
Cezar / and Marcus Crassus / and thus was the name of Counseylers turned in to
the name of Dictatours / which was that time an office partinent to princes to
govern other. And for a special cause this office and this occupacion of a
Dictatoure: by assente of all the hole Senate was committed unto three / that if
one offended: the other twain should be mighty and strong to correct the
third. And an other cause was this. while that twain were occupied in war
outward the third should govern at home. And thus all the while they were of
one heart of one assent / and void of variaunce among them self: the
noblesse of Rome floured in prosperity. But as soon as false couetyse brought
in pride and vain ambicion: The co^tageous Serpe^te of Division clypsed and
appalled her worthynes / co^cludyng so^hly as in sentence that every kingdom
proved by division is conveyed to his destruction. And so for the surquedous
pride on the party of Julius: and after of the said Cite of Rome: the
contageous couetyse entremedled with envy on the party of Pompey: made the
famous Cite of Rome fully wast and wild not only of their iunumerable
treasure: but caused the^ also to be full bareyne and desolate of their men /
where tofore of worthynes / of knyghthode / and of chyualry: they were
incomparable. And finally the false division among them self: was more
importable unto them: and caused more the ruin of the Cite / tha^ wha^ they
had war with all the world / like as this little storye compendiously shall
deuyse. And to convey brefly the process of this matter: ye shall first
understand that Marcus Crassus was senre to the parties of the North with
six legions of knights against the king of Parthes. And the manly man
Julius Cezar with other syxte legions of people was sent down passing the
great bonds of Lombardy / discending down by high Alpyes / and auaylyng down
by the large plage of Germany and of Almaygne / till by conqueste: by his manly
force and his mortal sword he brought all France in to subjection / and all
the land of Burgoyne Brabant / Flaunders / and Holande. In which conquest he
co^tynued till almost the space of his Luster was wasted out. That is to say:
that was the space limyted of the Romans: the which was called a Luster /
which is accounted the space of.v. year / and who so ever passed that space by
accasion of any conquest and not repaired again at his time set and lymyted of
five year: He was foriuged anon and de^pt asenemy and rebel unto the noble
Cite of Rome But this famous and manly man Julius prudently demynge in his
opyuyon that time lost while that fortune is blandesshi^g and favorable:
through the co^tageous occasyon of negligence and of sloth: is afterward full
hard for to be recovered. Wherefore of knyghthode and manly prowess he did set
the Romans statutes aside: and fully purposed in his noble and knyghtlyherte
for to pass the bonds and the space of his Luster / and to enforce him self
with his chyualry to win the bonds of Bretain and ouersayle by force the
weste party of our Occean. But for all his surquedous pride he was twyes beten
of at his aryuale by the worthynes of the Breto^ king called Cassybelan. And
plainly without favor to de^iare and specify the troth he migh never attain
to aryue at his lust and pleasure: till this manly king Cassybelan and
Androgenes duke of Cornewayle: fell at debate among them self / whereby I may
conclude that whiles unity and accord stood vndefoyled and vndeuyded in the
bonds of Bretaine: the mighty conqueror Julius was unable and impotent to
vaynquisshe the^. By which ensample ye may euydently consider and se: that
division like as is specified toforne is original cause in prouynces and
regions of all destruction: For when Julius by favor of Androgenes recovered
aryuale into Bretayne: shortly after Cassybelane the manly king: proudely and
knyghtly met with him / between who^e there was a mortal war. But like as it
is especially remembered and recorded by the writing of the most worthy and
graduate clerk Eusebius that same day when Julius and Cassybelan met in the
fold: this foresaid Cassybelane had a famous and a passing manly man to his
Brother: the which with his blody mortal sword never ceased to sle and
oppress the proud Roman knights / so farforth that they fled and eschewed
his sword as the death. For as he went there was no resystence. And this
continued so long that the Romans were impotent to resyste. But Oh alas when
he was weried of fight: it befell casually of Fortune which is ay contrary and
perverse: that he of adventure met with this manly man Julius / and both two
like as made is mention: fared as Tygres and Lions / eueryche woundyng other
full mortally / till suddenly by disposicio^ of fate: Julius with an unware
stroke of his dreadful sword rofe him atwene. And by cause the story makes no
mencyon what this worthy knight hight: I find none other name of him but that
he was brother unto the noble Breton king Cassybelan. The death of whom Bretons
ought full well to complain / by whose death Julius was made victorious / and
Cassybelane brought to subjection unto the Empire of Rome / and constreyned by
Cezar to pay for his truage / three thousand pound every year. And in the
sign of this conqueste and victory Julius Cezar edified in this land for a
perpetual memory to put his name in remembrance: the castle of Dover / and
Caunterbury / Rochester / and the tower of London / the castle and the town
of Cezarisbury / which now is called Salesbury And more over as says mine
auctoure he edifyed Cezaris Chester / that now is called Chychester / and the
castle of Exceter And in the mean while that Cezar thus proudely had holy and
entyerly the governance of Brutes Albion: his fellow Marcus Crassus of who^e
tofore is made mention: was slain in the Est party of the world / while he
made most cruel war against the fyers people of Parthes. And for his gredy
vnstauncheable thirst of couetyse / his enemies slew him in this wise. They
made melte gold and poured it in to his mouth / sayng to him in this wise.
Aurum sitisti: auru^ bibe. Thou have thursted gold all thy life: now drink
thy fill. Lo here ye may consider and se the short and the moment any time
transytory and not abydyng of all the warriors. And as the story reherseth
also: as for lamentable kalende of more infortune that after should follow:
Iulta the noble wife of Pompey and daughter to Cezar dyed of a child. For
which cause Pompeyus pretended to find a cause to revoke Cezar again to Rome
by asse^te of all the Cenate to the intent that he should come in his own
person to revenge in all haste the death of his fellow Marcus Crassus: as
before is said so vengeably slain in his conquest This same Pompey having a
secret dread in his conceyt lest that Julius Cezar should wax so mighty in
his conquest that he should not be egall of power / nor able to resyste him in
his repair / and dredynge also in his ymaginacion lest that* Julius would of
presu^ptuous pride usurp by tyranny to take upon him the lordeshype and the
dominacion of Rome But this manly man Cezar aduertynge full prudently and
perceyuyng the fraudulent meaning of Pompey on that one side: and the compassed
steyght of the Cenate of that other side: full aduysedly gave answer again
that he would accomplysshe and perform his conqueste which he had begone /
and than mekely and humbly at their request repair home again. And in this
wise entered in the snake of wanhope and of discord: which caused eueryche to
suspecte other and thus began to kyndle the fire of envy / enducing
successyuely war and debate among the^ self / and here upon without delay to
execute their purpose: and euydently to show the end of their intent: Pompey
and the Cenate of one assent without respite or deliberacion foriuged Cezar
gylty / disobey sante / rebel / and traytoure to Rome / and gave upon him a
sentence diffinityue of exyle and proscripcion for evermore. But Julius not
co^syderyng nor having no manner euydence ne suspecion of that malicious
co^spiracy that Pompey and the Cenate wrought against him. But all i^nocent
and vnknowlegynge ^ of their enuyous malice by good and diligent deliberacion
of intent did send his Imbassatoures: not unto his son in law Pompey: but
also unto all the worthy court of the Cenate / and to all other of the
Citezens of the Cite / requirynge and prayng the^ of equite / that for his
meritory deserte: they should not be contrary against him / nor for none
occasyon of wylfulnes: to deny unto him his custumable guerdon the which is
due of old antiquite to be given to co^querours: but that they would freely and
wylfully (uncompelled) grant him and put him i^ possession of the Palm and
the triu^ph which so long by knyghtly labor and ma^ly diligence he had for
the encreace and the augme^tacion of the common profit of all the empire of
Rome trauayled for. Tha^ for to specifye and declare the honor and Triu^phe
whylome used in Rome: First ye shall understand that Triumphus by
description: is as much to say in English as a treble gladness / or else a
synguler excellency of joy / in three manner of wise ordained for victours:
which through their high renown and ma^ly prowess had brought regions and
cities by way of knyghly co^queste to be subject and trybutary unto the Empire
of Rome. The first of the three worshipes done to a co^querour: was this.
First at his repair unto the Cite: all the people of hye estate and of low:
should with great joy and reverence in their best and richest array: mete him
on the way. And this was the first. The second was this / that all the
prisoners and they that were in captivity: should fetred and manacled go round
about enuiron his charet: so^e before and some behind And the third worshype
done unto him this was. That he should be clad i^ a purpurate ma^tell of
Jupiter as god / and sit with a crown of Laurer upon his heed in a charet of
gold / and about his neck a manner of a cercle enuyron made of gold: in
symylitude and lykenes of a Palm. And it so that his co^queste were performed
and acco^plysshed withoute^ sword or shedynge of blood: tha^ should the cercle
of the Palm be forged without pryckes or pynnes. And if so were that his
victory was fynysshed by the cruel fate of war: tha^ of custu^e his sercle
or his pectorall was forged all full of sharp prycki^g thorns / to declare
and specify that there is no co^queste acco^plysshed fully to the end by
mediacion of war: without that there be felt and found therein the sharp
thorns of aduersue / and that outher by death or else by pouerte. And this
royal victorious Charet to foresaid was drawn with four white stedes through
the most royal streets of the cite to the Capitoly / he having a ceptre in his
hand full rychely devised: and thereupon in sign of victory an Egle of gold.
And to show clearly that al worldly glory is transitory and not abydyng: and
euydently to declare that in high estate is no assurau^ce: there was set at
the back of the co^querour / behind in the charet / the most unlikely person
/ and the most wretch: that in any country might be found / disfygured and
clad in the most vglywyse that any man could deuyse. And amyd all the clamor
and noise of the people / to exclude the false surquedy / vain glory / and
idle laud: this foresaid foul and ugly wretch should of custom and of
co^suetude smyre the conqueror in the neck ever and upon the heed / and
standmele saying to him in Greek: this word (Norys yolytos) which is to say
in our english tongue as (Know thy self) which declares unto him that he
nor none other should for no such worldly glory be surquedous ne wax proud.
And that day it was lefull without punysshyng to every man of hye estate or of
low to say to him that was victoure / what that he would whether it were of
honor or worshype / of reprefe or of shame. And this was admytted for this
cause / that he should truly consider and aduerte that there is none erthly
glory that fully may be assured without danger of fortune. And shortly to
declare the difference between Triu^phus and Tropheu^. Triu^ph is a full and a
co^plener ouercomyng of enemies by battle. And Trophe is when a man puts
his enemies to flight with out stroke of sword. But touching this honor
aforsayd which Julius required and asked of right as for a guerdon which him
thought was meritory and due unto him. Anon this forsaid Po^pey with full
asse^t of all the cenate denied all with one voice his request: and of one
accord answered again and said him platly he should not be accepted there unto
no such honor / but planly they bad him know that he hade rather deserved to
be deed tha^ to attain to any such worshipe / allegyng against him that he
was both rebel and traitor to the statutes of Rome. And wha^ Julius clearly
conceived the short answer of the cenate and of this Po^pey tofore said /
there kindeled a full great hot bre^uyng fire of envy in his heart of the
fretyng hate specially that he bare in his breast for to be revenged of Pompey.
And as Lucau reherceth i^ his poetical book: the deneyng of this worshipe to
Julius: was the chief ground and occasion of all the war that began in Rome
/ rote and beginning also of all the co^tageous division among the^ self. But
so as Lucan lyketh to reherce and specify in his book aforesaid among other
causes that he put Lie in especial writes of three which were chief beginning
and rote of division among the^ self / prouyng by reason in those three: that
it must needs be: that the felicite and the prosperity of Rome must abate and
draw to decline / the which three: First he says it was necessary that such
aduersyte should fall to Rome. Secondarely he says it was co^suet adynary. And
thyrdly he says it was volu^tary. First that it was necessary: he proves by
example of nature in this wise. That like as Phoebus the son: when he aryseth
i^ the Orient: and by successyue course asce^deth into the highest point of
the Mydday spear: and of his kind and natural course must discende: and has
his golden tressed horns in the westren wawes: and than dymmeth and darkneth
our emespery by absence of his light: and also eke when the same golden wayne
of Tytan: fro the Ariet is whyrled up to the highest tower of his ascension in
the celestyall sign of the crabbe: and tha^ by the myghry compellyng of
natures right: he is constreyned to discende down and auale his charet. Right
so semblably there is no worldly worshype so bright nor clear shynyng in earth:
but that it must enclyne and auale down as soon as he has artayned to the
highest and the most famous point of his ascencion. For like as the rage and
the haboundau^t flow: when it has raught his stourdy wawes to the highest:
suddenly follows an ebb and makes him to resort again. In the same wise
wha^ any temporal prosperity is most flowyng in felicite: than is a sodeyne
ebb of aduersyte most to be adrad. Also in the same wise as ye may clearly
discern and consider at the eye: In trees and herbs / that when the
vegetatyfe virtue by the confortable influence of the son: is after the cold
winter: In Ver by little and little ascended into branches and bows: and
causes them for to budde and to blossom new: and also in herbs makes a
lusty and a fresshe color newly to appear: And more over by process of time
with her wholesome bawme aparaleth the^ with many fold sundry color: of red /
white / and grene: and tha^ anon after in discence of Appollo the son: the
same virtue fro the crop aualeth again in to the rote: right so there is no
felicite so flouryng / nor none so apparayled with blossoms and blomes of
transytory richesse: but as soon as the shynyng son of her glory shedeth his
beams most clear: full unawarely ere they can aduerte or take heed: ben robbed
and reued of their lordeshype and plonged a down die occasyon of some aduersyte
/ brought and enduced into aduersyte: outher by seckenes or by death. And thus
that the first cause is natural and necessary: and that all worldly pomp and
pride shall pass: mine auctour Lucan has proved by reason. Than touching the
second cause which is called custom able and consuctudinary: ye may consider
that ever of custom it falls that when the blind goddess of varyaunce Dame
Fortune has enhaunced a man highest upon her while: with a sodeyne syghe she
plongeth him down again. Evident example ye may take of kings and princes
that have been tofore. And tha^ touching the third cause of distruccion of the
Cite: Lucan lyketh to call (...) in his poetical muses: voluntary. Which is
as much to say: as a cause roted upon wylfulnes without any ground founded
upon reason. For only of wylfulnes they were so blind: that the^ list not to
know the^ self: but thought them self so assured in their felicite: that
they might not by no collateral occasyon of aduersite be perturbed ne put out
thereof. And thus through false surquedrau^ce they were made so wylfull that
none list to obey other. And so was brought in obstynacye: eueryche of them
demynge him self egall to other. And thus of co^trarious discord among the^
self: only of volunty: they stood disscuered and divided / which was one of
the chief occasyons of their destruction. And for this skyll toforne declared.
Lucan calls the third cause voluntary: in as much as it was falsely founded
upon will. And thus first by a cause necessary: and by the second cause
called consuetudynary showed tofore by example of custume: and by this last
third cause called volu^tary roted only upon will: The Romans among them
self: stood in such contrauersye: That they douted to which party they
should enclyne. And compendiously to declare how all these causes of division.
How the war which of clerks is called Bellum Civil: which is as much to
say in english: As a war among them self. For the clear compendious
process of which: first ye shall consider that Julius plainly informed of the
malicious co^spiracy compassed and wrought against him. Anon as he in his
repair out of Albion was passed the bonds of Almaygne and had attained to
high Alpies / which of auctours ben called the cold frosty hills / and the
bonds of Lombardy / and so holdyng his passage by the flode of the sturdy
river called of Lucan (Rubicanis) there appeared to him an old ancient lady
heavy and drery in a mantell of black / her face wympled tofore in full
dolorous wise: the tresles of her head for age full hoar and white. And for
constreynt of her heartily woe: eue^ upon the time when the black dark night
had over spredde their emyspery with the bordure of her ugly and her cloudy
cope. This woeful lady tofore said began her lament able complaynt to Julius in
this wise. Oh ye noble worthy knights most renomed of fame: Alas / whether
purpose ye with so mighty apparayll of Mars to proceed / or where cast ye to
fytche your stourdy standerdes or to displaye your ferefull pynons and baners.
Oh alas against whom have ye cast finally to execute the mortal hate that
brenneth in your heart / or against wheme purpose ye in such cruel wise to
prove your might. Remember in your thought that ye be vpholden by the Senate of
Rome? and your self accompred as for noble and full worthy knights of the
Cite / and show not your self now enemies to the Empire / by whose worthynes
before time it has been sustained and mightily supported against the assaute of
all her fone. And Oh alas aduerte and consider in your heart the noble and the
prudent statutes of the polecy of Rome / the which full plainly does crpresse
that it is lefull unto no man for to pass the bonds of this streme: but if he
be mortal enemy and tebell unto Rome. Now ye therefore that have so long
bemn friends / and so many maynteyned the honor of the cite: withdraw your
foot and haste not to fast: but let good deliberacion restrain your reins
that hasty wylfulnes led you not to confusion / not only of your self: but
unto the original ruin of the Cite: by the haboundant shedyng of blood that
is lykely to ensue. And suddenly when this lady had brefly expressed the su^me
of her se^te^ce without more she disapered. This ma^ly man and fortunate knight
Julius in party dismayed of this uncouth appearance: restreyned his host: and
made them to fetch their tents endelong the stronde upon the hinder parties
of the river. And in his uncouth affray: he suddenly abrayd: said in this wise.

Oh thou mighty Jupiter under whose demayne Vulcanus forgeth the dreadful
sownes of the thonder: and causes hertes to arise with the fire leven: And oh
ye gods and goddesses that whylome hade the governance of our au^ceters in
Troy: and oh ye noble gods Remus and Romulus the famous founders and mighly
protectours and patrones of the Cite of Rome? I as humble subject unto your
deite full lowly beseech and require you of equity and right to be well wylly
and favorable to promote my true quatell and cause / and benyngly of your
bou^teous goodness to favor and fortune the high enterprise which of just
title I purpose for life of death through your favor to execute / and not as
enemy nor rebel to Rome: but as a true Citeze^ and a preued knight cast me
fully to persevere. With condition that like as I have manly deserved: I may be
received / making a protestacion that not as enemy but as full friend and
subject to Rome I will be sound steadfast and true. Wherefore ye mighty and
noble Senators of Rome I require you of right that ye nothing arecte nor
ascryue to my gylte that I come with strong and mighty hand: that I enter the
bounds of the imperial fraunchyse. Making a full protestacion that only with
a clean conscience not entryked with none entente of evil meaning: that I come
to you of full purpose to be received as for your friend and not as your foo.
Requiryng also to hold him (what so ever he be) for full enemy to your noble
cite: that of will and intent labors to make discord atwene us twain. For
so that my meritory gwerdon which that I have in my conqueste justly deserved
be not denied me: I am and ever will be: for life or death? a true knight to the
Cite: to my lives end. And forthwith making no delay: like a Lion not dismayed
nor afraied: First of all in his own person he passed the River / the which
river like as Lucan remembers: the same time at the coming of Lezar: against
his custumable course: was raised on heygh into a great flode / and all the
white Snowes of Alpies were resolved with the beams of Phoebus where through
the ryuers in the valyes were raised so high that uneaths any man might pass.
But Julius of no uncouth adue^tures afraied / but like a ma^ly man fulwell
assured in him self; i^ the p^sence of al his worthy knights: said in this
wise. Here I leave behynd all the old co^federacies made betwyxte Rome and me /
and here I leave all the frendshipe of old antiquite and only follow the
traces of fortune: and of hole intent begin a ryghtfull war: for cause
only that by mediacion of peace proffered in my side: I may not atteyne my
title of right. And anon without more delacyon even upon the spryng of the
day: which of clerks is called Aurora: he unawarely with all worthy multitude
of his knights entered in to the cite (called of Lucan) Arimye / a cite
partment to Rome / and there he took first possessyon of the Empire: none so
hardy to resyste nor to withstand the fury of his sword / and all this while
the Romans standing in doubt to which party they should enclyne / whether to
Cezar or to Pompey. For of charity that they had ot their wives and their
children and to the old statutes of the Cite / they were favorable to Pompey
/ and of dread that they had of Cezares sword: they stood in so great
ambiguite: that they could not deem what was best to do. To how the mortal
envy of twain was cause and occasyon that / that noble cite which had all
the world in subjection / and was called Lady and Empress of all regions was
brought in to destruction. For in these two: first began the division which
nuer after might parfytely be restored nor reconsiled to unity / whereby as
seems unto me^: that all prudent Princes which have the governance in
provinces and Regions should take example what harm and damage it is / and
how fynall a destruction it is to be divided among them self. And for to
ratify by more Aucte^tyke example how much that unity more avails tha^
division I will shortly reherce and example the which Valerie puts / and it
is this. This auctour reherceth that whylome when the Cite of Rome stood lykely
to have been divided of a debate that was newly begone among them self: there
was a wise Philosopher among them: which of high diseressyon considered the
great peril that was lykely to fall and follow and though he would of wisdom
void that might ensue. And in presence of all the senate and lords of the
cite: he made bring forth an horse which had a long and a thycke tail growe^
behind. And than he commanded the myghtyest champion of the town to set on
both his hands and ssaye if he might by force pull of the horse tail at a
pluck. And albeit that he plucked to the vttermoste of his might: it would not
avail. And tha^ anon this Philosopher made call to the presence of the Senate:
the most impotent man of the Cite? a man unwieldy and crooked of age. And this
Philiopher made this old man to pluck the one hear after a another of the
horse tail / till by little and little: by process the tail was wasted
cleneaway / and the horse naked and bare behind. Behold said the Philosopher?
That while the tail of the horse was hole and one in it self: and ever the
hear with other (vndeuyded) the myghtyest champyon of your Cite might do
thereto no damage. But as soon as every hear was divided and disseuered fro
other: he that was lest of power among ye all: left never till the tail was
consumed and brought to naught By which example said the Philosopher?
Prudently aducrte and wisely cast tofore: that as long as ye be oue in your
self and of one heart: there is none so strong nor so mighty that may avail
by force to attempt your worthynes. But as soon as among your self one is
divided from a another: your enemies: though they be full impotente of power:
they shall by process of time pluck away the most fairest and the most shene
feathers of your worthynes. And by this example the Philosopher: ^oforesaid
reconsyled the Romans again to unite: and voyded away division among the^
self. How compendiously to resort again to my matter like as the story
makes mention: the Romans standing in great contrauersy among them self: to
which party thgey should draw The gods by many signs and pronosticacions
declared unto them the great myschefe that was lykely and very semblable to
follow. For there appeared unto the^ many uncouth images of sterres / some in
brennyng haberions of fire. And some with bright brondes in their hands
casting flame enuyron. And some with fyry darts and sharp hoked arowes
shotynge in the air. And in especial there appeared a large Comete of stremes
the which raught their branches on the four plages of the fyrmament. And the
son also when he hone most bryghte in the meredionall plage: the day
vnwarlytourned to night. And the pale moan against the common course of her
kind: sodeinly she was clip sed of her light. And forther the dreadful
Karibe^s of the sea Cycyle was turned in to blood. All the hounds also: being
in the bounds of Rome: left the noise of their barkyng / and in sign of
pronosticacion of great sorrow that was to come they howled and weymented that
it was pity to here / and the supersticious fire: which co^tynually tofore was
wont to bren in the chaste temple of the gods called Vesta: the flambe of the
same fire ever being bright upon her aulters. Of the which fire: by old time
was prophesied / that as soon as it divided and departed atwene (as it did
than) that the feasts and the sole^pnytes of Rome should ceace. And like as
the smokes of the funeral fire of the Theban brethern departed at Thebes:
Right so the departng of fire upon their aulters: was a true sign and a
pronostyke of division that should fall among the^ self finally to declare to
every region that where as the fire of love and parfyte charity stand departed
and divided among them self it is a very euydence / that without remedy it
draws to his destruction. Also an euydent token that sodeyne myschefe of
division should follow: the fomyng wawas of the sea surmounted the heyght of
Athlantys hills. Also all the tithe images in the Temples of Rome: which were
made of gold / silver / and diverse other sundry metalles: so as they stood in
their rich and costly tabernacles: they were seen thylke time of division
woefully co^playnyng and weeping / so ferforth: that the tears of their eyes
distylled a down into the earth / to complain the desolacion of their Cite
only caused by occasion of their co^tageous division among the^ self. Birds
also against the cuitome of their nature: were seen fleing upon nyghtes. And
bestes also were herd spekyng / and women brought forth monstrous children.
And all these uncouth wonders befell but a little tofore this foresaid division
i^ the noble cite of Rome for the dreadful time approached full nere of the
which Cybyll so long had prophesied before: when she sent the short su^me of
her sente^ec to the Senators of Rome co^pendiously in the nombre of.vi.
letters Three. R. R. R. and three. F. F. F. which were fully the pronosticacion
of.vi. myschefes that should of necessyre fall unto the cite of Rome:
comprehended and included in the.vi. letters specifyed in this wise. Regna /
Rome / Ruent. Fero / Fla^me / Fame. The Region of Rome by three things shall
draw to ruin. First by the sword of war among the^ self. And next by
fire. And than by hunger. The which three mysthefes so contageously shall
assail the Cite: that it shall be veryvnport able unto the^. And the ground and
ro^e of all this confusyon shall be among them self discord and division.

Forthermore to declare sundry pronosticacions that fell in their Cite Wha^ the
precstes made sacrefyce to their gods: their fyres suddenly quenched. In the
graves and sepulcres of deed men: there were herd woeful and lamentable noyses
and sownes which did put the people in very great dread. And in this wise the
myschefe and the ruin was showed and declared. First by diverse fygures and
sundry lykenesses of sterres showed in the heaven. And next by wonderful
monstres in the earth. Also the birds and the fowls of the air came homly and
not afraid fleing in to the Cite / by the which sign their Clerks that be
called Angures expounden it to their confusyon. And they by many fold mo
signs than I may or can declare: the subuercion of the Cite full long was
showed toforne / only bygon of this contageous division. But shortly to
entreat the substance of the story when that Cezar with strong hand aproched
the bonds of Rome: after when he had won the Cite of Arimye: and had also
conquered Rauenne: and Pompey for fere was fled toward the parties of Greece to
make him self strong. They of Rome had shortly determined in sentence that
Cezar not enter the cite: but so were that his hole retynue were left behind.
But wha^ they knew and saw him so passyngly mighty and strong / they began to
quake^ in their hertes / and namely wha^ they were destytute of an head. Of
which and for that: some Dukes of Pompey drew the^ to the parties of Italye
into a Cite which whylome was called Dirachiu^. And ever this worthy knight
Julius with his chiualry pursued after / and all that withstode he slew. And
the remenau^te he put manly to flight. And day by day the power of Cezar began
multyply and increase. And maugre all his enemies: of very force he entered the
Cite. And as some auctours express: wha^ the Romans (for dread) were ready to
receive him by their gates: he of indygnacion and disdain: made break the
walls and proudely entered as a conqueroure / and iustefied the Romances as
his. And holly took on him the governance / not only of the Cite: but of all
the hole Empire. And maugre the Senate he brake the brason door of their
treasure / and by vyolence took and taught it away / and plenteously departed
it among his knights. And in this mean while: full many kings of the Eest
party of the world came and assembled before the foresaid Cite called
Dirachium. Of intent to sustain the party of Pompey against Julius. And as soon as there was made relacion to Julius Cezar of this great assemble: He
made no delay: but with all his power passed by a country which of mine
auctour is called Epirum. And so he entered in to the costs of Thessalye /
where as he found Pompey: batayled against him with four score Cohortes and
eight / departed in to three wards. Now to declare the nombre and the
multitude of a Cohorte: ye shall understand that there ben two manner of
Cohortes / the more: and the less. And the more by description of Auctours /
conteyneth five hundredth / and the less: four hundredth. There were also on
the party of Pompey: forty thousa^de of footmen. And i^ the left wynge /
there were beside all this / six hundred knights on horseback. And in the
right wynge: there were.v. C. Among which as Vnicent in his myrrour
hystoriall makes mind there were many kings and princes / and many other
worthy senators and knights of Rome which came in defense of Pompey. And as
it is remembered also: Cezar had.lxxx. Cohortes / divided and departed in three
wards. And with this he had.xxx.M. of footmen / without passing great no^bre
of knights on horsbacke. And i this mortal battle all the party of Po^pey
were put to fleght and there were slain on his side.xii.M. and of worthyleders
which be called Le^turians: were slain.xxxiii. And Pompey fled out of the
flede / and for refuge took a Shype and passed by the bonds of Asye through
Thyrye / and aryued in Egypt. And there anon at his ariuayle by the
commandment of Tholome king of Egypt: he was beheded only for love and
favor of Cezar. And fro this victory this foresaid Cezar hasted to the parties
of Syrye / toward the mighty Cite of Alysaundre. And there Tholome king of
Alysau^dre held a battle with Cezar / both on land and on water. In which
war were slain.xxii. M.in the field. And.xii. hundredth Shypes discom fyted
and drowned. And Tholome the king: as he would have fled out of a ship (for
haste) he fell in to the sea and was drowned. And as his body was cast to
land: he was known and discovered by a gylte Haberion / the which Haberion
Julius Cezar made to be sent unto the Cite of Alysaundre / for dread of which:
they of Alysaundre yielded the Cite unto him. Tha^ he repaired again in to
Egypt and by occasy on of the death of Tholome: he gave the Septre and the
Realm and the hole governance of Egyte unto the queen Cleopatra. And so after
the Co^queste of many other Prouynces / Regions / and Lands: he made his
repair again the second time unto the Cite of Rome. And there he did take
upon him two offices / both of Counseyle and of Dictatour. And from thense he
went unto the Conqueste of Affryke. And there began a new war. In especial
against all the Alyaunce and the blood of Pompey. And slew all the Dukes that
were enclyned to be favorable to the party of Pompey / among which were
slain three mighty Princes / Faustus / Cilla / and Postumus. And Pompeya the
daughter of Pompey: iuged to be deed. And from those parties he entered with a
mighty and strong hand into Spain. And there (so as Suetonius writes) he
took upon him power to receive the trybute / which on the party of Spain was
due unto Rome. And so as this story makes mention he proceeded so far in his
conquest / so that he came to the Pyllers of Gades. And there he entered in to
the temple of the strong mighty Champion called Hercules. And when he beheld
in the same temple a rich image of gold set up for a memory of king
Alysaundre. Anon this Cezar began to sygh and compain in him self: that he
never might attain in his conquest to deserve so victorious a Palm of
worthynes: as in their time did Alysaunder and Hercucules. And thus pensyble
and heavy (he yssuyng out of the Temple of Hercules) fully purposed him i his
courage: knyghtly to take upon him of manly courage: some new enterpryses of
high prowess And whiles that he was thus supprised in his best thought: The
next night ensuyng / he had a wonderful vision: which was this. It seemed unto
him in his sleep / that he meddled with his own mother. Of the which dreme he
full greatly afraid and horribly agrised: made call to his presence / his wise
Philosophers and piuinours / to give a plain and a clear interpretacion upon
his dreme. And they anon concluded in short sentence that it was an euydent
sign that he should be fully put in possessyon to have the Imperial dominacion
over all the world. For these prudent Philosophers understood nothing by the
flesshely conjunction that he had with his mother: but a knotte of alyaunce /
performed up between the earth and him. Understanding in their exposicion: that
the earth is primordiall mother of all thing / concludyng thereby that he should
attain to be lord and Emperor over all the parties of the earth. And thus in
all have after the mighty conquest of Affryke / he repaired the third time to
Rome. And was made Emperor over all the world. And was so farforth enhaunced
on heyght: that the Son of his worthynes was run so far upon his spear
that it attained to the highest prycke of his exultacion. So that of necessyte
he must discende. For as the story makes mention: he perseue red not in his
Empire fully the space of five year. And for to reherce compeudiously the
prodigies and the wonderful signs that befell before his death. It is remembered
that the same year of Julius death: In the isle of Capwey: there was found by
Quarreours of the Country a Rich Tomb of Stone. And there in was found a
little tablet of gold graven with letters of Greek / sayng in this wise.: When
ever it shall befall that the Tomb of Capys shall be opened: and that his
bonesshable unclosed / that same year shall the noble and worthy Conquetour
Julius Cezar be murdered in the Capytoly at Rome by the false conspiracye and
ymaginacion of them that he has trusted most. Now was this foresaid Capys a
worthy man and of great auctorite: and the first founder and begynnynger of
the country of Capwey / and named after him. And like as the letters in Greek
specified it befell. And the second prodigy that befell tofore the death of
Cezar: was this. Upon the same night tofore: that he was slain on the morrow:
This noble Conqueror Julius had a reuelacion. Semyng unto him in his sleep:
that he was wynged like an Egle. And how he took his fleght so high / that he
sored above the skies / and aproched to the Celestial see of Jupiter: And fell
down upon the right hand of his god. Another marvelous sign or prodigy
there fell. Also his wife named Caliphurna: a little to fore the death of her
lord Julius: had a wonderful dreme or vision / semyng unto her when she was a
sleep: That the most highest Pynacle of the Imperial palace: sodeinly and
unawarely fell down and thereupon incontynently all the wyndowes of the Chamber
where she slepte: without hand of any man / suddenly brake a two their bars
of iron and opened. Of which noise she being sore afraid i^ her sleep / and
of feminine dread full sore syghed in her heart: as she that could not
conceive in mind what it meant. Also as Vnycent in his hystoriall books makes
mention: An hundred days before his pyteous murder: in the large market place
of Rome / where as the stature and the great image of Cezar stood upon an high
pyller of stone: the name of Cezar graue^ with letters of gold above his heed:
when the wether and the attempre air was most clear and still / with a sodeyne
stroke of the fyry leven / the first lettre of his name.C. was smyten away.
Declaryng by this pronostical sign that like as this lettre.C. in nombre
betokens an hundredth: and was also most craftily wroght and graven as for the
chief capital letter of his name / to show openly that the rasyng away of
this letter by vyolence of the fyry leven: that he that was heed of all the
earth / within the space of a hundredth days next ensuynge: should be vengeably
murdered in Rome. Also the same day of his murder: as he went most ryally in
his Imperial array toward the Consystory: a poor man named Tongilius took
him lettres of all the purposed co^spiracy by the Senate upon his death. But for
he was neglygent to read the lettres and to unclose them: the vengeable murder
was execute upon him. By which example: let no man be slow nor neglygente to
read his letters / lest after for his neclige^ce it may turn him to great
damage which after may not lightly be recovered. And the chief cause and
worker of this murder: was Brutus Crassus / associed unto him two hundred and
sixty of the Senate: all having Bodkyns in their sleues. And as it is in story
remembered: He had four and twenty deedly wounds as he sat in the Capytoly.
And as says mine auctoure / he never in all his smarte: made nouther cry nor
no noise / except only a lamentable and a dolorous syghe like a man that with
sodeyne sorrow were afraid. So that touching the vengeable manner of his
pyteous murder: I may conclude with him that was Flower of Poets in our
English tongue / and the first that ever enlumyned our language with flowers
of Rethoryque and of Eloquence. I mean my Master Chaucer / which
co^pendiously wrote the death of this mighty Emperor / Sayng in this wise: as
follows. ()(/):

With Bodkyns / was Cezar Julius
Wurdred as Rome / of Brutus Crassus
when many a region: he had brought full low
Lo: who may trust fortune any through.
THus by writing of my wise prudent master tofore said: The froward and the
contraryous Lady Dame Fortune: spares neither Emperor nor King / to plonge
him down suddenly fro the highest prycke of her unstable whele. Alas that
never man list to lift up his hertes eye / and prudently to aduerte the
mutabilite and the sodeyne change of this false world. And let the wise
governors of every land and region make a myrroure in their mind of this
manly man Julius / and consider in their hertes the contageous damages and the
importable harms of division / and let them se aduysedly / and take example
how the ambicious pride of Julius / the freting envy of Pompeyus / and the
vnstauncheable gredy Couetyse of Marcus Crassus: were chief and primordiall
cause of their destruction. Executed and accomplysshed by cruel death. And not
only that these aforsayd three abhomynable vices were cause of their own death
only: but occasyon of many a thousand other / many more than I can tell. Thus
the Cite of Rome not only made bare and barayne of their old riches / and
spoiled of their treasure on the ^one side: but destytute and besolate by death
of their knyghthode on the other side. Me seems ought enough suffice to
exemplify what it is to begin a war: And specially to consider the
trrecuperable harms of division. And for this skyll (most especially by
commandment of my master) I took upon me this little translacion / and after
my little co^nynge: have put it in remembrance.



: Thus ends this little treatise entytuled the Damage and destruction in
Realms.

Newly and of late Imprinted by me Roberte Redman.

Dwelling at London in Fleet Street at the sign of the George.

THis is little prose: declares in figure
The great damage: and destruction
That whylome fell / by fat all adventure
Unto Rome / the mighty roy all town
Caused only / by false Division
Among them self / the story tells thus
Through Couetise / and vain Ambicion
Of Pompey: and of Cezar Julius.
Christ him self / records i^ scripture
That every land / and every region
Which is divided / may no while endure
But turn in haste / to desolacion
For which ye lords / and prices of renown
So wise / so manly: and so virtuous
Make a myrroure / tofore in your reason
Of Pompey: and of Cezar Julius.
Harm don by death / no man may recure
Against whose stroke / is no redemption
It is full hard / in Fortune to assure
Her whele so often / tourneth up and down
And for to eschew / strife and discencion
Within your self / be not contrarious
Remembryng ay / in your discressyon
Upon Pompey: and Cezar Julius.
FINISH.

