AN EXPOSITION OF SAlomons Book, called Ecclesiastes or the Preacher.

Seetle and allowed.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

An. 1573.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regia Maiestatis.

An admonition to the Reader.
David that notable king and excellent Prophet, feeling in the course of this
life, the comfort and direction of the eternal word of almighty God,
professes openly in that his Octonary Psalm these words. Psalm. 119. Nun.
Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum (O Domine) and lumen semitis meis. Thy word
(O Lord) is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. David well
perceiuyng the corruption of his nature, the blindness of his understanding,
could not but acknowledge in that his long meditation, the necessity that he
espied in the Scripture of God, for where he saw his wit to weak to comprise
the merueylous works of God as well in his creation, as in his redemption,
(which he saw in spirit before,) could not well atteyne the life that he most
ioyed in, in this tra^sitory world, except his understanding should be
illightened, and his whole state of life truly governed by the lantern and
light of Gods word. He was no fantastical reader of his word, he ioyed not
rather to be a student or a talker, then a worker, but effectually framed all
his senses to savor and know the will of God, and to follow the same. His
spirit was altogether set to virtue, which intent whosoever does not follow,
James. 1.
he does as a man by the testimony of S. James, which delights to behold his
natural countenance in the glass, and is not careful so to impresse the
same in his remembrance, thereby to wype away the spots of his face: for
whosoever does not thus earnestly tarry in the law of perfect liberty, James.
1.
he deceives him self, and ends in vanity. For it is he only that is
blessed in his act that does persist in his law, applying the understanding
thereof to heal his own infirmities, and to be able to be a light unto others,
as we have great cause to thank the goodness of almighty God, for devising of
such a rule of Scripture to be lead by, and as we be bound to magnify
almighty God by his holy spirit to raise up such his well-beloved servants to
call upon us, and to bring us to the knowledge of him self, whereby we might
be tha^kefull: so is the danger very great to all such as cover this his light
under a bushel, that deteyne this precious jewel under unrighteousness of
life. The world was never more full of the certain knowledge of God, then it
is at this day, but almighty God was never more dishonored then he is at this
day, by many that profess by their knowledge to be leaders to the blind,
instructours of the ignorant, having the form of right understanding by the
law of God.

Why therefore do thou says S. Paul: Teach other and teach not thy
self, and so blasphemest the word of almighty God before them that know not
the power thereof, whose condemnation (if they repent not) shall be the greater.
We have much delight now a days to know many things, but little lust we have
to live after our knowledge, it is not he that hears the word of God that
shall be partaker of Christ's blessing, but he that does the word, not he that
has right understanding of his will, but he that is earnestly given to
express his will in his secret thought betwixt God and him self, in his
words and deeds of life to the institution and example of others. It shall not
be asked at that dreadful day when we shall come to make our answer to
almighty God, how much we have learned, how often we have read, how much we do
know, but how well we have lived, what works we have expressed to testify
with us of our inward regeneration, of our inward faith, that he might be
thereby glorified. And for this intent that we should be instructed in our true
duties to god and our neighbor, amongst many works and books to teach us
the same, none is more apt then this book of Solomon which we have in hand
none is more fit then this, which sets out the vanity of our corrupt
affections, no author more lively, no writer is more apt to teach all manner of
persons, as well public as private to rule the^selue a right in this miserable
vale of our corruptible life, the^ is the author of this doctrine contained in
this book. For whosoever will endeavor him self to apply his wit and his
understanding to the counsel of this work, shall soon perceive the
corruption of this world, and the vanity of their own nature, and in all his
trauayles what soever state of life he leads shall see by this lantern, how
to step forth fro^m faith to faith, from virtue to virtue, from charity to
charity, and in conclusion shall find all things mere vain and vanity,
nothing permanent, nothing durable, nothing allowable, but the knowledge of
almighty God, and the fear of his holy name: to whom be all honor and glory
for evermore.

Amen.
The Preface upon the book of Solomon, called the Preacher.
BEcause this book has been obscurely and darckly translated out of the
Hebrew tongue, He blames the abusing of this book.
every learned man has greedyly gone about to expou^de and declare it, each
man labouryng to frame diverse of the sayings therein to his own profession,
or rather opinion whether for that their curiosity was delighted in strange,
obscure and unwonted matters: or else for that in such obscure and dark
writyngs, it is easy for a man to feign what he phansieth and supposes. For
the Philosophers have thought, that which Solomon says even in the very
beginning, has appertained to them, namely, that all things are difficulte,
man is not able to utter them with tongue, as though Solomon meant some kind of
vain speculation in Philosophy.

Some other being offended with this saying of Solomon: As the beast dies so
dies the man, and they have both one end and life: have demed that he was an
Epicure, or spoke in the person of the Epicures. But none have more
daungerously misused the same, The error of the Schooleme^, in this book.
the^ the Schools of the divines, who have wrested this place: No man knows
whether he be worthy of hatred or love to the conscience toward God, and so
much have wrested the same, that they have utterly slaughtered the consciences
of all me^, and put out the most certain says in Christ, teaching and beatyng
into most miserable hearts, The doctrine of doubtyng, took beginning of this
book.
nothing more devoutly the^ yt we ought to doubt and to be uncertain, of the
love, and grace of God toward us, lived we never so inculpable.

So great was the darkness more the that of Egypt, that by reason of this
saying of Salomo^, yea rather through their own errors builded upon his
saying, they saw now no more the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists,
which do declare by so many miracles Scriptures and Arguments, that Christ is
our mediator, and the author of the most undoubted grace and salvation, that
God has prohibited and given freely to us. And no less hurt have diverse of
the holy and notable fathers and Doctors in the Church done by
misundersta^dyng of the same book, The error of holy fathers, in
misundersta^dyng of this book.
who have thought that Solomon had taught us herein the contempt of the world
(as they call it) that is to say of the creatures, that God has made and
ordained. Amongst whom S. Hierome is one which by his Comme^tary written upon
this book allured his beloved Blesilla to become a Nun. From hence has
flowed and ru^ne over all the church like a flud or inundatio^ all that
divinity of ye religious houses or monasteries, The beginning of Monkishe life.
where they taught that it was the duty of a christian to forsake the
governance of his house, to give up his office, yea to leave the Byshoplyke or
rather Apostolic ministry, to get them into the wilderness, to separate them
from all company, to live in quyete and silence, saying that me^ could not live
in the world and serve God: as though Solomon counted marriage, governance of
kingdoms, bearing of office and ministry of the word vanity, all which in this
book he meruelously extolleth and calls ye gifts of God. Error of the
interpretours.
And whereas Salomo^ declares that men the^ selves, or rather their counsels
and devises, are vanities, these men peruertyng all things, call the things
the^ selves vain, and suppose that they and their devises are sound and good,
smothly dreamyng all things contrary to Salomons meaning. And to be short,
they have drawn us out of this most goodly and profitable book nothing but
monsters, and of most fine and pure gold have made abominable Idols.

Wherefore the rather to discover this darkness, and to abolish these filthy
Idols, I have suffered these annotations of mine, noted and written, by other
as I spoke them, and framed after this order of speech, (for my self by reason
of much business could write no sufficient and full Commentary upon the book)
to be published. Which annotations albeit they are but slender and little, yet
may they to them that have no better, or which have been seduced heretofore
with false gloses (as I have been) give occasion as unto wise men, to become
the better and find out and devise better matter. Surely a very small taste of
this book was to me a great pleasure, after I was weryed in the same all my
life long, and had in vain vexed and corrupted my self, with wicked opinions
against the faith in Christ. Wherefore I give most hearty thanks, to ye father
of mercies, which has renewed this latter age with so many revelations and so
great light.

The title of this book.
Therefore we will more aptely call this book of the Preacher, the politikes, or
Oeconomikes of Solomon, (not for yt he gives any rules or precepts how to
govern any Cities, or to rule any families (for that does the law of nature or
reason of man abundantly perform. Whereunto all things in the world are
subject. Genesis 1. which has been always the fountain, Judge and end, and must
so remain of all laws as well civil as domestical) but for that it gives
counsel to men in adversity whether they be public or private persons,
instructyng their minds and strengthenyng them to patience, by bearyng of
misfortunes which many ways fall out in such cases, as the books of the holy
hystories and all Poets fables do declare, such as are Hercules trauelles, the
monsters that Ulysses and others overcame, the Bear, the Lio^, and Goliath
that David vanquished. He that in these points is ignorant, at length falls
down being tired, and great is his fall, as was the fall of Timon,
Demosthenes, Cicero, and diverse like. Through the impatiencie hereof have
heretics also styrred up sects in ye Church because such was the naughtynes of
men, that they forsook their ministry. As it is commonly said Desperation
makes Monks. For it is true that the wise man says: He means Plato.
Office and authority shows what a man is. But in deed, onles we have some
Solomon to exhort and comfort us, office and authority, ouerwhelmeth,
casts down, and vndoth a man.

I commend therefore to the godly brethren this my Solomon, rather pointed at,
and but touched, then fully declared. And I wish that some good and learned man
of a more abundaunt spirit, and happyer vain then I am would stand up, expound
and beautify this book according to the worthynes thereof, to the praise of
God and comme^dation of his creatures, to whom be glory for ever, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Argument upon Salomons book called the Preacher.
The obscurity or hardness of this book.
THis book is one of the most difficulte books of the whole Scripture, which
no man has hitherto fully attained unto, yea it has been depraved with the
unworthy commentaryes of diverse men: in so much that it is a more trouble to
purge ye author thereof from the dreams wherewith they have defaced it, then to
restore the true sense thereof again. And two causes there have been, Two causes
why it is so obscure.
why it has been more hard to understand then other. One was, for that they
perceived not the intent and meaning of the author, which thing as in every
kind of writing, so chiefly in this, and in all others, it had been requisite,
they had kept and followed. The other was by reason they were ignorant in the
Hebrew tongue, and in the auctors peculiar phrase, which many times swarueth
from the common phrase of speech, and differs much from the custom of our
tongue. The use of this book.
Hereby it came to pass, that the book which for many causes was worthy to be
had in all men's hands, and specially to be known to all governors of commonweals (for in it was most lively set forth and in no place like, the
administration of affairs as well public as private) has hitherto been
deprived of his name and dignity, miserably unregarded and neglected, so that
to this day, we have had neither use nor commodity of it. So much has the
rashness and ignorance of some men been able to do. Wherefore our first labor
shall be to hold fast the certain scope and intent of the book, what it
requires and whereto it tends. For if we hereof be ignorant, it shall be
impossible to understand the style and phrase in the same.

The meaning therefore and sum of this book is, The Argument and intent of
this book.
that Solomon will have us to be quieted and settled in our mind, that in all
occurre^ces and chances of this life, we should live contented with our
present estate, without care and desire of things to come, as Paul says:
living without carefulnes, because vain is the desire of future things.
Solomon gathers by a certain perpetual and co^tynued induction of
particular things, that men's devises and enterprises are frivolous and vain,
so that of particulars, making a general conclusion, he proves that all men's
devises are vain. For he says yt: to get living and riches, it helps not to
be wise, to run fast, it avails not to be swift, to get the victory, it
booteth not to be strong: yea, the wyser, the holyer, the more laborious a man
is, the less he preuayleth: so that as well his wisdom as his righteousness
and works are of no strength or force. So that if neither these nor any other
things be of force, then of necessity must all things be vain and forceles.

But here in the beginning must we root out an error and noisome opynion that
many men have, namely, The error of them confuted which condemn Gods
creatures.
that we think not Salomo^ to speak of the contempt of creatures which the
scripture will not suffer to be contemned or condemned. For all things which
God created are very good, and made for the use of man, which thing, Paul in
plain words affirms. 1. The creatures of God are good.
Tim. 4. saying: Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected,
that is received with thanks geeuyng. For it is sanctified by the word of God,
and by prayer. It is therefore very foolyshly and wyckedly done of some
preachers, to enuey against glory, power, dignity, riches, gold, fame, beuty,
women, plainly condemning the creatures of God. A Magistrate or officer, is an
ordinance of God. Gold is good, and riches are the gift of God. A woman is a
good thing, and made to be an helper unto man. For God made all things, to the
end they should be good and profitable some way to man. The abuse of Gods
creatures, and naughty affections of men are condemned in this book.
Therefore the creatures of God are not condemned by this book, but the
naughty affection and desire of men, which are not contented with these present
creatures of God, and the use of them, but are always careful how to heap up
riches, to get honor, glory, and great name, as though they should always live
in this world, lothyng still their present state and condition, and wyshing,
and aspyring to one thing after an other. For this is a great vanity and
misery, that a man should defraude and byguyle himself of the use of such
pleasures as are before him, and vaynely to vex and disquiet himself about
things he has not. These naughty affections (I say) and enterprises of men
does Solomon in this book condemn, and not the creatures themselves: For
touching the use of these creatures, he himself says hereafter: There is
nothing better then to be meary in this life, and to eat and drink, and man
to reign in his labor. etc. where he should be found utterly against
himself, if he should condemn the things, and not rather the abuse of them,
which is only in our affections. The error of them that understand not this
book.
Certain foolish men, not perceiuyng these things, have taught us absurd
opinions about the contempt and forsakyng of the world, and have themselves
committed many absurd things, as we read in the lives of the fathers, yt there
were some which would not look upon the Sun, (being worthy doubtless to have
had their eyes put out) and lived most filthely and slouenly, because they
would seem religious: which thing what we may judge of it, appears plainly
by that is said before. For it is but a sorry contemnyng of the world, to live
solitarily, and out of the company of men. It is no contempt of gold to cast
it away, or to absteyne from touching of money, as did the Franciscanes: but he
in deed contemns it that using it every day, is not carried away with the
greedy desire of it. This therefore is the principal thing that they should
consider which will read this book of Salomo^.

Farthermore, What things Solomon condemns in this book.
this also is diligently to be observed, that Solomon in this book speaks
only of mankind, and keeps himself within the bonds of man's nature, that
is, of man's enterprises, devises, desiers, and counsayles, least perhaps we
may imagine the same that the interpreters of this book do, which think the
knowledge of nature, the studies of astronomy and all philosophy, are here
despised, as vain and unprofitable speculations, whereas the commodities of
these sciences are great and manifold, as daily we see before our faces.
Besides that in searching out the grounds and causes of things natural,
there is as well great pleasure as profit. And the holy Scripture proponeth
diverse things, to teach us the properties and virtues of them, such as is this
in the Psalm: He makes thee young and lusty like an Egle. Again: Like as the
Egle that provoke her young ones to fly. Again: As the heart desires the
water springs and soil. And: Go sluggish body to the Emmet and Pismere. Yea
the scriptures are full of such metaphores and similitudes borrowed of nature,
so that he that should take the^ out of the holy Bible, should take therewith
much light from it also.

What the matter and content of this book is.
To be plain therefore, the subject and matter of the book is, that mankind is
so foolish, that he desires and searches after his own ways many things
which he can not compass and bring to pass, or if he bring them to pass, he
can not enjoy them, but possesses them with care and loss, not thorough any
fault in the things, but by reason of his most foolish affections and
desiers. Julius Caesar was greatly occupied to obtain the Empire of ye
Romans, but what perils and travels sustained he before he could get it? What
the affections of man are.
And having gotten it, he was not yet quiet, he had not bys whole wyshe, but
while he was carefully busied to clyme yet higher, he perished most miserably.
The same comes to pass in all worldly affairs, when we have greatest
wealth, straight way, we like not with it. If we want and lack, we are never
quiet and at rest for desire of it. This vice of man's nature and inclination
saw yt heathen writers. For thus says Ouide: That lawful is, we loath, and like
the things we are forbid to do:
That follows us, we flee, and seek
to follow that, that flees us fro.
Again: The present state does no man please,
Upon his own to live at ease.


This is the vanity of man's heart, The doctrine of this book is, to use our
goods with thanks geuyng.
never to be content with Gods present blessings, but to despise them, seeking
still one thing after other, never content till he have gotten his desire: and
having once gotten it, nothing regarding it, but still devising some other
ways.

Therefore to repeat again my saying, ye scope and end of this book is to
teach us to use Gods present benefits and creatures which he bou^tifully
bestows upon us with tha^kesgeuing, without carefulnes, and hereafter, to the
intent our heart may be quiet settled, and merry, being content with Gods word
and workyng. So in ye chapiters following, he exhorts us, to eat and drink
with the wife of thy youth, and not to want oil for our head, but to have our
garments white, according to ye saying of Christ: Sufficient to the day is the
travel and care thereof. And as Paul says: taking no thought for the flesh,
to fulfill the lusts of it. And if a man would follow this trade, his mind
would still be quietly settled, and God would abundantly provide us of all
things. And now men vex and disquiet themselves with two mischiefs, namely,
while they deprive themselves of the use of things present, and trouble and
vex themselves with care of things absent. Or if they have any use of their
goods, it is but bitter and unpleasant. Cicero that great eloquent man, had
been marvelous happy, if he had known well how to have used this quietness,
but the miserable man desirous still of higher advancement, and to set forward
his own ways and devises, deprived himself of many great be^nefites, and was
the cause of his own calamity and destruction. Well, S. Augustines saying.
therefore does S. Augustine say: Thou have appointed (O lord) that that man,
which is not contented with his own estate and condition, shall have a vexed
and troubled mind, for his punishment.

The corruption of ma^s nature and misery of man's affections.
And if a man would compare the goods that he has, with the evils, that he
has not, he should at length perceive, what a treasure of goods he possessed.
He that has his eye sight clear and good, makes no great account thereof, nor
is not much delighted with Gods benefits, but if he wanted eyes, he would give
all the goods he had to have them. Thus fare we in health, and all other like
things. If God would give me the eloquence that Cicero had, the power of
Caesar, the wisdom of Solomon, yet should I not be contented. Because we
always seek after yt we have not. If we lack a wife we seek for one. When we
have her, we loathe and despise her. We be all together like unto quickesiluer,
which in no place can stand still in rest. So inconstant is the mind of man,
being therefore unworthy to enjoy any one of Gods benefits.

What things are reprehended in this book.
Against this wretched affections of man does Solomon in this book inuey,
reprouyng the inconstancy and vanity of ma^s heart which enjoys neither his
goods present, nor yet them to come, because he does not acknowledge the
benefits he has received, nor geeueth thanks to God for them, and vaynely
seeks after the things he has not, which is as one should hang between
heaven and earth.

The first Chapter.
The Preacher or oration of the son of David, King of Jerusalem.
THe title of Ecclesiastes, or Preacher, The title of ye book.
I think, is rather to be referred to the name of the book, then to the
author thereof, because we must understand yt these words were openly
pronounced by Solomon, in some assembly of his Lords and others. For where he
was a king, it was not his duty or office to preach, but the Priests, and
Levites. Wherefore I judge these things were spoken by Solomon in some company
and hearing of his counselors and Courtyers, either at some banquet, or after
the banquet, when diverse of his nobles, and men of honor were present, having
long time before mused and studied of the state and condition of these wordly
affairs, or rather vain affections, and so as it fell out, when they were all
present, spoke and uttered the same. And that afterward, some of the rulers of
the Co^minaltie, or clergy noted them and gathered them together: In so much
that in the end of the book, they confess they received these things of one
Shepherd or Pastor, and digested them in this order. As if some one of us
sitting at a table should discourse of man's affairs, other being present,
writing what were said. Why this book is called the Preacher.
So that this book is a public Oration which they heard Salomo^ make, of the
which Oration, they thought good to call this book Coheleth, that is to say,
the Preacher. Not that Solomon was any Preacher, but for that the book makes
as it were a public Sermon.

All is but most vain vanity says the Preacher.
Hitherto, after a sort, we have understand the sum and end of this book.
Now ye greatest difficulty hereafter will be in the Hebrew words and figures,
wherewith Salomo^s books of all others do chiefly abound. Salomons phrase and
speech.
For Solomon has a singular kind of speaking, seeking to sense more elegant
then his father David, as having his communication more beutified with flowers
and figures then his. He speaks not like the common sort, but like a
Courtyer. David's talk is more plain, and yet wants not all manner of usual
figures. But Solomon uses none but a Courtly kind of talk. And as Courteours
use to corrupt the native speech of their predecessors, specially in writing:
so Solomon, because he would not seem to speak as the common sort use,
differs far from his fathers plainnes of speech, and from Moses, who of all
others is most plain, and yet has many notable figures in him, as has also
David, but they are common, and used figures.

Most vain vanity.
THis an Hebrew phrase. For where the Hebrews have no superlatiue nor
comparatiue degree, they are constrained by way of compounding to make their
superlatiue and comparatiue degrees. The cause why one word is doubled.
So they use to call a most excellent and singular song, the song of songs, as
Solomon has done. A vanity of vanities, that is, the greatest vanity that
can be, that is, nothing else but vanity. All this he speaks not against ye
creatures themselves, but against the heart of man, that abuses the creatures
to his own hinderaunce. And this repetition, vanity of vanities, and all
things are vain, is Salomons peculiar copiousnes.

The theme and argument of this book.
In this beginning he places the Theeme, as it were an argument of his whole
book, whereof he means to entreat, saying: that he will speak of the
greatest vanity that is, how me^ are most vain in all their devises, because
they be not satisfied with things present, which they use not, nor can not
enjoy things absent. They turn even the best things into misery and vanity
through their own default, and not through fault of the things.

What has a man of all the labor he takes under the Sun?
Men's devises and enterprises are vain.
But vanity. That is to say: men are led and drowned with their own devises,
and in all their enterprises what get they? naught else but vanity, because
their labor is vain.

It avails nothing. For they neither enjoy things present, nor absent,
because their mind is not quiet, and so they are carried between heaven and
earth, and prevail nothing. For this word vanity properly signifies that yt
we call nothing. They heap up treasures, riches, and seek to be of power. etc.
And all these are nothing. Gold in deed is a thing, but to thee that can
not use it, it is nothing.

That he says, of all his labor, Of whose labor and travel Salomo^ speaks.
must be understood as spoken with a kind of veheme^cie. For hereby he
declares that he will not entreat of Gods works, which are holy and
wholesome, as are all his creatures, but of man's works, which are led and
borne about with their own ways and devises, meaning hereby to repress their
calamity and toylefull travels. Neither speaks he of the labor of our
hands, commanded by God Genesis 3. In toil and labor shall thou eat thy
bread: but of our own ways and devises, whereby we go about to bring to
pass, that seems good in our eyes. For the word Amal, signifies misery and
calamity, rather then laboring, even such a kind a labor, as men afflicte
and vex themselves with in vain. For it is a most miserable labor to be so
busily occupied to bring our devises and enterprises to pass, and yet nothing
to prevail. He says therefore: What gets a man. etc. that is to say, in
that he takes so great pains to bring his devises to pass. What has he or
gets he, with all this labor and study of his but mere vanity?

Under the Sun.
He speaks of men's enterprises, not of Gods works.
HEre he means to describe the kingdom of vanity, and the place where this
kingdom is, calling this whole kingdom of vanity, a toil or travel under
the sun, by a kind of singular phrase, such as we read is not used else where
in the Scripture, because he will hereby exclude the works of God which either
he works him self, or works in us or commands us to work, which works
are above the sun, and beyond man's devise. For the sun rises to the end
that me^ may go forth to their work Psalm. 103. that it may give light to the
world, to serve us in our bodily affairs: under this sun I say, are these
vain devises taken in hand, wherewith men afflicte them selves. This is to be
noted again, to take away that vain cogitatio^ of me^, that have interpreted
these things of the vanity of Gods creatures. In deed all Creatures are
subject to vanity, as Paul testifies, Romans 8. but yet the creatures them
selves are good. Otherwise he would have said the sun had been a vain thing,
but he excepteth ye sun, because he says under the sun. He speaks not
therefore of Gods works, which are all good and true, and above the sun, but
of those works which are under ye sun, which we do in this bodyly life of
ours, in the earth.

One generation passes away, and an other comes, but the earth abides, or
indureth still.
THou see he recites not the works under the sun, Gods creatures are
firm and stable, but men are carried and vexed with diverse desires.
but the very Creatures of God them selves, such as is the generation of men,
the sun, the water, and the la^d, comprising almost the four Elements
herein. For the Philosophers have so devised the four elements, wherein all
things live that are in the world. They have placed the sier above, over ye
three other elements. And Solomon seems to take the son, for this fiery
element so that in these words he expounds what he would have understood,
by these words under the sun, so that the sum of his meaning is this. The
creatures of this world, the sun, the air, the water etc. Wherein men have
there being, abide in ye rule and law appointed them: they go forth, they run
back again, they are carried etc. even as they are ordained, they have their
prefixed courses, they change not, they go not out of them, but do that they
ought to do, as the sun goes his way and certain course etc. But men which
have their being in these four elements, creatures of such consta^cy and
stabilitie can not do the like, because they waver and stagger, being most
inconstant by reason of the variety of their diverse entreprises and desires,
not content within their own bounds, businesses, and vocations etc. Wherefore
they expound not the matter which understand the generation that passes,
False interpretation blamed.
to be the Jews, and the generation to come, to be the Christians, because
Solomon speaks here of the perpetual success of generations and ages.

The sun rises and goes down, and returns to his place again breathyng,
that he may rise up again. The wind goes toward the South, and turns to
the North, fetches his compass, whyrleth about, goes forth, and returns
again to his circuites from whence he did come.
Solomon continues in describyng of this kingdom and place of vanity, Gods
creatures abide within their bonds, but men stray out of theirs.
proving the stabilitie of ye sun by his perpetual and constant rising,
sittyng, and course. Farthermore he signifies that ye wind and the air
follows the force and course of the sun. For he makes the sun the Lord
and ruler as it were of ye elements. This sun (I say) has the wind at his
pleasure, and governs all things by his administration, tempering the air,
the water, and the wind, by his race and course etc. When he arises, he
makes (as we see) one air, when he sets, an other. And even after a like
sort he works an other time in alteryng the water etc. For when the sun
sets, the earth becomes moist, the water cold, the air dankish etc. Yea
almost all creatures are diversely disposed according to the rising and setting
of the sun.

And breathing again to his place.
THe word Saaph. For the which our interpreter has naughtely put returned, The
sun rayseth the wyndes with his mouyng.
signifies drawyng of the breath. He means therefore that the sun, by
reason of his violent force, wherewith he is carried, is as it were the cause
of all wyndes and blastes, as when one runs, he moves the air, and causes
a breath. To breathe therefore, is with a most swift force to be carried from the
East unto the West, and the^ to the East again, which comes to pass every
day and every month.

The wind whyrleth and turns about.
THat is to say: the sun when he turns to the East again, there to rise,
caryeth the wind with him, and has the wind in his power. All this is
Salomons peculiare copiousnes, whereby briefly, he means nothing else, but
that the sun rises and sets every day, and that the wind is raised with
the force and violence thereof.

All floods run into the sea, and yet the sea runs not over. The floods
return to the place from whence they flowed, that they may from thence flow
out again.
ARistotle disputes from whence the fountains and wyndes do come, The cause
of sprynges and fountains.
and is meruelously troubled in finding out ye same, and diverse other with him,
but yet none of them could find out that that Solomon here says, that all
rivers come from the sea, and run into ye sea again, making the sea to be
the origin and beginning of all rivers, from whence by certain secret
drayninges under the earth, they swell up and break out, where notwithstanding
diverse of the Philosophers imagine, that the springes and beginninges of all
Rivers come from under the earth. Howbeit Salomons saying is the truth,
namely, that all fountaynes and Rivers flow from the sea, and ebb into it
again. These are very great wonders. First in the course and moving of that
huge light whereof we have spoken already. Then in that the Rivers run into
the sea, and yet the sea is not filled therewith. For else if the River Albis
had flowed still from the beginning of ye world, it might have risen so high,
to have filled the air, even up to ye Moon. And now although it has run
more then five thousand years, that it still abides within the banks, and
runs not over.

All things are led with their own course and order.
He says therefore, that all things continue in their order, and perpetual
motion, as the Sun runs about every day, and never ceasseth: so the air
continues still in his motion: so the floods daily run into the Sea. The Sea
again by certain secret conduites and veins in the mountains soketh and
droppeth, as it were into springes and Rivers, and the earth is a very
strainer, through the which the water is clarified.

Thus we see that Solomon in few words comprehends the marvelous
disposition and motion of the four elements within themselves, naming the
earth, the Sun, the w^^de and floods.

I suppose Solomon means by the allegory of these natural alterations, What
the meaning of this comparison is.
to bring us to the matter that he treats of, and frames this similitude
unto us. As if he should say: Even as all these things abide in their
chaungeable courses, so do all our affairs likewise. The sun is never
wearied notwithstanding his continual course, the waters run into the Sea,
and yet are not spent and consumed. etc. Eue^ so fares it with me^. They still
do as their elders have done, which gave themselves unto vanity. Eue^ as they
nothing prevailed, no more do we. No man amendeth by an others example, or
takes ever the more heed, by an others dainger. Julius was most vainly
occupied. Cicero sought to be eloquent. But what was the end of their travel?
most vain, because they atteyned not to that they desired. If he had used his
eloquence not after his own devise, but as time and place had served him,
doubtless, he should have been a most happy man. These men's examples do we
follow. etc. Therefore, all men's devises, rise, fall, go forward, and come
backward, and continue as they always have done. So there is in these words,
not only a description of the kingdom of vanity, but also a similitude and
comparison of man's devises.

All things are hard to be known, neither is any man able to express them.
The error of Sophisters upon this place.
THis text the Sophisters have corrupted, while they think ye study of
Philosophy is here reprehe^ded, whereby me^ search out the nature and causes
of things, as though this were an evil thing, not able to be declared. But it
is not evil to search out the nature and properties of things. Moreover ye
causes of all things are most manifest, so far of is it, that they be hard
and difficult. This therefore he means, that he will speak of the vanity of
man, but that the same is so much and so great, that he thinks he can not
sufficiently express the same. The vanity of man greater the^ can be
expressed with words.
It can not be uttered he says how great the vanity of man is, which thing
Persius the Poet declares: saying, O what great vanity is in the world. And
an other writer says: No man lives content with his estate. And every man
ought to live within his bounds and compass: vanity stretches farther, than
can be rekoned in all men's affairs. Therefore it is but little that I can say of
vanity, if a man consider the greatness thereof, It is to gross and to much.
For so great is this worlds vanity, that I can not with any words express
it. The thing is greater, then either men can conceive, or I am able to utter.
It is an hard matter to declare the variety of men's devises and desires, what
it is that Julius coueteth, what Alexander, what Solomon, what Cato, what
Scipio, what Pompey. The affections of men are always more, then the tongue of
man can express. And now he proves that he said by an example.

The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing.
THat is to say man's eyes and senses have never any rest. The insatiable gulf
of man's heart.
If I should go about to declare but only the pleasures we conceive by seeing
and hearing, I should take an endless labor in hand. If the eye be not
satisfied with seeing, how shall I be able to utter all the vanity of man. To
be short, naught and unsearchable is the heart of man. Such is the diversity
of man's affections and desires, that that the eyes have never seen enough. Now
they desire to see one thing, now an other, and when they have their wish, yet
is not their mind contented. The heart is a gulf always gaping, it coueteth
all things, and though it have all it desires, yet still seeks it for more.
Alexander Magnus.
Consider Alexander Magnus, who being Lord almost of ye whole world, yet when
he heard there were innumerable worlds, sighed, saying, and I have not yet
vanquished one world. Thus in his heart he coueted infinite worlds. What man
is so eloquent, that he can express this most vain affection of the heart?
This vanity and greedynes of man's heart can not be expressed. That which he
has does not like him, and wishes for that which he has not. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing: understand this generally, not as they have expounded
it: It is not satisfied with beholding of heaven.

What thing is that that has been? even the same that is to come. What is that
that has been done? even the same that shall be done. And there is no new
thing under the son. Is there any thing, whereof it may be said, Lo, this is
new, for the like has been in the times that have been before us. There is no
remembrance of things past. no more shall there be any remembrance of
things to come hereafter.
HEre do the Sophisters trifle again, understanding these words of the
Creatures their selves, where Solomon plainly signifies, he speaks of men's
affections and desires, saying: The eye is not satisfied etc. Because hearing
and seeing are such senses, as soonest perceive things, and are most delighted
with them. And thus he means.

What is that that has been?
THat is to say, Man's mind is insatiable.
after thou have prepared that thou desire yet is not thy mind quyeted, the
same affection abides still after thy desire, yt thou had before. The
mind is never contented. Alexander, when he had overcome the world, had no
more, then he had before. For his mind was never the more satisfied. Julius
thought to establish a common weal, so thought Brutus too, but neither of them
brought it to effect. This is it that he says, What is that that has been?
Verily even the same that has been down before, that is to say, the same
affection still remains, which will never be satisfied. That that he
desires or studyeth to have or bring to pass, is even the same he has all
ready. To be short What a man has to day of the same will he covet more to
morrow.

Vanity of man's heart.
For here is signified the restles, and insatiable appetite and vanity of man's
heart, that ca^ not be satisfied with things present whatsoever they be. That I
have done this day is nothing, although I have had my purpose, I am not
content. I will still prove other ways. Thus do all me^, so did Julius, so
Pompey, so Alexander. And even as they did, do all other. They desire things
to come, and loathe things present. Remember therefore that Salomo^ speaks
here of man's doings, and not of Gods, either already done, or to be done. For
he speaks always of the things which are done under the sun in this
kingdom of the world. It follows therefore:

There is no new thing under the Sun, neither any thing whereof it may be
said, lo, this is new.
THis place has meruelously troubled the Sophisters, In man there is no new
thing, but concupiscence and naughty inclamtio^s dwell in all men.
because they read in the Scriptures many new things were done. For the
nativity of Christ was a new thing. A Virgin to be a mother was a new thing.
Again: I will make a new heaven and a new earth. And again: I will make all
things a new. Again: The Lord will do a new thing upon the earth. etc. These
sentences have caused them to trifle egregiously upon this place, because they
would reconcile both Salomons sayings, and these other sentences. But this
comes to pass through the ignorance of Salomo^s phrase, because they mark
not what he means, when he says, under ye Sun. For if thou understand these
words of Gods creatures and workinges, it is no true saying. For God works
always new things, and we do nothing that is new. For there is but one old
Adam in all me^. Our forefathers therefore have abused these things even as we
abuse them. The same affection that was in Alexander, was in Julius, and the
like in all Emperors and kings, the same is in us also. Even as they could
not be satisfied, no more can we. They were wicked and ungodly, so be we. We
desire to satisfy all our senses, but we are not able, because our heart is
insatiable. Therefore we do no new thing under ye Sun. There are no new
affections in men, but we abide always one, neither refrain we our
curiosity, no although we be wa^ned by their examples. Man's heart ought to be
content with things present, and to mortify the affection of things to come,
which thing because they do not, it is justly all together vanity. This it is
therefore that he says: There is no new thing under the sun, that is, in men
there is nothing that new in. But God does new things every day.

God works new things in some men.
And yet afterward in this same chappiter he says, he says, I have passed all
the kings that were before me in wisdom: was not this a now or strange
thing. Yes truly. But this was the gift of God. Ergo, a very new thing. And
all men desire even the same, but thou shall scarcely find one that has
altered this affection. Others have builded as we do, have made wars as we
do. And even as they have not by their desires and enterprises attained to
that they desired, no more have we. But God by his works both many and great,
does always new things.

There is no remembrance of things passed.
That is to say: Men are not moved with the examples of their predecessors.
men follow their desires, and set forward their own enterprises, they will
not consider by example of their predecessors, how they nothing prevailed. No
man marketh how Alexander and Julius attemptes were but vain. The example of
Dion, that so vnluckely urged his own devise in calling home Dionisius again,
and in stablishing his common weal, could not make Brutus take heed. These
are ye themes as it were of his whole book, whereof he means to speak, that
is to say of ye vanities of man, which goes about diverse things, and can not
bring them to pass, that is, of the inconstancy and insatiabilitie of man's
heart.

I my self the preacher was a king of Israel at Jerusalem, and did apply my
mind to seek and search out the knowledge of all things that are under
heaven.
We have hitherto heard the general theme and argument of the book, wherein
he purposed to treat of the unhappy devises and enterprises of men, striving to
set forward and fulfill their own ways, which God does frustrate, as one
always withstanding such atte^ptes. Now he begins to rehearse certain
particulars, gathering by a dialecticall induction, that universal
propositions, wherewith he began his book, that is to say, that all things
were but vanity. And he increases this misery, or vanity, that where man
sees his forefathers devises, and enterprises made frustrate, and how they
wearyed themselves in vain, will not yet be learned. For the flesh is so
foolish, and the reason so blinded, that it can by no examples be amended.

He begins with him self, and sets him self for an example of this
vanity. He begins his doctrine (...) the example of himself, which he
sets out to all men to follow.
I says he went about to govern my kingdom prudently and notably and could
not bring it to pass, although I was a king appointed by God. For it is well
known that this king was greatly commended for his divine wisdom and highly
renowned in ye Scriptures. 3. Reg. 3. Because (says God) thou have asked this
thing, and not long life nor riches etc. Lo I have given thee a wife and an
understanding heart, so that there has been none before like unto thee nor
shall be after thee. This is a singular testimonye of this kings wisdom, and
yet this prudent and wise king, could not bring his desire to pass, his
atte^ptes could have no success and not without a cause. For god gave him not
this wisdom, to the end he might do all things. God said not, I will give
thee such wisdom as all other shall obey etc. So that by reason of this
wisdom Solomon had more travel and grief then good success. He saw it was
the will of God, that he should well govern his kingdom, and give and
appointe good laws for his people. But no man followed him, neither his chief
rulers, nor the people.

Of his own example by an argument a maiore.
He says therefore, for as much as my devises have not succeeded to my mind, nor
have been obeyed, what shall happen to other of less wisdom? First (says
he) I protest mine own experience. I that here speak unto you was king of the
Israelites. All these words are spoken with a vehemency of affection I am a
king, and yet I can not prevail. For who is able to resist the king, which is
Lord over all men? I am not a king only, nor of every people, but of the
people of God, amongst whom have been many holy men, Prophets, and teachers
of Gods law etc. To conclude, I am king of Jerusalem, that holy place which
God chose to dwell in. If a king of such power, so free, so wise, of so holy a
people, in so holy a City, where God and his word was continually, could not
bring his holy and good devises to pass, what shall we say of others?

I did apply my mind to seek and search out the knowledge of all things,
that are under the son.
WE must abide again in ye Theme. He speaks of his own works and
enterprises.
He speaks not of Gods works, which are not only under the Sun, but are
every where, but of those things that are done by me^ under heaven, which is
the place and kingdom appointed for us. For Gods works are above heaven,
beneath heaven, and every where. They are the works therefore that we do of
our own heads and power, whereof he says, I purposed in my mind to set all
things well in order, to have my kingdom well governed. But look how much
God wrought, so much was ordained. And where God did not put to his hand, there
set I forward my counsel, wisdom, and enterprises, to have all things well
ordered, but all in vain. For I nothing prevailed, but did miseserably trouble
and vex my self, as follows:

Such travel and labor has God given to the children of men, to exercise
them selves therein.
THat is to say, Me^ troubled with their own wisdom.
God gave me such a cogitation and mind for my punisheme^t, that at length I
should learn, that I ought not to trust to mine own wisdom, and that any
thing were it never so wisely toke^ in hand, was but in vain, if God would not
prosper it. I could not abide yt there should be any defect, or error in any
thing etc. It justly therefore fell out, yt I should be vexed with this
cogitatio^, that I might learn to resign and give over mine own will. And
see that mine own wisdom was nothing. And this is an evil vexation, because
we will not give place unto ye wisdom of God, but will seem wiser then he,
and not suffer those things, which the wisdom of God suffers, nor commit
our selves to his will.

The care of man to his vocation, ruled by ye word of God, good and necessary.
Howbeit that cogitation and inquisition that seeks to profit the common
weal is not only not evil, but good also. He is a good man that is desirous
to do the world good. He that is thus minded and reasons: Would God this
City, or prince would understand and be wise, is not evil minded. For to be
careful for the well orderyng and gouernyng of a common weal, is an high
virtue, and the greatest that is among men. But this search (I say) and enquire
to benefit my common weal, was vain, it succeeded not. But I was vexed
therewith. Cicero, Demosthenes, most prudent men, greatly desired to have their
commonweals to prosper, and yet were they cause of all their troubles and
mischiefs. Thus did God make their wisdom of none effect. And so this book
condemns the care and thought that we take to set forward matters either
public or private, by our own devises and wisdom.

Mark Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Ma^s counsels not ruled by gods word, are deceived.
and all the holy fathers. As Soon as they began to trust to their own
counsels, besides the word of God, all things went backward with them. For
unless God by his word direct and appointe men, they can do no good without
Gods word, we can do nothing although we begin. So Adam and Eve, saying: when
their son Cain was borne: I have gotten a man of the Lord, were deceived.
Because it was a cogitation of man, without the word. They had conceived great
hope, that this should be the seed. Well he is brought up, made heir of the
world. Shortly after he sleieth his brother: there all their vain cogitation
lies on the ground. So was Isaac beguiled in his first begotten son Esau.
Saules intent was vain, to leave the kingdom to his children. So was David,
when he preferred his son Absolon. Thus does God use to elude and disapoint
all cogitations and counsels that stay not upon his word. And very well. For
why will we prescribe him, and add any thing to his wisdom?

We must abstain, and not trust to our own counsels, but to gods word only.
Let us learn therefore to submit our selves to Gods counsels, and refrain our
selves from such cares and cogitations as God has not commanded. There is no
surer way, nor more acceptable to God then to abstain from our own devises,
and to stay upon his word: there shall we find enough to occupye our selves
upon. He has commanded us to have faith, love, to bear the cross. With
these I say, we may be occupied well enough, other things let us take as they
fall out, leaving all care of success thereof unto God. For now, because we
contemn his words, god again punishes us with vexing our selves in vain.
For God will not have the good or evil, that wise men and Princes devise
without his word to come to pass, as it is said Psalm. 32. The Lord brings
the counsel of the Heathen to naught. etc. Therefore where greatest wisdom
is, Where the greatest wisdom of man is, without ye fear of God, there is
most foolishnes.
and most diligence, there does God most disappoint men's devises, as plainly
comes to pass in our days, where the Princes and Bishops of Germany can
bring nothing to effect for all their meetinges and Counsels. And yet can not
God with all this make us to submit our counsels unto him. It is called therefore
an evil occupation, that is, such as vexes and disquieteth (not for that
wisdom, and counsel be evil) by a common phrase of Scripture, as in Matthew
the vi. Sufficient for the day is the travel thereof. Now this travel or
affliction has God geeuen unto man, not to destroy them, but to call them from
their foolish wisdom and ways, and to teach us that our wisdom is nothing.
Cicero wrate many things wisely, which when we that read them go about to
express, they go forward like the crabbe, and nothing succedeth because we
take in hand of our own selves to do them. For very true wisdom can do
nothing, but the will of God, wherefore we must pray Thy will be done etc.

I considered all the things that are done under the sun, and lo, they are
all but vanity and vexation of mind. Things crooked can not be straight, nor
the imperfection of things can be numbered.
THis is a confirmation of that he spoke before: I have not only proved this
vanity by mine own example, but I have considered all other men, and I see
that their ways and devises be but vain as well as mine. Even as mine own
devises succeeded not, no more have I seen any other men's in the world
succeed. Wise men's devises are made frustrate and disappointed as well as
fools. Therefore by these words is that affection called good or godly
inte^tion beaten down, when we say commonly, I have a good intent or meaning.
Unhappy is ye good intention, that is not ruled by the word of God, and faith.
But that good intent is nothing that is not governed by the word of God, and
springs not of faith. And all other how beautiful so ever they appear, are
most hurtful. Even Cicero him self had the experience hereof as he
witnesses: The best devises, speed woorst. And God does very well in so
frustrating our purposes. For if matters should never so little succeed as we
would, then would we by and by be puffed up with pride, and ascribe the glory
to our selves, which is against the glory of God, who alone is to be glorified
etc.

Crookedness can not be made straight, nor the imperfection in things be
numbered.
HE adds the cause why all things trouble men with vain care and thought.
The cause why all things ca^ not be ruled, by our counsel.
Because says he the defaultes and imperfection in things are infinite and
can not be amended, their greatness and multitude so far passes all man's
devises. This is that therefore he would say: I have wisdom and understanding
enough to perceive what is meet and expedient. But what am I able to do
therein? There is so great crookednes and deprauation in all men's affairs,
that they can never be amended. Consider ye Empire of Rome, which
notwithstanding it was prudently governed, yet it could never find or
stablishe any firm peace with all their devises. But when one enemy was
slain, there arose diverse other. And when they were without wars abroad,
they had civil commotions, till the common weal was destroyed. Even so fares
it with all men. Let every man mark the course of his own life, and if all
things succeed according to his mind all his life long, let him reprove
this book of lying.

All things must be committed to God, and he desired to order our devises, and
to geeue them good success.
Wherefore it shall be best to commit all things unto God, and to follow those
which say: let it go as it goes, because it will go, as it goes. Which
thing also the Dutch proverb teaches us: Thou art yet a great deal too
Green to make of an old Knave an honest man. Hereof we see Princes which
would best refourme and amend all things, many times do much hurt. In this
world nothing can be so well ordered ye all things can be well done, and no
imperfection remain. Therefore it is best to walk in faith, which lets God
reign alone, and prays that Gods kingdom may come. Ene^ as Christ did not
commit himself to men, but bare with all men's defaultes and iniquities. When
it was said that John Baptist was killed, an horrible offense, he said
nothing, but went into the wilderness, and fed the people, he makes no account
of it, preached the word only, and did his duty. Therefore this a Christian
wisdom for a man to commit him self to the kingdom of God, and all his
matters to him that judges justly. A Christian man may judge of offenses by
the word of God, but he may not set his hand to the punishing of them, unless
God urge him thereto, or that he be appointed by his word. Therefore where
thou art but one man, and art not able to correct and amend all that is
amiss, leave it to him that is of more power then thou, which alone is able to
bring all things to pass.

I communed with mine own heart saying: lo, I am come to great estate, and
have gotten more wisdom then all they that have been before me in Jerusalem:
yea my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge, for thereunto I
applied my mind, that I might know what were wisdom and understanding, what
error and foolishnes, and I perceived that this also was but a vexation of
mind: for where much wisdom is, there is also great travel and disquietnes,
and the more knowledge a man has, the more is his care.
The wisdom of king Solomon.
THese words are even ye same almost which he said before. I (says he) have
mused oftentimes, how it comes to pass, that my devises and enterprises
could come no better forward, considering I am a man of such authority, and
excel all other in wisdom. etc. For besides that divine wisdom, wherewyth
God had endued him, he also wonderfully excelled in worldly wisdom and
policy, in so much that the order that was among his servants seemed
wonderful to the Queen of Arabia.

Wisdom and knowledge.
What knowledge i^.
BY knowledge he means not speculation, but a kind of practice and
experience, and discretion in doing of things which we call sight and perfect
understanding in matters, as is spoken of in ye Psalm.

Wisdom is that knowledge whereby I perceive how a common weal is to be set
up and governed, What wisdom is.
which afterward is to be moderated and ordered, by knowledge and experience,
according to circumstances falling out, and according to reason and moderation
as time and matter shall bear it.

Error and foolishnes.
Verily eue^ to put them out from me and my kingdom, and to enhaunce and set
upon those other. But what happened? I found that this also was but a vexation
of the mind, and fruteles care, without end. Therefore the wisest way is, for
a man to frame him self to take all thing in good part: why?

For where much wisdom is, there is also great travel.
He that sees much and knows how things will go, It can not be, but he must
be wrath and think. Ah how ungodly and how shamefully does it pass over,
whence comes this stomakyng and indignation, but of much wisdom? For he
that has knowledge in many things, has many causes to anger him, as seeing
every day many unworthy things committed. He whose eyes are shut, knows
nothing, and therefore nothing offends him. Wherefore learn to be still, and
to commit the kingdom unto God, and to pray: Lord, let thy will be done.
Otherwise thou wearyest thy heart, and thy body and do but lose thy time, and
thy life.

The second Chapter.
Then said I thus in my heart: go to, I will take mine ease, and have good
days. But lo, that is vanity also.
The continuation of the former chapter with this present.
BEcause in the Chapter before, he showed that care, and thought, and men's
forecastes, specially such as we provide for our selves by, are vain and of no
force, teaching us to be content, with the word of God, and his working, so
that we should presume to do nothing, but that the word of God prescribes us,
or his working enforces us to do, which yet many times is contrary to his
word, as when he oppresses us with some evil, even when we have done
according to his word, wherein we have need of faith and patience, that in
these cases we yield not to our own devises and seek to escape thereby, but
commit our selves unto him, and to suffer his hand in his own work: now he
turns him to an other devise.

I said in my heart, I will take mine ease.
AS though he should say. Mourning companion unto pleasure.
Seeing carefulnes, and mine own devises profit not, I will refrain from
them, and and turn me to the right hand, and take to me a quiet and easy
life, and delight in pleasures: I will let all go as they come, and take my
pleasure. But this was also a vain devise, and prospered no more then that
first devise of man's wisdom and carefulnes. For eue^ herein also did God
withstand me. For quyetnes comes not but of Gods word and working. And this
does experience it self teach us. Many times banquetes and feasts are
appointed to provoke mirth. Fine iunkets, enterludes, and games are devised to
cheer the ghestes, but most times the contrary falls out. And seldom does
any good collatio^ or pittaunce come of it. For either there are present some
sad and severe countenau^ces, or else some other thing disturbeth all the feast,
and specially when men deliberate to make such mirth and pastime long before.
Many times it comes to pass, that some casualtie falls out even in the
meriest banquet, by Gods appointement. And so comes it to pass also in other
matters.

Love is bitter.
Some man seeks his pleasure in love, but by and by he feels the bitterness
thereof, which thing S. Augustine also complayneth of in his books of
confessions, how he was miserably scourged in the middle of his loves. Even so,
when we take our pleasures, by and by the sauce thereof is bitter. Therefore
there is no better thing, then to abide in Gods word and working, so to frame
our heart that it may be at rest and quiet, and contented with his present state
and condition. We must use Gods gifts with ye acknowledgyng and fearyng of him.
If God geeue us a wife, to take her as a present benefit, and to use her. If
thou will pass these bounds, and increase this benefit, thou shall have
sorrow and sadness in steed of mirth and joy. We must therefore do only,
that that God wills and appoints. If thou seek for joy and delight, thou
must look for it, at his hand. Therefore even as God offers thee such
occasion, so take hold thereof, and be meary with those that are meary. And
among those that are meary, seem not thou to be a father Sapience and severe
person, as do these holy ones, which will dashe and disturb that mirth that
God geeueth us. Only acknowledge thou them to come of gods gift, and receive
them of his hand, and use them as his gifts.

To be short, As God sends the^ so must we enjoy with fear, either
adversity or prosperity.
we must not take and enjoy our pastimes or pleasures, or devises, nor any
other thing, but eue^ so use them as God sends them. Let men yield up all
unto God. It is not our parts to prescribe either place, person, or manner, for
then we shall be deceived. Therefore mirth is not condemned as any vain or
naughty thing, but man's enterprise and counsel, while we will procure and
seek to be meary without the will of God, but must use them both as God
sends them. For even as to procure sorrow and care of our own heads and
devises, is an offense: even so, when God sends them, not to bear and suffer
them, is likewise an offense. So to avoid mirth, and not to receive it when
God sends it, The usage of hypocrites.
is a damnable thing, as these holy men forsooth which put upon them their
Cato his countenance, appointing times, places, persons, and other rules of
severity, which is the property of hipocrites, and but a vanity. They will
have us to mourn with them that mourn, and they will not rejoice with them that
rejoice. Sadness, mirth, and all other like, both outward, and inward things,
must not be measured by place, time. etc. but eue^ as God of his free goodness
sends them: so may we freely use them. Therefore he says:

I said in my heart, I will go, and and take my pleasure.
THat is to say, I would have measured the matter, by rule and by order, but
this was nothing but vanity. Here must we warn you again, The error of
Hierome.
that you swerve not from the Theme, as Hierome did, which foolishly glories,
that he learned out of this book, the contempt of the world, and of all
creatures, which afterward, the Monks and Sophisters imitated, being ignorant
what thing it is to contemn the world, or what the world is. For this is ye
very way to teach men to contemn Gods creatures, and to forbid me^ the use of
them, against the manifest words of holy Scripture.

Therefore to forsake the world, What it is to forsake ye world.
is not to abstain from Gods creatures, but from our own devises. Thus might
Hierome well have taught his beloved Blesilla: Contemn not the creatures of
this world, but thine own devises, counsels, cares, and affections, whereby
thou seek through thine own wit to bring all things to pass. Honor, and
the delight we have in things, is not evil, but carefulnes in matters, and
thine own ways and fetches, are to be set naught by. Neither is this to
contemn the world, to go coursely apparelled, to subdue the flesh with
watchyng, to bring it under with fasting. etc. but to use these matters as
occasion offreth. If God send meat, to eat it: if none, to suffer hunger: If
he call us to honor, to accept it: if he send loss and hinderaunce to bear
it. If he cast us in prison, to take it patiently. If he will aduau^ce us to a
kingdom, to follow his calling. If he depose us from one, not to care for it.
Eue^ as David governed his kingdom, and took his banishment both in good
part: a true despiser of this world. Such therefore are right despisers of the
world, as take all things in good part, as God does send it unto them, and use
all things in this world with thanks giving, while they have them, and ca^
willingly want them, when God takes them away.

I said unto the man given to laughter, thou art mad, and to the man given to
mirth, what do thou?
No pleasure dureth with a man always.
Understand all these things of man's ways and intentes. Thus he means, I
thought by art to devise me good days, to seek my pleasure and pastime: but
this cogitation was a mere madness, which two ways troubled me. For first the
travel of devising and searching vexed my mind. Then when I think I have
attained to my purpose, by and by some sorrow or grief falls out, that
causes me to lose both my labor, and joy. This is it that he says, the
laughter that I seek for, and the joy, which I go about to procure, what
avails it me? For I ca^ never attain to it, but always some grief or
trouble happens between. Therefore that joy and mirth is best, which is not
sought for but which God sends unlooked for, without thy cares and devises.
So the outward mirth is good, but with those yt use it well. The wicked
although they live in never so much pleasure, yet theirs is no true joy,
because, they acknowledge it not for Gods gift, but straitway loath it, and
invent other delights, being never content with that which is present.

And I thought in mine heart to abstain from wine, Against Monkish life.
and to govern my heart wisely, and to comprehe^d foolishnes, until I might
perceive what was good for the children of men, to do under heaven as long as
they lived.
HEre now the third time, he deuiseth an other way, minding to prove, if
happily this way would succeed. For as much as in this life, which I lead in
the world amongst men, neither the cares wherewith I breaking my self, to
profit others, nor yet pleasures succeed, but are all in vain: I will take to
me an vnpleasau^t, and austere life, utterly to live in abstinence and hardely
etc. I marvel that these false contemners of the world and the Creatures
therein, have not marked this place of Solomon, where he calls this austere
and severe kind of life a vanity. Here therefore he condemns those straight
rules of the Monks, specially of the Charterhouse me^, which yet the world
wondreth at, and holds for godlynes and holiness. The sentence is as it were a
thunderbolte against all rules, and Monkish religions, whereby they make those
things in subjection to them and their devises, which are not theirs. Not
that abstinence is an evil thing, but to seek it of our own devises, and to
bind our selves to them as unto things necessary. For time, creature, place
etc. are the gifts of God, which yet these me^ will captiuate with their rules
and prescriptions. Howbeit they get nothing thereby, but sorrow and misery while
they afflict their body, and vex themselves in vain. For thus do the
Charthusians prescribe: Eat no flesh although thou should dye therefore.
But this is of all other things the worst, that they seek and set holiness in
these doings. As though the devil him self could not on this wise be holy.
Which neither drinks wine, nor wears purple etc.

He says therefore. Against works of ma^s choice and devise.
All these things would be good for me in deed, either to abstain, either to
eat and drink, but then are they evil when I put mine own devise thereto.
God appointed neither place, time, meat, nor abstinence, and we fools
appointe them. One while, I will eat flesh, an other while I will not. God him
self says, when you have meat, eat it, when thou have none abstain.
Wherefore, if thou will use abstinence, abide the Lords devise. For he can
cast thee in prison, he can send thee hunger, and sickness etc. Here use thou
abstinence, here have thou a rule not prescribed of thy self but of God. Now
through thine own devises, thou counterfeitest a form of abstinence, contrary
to Gods appointment. And these godly contemners of the world do so refrain
from things, that they want no manner of thing, and so order the matter that
they abstain from nothing. To be short, even as by their own righteousness
they advance them selves above God: so by their own constitutions, they
advance them selves above all his creatures.

And to govern my heart wisely.
Wisdom is to want, or be free from foolishnes.
THat is to say, I thought to govern my self, by mine own counsel wisely, and
in absteining to seem a wiseman, that I might comprehend wisdom (or
foolishness) for the Hebrew word is of doubtful sense, signifiyng some time
wisdom, some time foolishnes, but most commonly foolishnes, so the sense is,
that I might comprehend what was foolishnes, namely, that I might know how to
tell other what was wise, what foolish: that I might comprehend it, to shun
and avoid it. For it is the part of wisdom, not only to know that that is
good, but also to avoid that that is evil.

Salomons exercises.
He rehearses almost a whole beaderolle of his works, that he exercised to
teach others. I began (says he) to assay many ways, whereby to occupy my
self, in abstayning from wynes and pleasures, so that other by my example
might learn to live the better, and the wiselyer to absteyne, and to govern
their household. He speaks of a worldly and civil wisdom, not of the
heavenly and spiritual, whereby we understand what duty we owe unto God. I
began to build, to plant vineyards, I omitted no labor and travel. etc. but
of all my labors, I reaped nothing but vanity. Because I would govern my
self after mine own rule and devise.

And for a man to rule himself after his own devise, is but a vanity, It is
vanity for a man to govern him self after his own devise.
nay he two manner of ways hurts himself. First he troubled himself with
his own devises. Secondly, he attayneth not to that he would, or if he attain
to it, some sorrow fauleth out, that dasheth his devise. Thus Nero builded a
princely Court of great magnifice^ce, but he could not enjoy it. For thus it
comes to pass commonly, that one builds, and an other possesses and
enjoys that that is builded, Princes devises are vain.
and as the parable in the gospel speaks, one sows and an other reapeth.
So our Prince Frederike of famous memory, builded very much, but others have it
in possession. He had a respect to times coming, and was not content with
things present. When he had builded one house, by and by he sought to build
an other. This Prince that now is, enjoys not ye houses builded, but builds
other, fenceth Cities, and has utterly a diverse devise. And his successor
will undoubtedly be delighted with an other.

Overmuch care to increase riches is reprehended.
These things therefore are surely a great vanity and misery, to be vexed in
our works, with sorrow and care, until they be accomplished. When they are
ended, to dye, or fall sick, or some other way to be deprived of the use and
commodity of them. And he that succeeds us oftentimes, not to use that we
have done, or to pull it down. This is the whole course of man's life. God
always strives against man's devises, and we again contrary to his. But it is
easy for him to destroy whatsoever we begin, yea so great is the vanity of
our heart, that it never agrees long with it self, neither can it be so
stable, to rest and abide in his present state. When man has assaied, and
brought his devise to pass, yet his curiosity in doing still remains, he
straight ways misliketh that he has done, and proves an other way, even as
he said before: what thing is that that has been. etc. Such is the mind of
man after his purpose gotten, as it was before, always unconstant, and
unquiet. If a man have one piece of gold, The more thou drinkest water, the
more thou desire it.
he looks and coueteth for ten more. He that has ten, desires an
hundred, he that has a hundred, a thousand. etc. If a Prince have one Castle
commodiously builded, he will have two. If he have one kingdom, he ambitiously
desires an other. To be brief, Alexander desires to have many worlds.

So comes it to pass in men's houses, in marriage, A ma^s vocation must be
applied, and good success desired and looked for of God.
and bringing up of children. Thou deuisest to marry a wife, well manered,
honest, for thy commodity, a good houswyfe: but it may chance thee to find a
naughty one, altogether of contrary conditions, or else though she be very
honest, that thou may want many other good properties in her. Thou think
how to bring up thy children that they may be honest, and profitable for their
country. But lo, otherwise then they looked for, they become murderers, or
otherwise wicked, and unprofitable burdens of the earth. Shall we therefore
forsake ye charge of housekeeping? Because I see nothing succeeds according
to my diligence, nor aunswerable to my labor and travels? No. What then? Thou
must govern thy house, instruct thy family, bring up thy children, rule thy
wife, but so as it must be without thy appointment and measure, that thou trust
not too much in thine own wisdom. If thy son be apt to his book, let him
learn it: if to some handy craft, let him learn it likewise. Only pass thou
not thy bounds, but commit the success thereof to God. Otherwise thou shall
perceive the two incommodities spoken of before. Now by these premises, may
easily be understood the things that follow.

I made gorgeous fair works, I builded me houses, and planted vineyardes. I
made me orchardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in the^ of all
manner fruits. I made pooles of water to water the green and fruitful trees
withal. I bought servants and mayde^s, and some I had borne at home. I bought
cattle and sheep and had more substance then all they that were before me in
Jerusalem. I gathered together silver and gold, even a treasure of kings and
lands. I provided me singers and women that playde on instruments, to make
men mirth and pastime. I gat me Psalteries and songs of Music, and I was
greater and in more worship, then all my predecessors In Jerusalem. For
wisdom remained with me, and look whatsoever mine eyes desired, I let them
have it, and whatsoever my heart delyted, or had any pleasure in, I withheld it
not from it. Thus my heart reioysed in all that I did, and this was my portion
of all my travel. But when I considered all my works that my hands had
wrought, and all the labor that I had taken therein, lo, all was but vanity
and vexation of mind, and nothing of any value under the Sun.
A roll or register of Salomons works.
Solomon recites in this place, a beadrolle, as I said of his works, that he
did to procure him mirth and pleasure, and to well govern his house and
family. They are easy to understand by that is aforesaid. I made great or
gorgious works. Which our interpreter speaks thus by Magnificacie, that is
to say, I made notable and great works, of the which we read the 3. of ye
kings, the 3. and 7. chapiters. etc. What profit had I thereof? none but pain
and travel, and others the fruit and commodity.

Paradises, or garde^s of pleasure. The Hebrew word signifies A pleasant
garden, wherein be fair plottes of flowers and most noble roots.

Seruau^ts borne in their masters houses.
Vernaculos, that is servant borne at mine house. For the children of
bondmen, which were borne at home, were called Vernaculi, which always did
service to that master, whose bondsman their father was, whether he were bought
with money, or howsoever else he became bond. I bought servant and maidens,
that is to say, I was a notable husband in governance of house and family. I
thought to rule my house according to mine own fantasy and devise. I
gathered substance and treasure. Whatsoever ornaments and precious
apparellings were to be gotten in any country, that I furnished my self with,
to declare the pomp of my kingdom, as great and rich kings use to do.

I provided me singers, and women playeng on Instruments, to make mirth and
pass time.
HEre is a great variaunce among Gra^mariens what Schida, and Schidoth is. I
translated it, men and women dau^sers, but I like it not. I follow them in ye
mean season, that think they are instruments of music, and that because of
that is said before, where he thus writes: I prepared me men singers and women
singers, and things that might cheer and sollace men, that is to say, noyses
of instruments. He doubleth this word Schida, Veschidoth, because perhaps he
would express the mutual consent and singyng by course that is among
Musicians. I was in great authority or worship etc. That is to say, all these
things were most commodiously ordered and disposed afterward. What wisdom
Solomon understands in this place.
And wisdom remained with me. He understands not speculatiue wisdom, but
that wisdom that consists in good ordering and governing these worldly
affairs, wherein is included the divine wisdom. He confesses that he had
not only abundaunce of things, but wisdom also therewith, to administer,
rule, and govern all things well, which is the greatest gift that God gives
man. But it had no success, because he would have all things, which he had so
wisely ordained proceed after his own devise etc. where notwithstanding, this
is the saying of all men in the world. It is not as it ought to be, because
they see many things wisely appointed and ordained and yet have no success
etc. The greatest point of wisdom therefore is to know this, that success
follows not, but when God appoints and that things are governed neither by
counsel of the wise, nor by temeritie of the foolish.

And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I let them have it.
The impediments of pleasures.
THat is to say, I went yet farther, and thought to enjoy all the things. I
had prepared, but I was not permitted. I meant to make this my portion in this
life, but God would not suffer me to order these pleasures after mine own
devise, he always put many stumbling blocks in my way. When I would have
enjoyed my desires, my gardens, the affairs of the kingdom called me back, I
was feign to sit down and give sentence according to law and right, I had
matters in suite to arbitrament, and to determine and take up etc. Thus I was
not able to take my pastime as I desired. This same very thing happens in our
Princes, that when they purpose to take their delights, some heavy occurre^ce
falls out that disturbeth their joy, and causes them to sorrow. Thus does
God always, to stop and hinder our devises and appointementes. He gives us
enough to use and make merry with, but he will therewith have us to keep his
Creatures purely and sincerely in their own liberty.

Lo all this was but vanity, and vexation of mind.
IS not this a great vanity, for a king that has such abundaunce of goods,
and plenty of all things, and can not yet enjoy any one thing of so many
according to his own devise. We must enjoy things present.
And if he chance to enjoy any of them, yet it is but by stealth. So unable
we are to govern, or comprehend things after our own desire. Let every man
therefore freely enjoy the things present even as God sends them. Let him
suffer them to be taken away, and to be given him, to go and to come,
according to the Lords pleasure, when it is good. Let him think It may again
turn to evil, and contrariwise, that he wallow not and be drowned in
pleasures, as the wicked use etc.

Nothing of any value under the Sun.
OF his own devises man reapeth nothing but travail and misery. The Creatures
are good, but our desires and devises are vain, which prescribe unto them
bounds and rules, whereas they will not be ruled by us.

Then did I turn me, to consider wisdom, error, and foolishnes. For what is
he among men, that might be compared to me the king, in such works? And I
saw that wisdom excels foolishenes, as far as light does darkness. For
a wise man has his eyes in his head, but the fool goes in darkness. I
perceived also that they both had one end.
BY an other experience he proves all things are but vain, Wise men's
devises frustrated.
I mean man's counsels and enterprises. Even (says he) as it has happened to
me: so see I it happens to others also. My devises, and wisdom were
frustrate and in vain, and could not attain to that success yt I wished. The
same I perceived in others likewise. I looked upon other men's wisdom and
folly, and compared them together. I saw how some me^ dealt very wisely, and
went about matters very prudently. I saw also foolish men and hare-braynes
working without counsel, and yet their folly and temeritie was sometime
fortunate and had good success. Where the counsels of the wise came to no
effect, and the wise men were most unfortunate, in so much that this fool
hardynes became a Proverb, Fortune favors fools.

Examples.
Cicero and Demosthenes were most wise men, and had notably appointed their
commonweals, and made very good laws, they thought also, yt they should have
had good success, but it fell out otherwise, in so much that the one said of
him self: O I that was never wise, and sometime judged in vain to be that I
was not. O Citizens, how much has your opinion of me deceived you. etc. The
other broken and worn with age and travel, said, that he wished death rather,
then to be combred again with charge of public affairs, him self having
well tried that matters go not according to the good counsels of the wise.
Contrariwise Julius and Octauius Caesar's, not always followyng wise, but bold
counsels, were much more fortunate. Philip king of Macedonia proceeded against
Demosthenes devises, being him self also more fortunate then wise. The
success is not aunswerable, to wise men's devises.


Surely their devises and counsels were good, but so to urge the^, to appointe
so certain a success of the^, was a vain devise. For matters will not be
taken in hand by man's devise. To be brief matters go not according to the
counsel of ye wise, nor according heddynes of fools, that the counsels of the
wise might be proved foolish, that we should not glory in our selves. Thus in
war straitway the victory is not gotten, albeit the army be never so well
appointed, and all things most wisely forecast and devised. As not many years
ago, ye French king thought to have had a great victory against the Emperor,
but it fell out contrary.

This he says therefore? Devises are of men, but success of God.
Thou see that matters succeed as well with fools, as with wise men, so yt it
might appear there were no difference between a fool and a wiseman, as
touching success, yea that it might seem there were no God that suffers
matters so unadvisedly to pass. But Solomon answers, no, but that wisdom
far passes foolishness. True it is that man's wisdom brings not things
to pass, but God does it. God by his wisdom can bring to pass what he will,
but man can not. For God has not only wisdom, but also a power to do it,
so that the thing which he commands must needs succeed. This man can not
do. To conclude: Gods counsel is not deceived but men's counsels how wise
soever they be, are deceived. Therefore he says very well:

And I saw that wisdom excels foolishness as far as light does darkness.
Wisdom is very good, but because it lacks power and strength, it can not
bring things about, nor rule the success of them.

A wise man has his eyes in his head, but the fool. etc.
We must not put trust in our own devises, and commit the success of them to
God.
I See verily that the like happens to them both. Our wisdom deceaueth us,
our foolishnes deceaueth us: yet wisdom passes foolishnes. To have the eyes
in the head, is an Hebrew phrase, which we commonly do use to express thus.
He that will play at cheastes must not hyde his eyes in his purse. Whereby we
signify that he must not only be skilful in that play, but also have a
diligent eye and care to his play: So he says here:

A wise man has his eyes in his head.
THat is, they are not only wise handlers of their matters, but also
circumspect and careful about them, and see in deed how things should be
ordered, but can not perform and accomplish the effect. The fool has not
his eyes in his forehead, because he proceeds rashely, and at all auentures.
Howbeit in deed on both sides ye matter goes by fortune, and chance, that
is, God rules the success, and not according to our circumspection or
negligence. Sometimes they fall both, sometime they prosper both. But God will
not that we shall make any certain rule thereof. For the creatures are not in
our power, but in Gods, who grants us the use of them, and by our means
does what pleases him. That we of our selves add hereto, in going about to
rule the use of them by our counsels and enterprises, is vain. He schooleth us
therefore, not to trust in our own wisdom and counsels, but to do as occasion
serves, and if it succeed not, to commit it unto God.

For what man is able to imitate the king that made him before. etc.
He that made us, governs us.
HEre by a goodly and apt paraphrasis, he describes god, as if he should say:
God is our king, he has not only made us, but also continually governs us,
so that all things happen to us according to his will. He alone reaches from
the beginning to the end, neither can any man hinder or stop his will and
counsel. For this cause thought Solomon to call him a king rather then God.
Some men have wisdom, some foolishnes, but no man can imitate his king, nor do
that he does. For what he appoints comes to pass, his will and counsel
takes effect.

And made us before (to say) that we were.
THe like phrase has S. Paul: Who first gave unto him, and he shall be
recompensed? Even therefore as this king rules and governs, all things fall
out. Hereby therefore he shows that our devises are of no value, because we be
made, and be not the king. God will not have us and his creatures to be ruled
by our selves, but contrariwise, or else we should be kings and rulers over
God. Nothing succeeds after our wisdom, or foolishnes, but many incur
displeasure by foolishnes, and more by wisdom, as even the wysest of all other
men, Dion, Cicero, Brutus, Demosthenes. etc. Because God does frustrate and
delude man's counsels and devises, to provoke us by all means to fear him, and
to learn to let him alone with the governance of all things, and in nothing
to prescribe him.

And I saw that the success of both these men were alike.
THat is, I saw, they had both like fortune, that as little prevailed the wise
man as the fool. That things are governed neither by wisdom, Both wisdom
and temeritie, without Gods governance, is unhappy
nor foolishnes, although God suffer things to be done by them both, but no
rule must be made thereof. For if our counsel were of force, then should it
always prosper. If foolishnes did hurt always, then should it never prosper.
Marius, Antonius, and diverse other prevailed more by their temeritie and
rashness, then Cicero did with his wisdom. And a man shall no where find more
examples of man's foolishnes and wisdom, then among the Romans and Gentiles.
For among ye Jews, wars were taken in hand for the most part, according as
the prophets appointed, and God commanded.

Then said I in my mind, if it happen unto the fool as it does unto me, what
need I labor then any more for wisdom? So I said in mine heart, that this
also was but vanity.
We must not trust in our own devises.
ANd these words tend to this end, that we should abstain from affiau^ce in
our own devises. I (says Solomon) governed my kingdom most wisely, and I had
a Lieftenant or president, which governed not so prudently as I, and yet had he
good success. Since therefore I see fools have as good success, or better
then I, why trust I to mine own counsel and wisdom, increasing but my labor
and sorrow.

So I said in mine heart this also was but vanity.
I Found by experience, that neither wisdom, nor rashenes was to be trusted.
For before it was declared, that wisdom passes foolishnes, although things be
governed neither by foolishnes nor wisdom. Our affairs must be commended to
ye king that made us.
We must hold therefore a mean between both, we must commit our matters to
the king which made us. If he offer us any commodity, we must use it: if he
give us ought, we must take it: if he take ought from us, we must suffer it.
etc. Do that thou art able, what thou can not do, that let alone. Look
what thou can not lift, let it lie. So my wisdom shall be profitable unto
me, if I do that I know pleases God, and leave to his ordering that he will
do by me. If we would thus do, then should we be wisemen in deed.

For the wise are ever as little in remembrance as the foolish. For the days
shall come, when all shall be forgotten.
BOth that the wise man has done and devised by this counsel, All things
through oblivion, are buried and forgotten.
and that the fool has done through his foolishness, whether it succeeded
well or evil, shall be forgotten. For neither they themselves, nor other shall
be the better for it, that they may learn to commit all things unto God,
but their posterity shall follow their own ways, and not be content with the
ordinances of their Ancestors, but seek new devises, lothyng that they have,
and seeking for that they have not, dreaming thus. If it once succeeded well
with me, it will do so once again. If it did not before succeed, it will now
succeed. We will do wiselyer then they have done before us. etc.

Nothing is of continuance in this world.
Behold the Romans common weal, how the Consulles always, and the Emperors
afterward still repealed their Predecessors Acts, disdayning things present
and past, and lookyng on things to come. Why therefore do thou take such
care, as though thy posterity would like or allow that thou do. It will not
be. For that men have, they reiecte as unprofitable. etc. Therefore it is
impossible, that things should remain in the same estimation with posterity,
that they were in before.

Lycurgus.
Lycurgus thought he had given such laws to the Lacedaemonians, as they would
have kept till he had come back again, that is, for ever. According to the
which devise, he went his ways, mynding to return back no more, hoping by
this means, that his laws should be always observed, but he nothing
prevailed.

Augustus said he had laid such foundations of a common weal, Augustus.
as he hoped should stand for ever, but they that came after, turned all up set
down. The people of Rome wished the death of Nero, Nero.
hoping they should have had a better common weal. But afterward it went never
the better with their common weal. Solomon so governed his Realm that he
thought it should have so continued still, Solomon.
and by and by after his death it was divided. Roboam.
For Roboam which succeeded him, not content with his fathers wise governance
of the kingdom, rent it in two parts.

And it comes not only thus to pass, in externe and civil matters, where
such foolishnes is the more tolerable, because there is but the loss of
things corporal, but also in religion, Alteration of commonweals and
religions.
and in the word of God, where posterity always neglecting the purity of the
doctrine left by our predecessors, seek new inventions, even as they, which
now the Gospel is published, not content with the purity of faith, and
doctrine of the Gospel, raise new disputations about the Sacraments, which
when it has been of any continuance, new sects will arise without end.
For the flesh can not be co^te^ted with one plain and true doctrine.

Solomon speaks not of persons, but of those things that men do.
Thou must understand that Salomo^ speaks not here of the persons but of the
things that men do, whether they be wise or foolish, because they be neglected.
The remembrance of men indureth in books, but not in ordering of the
commo^weale, and matters are registered and put in Records, but no man cares
or takes heed to them, neither is posterity moved with the examples of their
predecessors. Still they devise new ways and fashions. That lies before
them, is lothed, that they have not is desired. Briefly, to be content with
things present, is plainly a gift of the holy ghost, a thing impossible to
the flesh, which always forsakes things present for things to come, and
whiles it pursues the one, it loses the other, defrauding it self of the use
of both. A covetous man lacks as well that he has, as that he has not. And
as it fares with the covetous in money, so fares it with all mankind in
pleasures and devises etc. that is to say, they have nothing though they have
all thing. Let Alexander Magnus stand for an example, whose mind was not
satisfied after he had conquered all Asia. If this be true in outward
things, what marvel is it in matters of the Gospel? That we have we have
not, because our affection is not settled, but are desirous of other things.
On the other side Christians have all things, though they have nothing.

And the wise man dies as well as the fool.
THe like saying is in the Psalm 49. Wise men also dye and perish together
as well as the ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other. etc. This
also is to be understood of things that men do. The wise man dies for all
his doings as well as the fool. No man regards what they well ordained. And
when thou have done as well as is possible, for thy reward, are all thy doings
disdayned, or else thou art hanished or put to death etc. Yea many will contemn
thine Acts and repeal them.

Wherefore I was weary of my life because I saw that all things done under the
sun were naught. For all was but vanity and vexation of mind.
THat is, whatsoever was done under the Sun did much displease me, forasmuch
as it was naught else but vain labor and vexation. Not that Solomon wished
his death, but for that he thought it was a miserable case to lead a ma^s
life in such doings. Thus he means: I became weary of it and ouerladen
therewith. For who can suffer to have nothing but labor in diuising and
contempt after he has done. What this phrase, to live, signifies.
To live, or life, after the phrase of Scripture, signifies to live well and
at ease. To lead a perfect life. Psalm 22. No man has quickened his own
soul, yt is whose soul lived not well. Those that live evil and a hard life,
as poor men that are oppressed and in misery, and appointed to dye. Of these
it is said in the scriptures, they live not. Therefore he says not, he
desires death, but that this trade of life wherein men are so wearyed and
vexed with their own devises, displeases him.

Solomon means that we should stand in a readiness whether life or death
betyde, How we must live.
and calls us back to the use of things present, because we should be
content with them without care of hereafter, and commit all things unto God,
who will work by us, as it were unwitting to us. Eue^ as the Ox that treads
out the corn and eats, knows not what he does, nor is careful for his
living or labor: so must we do, that God offreth us, and suffer that he
will have done. Yet all these things must be but as a morsel of bread, which
we have here on earth, that we look not by our own devises to garnishe this
life, for then shall we always be unquiet, as follows:

And I was weary of all my labor which I had taken under the sun, because I
should be feign to leave them to an other man that comes after me, who
whether he shall be a wise man or a fool I know not. And yet shall he be Lord
of all my labors.
The life of man is miserable.
THis sentence is all one with yt above. Solomon flows in words, and
copiously treats of this place. Thus (says he) I am weary of my life: for
albeit I have ordered all things after the best way that can be devised, yet
know I not whether mine heir shall be wise or foolish. If he happen to be
wise, he will set light by that I have done, and invent an other thing, seeing
I my self many times mislike mine own doings, and am desirous of other. If
he be a fool, he will destroy that I have done, and take as much pains in
pullyng down, as I took in setting up, according to the Proverb, One
builds, another pulls down. So Octauius Caesar beautified the City of
Rome, Nero defaced it. Pompey brought great masses of money into the treasure
house, meaning it should serve for the benefit of the common weal. Caesar
after that took it away, and it became rather a destruction then any benefit
to the common weal. Therefore whether mine heir shall be wise or foolish, in
vain have I traveled, and spent my life in vain cares, having an eye to
things to come, and not using things present, and therefore he adds:

So I turned me to refrain my mind, from such travel as I had taken under
the sun. For so much as a man should weary him self with wisdom, with
understanding, and industry, and yet be feign to leave his labors to an
other, that never swet for them. This also is a vain thing and great misery.
For what gets a man of all the labor and travel of his mind, that he
takes under the sun, but heaviness, sorrow, and disquietnesse all the days of
his life. In so much that his heart can not rest in the night. This is also a
vain thing.
I Ceased (says he) to take any more care for these worldly affairs. we
must not be careful for to morrow.
This is the saying of a wise man which calls back his mind from cares, to
rest and quiet. I will be content with things present, and I will do and
suffer forthwith that God wills me, neither will I care for to morrow. This is
the conclusion which afterward he amplifieth copiously, saying:

For when a man has wearied him self, with wisdom, understanding, and
diligence etc.
HEre you see what he understands by wisdom, not speculation, but the rule
and governance of matters, industry, or congruence of doing, Industry or
dexterity in doing of things. When all things are done in order and in time.
Eue^ as he appointed twelve Captains over the land, their diet, and horses
etc. This he calls to weary him self in wisdom. This wearysomnes and
portion he leans to a man that has taken no pains in the same, yea that
more unhappy is, to a man that cares not for it, and forgets it. When I
have taken all this pain says he, I leave it to one that contemns it, or
spoileth it, which thing surely is a great vanity.

For what gets a man of all his travel etc. This is but copy etc. Nor can
rest in the night.
HIs heart is not at any rest, no not in the night while he paineth him self,
not only in ye day time to bring his devise trimely to pass, but when he has
finished it, studieth in the night, how to preserve and increase it.

Is it not better therefore for a man to eat and drink, and his soul to be
merry in his labor?
THis is the principal conclusion, The principal conclusion of the whole
book.
yea the counsel of the whole book, which he often hereafter repeateth. And
this is a notable place for the expou^ding of that is gone before, and that
that follows. Thus he co^senteth with that that is said before. These
pleasures are to be condemned that we of our own heads and devise prepare
for the time to come. Those travels and pains to be condemned which we
undertake of our own pha^tasie and brain. But the pleasures and travels that
God sends are good, and to be used as they come without care of pleasure, or
vexation after to ensue. But who ca^ thus do. It is very well said, but we do
not that that is so wisely proponed, we hear it as though we heard it not, and
see it as though we saw it not, and no man follows it. For we are drowned in
ye care of making preparation and compassing of our own affairs. Our heart ca^
brook no good counsel, but is vexed every day more and more. The godly cast
from them all cares. All other men lead a disquiet life, even till they dye.
He says therefore:

I saw that this was a gift of God.
True mirth or joy is the gift of god.
A Notable saying and singular doctrine, but yet he less urges this saying
the^ that before. Which comes to pass by reason the affirmative moves us
not so much as the negative, even as this affirmative: I am the Lord thy God
which brought thee out of the land of Aegipt, it is quickly said, but it does
not much move us. In the negative there is greater force. Thou shall have none
other Gods in my sight. etc. So in this place, he briefly handles this
affirmative. It is good for a man to eat and drink. etc. but in the negative,
he is very long to show and prove unto us our folly; namely, that we nothing
prevail with all our travels and devises, because we are troubled with cares,
and use not things present. So unto these gross headed men, it is requisite
he spoke grossly, and at large. For unto wise men, all might be said in one
word: The Lord himself is thy God. etc.

For who has eaten, or done more things abroad then I?
HE alleges his experience. For if I which have done so great things, and
have so abounded in all manner of riches, have not atteyned to my wyshe and
desire, how much less shall other do so, if God give not mirth and joy?

God gives to the man that is good before him, wisdom, understanding, and
gladness. But unto the sinner he gives wearines and superfluous care, that he
may gather and heap together the thing that afterward shall be given unto him,
whom it pleases God. Wherefore, this also is a vanity and vexation of the
mind.
THat it is the gift of God to be content with things present, he proves.
Because it is given without any merits of ours going before, The godly use
their goods with peace and mirth: but the ungodly have no peace.
to that man whom God lyketh. He deuideth the world into godly and ungodly.
Unto the godly, beside the gifts that they have like unto others, chiefly
prudence and wisdom, is given mirth also, because they be content with
things present, they are not troubled with thoughts and desires of the mind
as the wicked are. That they have knowledge, and are wise in doing their
business. etc. their knowledge is in mirth and peace, but the wicked have
trouble and vexatio^, always gathering together more and more, and never be
satisfied. Moreover, although they have wisdom and industrye, yet it is so
mixed with sorrow, that they are rather a pain to them, so that they can not
enjoy their travel, but till the ground and build, and other receive the
pleasure and commodity of it. But that the wicked travel in and build, none
uses well but the godly. So those things that Princes gather together, are
the goods of the godly, because they only use them mearily and with thanks
giving, although they have but a little. The wicked have much, and yet they use
it not, but have therewith great care and vexation. To be short, the godly
truly have the whole world, because they have joy and tranquillity. The
ungodly in having it, have it not. This is the vanity that the ungodly have.

The third Chapter.
To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under
the heaven.
ANd here Solomon (as has been declared before) speaks of ma^s works, that
is to say, All the works of man have a time to be begone, to be done, and to be
finished in.
such as are taken in hand of man's wisdom and counsel. This the interpreters
not marking, think that he speaks in this place of the corruptyng of Gods
creatures. Thus therefore understand, that all man's works and devises have
their certain and appointed season of doing, beginning and endyng, beyond man's
power and ability, so that he speaks against free will, because it is not
in our power, to appoint ye time, the mean, and the effect of our affairs,
and that our enterprises and endeavors herein are utterly frustrated, but that
all things go and come when God appoints. This he proves by the examples
of men's works, which are ordered beside and above man's appointment, so that
hereof he concludes, that men are troubled in vain with their own devises,
and can bring nothing to pass, for all they can do, until that time and
hour comes, that God appoints. Hereto belongs that saying in the
Gospel: The hour is not yet come. Again: A woman while she is in travel
has pain and sorrow, because her hour is come. Thus the power of God
comprehends all things under their appointed hours and seasons, so that no
man can let or hinder them.

How we be rulers and Lords of Gods creatures.
But thou will say. How then is man made ruler over all things Gene. 2. if he
be not able to govern them at his pleasure, and to use them according to his
desire? I answer: we be so made gouerners of these creatures, as to use the^
for the time present. But we are not able to rule them with our cares and
travels. No man with all his devises, can compass any thing for the time to
come. For he that is uncertain of things to come, how can he take order for
things to come. Therefore God will have us to use his creatures freely, as he
gives the^, without prescribing of time, mean, or hour. For these things
are in ye hand of God, so that we must not think it is in our power, to use
things when we will, unless he grant it. For this cause Jesus the son of
Sirach says: God left man in the hand of his counsel, but he gave him
precepts and commandments, whereby to moderate his devises and doings. etc.

All things have their time.
THat is, their appointed hour and season, which if man pass and go beyond,
and will bring all things about after his own ways and devises, he shall
reap naught but vanity thereof. Many men labor to wax rich, but they
prevail not. Other are enriched, yea without any labor. Because God has
appointed that hour, for the one, and not for the other.

And every purpose. etc.
IN the Hebrew it is Hephetz, which commonly is translated pleasure, or desire.
Me thinks it may handsomely be translated delight, as in the 2. Psalm: his
delight is in the law of the Lord. For Hephetz signifies, that which a man
does apply himself unto, and deliteth in. That desire that a man has to
fulfill the law. But even herein also, all ye things that men wish and desire,
they labor and would feign have the^, but they vex themselves only, because
they can not attain to that hour and season, which they go about to prevent,
and therefore they get nothing. Therefore things must simply and plainly be
committed unto God, and we must use things present, and abstain from desire
of things to come. And if we deal otherwise, we shall reap nothing but
labor and travel.

There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye.
Man is no Lord, but a bayliue of his life.
HE proves the thing he has spoken by examples of man's devises and
occurrencies. Our birth has his time, says he, and likewise our death. And
even as we have not our birthes in our power, no more have we our deaths, and
yet nothing is more ours then our life, and all our members, but only to use
them. But we have no power or Lordship given us over the^, not for one minutes
space, and therefore in vain we seek to prescribe them rules or laws. The
infant is in the hand of God, and can not be borne before his hour comes.
The women labor and are very careful about the birth of it, and tell when it
will come, but there is no certainty in their saying. No more can we die, be we
in never so extreme danger and desperation, but when our hour is come. Why
then fear we death? Thou can live no longer then God has appointed, nor dye
any sooner then he appoints. For thus says Job. 14. Ma^s time is determined,
and the number of his months is with thee: thou have appointed him his
bounds, which he can not pass.

But thou will say, Every man is appointed his certain hour to dye in.
many pearishe wilfully, and through their own temeritie, which might
otherwise live longer. Some break their own necks. etc. Could they not have
saved their lives? I answer, No. God appointed that hour, those means, and
that kind of death, as daily experience teaches us. Some are deadly wounded,
and are easily healed and live, some other are scarsly scratched, and yet dye
of it. The Astrologers ascribe these things to the Planets, other attribute it
to fortune. But the holy Scripture ascribes it unto god, in whose hands are
laid up all the minutes of our lives and deaths, with whom it is all one,
whether thou dye of a grievous wound, or of a little scratch, because he will
confound all ma^s wisdom and devises. But to ye true Christians this is a great
comfort, because they know death is not in the power of Tyrauntes, nor of any
creature, and because they should not be over careful about death, but should
dye like children when God so appoints. Therefore as he pronounces of the
condition of our birth and dyeng: even so may we say of all other affairs of
men, as it follows:

A time to plant, and a time to pluck up.
THese be works of ma^s life, and yet no more in our power, then our life it
self. In the spring, we plant and set, in harvest we pull up again. All
things are to be done as God has appointed and ordained, and none otherwise.

A time to slay, and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to
build, a time to weep, and a time to laughe: a time to mourn, and a time to
dance: a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones: a time to
embrace, and a time to abstain from embracyng: a time to seek, and a time to
lose: a time to keep, and a time to cast away: a time to reap, and a time to
sow: a time to keep silence, and a time to speak: a time to love, and a time
to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.
TO this roll belongs experience to be applied to the whole course of man's
life. For here it comes to pass, We must use ye goods that God has given us.
that one sows, another reapeth, one gathers together, an other wastes and
spe^deth. To be brief. Every work of man's life has his appointed season out
of ye which what soever man does, he labors in vain and prevails not.
There is a time to weep, and a time to laugh. Many times it chances that
when we mean to be meryest, some great trouble marreth all. Therefore mirth
has also her time and season. Experience teaches us all these things, that we
(I say) can do nothing according to our appointementes, but as time serves us
to do them. Therefore let us not trouble our selves about things to come, but
use things present.

What profit has he that works of the thing wherein he trauelleth?
THat is to say, unless times and opportunity serve him, he shall do no good. The
maker of a thing has nothing but his time and season. Till this comes, he
can do nothing. If the hour be hit so does he likewise hit it.

I have seen the travel that God has given the sons of men, to humble them
thereby.
THis is a declaration of the things gone before. In all these things says
he, I have seen that men can do naught of them selves, unless their hour be
come. And they that will prevent their hour are troubled with sorrow and care:
so that their own experience teaches the^ to abstain from care for things to
come, and to use those things they have.

For God has made all things beautiful in their time and season.
THis now is ye other part. God appoints all men a time and season.
They that wait not their time are troubled and vexed. Again, they that abide
it, find much comfort therein. For every thing that God does, and that is done
by God, the gift is pleasant in his season. That is: when the heart is void of
cares, and then has some commodity or pleasant sight happenyng to it, that
greatly delights it. Therefore such men reap pleasure, where other gather
affliction and vexation, because they do their things in the time that God
appoints.

Also he has set the world in their heart, yet can not man find out the work
that God has wrought from the beginning to the end.
Men cannot enjoy the things that god gives them.
THis is a confirmation of the things gone before. Although (says he) God has
set the world in their heart, yet are they not able to govern it through their
own counsels. This is an Hebrew phrase, to give or speak to the heart, for to
give or speak fair or mearily. This is it he would say. God does not only
set the world in their power, whereby they may use the things present, but also
sets in their heart, that they may use it with pleasure and joy. That they
may have both joy and pleasure of it. And yet man knows not when his work
shall begin or end, when or how long he shall enjoy it. Therefore man must be
content, that has the world in his use.

They that are content with their state, use their goods present.
Paul speaks in a like phrase Act. 14. And surely he left not him self
without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, fillyng our hearts with food and gladness. And in an other
place: Which ministers to us all things abundantly. This joy has the
Christian and every one might have it, if he could be contented with things
present. Well says S. Hierome in his Prologue upon the Bible. The saying of S.
Hierome.
To him that trusts in God, all the world is instead of riches. But a
faithless body has need even of an half penny, according to the Proverb: A
covetous body wants as well that he has, as that he has not.

But man finds not out the work. etc.
THat is to say, man can not know, would he never so much vex him self there
about, when God will do him good, Things to come, must be commended to God, and
things present must be enjoyed.
when to begin, or when to make an end. Even as no man is able to search out,
or declare ye hour when any shall be borne, how long they shall live, or when
they shall dye, study they never so much. We must therefore say: Lord, it is in
thy power to give things for the time to come, in the mean season I will
rejoice in that thou have given me, and in that thing yt is present. Thus ye
other actions of ma^s life, whereof he has rehearsed a great many, are not in
man's power. For if it were, some men would always make war, other would
always give themselves to gaming, other would always be occupied in
buylding etc. Because many men give the^ selves hereunto. Therefore all the
world is ours, only we must not prescribe God any time or manner how we will
use them. I will not (says God) be measured according to your devises, for so
should all things be at your commandment, and I also. He concludes therefore
as in the chapter gone before.

And I know that there is nothing good in them, but to rejoice and to do good
in his life. And also that every man eats and drinks, and sees the
commodity of al his labor, this is the gift of God.
What is most pleasant to a man.
THese things are well enough understood by the premises. For this he means
to say. There is nothing better for a man in these miserable cases, then to
enjoy the things present, and to be merry at his heart, without care and study
of things to come. But this is the gift of God that a man can so do. I am
able (says he) to teach ye what to do, but to do it my self, or to give the
power to do it, I am not able. He shows both what is to be done, and where yt
we must do is to be received. He declares that our cares do only vex and
molest us, but he teaches us that we must call upon God, to remove away these
cares, and to give us good success and peace of mind.

I know that whatsoever God shall do, shall be for ever: to it can no man
add, and from it ca^ none diminish. For God has done it, that they should
fear before him.
THis is to say, Gods works are stable, but man's frail and unsure.
I saw that all things that God does, endure for ever. As for our works, they
be vain and uncertain. And this antithesis or cou^terpoint is to be well
marked. God only (says he) can bring his purpose to pass, and appoint them in
their times. Look to whom he gives the gift to enjoy things present, he has
it. He is faithful and sure. That he gives, no man can take away. If he give
life, no man can bereue us of it, although the world and Satan rage and rave.
For he is sure and everlasting. If he give me good eyes, I shall keep them
notwithstanding Satan would throw all the dust of the earth into them. If he
will grant me strong, and whole arms and legs, no man shall be able to take
them from me. All our works have their time and hour ordained, which we can
not appointe. Who then? God himself appoints the hour, and not fortune and
destiny, as ye Philosophers suppose. When he suffers the hour to come which
ordained it, then it comes.

Therefore will God have the works of men to be uncertain, because, he he
will be feared.
Why then does he so trouble me^ with this vain cogitatio^, reserving all times
and seasons to himself? Therefore (says Solomon) because he would be feared,
because we should not be rash in our businesses, nor attempt any thing
proudly and presumptuously as of our selves, as Paul also teaches us: Walkyng
in fear, knowing that it is not in man's will and endeavor, because it is he
that works both the will and perfourmaunce. He that believes these things,
that is, that our affairs lie not in our own power, he does nothing rashely.
He attributes all to God that works it, and looks for it at his hand. If
he grant it, he enjoys it, if not, he can be contented to lack it. If he
take it from him, he bears it. Thus remains the glory of God, the humbling
of our selves, and the true worship of God in us. For this is the fear of God,
to set God in our sight, to know that he is the beholder of all our works, and
the author of all prosperity and adversity.

That that has been, is also now, and that that shall be, has been
already, and God requires the things that are past.
BEfore in the first Chapter, he said: The difference between the works of
God, and man.
What is that that has been? that that is to come. etc. Because in that
place, he spoke of men's works and doings, here in this place, he speaks of
Gods. Man's mind can not content it self with the things it has, but still
wishes for the things to come. And when those things are come that it
wishes, it is not contented neither, but again desires other things, so
that it is never satisfied. For this is the condition of the heart of man,
always to gape after future things, and never to be filled. But God
proceeds after a contrary sort and manner. For that that has been with him,
is yet still: that is to say: be turns him not to things to come. For thus
says the Scripture of him. He beheld all the things he made, and they were
very good. God rests in the work that he makes, and does not so hop and
leap to the desire of things to come, as man's mind does. And they ye walk
according to Gods appointment, do even like: their heads stretch not to
future things, containing things present. The godly person labors and
works after a constant sort, and constantly enjoys the thing that God
sends.

Because God requires the things that are past.
Gods works and man's are not all one.
HE compares (as I said before) gods doings and manners together with man's, by
way of an Antithesis, or cou^terpointing. Our study is to neglect and set light
of the things we have, and to behold and wait for the things we shall have.
But God pursues the thing that is, and perseuereth in his work, that ye thing
he does, may be stable and constant. In like sort are the studies of those that
are godly. This is it he would say. Eue^ when man goes about to let or hinder
Gods work, yet God seeks how to defend and maintain that work that man
goes about to hinder and let. etc. God appointed David to be king: Absolon
persecuted him, and went about to let it. But God again restored that that
Absolo^ would have let. The things that God appoints are not so inconsta^t
and fickle as man's devises. For God does not abhor and loathe his own
counsels.

Moreover, I saw under the Sun, the place of judgment, where was wickedness,
and the place of justice where was iniquity. And I thought in mine heart, God
will judge the just and the wicked: for there is a time for every work and
purpose.
WHat should I speak of the vices and vanity of man's devises, Unrighteousness
in commonweals.
where as even in the place of judgment, that is, where justice and law
should be administered, wicked men and ungodliness do reign. And Salomo^ does
not so much complain, that ungodliness is in the place of judgment, as that it
can not in that place be amended and corrected: as though he should say. All
things are utterly so vain, that the care of correcting this unrighteousness
of officers, does no good. When I saw this wickedness, I thought to correct it,
but I found that I was not able, till God would correct it. So our Prince
Frederike was wont to say: The saying of Frederike Duke of Saxony.
The longer I govern, the less I know how to govern. Again: Where shall I
at length find him that I may trust? See in the courts of all princes, how
notwithstanding there be diverse good men that wish well to the common weal,
and geeue good counsel thereunto, yet will there be always some found, that
will dashe and trouble all their counsels and devises. Such therefore, and so
great is the malice and naughtines of man, that man is not able to amend and
correct all men.

Salomons meaning therefore is, that if a man would break his brain to correct
all men; he should reap nothing but travel and care of his doing. Therefore
the matter must be committed to God, and such stones taken and lifted up, as we
are able to rear and welde. That that will not be reared let it lie still. I
(says he) that was a wise king, over an holy people, and a diligent setter
forward of righteousness, was compelled to suffer wicked persons to be in
public office. For although I had displaced and put certain of them out of
office: yet always would some other prove the like. Then how will it fall out
with other Princes. Therefore it is the best to do that God appoints, and
the rest to commit unto him, which in his time shall judge both the righteous
and unrighteous. For men will not, nor can not, although they were never so
willing.

There is a time for every work and purpose.
ALl things (says he) have their time. Vices can not be corrected, until that
appointed time and season come. In vain therefore do we go about to prevent
that time, by our amending of all things before that time. In so much that my
enterprise succeeded not in mine officers. I did what I was able, I corrected
as much as I could, the rest I committed unto God.

I considered in mine heart the state of the children of men, that God has
purged them: yet, to see to, they are in themselves as beasts. For the
condition of the children of me^, and the condition of beasts are even as one.
As the one dies: so dies the other.
A complaint of the confusion of man's life to the outward sight, against which
the word of God must be set. For there is a difference between the godly and
ungodly.
THis place is somewhat obscure, not so much of it self, as through the default
of the expositours, which greatly trouble themselves, while they suppose for
the most part that Salomo^ speaks in the presence of the ungodly: but this is
but a cold invention and supposall, although a received. Me thinks the
sense is to be taken plainly. He makes a manner of a Sermon or collation of
ma^s ways and devises, that they are all but vain. At length he comes to ye
trouble and vexation, that is in officers, how they which ought to be a rule
and ensample to other, are also vain them selves. So of special propositions
going before, he descends to general. What shall I say or speak of singular
estates, of persons, when we be all as beasts? Is not this a miserable case
among me^? Wherein differ they from beasts, which have no remembrance or
feeling of God? But here rises a question. Wherefore he compares men with
beasts, whereas before he taught us there was a religion and fear of God, and
a life everlasting after this life. Which thing has most troubled the
expositours. The aunwere is short. The interpretours do not here mark the
scope and drift of the book, neither do they remember (which thing yet
Solomon does often repeat) that he speaks of the things under the Sun,
which in the new Testament, and more commonly is said, in ye world. For this
book makes a difference between a godly life, and the life that is led in the
world, or under the sun. To have a cheerful heart, and to joy in ye things
that God geeueth us, in the fear of god, is nothing of the world, but a gift
of God from heaven, and above the sun. But to be vexed with the care of
worldely things, is a beastly state and condition.

The state (or fashion) of the children of men.
IN the Hebrew tongue this word is of a large signification, but as it is here
used, it signifies a fashion, manner, order, conversation, as in the Psalm.
109. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order, or fashion of Melchisedech. I
think it signifies properly a guise, or manner. The Epistle to the Hebrews
does notably handle this word of the Psalm. For even as Melchisedech (says
he) had neither father nor mother etc: even so and in like sort etc. It
comes of this word Dabar, which is a thing or cause. It signifies therefore
a fashion, or manner, so that the meaning is: I considered in mine heart the
manner or fashion of man's life. After what sort men behave them selves on
earth. What success men have in their doings, and how they behave them selves.

For the condition of the children of men, and of beasts are all as one.
THat is the like things happen to me^, as do unto beasts. He means man
passes up and down this life as the beasts do, and gets no more by his
life, then do the beasts.

As the beasts dye, so dye men.
HE speaks of the hour of death, The hour of death is uncertain.
not of the kind. That is, as the hour of the beasts death is uncertain, so
is the hour of ma^s. A beast knows not when he shall fall sick or be whole,
or when he shall dye, no more knows a man. Why therefore are we so proud?
Since we know no more when we shall dye, then does the beast?

For they have all one breath, and there is no excellency of man above the
beast. For all is vanity. All go to one place, and all was of the dust, and
all shall return to the dust.
THis place can not be wrested to the mortality of the soul, It seems that
men and beasts have both one kind of death, but there is yet a great
difference: for ye souls are immortal, and the bodies of men shall be revived.
because he speaks of things under the sun. Certes the world can not
perceive, nor believe that the soul is immortal. But if a man regard the
likeness that Salomo^ speaks of, man dies like as the beast does, and
breaths even as the beast does. In a kind of likeness therefore we be all one.
The Philosophers reasoned in deed of the immortality of the soul, but so
coldly, that they may seem to have done nothing but trifle, but Aristotle
chiefly so disputes of ye soul, that in all places he takes circumspect
heed that he reason not of the immortality thereof, and would not express
what his meaning was. Plato reported rather what other men said, then what him
self thought. For the immortality thereof ca^ be proved by no reason of man,
because it is a thing beyond the sun, to believe the soul is immortal. In
the world it is not seen, nor understood for a certeinty, that ye mind of
man is immortal.

All go to one place etc.
All things living shall return into dust of ye earth.
THat is, unless the Lord gave his spirit unto man no man could say, that man
differed any thing from the beast. For man and beast are made both of one
matter, of dust, and return again also into that dust. And the returning
again into the same thing or place, is an argument of likeness between man and
beast. Not that it is so in deed, but because the world according to the
likeness falling out between them so supposes, and can not suppose otherwise.
Therefore to hold or believe otherwise, is required an higher matter, then is
the world.

Whereby he tries them.
THe Hebrew word signifies to purify or choose. God says he, Men in their
miseries are comforted with hope of eternal life.
suffers both man and beast, all after one sort and fashion to come into the
world, and to go out of the world. But this he suffers to try whether men
will only regard these outward appearaunces, and be led with the arguments
of the wicked, and believe none other thing. The godly by these things are so
exercised that their faith is the more increased. They pass out of this world
in deed, as do the wicked and the beasts, but in their heart and spirit they
are comforted and at quiet.

Who knows whether the spirit of man ascend upward, and the spirit of the
beast descend downward unto the earth?
TEll me plainly (says he) of one man, The ungodly doubt of the immortality
of the soul.
not of the godly, but of those that are under the sun, or in the world,
which can affirm that the soul shall live after this life, considering he
sees the life of man and beast to differ in nothing. For as soon as their
breath fails them, they dye both. This no man knows. But in that we know
it, we know it not as me^, but as the sons of God, and above the sun, as
who have our conversation in heavenly things, and belong unto heaven. In the
world this knowledge is not, neither is there any peace, but all things come to
pass as with beasts. There were in Greece most excellent wits, which yet
never uttered any sound learning touching this matter. Lucian a man of a sharp
and pleasant wit disputes earnestly hereof, but scoffing only at the
Philosophers opinions of the soul.

Therefore I see that there is nothing better, then that a man should rejoice
in his affairs, because that is his portion. For who shall bring him to see,
what shall be after him?
The opinion of godly men which believe the immortality of the soul.
THis is the opinion of those that be godly, for they have taken hold of this
doctrine. The ungodly are vexed with the likeness and similitude between us and
beasts, and can find nothing but vanity in their travels. For this doctrine
they neither know, nor believe, for reason can not persuade it them. And by
this place is all the whole heap of Philosophers convinced, gathering many
things together touching the immortality of ye soul, which they believe not.
This therefore is the portion of the godly, to enjoy the things present, and not
to be troubled with things to come. But this comes not to pass under the
sun. They that do otherwise clogge them selves with double incommoditie,
they enjoy not the things present, nor attain not to the things to come, and
it happens unto them as unto Aesopes dog, that snatched at the shadow, and
lost his meat. So these men loath the things present, and seek for other
things. Thus hitherto Salomo^ has discoursed most in generalities of ye
vanities of this world: now follow certain particulars.

The fourth Chapter.
So I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought under the
sun: and behold, the tears of the oppressed, and none comforts them, nor
delivered them out of the hands of their oppressors, to comfort them.
A co^plainte of the misery of man's life from which without ye help of God, he
can not be delivered.
Hitherto Solomon has rekoned the vain devises of men. By reason that God
hinders and lets them, namely how those things only, which God does and
appoints, atteine and come to their end, and can not be let or hindered.
Now henceforth he rekoneth the impedime^ts of men's devises, that is, the means
and causes, whereby God uses to revoke us from our counsels and devises,
compelling us to use those things that we presently have. I saw (says he)
that neither Princes nor Magistrates are hable to take away violence and
injury from among men, yea God sets naughty disposed me^ in their way, from
whom they can not be delivered. David being a very good prince minded to
profit and do good to the common weal, but Ioab and Absolon did hinder and
let him. Sclander, or reproach.
He went about to make Ioab out of the way, but he was not able. Thus have
Princes their hinderers and disturbers, who^ yet they are compelled to suffer,
and by who^ God hinders the devises of the wise. I saw also how Judges were
corrupted and bribed, Oppression of good me^.
and how tyrants oppressed the widows, and fatherles children etc. And surely
greater is the violence and fearcenes of man, then any man is able to rule and
correct, but God alone.

Wherefore I praised those that are dead, above those that are living, and I
counted him that yet was unborn better then them both. For he has not seen
the evil works that are wrought under the sun.
HEre again these fine witted me^ dispute, If ye godly had no consolation, it
were better not to be borne, then to live in so great misery.
as though Solomon spoke like an ungodly man, that preferred the dead before
the living. Albeit Augustine treating of ye place of S. John: (It had been
better for that man that he had never been borne.) says: It were better for a
man to be in evil case, then to have no being at all. Howbeit these men deal
sophistically. Damned and miserable creatures thus think and judge, as Solomon
here says: For undoubtedly, they had rather not to be at all, then to be
continually so tormented, and this in deed were better for them. Therefore
Solomon says well in this place. If we consider the miseries and afflictions
of me^, and have respect only to this life, we shall praise the dead, rather
then the living. A man were better to be dead, then to see so great misery and
calamity. He speaks nothing of ye judgment to come, but of things done
under the Sun: where it is better not to be, then to see such afflictions of
men. Which thing also the Gentiles perceived: which affirmed, that it was the
best thing not to be borne, or being once borne, shortly to die. Therefore this
place is to be understood plainly by way of comparison.

Also I beheld all travail and perfection of works, that is in the envy of a
man against his neighbor: This also is a vanity and vexation of the mind.
An other kind of man's misery, envy, hatred, contention, used in this life.
HEre is another kind of calamity and impediment of man's devises: Even as
among great men, and men of power reign sclaundering and oppressing. etc. So
among the commo^s is there nothing but envy, emulation and hatred. etc.

Look upon the comminaltie, and consider the artificers, there thou shall
find how evil disposed they are, what naughtines, fraud, deceit, and
backbiting is among them, and how they hate, and envy one another to the
death. If a man be cunning in any thing he is hated, and has enemies. He that
is a good workema^ has an hundred that hate him: whereby it comes to pass
as the Poet says, that the potter enuieth the potter, the Smith, the Smith,
and the Poet the Poet. This is the case and course of all Artificers. Imagine
there were one that would learn some craft or occupation, Men must not leave
their vocation because of the evil will, or unthankfulness of others.
whereby to get his living in time to come. If he should learn it so exactely
that he should pass other therein, then would other a great many envy and hate
him. What then: Should he leave of? Should he learn nothing? No. But labor
still to his power, and commit his work unto God. What shall we do at our
study and books? Shall we give over, because our Scholars perceive not this,
or that thing? or because learned men are despised? No: go forward with that
thou have in hand. Wait still for the hour. For thou know it is well done
to teach other. Regard not therefore the world, or thine own devises: Whereto
soever thou appliest thy self, thou shall find troubles.

We must follow our vocation although me^ envy, or hate us.
We thought in these days, to have done many good by means of the Gospel, and
hoped that all men would have embraced it, but even they whom we benefited, in
delivering them from the Popes tyranny, do foulely bewray us, and they at
whose hands we looked for aid and help, tread us under their feet. What
shall we now do? Shall we take indignation thereat? Shall we cease of from all
our doing? No. Let them envy, despise and persecute: we will hold on as long
as we are able, teaching, laboring, writing, learning, for so is gods will we
should. For without envy, no man that means well to do, shall live in this
world. We must not appoint the time when our travel shall do good. Let God
alone therewith. Only, see thou labor, and do that God appoynteth thee. And
think not that thou art able to redress all things, to see that all Officers
be good, and all Artificers and crafts men at peace and unity. Thus therefore
he says:

I saw the industry and perfection that is in workmen.
THat is, Warninges and comforted Evangelical.
I saw men well framed and disposed to their duties and occupations, but they
could bring nothing to pass according to their desires, because it was not in
their power, the hatred of their neighbors was such an hindrance to them.
Therefore these be plainly admonitions and comfortes of the Gospel, which call
us from the ears of this world. For many are the heaps of man's vanity and
misery, and every where at hand. When I first began to preach, I traveled
diligently to make all me^ good, but it was said to me, and that truly: he is
to young as yet to teach old knaves to become honest men.

The same falls out in all other professions. This evil bestyrreth it self
in every kind of life. The best is therefore to enjoy the things we have, and
to go forward with that we have in hand, and to let evil pass by us. And so
shall we delude the world.

To be short, he that will live quietly, How a man may live.
must think with himself, that he shall see nothing in the world but vanity,
and the^ shall it not grieve him, if any evil happen, and he shall rejoice in
those goods that God has given him. And if you be driven to such necessity yt
thou art compelled to provide for thy self, do that is lawful for thee, and
then let God do what pleases him. But if thou will wittingly give thy self
unto the world, All things can not be redressed.
to correct all that is amiss, and to remedy all inco^uiences, and wilt drive
Satan out of the world: thou shall procure thy self travel and sorrow, and
naught else, and shall as little prevail, as if thou would go about to
stop the course of the river Albis from flowing. The affairs of this world
will not nor can not be governed at ma^s pleasure, but he yt made them all, the
same rules the^ also as he sees good.

This also is a vanity and vexation of spirit.
IF for example thou would remedy this envy, and such like evils. Let them
envy one another, let and hinder one another, deal unjustly one with
another: if God mean to use thy help and counsel, he will do it in his time
and place: wait thou for that. Even so now, if it please him to preserve
studies and schools, he knows the time and persons by whom to do it. They
whom we think fit for this purpose, be many times most unhandsome and
unfit.

The fool foldeth his hands, and eats up his own flesh.
A Fool in this place signifies not (as we commonly understand it) a dyssarde
or natural, Whom Solomon calls fools.
but a wicked man and a naughty, whom in the Dutch tongue we call, a lewd
ungodly person: such as are those envious bodies, who being not able to do any
thing themselves, do yet disturb and hinder other. Such men being of no
account themselves, and without wit and industry, do no good while they live,
but be grievous unto others. Even like those yt teach or learn naughtely,
foolish and unlearned preachers: so are there among artificers, such drones,
as we call pelters or counterfectours, which only be impedimentes to other,
and can do no good them selves. Such there are among the magistrates,
hynderers of the common weal, so that they most disturb the common weal,
good studies, and other vertuousnes, who we hoped would most have furthered
the same. So many foolish preachers more hinder the Gospel, then the
professed enemies of the same.

The fool therefore foldeth his hands.
HE is no earnest labourer, no wakefull person, but a sluggard and sleper,
which cares not for his labor, but hinders contemns, and backbiteth other.
This is to fold the hands: to do naught him self, but to hinder and let
other. The like phrase is in the vj. of the Proverbs. Fold thy hands, and
poverty shall come on thee as one that trauelleth by the way. To fold the
hands together, a sign of some evil luck.
Hereof it seems to come that Pliny says: It bodeth some evil luck to fold
the hands together, which was very well said of them but not understood.
Contrariwise of a diligent and good housewife it is said: Her hands laid hold
on the spyndle, that is, She does earnestly mean it. Such foolish and naughty
men does God raise up to hinder and let our devises.

He eats his own flesh.
Again this is an Hebrew phrase, for he consumes him self. The like is in
Hiob. To eat ones own flesh, is to vex him self.
I tear my flesh with my teeth. This he means. Such foolish men profit
not them selves, but hurt and withstand other men. He enuyeth at other men, and
fretteth him self away. Such a man in a common weal is like unto rust and
worms, hurtful both to him self and to other. And therefore do they likewise
continue as patches.

Better is one handful with quietness, then two hands full with labor and
vexation of mind.
THis may be understood to be spoken either of the fool by way of imitation,
Men must be content with mean estate.
or else plainly and by way of affirmatio^ of Solomon. If by way of imitation
the^ must it be taken as a wise counsel of a foolish man, which abuses a very
good saying, after his doltish sort, as such as he is used to do. As if he
should say: why should I take such pains, as does this man, wearyeng and
toyling him self with such labor and travel? Why should I wear my self
away? I shall receive as much as an other, so excusing his slouthfulnes, as a
certain Monk said, affirming there was no reason why he should consume him
self away by studying, considering he received as large a portion as the
Doctor. Amongst such fellows we have to live, although they be intolerable
even as when we are constrained to walk thorough woods and thickettes, where
we must strive to get out, although the brambles and thorns stay and hinder us
never so much. For this world is nothing but thorns. If thou will take them
affirmatively as the words and counsel of Solomon, which sense pleases me
best, then this is the meaning. Seeing in all affairs there be lettes and
impedimentes, what shall a man do? Freat not thy self, though such fools
hinder thee. And if the fool will fret him self, yet hold thou on in thy
labor, and enjoy that thou have gotten mearily. If thou can not have both
thine hands full, take in good part that God gives thee, though it be but an
handful. And although thy gain be but small, yet content thy self, and live
chearefully therewith.

I turned my self, and saw an other vanity under the Sun. There is one
alone, and not a second, which has neither son nor brother: yet is there no
end of his travel, neither can his eyes be satisfied with riches, nether
does he think, for whom do I travel, and defraude my self of pleasure? This
also is vanity, and an evil travel.
Solomon goes on, The covetous are reproved.
in reckonyng the cares that follow the vanities of men, among the which he
accompteth this covetous Euclio, which gathers and hourdeth up heaps, and
yet can enjoy none. All the world for the most part is enta^gled with this
vice. All men seek that is their own, and provide for the belly, yet chiefly
he reprehendeth such as break their brains to enriche themselves, and only
gather for others, neither abydyng a time to get them, neither to enjoy the^.

There is one alone. etc.
THis vice the Poets also condenme, and worthily deride in their fables. For
the covetous man enjoys not his gold, he only looks on it, and yet his
eyes are not satisfied, even as the Poets feign of Tantalus. For thus writes
Horace: The thirsty Tantalus does stand, in water up to chinne:
And feign would of the River drink, that glydeth by full thynne.
Laugh not (I say) for change the name, and then the tale is told:
Of thee that heapst and sleepst upon, thy bags of gathered gold.
Or as a man that fears to touch, some holy thing, art feign,
To look and gape upon thy gold, or else from it refrain.


It is better therefore there be two then one, for of their labor comes some
profit. For if one fall, his fellow will lift him up. Woe unto him that is
alone. For when he falls there is none to lift him up. And when two sleep
together, they shall one warm an other. But how shall one become whot. And
though one may overcome one, yet two may make resistaunce: a threefolde cord
is not easily broken.
THis is the counsel of Solomon commendyng society and fellowshyp of goods,
and commaundyng us to use things present, A comme^dation of co^munitie of
goods, for goodness will communicate it self.
and not to labor for our selves only, but for others behoof also.
Fellowshyp is profitable for the preservation of goods. The covetous body will
have no partener or fellow and condemns the community of goods gathering to
him self only, being a very dog at the hey stacke. These solitary persons,
and scrapers, no men but beasts, Solomon in this place condemns. It is
better says he to live in society and fellowship of goods, for if one fall.
etc.

This place they racked to sin and confession, The deprauyng of this place.
thus understanding and expounding this text. If any man had fallen in sin,
and had had no holy man to have made his confession to, he had not been able
to have risen into the way of grace and godliness. Howbeit we have declared that
Solomon speaks of the course of man's life under the sun, against ma^s vain
vexing of him self. For he commends the society and fellowshyp of man in
enioyeng their goods, against the solitary life of the covetous. This is that
he says. The covetous man profits neither him self, nor other. No man
feels any commodity by him, as he that lives not with any man, but keeps
his goods only to him self, yea in having them, has them not. But who so
leads not his life in such solitary wise, of him comes some commodity,
being profitable to him self, and receiving commodity of others. For this
society makes to the preseruyng and increasing of goods. This is it, that he
afterward adds: he has none to help him. Again: how shall one become
warm? He has no help, no counsel, no comfort in affliction. What has he
when he alone gathers for him self? he is only a beholder of his money, as
it were of some painted table.

A threefolde cord is not easily broken.
Communion of benefits is a band of humane consolation.
HE entermedleth a feate Proverb, as he does oftentimes hereafter, and that
according to the manner of a good preacher. The meaning is, It is better to
have fellows, and to enjoy things in commune, then to be a covetous body,
solitary, rapyng and reuyng only for him self. In fellowship there is mutual
help, aid and comfort, where the covetous man's life is miserable, vain and
full of affliction, being at length compelled to dye like a miser. This thing
he confirms by a Proverb, borrowed as it may seem hereof. A certain wise
father ready to depart this world, called his sons unto him, deliueryng them
a bundle of rods to break, which when they could not break, being bound
fast together, yet being taken in sunder, they brake. Thereby teaching his
sons, that their force and power should be invincible as long as they lived
in unity together, and would one help an other. For thorough concord small
things would grow and increase, where through discord they would lose and
fall in sunder.

Better is a poor and wise child, the^ an old and foolish king, which will no
more be admonished.
HEre is an other kind of life after these covetous persons and unprofitable
to others. He reprehendeth ambition.
Even as he said there was vanity in covetousness, so now he says there is the
same in ambition. For many are borne to be kings, and yet remain not so. Many
come out of the prison and become kings and richmen. Other forgo their
kingdoms and become servant, because we should know, that our devises are
nothing. Our counsel, our endeavor does nothing. Therefore some of captives
become kings, and govern well, because God prospers the^, and some that be
borne kings govern naughtely. I have seen many children godlyly brought up,
and very well instructed, which when their tutor has been gone, and they
come to their inheritance, have proved very ungracious and wicked graftes.
And other without any education and instruction have made good men, what then?
Shall we neglect our children? Shall we not instruct them? Shall we set all at
six and seven? No.

Labor is commanded but care forbidden.
This book seems utterly to teach us negligence and slacknes in things, but
it does nothing less. It teaches us in deed to set naught by our own
devises, and cares, wherewith we trouble and vex our mind. So while the
Gospel rejects the righteousness of works, it sets not our hand at
liberty, but our conscience, because God has commanded the work, but
forbidden the care. So our children must be instructed, but touching their
profit therein the care must be committed to God. Even as the husbandma^ must
sow his seed, but commit the care of his crop unto God. Even as God by his law
that he gave this people, omitted nothing that might belong to the governing of
them, although it took not such effect as it ought, and fell out evil with a
great many: so must the Magistrate have a dilligent care, that the common weal
may be well governed, and defended, but yet not trust to his own industry and
counsel. He must do his diligence and take pains etc. But he must put away
cares and vexation of mind. For we must not prescribe God any means, place,
or time. As the husbandman throws his seed into the ground, afterward he
goes his way, and takes his rest, nothing careful for the increase, for else
he should never have any rest. Therefore let no man think that Solomon
co^de^neth men's labor. He forbids cares and anxieties, but labor he
requires.

For out of the prison he comes forth to reign, where he that is borne a
king loses the same.
The affairs of man pass wonderfully and are not ruled by our devises.
THis saying agrees with the premises in this wise: therefore is a wise child
better then an old fool, because many times it comes to pass, that some
comes out of the prison to a kingdom, and some other of kings fall to be
ignominius and foolish, as Manasse, Zedechias. But contrariwyse Joseph being
delivered out of prison, became ye chief ruler in Aegipt. And in our days
Matthias king of Hu^gary being brought out of the prison was made a mighty
king. Such things many times come to pass in the world, as the Roman
histories declare. Valerianus none of the worst Emperors, being taken
prisoner, served for a stool to the king of Persia to get on horseback by all
the days of his life. How happened it so unto him? Because his hour appointed
of God was come. Wherefore then take we such cares: Sufficient to the day, is
the care and travel thereof.

The education of a king.
Therefore a kings son must be enfourmed, and brought up like a king, but to
prescribe him what he shall do in time to come, and how good a king he shall
be, is but an afflicting of the mind. This must be committed unto the
determination and will of God, and we must say: Lord God I enstruct and teach
this child in deed, but make thou him a king, at thy will and pleasure.

I beheld all the living which walk under the Sun, with the second child,
which shall stand up in his place. There is none end of all the people, and of
all that were before them, and they that come after shall shall not rejoice in
him. This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
Solomon calls the living, those that live gorgiously, and as though they
sought for no other life, but that ye world had been created for their sake
only, as the Gallaunts of the court use to do. He continues in the example
of a kings education, whether it be to govern at home, or in the field.
Education (says he) is a good thing, but man's will and study brings not to
pass that he would. The devises of education are deceitful, the travel is
necessary, but the success and care oftentimes beguileth us. Our devises
deceive us.
Therefore he teaches us that our devises are vain. For if care and counsel
deceive us in a kings education, how much more will it deceive in education of
the commons, where is less care, and slenderer education.

That he says the living, or all ye states under the Sun, keep company with
the second child, he means not all simply, but the most part of the
kingdom: so that the sense is, all the company that be about the king, wait
and attend upon the kings son his beck. Every one cleaves unto him,
having conceived some great hope of him. For this young Prince is the second
youth or springall, which stands in steed of another king, that is, which
shall be king, and succeed in the kingdom after his Father: Before whom, and
behind whom is there a great company of people, that is to say, he is waited
on with a great multitude of people behind and before, garding him, as though
he were king. There is a great hope in this young man, that he should pass his
father in power and authority. All me^ deemed and judged very well of him, and
yet they rejoiced not in him. Why so? Because he answered not their
expectation, because he proved such a fool and dullard, according to the
proverb, saying: either a king, or a fool borne.

Thus Nero in great hope and joy of the people was made king, Nero.
in so much as the first five years of his reign is of great fame and
renown. But the years after proved most unlike. Heliogabalus. Co^modus.
So Heliogabalus and Commodus also were chose^ Princes and Emperors, with
great expectation of the people that they would be good men, but they deceived
all men of their hope and looking. For one of the^ degenerated into a most
filthy man, yea into a beast, rather then a man: the other fell out to be most
incommodious, and ye third proved Nero. Good princes are rare and seldeom.
Wherefore a good Prince is a most rare Phoenix. For men's counsels are
deceaueable, in so much that he of whom we conceived many times some singular
hope, him we most repent us of. So Roboam, Roboam did degenerate.
the son of a most wise father, of whom surely ye people conceived a very
good hope, as one brought up godlyly under his father: yet proved he most
unlike to his father. If therefore men's counsels so fail in the highest degree of
life, they will much more fail in the life of private persons, in thy house,
in thine office etc. For even there also thou shall have thy child either an
artificer, and workman, or a fool. etc.

In deed he speaks of kings, for in honorable personages are honorable
exploytes and deeds, that is, such as are apparaunt. The deeds of private
persons commonly are either neglected, or less observed and marked: but
according to the Duch proverb, A wise man commits no small folly. If a
Commonner offend, or commit some foolish fact, it is not much regarded.
Otherwise, ye state and condition of private men and kings is all like.

Labor and endeavor are not condemned, but men's own devise and carefulnes.
Therefore Solomon condemns not the pains taken in education of a king, in
enriching of a child, in governing of a family and household, but our
devises, whereby we will rule and order all the matter. He commands the
work, but he forbids thee the care. Travel thou instantly, but commit
the success and effect to God. Remember the example of the king diligently
brought up and enfourmed, and yet altered, that thou may know how things go
not by our devises and endeavors, but by the will of God, which has appointed
a time and season for every thing, out of the which nothing can at any time
succeed. Therefore if he answer to his education, thanks must be given unto
God, not to our study and care, but unto Gods blessing. If our corn grow
well, we have to thank God for it, not our selves. For how is man able to
defend his corn either from birds, or beasts, or worms, or from the envy
of Satan. Therefore it lies not in our care and carke, but in the favor and
blessing of God, to the end we should thank him only, which works all in
all, according to his good will and pleasure. So falls it out in the
education of our children. If thou have a good child, say the Lord has given
him and brought it so to pass: If not, say, this is the proof and state of
man's life, I did my diligence, the Lord would not have it so: his name be
blessed.

The fifth Chapter.
Take heed to thy foot, when thou entrest into the house of God, and draw
nere to hear: for that is better then the Sacrifices of fools, for they know
not how much hurt they do.
The abuse of this book.
HEre do I begin the fifth Chapter, for it is a new place. By reading this
book, it happens to the unwise, as unto the ungodly, through the preaching
of the Gospel. For when these men hear the righteousness of faith and
Christian liberty preached, and the righteousness of works denied, by and by
they reply: let us then do no works, but let us sin on still, for faith is
sufficient. Contrariwyse, if works be preached as fruits of faith, straightway
they attribute justification to them, and seek salvation in them. So always
these two things follow the word of God, presumption and desperation, so that
it is an hard matter to hold the right way. The like falls out by this
book. The unwise when they hear this doctrine, that we ought to be quiet in
heart and mind, and to commit all unto God, infer thus: If all things be
in Gods hand and power, then will we not labor at all. Even as the other
offend on the other side, in being too careful, while they will moderate and
rule all things after their own measure and devise. But we must all hold the
straight way to do our diligence, and what we are able, according to the word
of God, but not to measure our doings after our own devise, but to commit all
the success of our doings to Gods wisdom.

It seems to me therefore, that Solomon in this place uses a kind of
prevention, and wholesome exhortation to them that walk not in the right way,
but either are too remiss and slack of their labor, or else too careful,
counselling them to be ruled by the word of God, and yet in ye mean season to
take pains and do their endeavor diligently.

Take heed to thy foot, when thou entrest into the house of God.
THe temple or house of God was ordained not so much for sacrificyng, Why
churches and assemblies of people were instituted.
as for preaching, that the people of God might meet together, to hear the
word of God. As a Prince calls his house together, not only to eat and
drink, but to hear his word etc. Therefore where the word of God is not heard
there is no assembly of Gods people or house. Why he bids the^ to look to
their feet.
He commands them to take heed to their feet rather then their heart, to
the end, they should not be offended when they hear this doctrine, as David
says in the Psalm: My feet were almost gone. For after the word of God,
whether it treat of peace of conscience, or outward peace, follows offense.
For it is that sign that shall be spoken against, for the fall and rising
again of many. Even as Christ says: Blessed is he which is not offended at
me. To be short, the word of God is offense and foolishnes to the flesh. Our
doings and devises must be ruled by the word of God.
Thus he says therefore: Thou hear when I teach thee, but take heed thou be
not offended, or make my teaching a stumblyng block to thee: that when thou
hear, a man should quiet his mind, and that his devises be in vain, thou
say not, then will not I labor at all, or think then thou have nothing to
do. Or contrariwise, that thou be not over careful, and would govern and
rule all thing after thine own reason. Man's cares, disputations, and counsels,
are as vneffectual as Plato his policy or common weal. But if thou will
avoid all offenses, give thy self to the word of God, and to his workyng, and
cast thine own devises and cogitations away. Open thine ears and be
persuaded. Draw near to harken. For in no ways neither of Gods nor man's can
we be in safety, onles we give over our selves wholly to the word and workyng
of God, and stay us thereupon without any waueryng of mind.

For this is better then the sacrifices of fools.
THis is added by way of a Proverb, To harken to ye word of God, is better
then the sacrifices of fools.
to confirm this sentence. It is better to harken to ye word of God, then all
the sacrifices and worshippings of fools. This he says, because he would
extol hearing and obeyeng of the word, above all works. For it is meetest of
all, that we should harken to the counsel of our God, as often as we come into
the house of God. The wicked tire and werye the^ selves in their works,
forsakyng the counsel of God. Who be fools.
And here may thou see what a fool signifies with ye Hebrews, not him that
we call a dysarde, but him that harkeneth not to the word of God, or believes
it not with his heart, although otherwise he be never so prudent, because such
men know not God, neither the things belongyng to God, much less care they
for them, but are vexed and carried about with cares, caryng for that is not
worthy to be cared for. Their care is how to do sacrifice. But lay thou hold
on the best part: harken to the word of God, and beware thou be not offended
at it.

For they know not how much hurt they do.
Hypocrites know not how much hurt they do.
BY these words he expounds what fools are. For surely there is no man so
evil, which would commit evil, if he knew it were evil in Gods sight.
Therefore he calls those fools, ignorauntes, and blind, which do many
things as though they were good, and with great earnestnes, but yet are
ignorant that these sacrifices which they so busily make are utterly impious.
Thus Christ calls the Phariseis blind, which used to offer many sacrifices,
and to weary them selves in works, but neglected faith and charity, yea knew
them not, calling that good that was evil, and so contraryly. Truly therefore
does Solomon call them fools.

Here thou see that the highest, The foolishenes of hypocrites.
and chiefest point in religion is called, evil. For he speaks of sacrifice
which they made with great good intent and earnestnes, because they did it,
and regarded not the word of God. Abide therefore in the word, least thou
neglect the same, and follow thine own ways, and fall into ye sacrifices of
fools, as they did which vowed chastity, poverty, obedience, and such like,
neglecting the word of God. All these in this doing were offended, and their
feet slipped.

Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hastye, to utter a thing
before God: for God is in heaven, and thou art on the earth. Therefore let thy
words be few, for many cares breed dreams, and multitude of words
declares a fool.
THis is one part of them which are offended, and decline to ye right hand, He
warns us to avoid offenses.
which to much weary them selves and reason of gods counselles. Even as other
say, if we should do nothing but only believe, then let us do no works: so
these men say, if our counselles be of no force, then what shall we do?
wherefore did God make us on this wise? wherefore gives he one man good
success, and another none? Solomon therefore counsels us in this place not
to yield to such cogitations, or to follow such disputers, but to abide in the
word, and to do yt God prescribes us. Neither to regard the ones overmuch
carefulnes, nor the others over great negligence, but to hold on in the
straight and high way.

Before God.
THat is, in the house of God, in this place where God is woorshipped and
preached, there be not to hasty to speak, that is, become not a teacher, but
suffer thy self to be taught. The wicked after they have heard the word, do
by and by bark and murmr at it, some on the left hand, other some on the
right, both of the^ being swift to speak before God, while they will place
their doctrines in steed of Gods. Therefore follow not y^ neither thine own,
nor their words, but harke^ what ye Lord says, as James teaches thee: Be
not many masters. The meaning is, The only son of God is to be followed as
our teacher, and nothing must be taught contrary to Gods word.
be not a master of thy self, or of other, neither harken to thy self, or to
other, but only to the word of God. For one is your Master and teacher which
is Christ, who is in heaven, hear him.

Dreaming comes through multitude of cares.
THese be two proverbs which he applies to his saying: Ostentatio^ of wisdom
and overmuch that reprehended.
for it comes to pass that where many cares and cogitations go before in the
day, that diverse dreams follow in the night, even by the judgment of the
Physicians. This general proverb, thus he applies: If thou reason and be
carefully busied in thy mind how to order things, and wilt take care for all
matters, there will ensue nothing but dreams, which will delude thee when thou
art waked, that is at length thou shall conclude but vain matters. 1. Timoth.
Knowing not what they say, nor whereof they affirm. So where we and others
appoint many ways, yet none of the^ is followed, much more when we prefer our
cogitations and counselles before the word of God.

And multitude of words bewrays a fool.
THat is to dispute of diverse matters, to be to wise in our own opinions, to
teach and prescribe all men argues a fool. Thereby is a fool to be known
when he will seem to be wise. Ouerhasty wisdom and righteousness comes
never to perfection as one said: I hate that boy that is wise to soon. This
therefore is his counsel, that we should not be so ready to dispute and reason,
as to harken and do. And this text might have been concluded in two words:
Hear, and hold thy peace. For he that can give good ear, we say in our Dutch
proverb he will be a wise man. And he that with many words and much
disputing, will seem to redress matters, is a fool, and sets things the
more backward. These are therefore notable proverbs, for manners, and which
may be spoken against those, which through their own devises will get their
living or which through their works will prescribe God a rule etc. Even as
Judas calls them dreamers, which will order and appoint the Church without
the word of God.

For God is in heaven, but thou art on the earth.
THat is remember thy state or condition. God must be heard and obeyed.
The great majesty of God is in heaven, thou art but a worm on the earth.
Thou must not talk of Gods works after thine own judgment, let God rather
speak: dispute not of Gods Counselles, nor go not about to bring thine own
matters to pass through thine own counsels. It is God alone that can dispose,
and bring all matters to pass, for he is in heaven. All this we thus express
in the German tongue: few words, hold thy tongue. Thou shall appoint God no
rule. These men therefore offend on the left hand, which will not hear the word
of God, but they will help matters to go forward, and teach God what he has
to do. These men he thus beats down: Hear, and hold your peace, and do
that which God commands and appoints you, which if you will not do, you
shall offend, and so become a dreamer and a fool.

When thou have vowed a vow unto God, differ not to pay it, for he
delights not in fools. Pay therefore that thou have vowed. It is better that
thou vowest not, the^ to vow, and not perform.
The doctrine of vowing.
THis place is greatly tossed in the Church and kingdom of the Pope, as the
only foundation whereon they build and set up their Monkish vows. We dispute
not whether vows are to be performed or not, but whether the vows which they
vaunte of, be vows, yea, What things may be vowed.
or no. Hierome and Lyra agree both in this, that a vow ought to be such as is
possible for us to perform, and concerns the glory of God. This they call a
foolish vow, to gather up strawes from the ground, and to claw the head with
one finger. And Moses recites diverse kinds of vows, and what things may be
vowed, namely a field, an house, meat, cloth, our own body, all which are
in our power. Thus the Jews vowed their life and body to the Priests, to
serve them for a certain time appointed. Furthermore, The vows of the old
testament.
Moses has no perpetual vow, but one which he calls Anathema, namely a
vow of death, in ye last of Leuit. that that must be slain whether it were
man or beast that was vowed, as did Iepthe in the eleventh of Judges.

Wherefore if Monks will brag of their perpetual vows, The vows of Monks.
they must by and by be killed, if they will defend their vows by Moses
authority. Otherwise all vows be possible, and for a time, so that thou may
vow thy body to God, also thy field, thy meadow, thy garment, for a certain
time. etc. that the Leuite, or Priest may have the use of it. This kind of vow
was very profitable for ye Leuits, for their better maintenance and finding.
And God appointed this for their provision. Our vows are utterly foolish,
What our vows and wishes be.
if (I say) not impious. For we vow poueruertie and obedience, which are
commanded in the Gospel to all Christians. To vow virginity is a thing
impossible.
To vow virginity is impossible, Ergo, by Hierome and Lyra his judgment, they
are no vows. Howbeit this place of Solomon seems to me, to pertain to those
that are on the right hand, who hearing that their own ways profit them not,
will afterward do nothing at all. For thus the fool disputes: if by mine
own care and devise, I can not bring that I will to pass, then will I not
perform that I have vowed. etc. Against these contemners he says: Do that
that God commands: I quit thee not from laboring, but I appoint thee to do
that ye God has commanded. He commands thee to pay or perform that thou
have vowed. Conclude all these sayings thus: Harken, hold thy peace, and do
that thou have to do, that is, that God commands thee.

For he is not delighted in fools.
God is angry with scorners and co^temners.
NOw confirms he his saying with a threatening from God, he speaks of such
fools (after the manner of Scripture) as contemn and regard not the word of
God: Be not reachles, make not light of it, for you shall not escape
unpunished, but abide such pain as is ordained for them whom God forsakes,
and is angry with.

Suffer not thy mouth to make thy flesh to sin, neither say before the
Angel, that this is ignorance, least god be angry with thy saying, and destroy
the works of thine hands. Many words are but dreams, and vanities, but
fear thou the Lord.
THis is a confirmation of the same sentence, Contempt of God condemned.
admonishing us that we be not obstinate in refusing to do yt we ought, as he
taught us before, not to be too careful, and to do all according to our
pha^sie; and devise. Speak not (says he) so carnally, so rashely, so
foolishely, to harken to thine own flesh, but speak according to the wrode
of God. And say not this is ignorance, or a trifling fault, if I labor not,
or perform not that I have promised, as men of light consciences make light
of sin, and think that God regards not sins, or requires not our good
deeds. See thou excuse thee not, or neglecte if thou offe^de him. For hereof
spring heresies, when they set the word of God at naught, and shamefully
defend it, standing so highly in their own conceit, that they think they
have no need of Gods word.

What the Hebrew word Sigaion signifies.
This security or negligence, the Hebrew word Sigaion declares, which is used
also in the title of the seventh Psalm. and in the title of ye song of Habacuc.
For it signifies ignorance, but not that that we call foolishnes or lack of
knowledge, but rather that which more truly we may call lack of conscience,
or inconscience, if that were a Latin word, that is, when one does not know a
thing, or makes no conscience of it: so that you may refer it not to the
Angel, but unto him that says: I know no fault by my self, God will not
reprove me.

Before the Angel.
BEcause God governed this people by the mean of Angels as is said in the
epistle to ye Galathyans. The law was ordained by Angels, in the hand of a
mediator. And Moses says: to the people. The Angel shall go before you,
commending to them the Angel yt governed them: after this manner Solomon says:
say not before the angel. etc. whom the Lord has appointed to be our
governor Before the Angel is all one, as if he should say, before God: Least
God be angry with the same. etc. that is: See thou contemn not thy vow and so
become unfortunate in all thy ways and doings.

Afterward he concludes all this place, Where many cares be, there are many
dreams and vanities.
after ye same sort, and with ye same sentence almost that went before: Dreams
only and vanities etc. For where many cares are, there be many dreams, and
where are many counsels, and disputations, there be many vanities. Therefore
fear thou God, be content with his word, and suffer him to rule at his
pleasure. For he is in heaven, and thou on the earth, as before is said. Labor
thou, but let him govern thy labor and give success. For what gettest thou
by all thy words, cou^sulting and disputing but trouble? For where many words
are there are many dreams etc. This is the universal proposition simply
converted. Where are many cogitations and disputations, there are many dreams,
where are many dreams, there are many words and disputations.

The su^me of this doctrine.
The sum therefore of all is to fear God, and in thine heart to reverence and
worship him. So Paul commands the wife to fear her husband, that is, so to
reverence him, that she commit nothing that may offend him. Even so shall we
fear God, that is we shall reverence him, and do or commit nothing that shall
offend him. This he means: Neither consent thou to them that are too
careful, nor to those yt are too careless. Be thou neither impious Despiser,
nor presumptuous Counselor and Searcher.

Here now is ye end of this place and admonition, not to be offended at ye
course of this life, Neither (faith he) dispute nor contemn, but reverence
God, and think that it is Gods doing. etc. For god thus does all things, to
confound our devises, and our flesh, and to declare that he is God. etc. For
the flesh is either to careful, or to contemptuous. Thus Solomon in the myddle
of his oration takes care to put away offense, least any should be offended at
his doctrine, and either neglect his business, or presume to much of him self.
Therefore he counsels us to perform our vow, that is to fear God, and
keep his commandment.

The Scripture understands by a vow not only Ceremoniales, What the
Scripture understands by vowing.
but the whole serving of God. as David says: psalm 49. Pay thy vows to the
highhest, Likewise that the Jews cried out: All the things that God has
commanded, we will do. This was a very great vow: Eue^ so thou ye have
promised to perform his will, stand to this vow, letting pass all other
things, which God will not have the to search or care for. Now returns he
to the rehearsal of men's affairs.

If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of
judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter. For he that is higher then
the highest regards, and there be higher then they, and the King is over all
the earth, so se the ground tylled.
AFter this treatye of godlynes, An admonition against the offense taken when
good men are oppressed.
he returns again trymly to his Roll of vanities, where he repeteth one
thing oftentimes as is used in Sermones. This he says. I bad you fear God,
or else you should do no good, yea you would say, there is no God, unless you
were armed with the fear of God and knowledge of the truth. For when you see
the poor oppressed and judgment subverted here you will murmr, what
unrighteousness will you say is this? where is god become? why suffers he
these things? against these cogitations and offenses, Solomon confirms us,
fear thou God says he, and think there is a judge appointed for it, he shall
redress it. If thou can not amend the Judge, think this is the course of
this world and how no man is able to cause all Judges to be just, this only
is in Gods power, the high King.

None understand these things, but those that have been in office. I have
seen and proved in the Monastery, how many unjust me^ have been put in
office, which thing yet could not be remedyed. So Doctor Sulpitius being very
wylling and desirous to put good men in every office, The saying of Doctor
Sulpitius.
and yet could not, was wont to say: men must go to the plough with such
horses as they have: he that has no horse, must go to plough with Oxen
according to the proverb. Good politic men are rare.
So it fares in worldly affairs: Sometime there is a good Prince, but he is
not able to see that all Presidentes and Judges be good and just men, and yet
he is compelled to have officers. So wise men have great care to make good
laws for the commons, that they should be obedient, but yet they murmr and
complain of the force, and unrighteousness of the Judges. etc.

When thou see such things, The offense taken of naughty governing the
common weal.
think these be the vanities of this world, and fly not out of the world as
the Monks do into ye wilderness. For they fare like the husbandman that has
fierce horses, and will give them up, where rather he should use all kind of
diligence to tame and break the^. So there be some so froward and wayward
householders, so sharp exactors of work, that they do nothing but disturb
the whole house with their unreasonableness. The saying of Frederike ye third
Emperor.
This is a notable saying of Frederike the third which was Emperor: He that
can not dessemble, ca^ not be an Emperor. Add this, he that knows not how
to dissemble, knows not how to live. If thou wylt^ live in the world, learn
to see this.

The doctrine of this book is, that in the common miseries of this life, we
should keep faith fast, and a good conscience, and quiet heart in God.
Then let us do nothing. Not so: We must labor and be doing: but that thou
can not bring to pass, dissemble. Thus it behooves a wise householder, to
dissemble, and make as he knew not of diverse things that offend him: For it is
impossible that all things can be done well and rightly. This book therefore
teaches peace and quietness of mind, in these worldly affairs, that when thou
see or hear of evils thou should not vex thy self, but say, this is
the course of the world. It goes none otherwise here. Again, when thou see
things go well, to say: Blessed be God, which so ordreth these things, that
not only he suffers evil to be done, but intermedleth good with evil. Do
thou that thou art able, the rest commit unto God, and according to the
proverb: He that can not lift up the heavy stone, must let it lie still, and
let him take up the stone that he is able. Therefore when thou see evil in
Princes, Officers abuse their authority, Judges give wrong judgment, the
commons murmr, and wise men dispute, think God will redress this gear.

Let not this matter trouble thee.
HE goes about to quiet and pacifye our mind: Marvel not says he, though
thou see such things but be conted. Thou art not able to remedy these things,
for thou can not help or better them: wherefore fear God, and commit the
matter unto him, so shall thou be quiet. He that will not thus do, shall find
nothing but trouble.

For he that is higher the^ the highest regards.
THat is, do not thou vex thy self, That God is ye reue^ger of all wickedness.
if thou can not redress it, leave it to an higher Judge. That, that the
inferior is not able to compass, let him think it belongs to the superior.
If the Prince be evil, complain of it to an higher power, even to God. So if
I should vex my self much about the schisms and sects which disturb the
Church, and contaminate the Gospel, what should I prevail? Therefore I commit
the matter to God that is the Judge, in whose hand are all things.
Notwithstanding I am sorry that the souls of men are so miserably seduced and
deceived, but I ca^ do no more but according to mine office resist them, and
say leave of, you have erred long enough, repent. When thou have thus
counseled an other, then commit him to God, according to Paul's saying: Him
that is an heretic, after one or two admonitions, shun and avoid. etc.
Again: wicked men wax worse and worse. For they shall not escape their Judge.
Every one has his Judge, if the Bailiffe does it not, the Sheriff or Mayor
will do it. And if he will not judge them, the king shall, if the king regard
it not, the Emperor shall. If the Emperor will not, God will not contemn or
neglect it. This is it that he means: The king is ruler over all the earth.
Solomon had no higher office the^ a kings: Let the king bring to pass that
thou art not able.

To see the ground tylled.
Wherefore the Magistrate is ordained of God.
THis seems to be as an adiection, or addition to a kyngly estate. Whereby is
signified to what office he is appointed and what charge is of the secular
power. To this end (says he) is he ordained a Magistrate and officer, to see
the earth be tylled, to revenge the injuries and wrongs of inferiors. The king
has the sword, to defend the innocent, and to punish the malefactor, and
God suffers no wickedness on the earth which he punishes not by the
magistrate. If the inferior officer does it not, yet the higher does: It
comes at length to the power of ye sword.

This is notable that he calls ye king a tyller of the ground: The duty of
kings.
which thing signifies not only the tyllage of the earth, but the whole
maintenance of the common weal, which consists of laws, judgments. etc.
For it is a kings duty as well to defend, as to make provision for victuals, and
other necessaries. Tyllage prepares food, war, or the sword defends us,
keeps under the malefactor, that other may ply their tyllage, and do that
they ought. So it lies in the king, as well to make provision for necessaries
as to see them conserved. For unless he defend them, other can not follow their
tyllage. Thus Solomon both armeth us against offenses, and also teaches us
that our devises are but vain. I (says he) am a king by Gods appointment, and
albeit I am not able to redress all things, yet I do as much as I am able:
the rest I am compelled to bear and suffer, least ye whole land should be left
waste, commending all things in ye mean while to God the high Judge, who has
all the power of the sword in his hand. Thus let every man in his calling do
what he is able, and commit the rest to the higher power.

He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves
riches, shall be without the fruit thereof: this also is a vanity. When goods
increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good comes to the
owners thereof, but the beholding of them with their eyes?
The vice of covetousness.
THis belongs to that he said in the first chapter: The ear is not satisfied
with hearing, nor the eye with seeing. Here he treats of the vanity and
desires of man's heart. One world was not enough for Alexander. So fares it in
all other affairs, honors, riches. etc. For so goes the miserable life of
man, that a covetous man is an example to all men. He has money, and yet is he
not satisfied, yea he enjoys it not being present, What a covetous man is.
only he thyrsteth after other that he has not.

What else therefore is a covetous man, but an heart stretched out to that it has
not, and turned from that it has? Therefore this is a vanity of the heart: were
it not better to be content with things present, and to cast of the care of
things to come? Soldiers are happier then covetous men, although they be the
worste of all other men, and live most hardly. For else all men be covetous,
except such in whom other like vices put covetousness away. But the godly only
have this benefit, that they are contented with things present, and can use
them also with mirth and thanks geeuing. A covetous man has no greater mouth,
belly, etc. then a godly poor man, nor digesteth no more then he, and yet is
he contented with a little, yea he is rich, where the covetous in the middle of
his riches is a beggar. These things men are taught both holesomly and godlyly,
but the flesh is careless say we, or do we, what we will. The goods of the
covetous consumed by others.


Where much goods are. etc.
THis is a notable sentence: The covetous man is never filled, but still
gathers. To whom? A niggard requires a prodigal. For although he have never
so much money, yet is it consumed either in his life time, or when he is dead,
neither has he any thing of it but sorrow and travel. King Solomon has his
houses full of silver and gold, but who uses them? His Courteours. He only
is but fed and apparelled therewith. Who have ye use of Princes goods, in
princes Courts? Soldiers, What it is to gather riches.
writers, braggers, and other gay knaves. Therefore to gather riches together,
is to gather together many wasters and consumers. Why then vexest thou thy
self with such scraping all things together? Be content with that thou have.
For if thou will needs gather riches, they will not come without ghests that
will devour them, if not in thy life time, yet after thy death. Thou have
naught else of all thy goods, but to fill thy mouth and thy belly, and to cloth
thy back. If riches increase, take thy part of them, leave the rest unto
others, and lay aside thy careful gathering and scraping. If thou will not so
do, yet shall it be done. For thou hear here: Where much goods are, there
are many to eat and consume them.

And what good comes to the Owners thereof. etc.
THis is an egregious mocking of Covetousness. Horace says: Thou lie gaping
and sleping over thy bags round about thee, and art compelled to spare the^
as though they were some religious stuff, and have none other joy in them,
but as in certain painted Tables. The same says also: Among all thy hourds
and heaps of riches, a very beggar. The same saying has Solomon: A Covetous
man has none other commodity, but to behold his florens, as I behold a
painted table, any thing more he has not. A covetous man can not use his money
to that end it was ordained, namely to eat, drink and clothe himself, and
to serve other men's turns with the rest. For to this end grows wine, corn,
gold, and silver, yt we should thus use it. But the flesh cares not, but
follows her own desires. Wherefore this follows of it, that he leads a
miserable life, without rest or quiet.

The sleep of him that traueleth is sweet, whether he eat little or much but
the sacietie of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.
Solomon proceeds in conde^ning riches, that is to say, the carke and care of
gathering and keeping of riches. For the more a covetous body gathers riches,
the more his mind is desired and enflamed. Always a covetous body is in
need, and in the myddle of his goods wants, yea covetousness is such a
monster says Salust, that neither with plenty, nor daintye it is diminished.
And as an other says: The love of money increases, even as the money it self
increases. Among these miseries of a covetous man, he rehearses yet one
other. Though a covetous man be never so full, yet he can not sleep. So that
all manner of ways a covetous man's life is miserable, being at rest neither day
nor night. For nature has so ordained that the body being temperately dyeted
and refreshed, sleapeth sweetly and quietly. For Dru^kards neither sleep nor
wake, being nether dead nor alive. And he ye labors moderately, sleeps
quietly, although he eat but a little, as was said: Man goes forth to his
labor until the Evening. The covetous continues his labor, even until
midnight wearieng, and breaking his body. The body therefore of the covetous
ouercharged with meat, and tired with labor, and the mind troubled with
cares, will not let him to sleep, or take rest. Moderate labor commanded.
Therefore seeing Solomon says to him that labors, he commands to labor,
and forbyddeth not to get goods. And where he says: Sleep is sweet, he
requires moderate labor, such as exercises the body, but tyreth it not.
Therefore he appoints to labor, and forbyddeth to be covetous and careful.
For the blessing of the Lord makes rich men, and not continual toil and
labor, as is said in the 126. Psalm. It is but lost labor that you rise so
early, etc. Again Thus God gives his beloved sleep. Thus Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David, Solomon, were made rich through gods gift and blessing. And they
so used their riches, that other were relieved also by them.

How we ought to use our goods.
Wherefore riches are not to be cast away, Offices are not to be given over, as
Epicures have taught, the wife is not to be cast of, nor the familye to be
forsaken, but we must take pain, and be content. We must be doing among
others, and take in good part whatsoever God sends. In what state God has
placed thee, there remain, only see thou go not about, to rule al things
after thine own prescription. In that state, what hurt happens not to thee,
take that for a vantage. For this life is so variable, ye we may every day
look for some evil or myshap. As for prosperity and good hap, comes without
our expectation. But when it comes, we must give God thanks for it, as for
some singular benefit. If we chance of an honest wife: if we happen to have
obedient children, let us thank God of it. If the magistrate rule the common
weal well and orderly, if the field yield his increase etc. we must take all
for a vauntage. But if it happen otherwise, vex not, frett not thy self. Thus
Solomon will not take us out of the world, but set us forward in it, A
doctrine how we ought to use our goods, and to bear the common miseries of
this life.
least we should imagine him to be like to Cratis or Diogines, which were
foolish despisers of the world, and of riches. For this is but an impious
saying of ye Philosophers, (...). Live like an hydden and unknown man. For
when they saw the world was ruled unjustly they thought it best to live
solitaryly, and not to meddle with publyke affairs, least they should be
compelled to see and suffer such unrighteousness. This saying of using and
bearing with ye world was unknown and hidden from all the Philosophers. But
seeing we have Solomon to teach us, let us do what we are able, and that we are
not able to do, let us let pass.

I have seen an evil sickness under the sun, to wit, riches conserved to the
owners for their evil. And these riches perish by evil travel, and he
begets a son, and in his hand is nothing.
THis also is a most vain misery in ye life of man, not come in deed to all
men, but yet such as is daily seen, how riches are reserved to the myschiefe
of ye master and gatherer. The goods of many are hurtful to ye owners.
Solomon complains that this is not only a mysery in such men, but also yt
we see such things come to pass in the world, though we be free from them.
Examples.
For how many have been privily slain in their own howses, in our days,
because of their riches. Had not the Duke of Bauarie in our days a great mass
of gold, George Duke of Bauarye.
a tower full of gold? But this gold purchased war unto ye Duke, and
calamity to the whole land. And scarce any Princes have left great riches
behind them, but they have been the destruction of the whole Country, as
Julius Caesar turned the Treasurye of Rome to the destruction of the City. Our
Bishops gathered treasure together, but only for a myschiefe, for none was
the better for them, and that causes the Burroes, and people of the Country to
rise. Now also they hold on in gathering, and fleecing of the people, but they
will not leave, till such come as shall take from them that they gather, with
their own destruction.

Shall we not yet cast riches away? No rather we must prepare riches,
specially Princes, We must get goods, but to our own and others godly uses.
but to the end to use them and relieve others, which because we do not,
therefore God suffers for a punishment those riches wherein they put their
trust, to be the destruction of the owners. So Ezechiel prophecieth against the
covetous and wicked Jews. They reached not out their hand to the poor,
therefore they shall be led into Captiuitye, and perish with their riches. The
same shall happen to other rich me^, covetous Bishops, and contempners of the
gospel, That that Christ will not take, the Chequere will.
because they will not let the poor have ye use of their riches, ye Soldiers
and Checquere shall come, and take that that Christ receives not.

They perish with great calamity.
HE suffers great misery. At home he is every day in danger of thieves,
abroad of Robbers, he is taken and killed. This song merchant me^ know full well.

And his borne of him shall have no possession of him.
THe reason is, because Sodom and Gomorra have riches, but they reach not
their hand to the poor: therefore ye Lord ouerturneth them etc. The covetous
gathers, and an other destroys that he gathers. The covetous thinks: my
son shall have these riches, but lo God sends thieves and Robbers, which
turn him out of all he has, so that neither he nor his son have any thing
left. Apply thy labor and ask and look for good success of God.
Wherefore we must follow labor, but look for the blessing of God, and relieve
the poor and needy: yea all our labor must be yt in the harvest, and at ye
grape gathering, we must sing and labor, and in the middell of our labor and
sweat be meary, and so affected, that we can be content to forgo all with a
good will, thinkinge thus: I will labor for me and my children, If God send us
any thing, we will use it. If any thing be left, let my son have it after me,
If nothing, God will find him and provide for him, as he has done for me.

Even as he came naked out of his mothers belly, so shall he return naked
again as he came, and shall bear away nothing of his labor. This is a vain
and miserable thing that in all points as they came they shall go again: and
what profit has he, that he has traveled for the wind?
THis also is in Job. the first chapter: How we should use our goods.
Naked I came out of my mothers womb. etc. Again in Paul 1. Tim. 6. We
brought nothing (says he) into the world, neither shall we carry any thing
out of the world. The rychest man in the world, can glory in no more, but
that he has eaten and dronke^ of his goods while he lived. etc. Since
therefore we carry nothing with us, let us bestow it on other, and use our
riches, as we use running water and the air. Let him think thus: As when I
dye I shall leave my riches, eue^ so shall I do while I am living. Why then
should I so carefully gather goods, since I shall have but a morsel of them my
self. The water I use thus, I wash me therewith, so do other. Look what we
do not need, the same do we suffer to pass by us. So use I fire and the
air. And so ought we to use riches, as Stewardes and bestowers of them only.

What profit has he that he has traveled for the wind?
To labor against the wind.
TO labor against the wind is an Hebrew phrase, which Paul has imitated. 1.
Cor. 9. I so fight not, as one that beats the air: And in ye 1. to ye Cor.
the 14. You shall be as me^ that speak in the wind. It signifies as much as
to speak in vain. So says Solomon: A covetous man labors in the wind,
that is, in vain: It is all l^st labor.

All the days of his life he eats in darkness, with much grief, sorrow and
anger.
What light and darkness signifies in the Hebrewe tongue.
Again, this is a phrase of the Hebrews. He eats in darkness, for he eats
in sadness. It is taken from the gesture and countenance of men: for when the
heart is heavy, then the eyes are ouercast, as it were with a cloud. But when
it is meary then is it lightened as it were with certain beams, and a new
light. This phrase is very often in the Psalm, light for mirth, and darkness
for sadness, as in the 27. Psalm: The Lord is my light, and my salvation.
Again: Lighten mine eyes. etc.

To eat therefore in drunkenness, is to labor in sadness. A covetous Artificer
finds always some matter to offend him and to chide at, What it is, to eat
in darcknes.
because he is full of cares and heaviness. he can not eat his bread in mirth,
he is always chyding, he always finds somewhat in his familye that greueth him.
So before the Prince and Magistrate are brought no matters but evil, there the
unwise magistrate vexes himself with care, because he sees his care and
study takes no better success. But the wise ruler says thus: I do and geeue
the best counsel that I can, I suffer that I can not redress, and am
compelled so to do, leaving it unto God, which only knows how to correct
all things at his pleasure, and to prosper our counsels.

So it greeueth us to hear among so many preachers, so few faithful and good,
and which love their charge with all their hearts. But what shall we do? Shall
we vex and fret our selves away with sorrow therefore? No not a whit. But let
us commit the matter unto God. etc. We must therefore acquaint our eyes and
ears to see and hear thoss evils that we would not, and not think to hear
and see the goodness, which would like us. The world will not suffer this
gear. He that would have nothing to offend him, shall find more things
than any other to offend him. Therefore let us so fence our selves against all
these evils, that we may know this is the course of this life. etc.

Therefore I see it is good for a man to eat and drink, and to be meary in
all his travel that he takes under the Sun, all the days of his life that
God gives him: for this is his portion. But this is the gift of God, when he
has given man riches and substance, and power to eat and drink his part
thereof, and to rejoice in his labor.
The conclusion of the whole book oftentimes repeated.
THis is the conclusion of all this book or disputation, declared also before
in the second and third chapiters. And here thou see that Salomo^ does not
condemn riches, nor forbid us to get riches, either meat or drink, but
calls them ye gifts of God, to teach us to cast our cares away, to look for
all these things at gods hand by faith, and when God will: patiently to take
the loss of them, as Abraham gave his son unto God. Therefore riches must not
be cast away: for God does not give us them to that end, to cast them away, or
to absteyne from them, but rather to use and deal them to those that need.
This sentence is the interpretation of the whole book, that Solomon forbids
all vain cares, that we should use things present mearily, being nothing
careful for things to come, least we lose our present benefit and commodity.

For this is his portion. etc.
THat is, the same is all that he has of it. For he remembers not the days
of his life. That is, his heart is not vexed with cares and heaviness, neither of
things past, ne yet to come: because God cheareth his heart. etc. Thus has he
joy in his labor, and in the middle of evils enters into Paradise. But the
ungodly and covetous, and as many as after this example use not these worldly
goods, begin here to be tormented, and thrown into hell. etc.

The sixth Chapter.
This is also an evil under the Sun, and much used among men: A man to whom
God has geeuen riches and treasures, and honor, and wants nothing for his
soul of all that he desires, and yet God suffers him not to eat thereof,
but a strange man shall eat it up. This is a vain thing and a miserable.
Of what rich and covetous man Solomon here speaks.
AFter this doctrine and exhortation intermedled, he returns to his roll of
the diverse devises of man's life, wherein vanity and misery reigns. It seems
like that he said before of the rich man. But here he speaks of such a rich
man as keeps much riches about him, and a great family, living in rest
without loss of his goods, and yet in the midst of his honor and riches, is
grieved, and can not enjoy them, because either he falls sick, or is vexed
with hatred and care how to keep and increase his goods. So with that he has
he is molested, and perishes. If he have a son, then comes another care,
how he may leave him a rich man, when he is of age. For as the proverb says:
for a small child there is but a small care, for a great child, great care.
They gather for their children, they desire to leave them rich, to bring them
to great honor. These are the wishes and desires of all me^, which yet are most
vain. For what is it for a man in his life to have al things, and yet to use
nothing, but always to gape after more, and that he has not, not regarding
that he has?

He describes therefore such a rich man as wants nothing to live welthely and
mearely with, and yet does not so. What manner of rich man he describes in
this place.
Look upon many of our noble men which might live commodiously upon their
own, having abundance of goods upon their lands, yet not contented
therewith, get them to Princes Courts, and look still for more, living most
miserablye. The like we may see in rich men and Marchaunts, who being able to
live at home quietly, with great danger of their life, and loss of their
goods, make great vyages both by land and Sea. Is not this a vain and
miserable trade? Therefore it follows:

If he beget an hundredth children, and yet live many years, and have great
riches all the days of his life, and yet his soul is not satisfied with goods,
and his body not buried: I say that an untimely fruit is better then he. For
he comes into vanity, and goes into darkness, and his name shall be covered
with darkness.
The miserable state of covetous men.
HE amplifieth ye misery of a covetous rich man. Let no man (says he) think by
sparing, to enriche his heirs. For riches are the gift of God, and come not of
our labor: for many labor carefully to get riches, and yet can not attain to
them. Again many wax rich, and have taken no great pain for them, that a
man may know riches are ye gift of God. Neither is it in thy power to leave
this or ye heir rich: It is meant that poor men shall not be rich. Do what
thou will, thou shall not enriche him whom God will have to be poor.
Furthermore it may come to pass, that this covetous rich man may dye, when he
has lost all his goods before.

And may want buryall.
HE holds on in exaggerating of his mysery, that is, he may be forsaken of
all his friends, or dye in an other country, and not at home.

I say that an untimely fruit is better then such an one.
THat is, it were better he were not at all, then to be such a miserable man,
and in such great store of goods, a beggar. This is true without godlynes.
Compare the life of a covetous rich man, and a wretch with him that is not yet
borne, and thou shall perceive it. And Salomo^ speaks not as fools use to
speak, as some say of this place, but sets out the life of fools, in the
outward body. There it is better not to be borne then to live in such sort:
that is to say, to have riches, glory, children, long life, and yet not to
enjoy them.

This therefore is truly understood of a miserable rich man, A rich man
couecous is a miser.
who has the things pertaining to felicity, and yet his wretched mind will
not suffer him to use them. Surely a poor man that takes his condition in
good part, is better then a rich: for the wayfaring man with never a penny in
his pursse, will sing as he goes by the way: but the rich man is afraid of
every bushe, and in great felicity is a very beggar. Therefore ye world is
altogether ruled by opinions, but God rules in deeds. We are vexed with
opinions, and lose the things their selves, like to that dog of Aesops that
we spoke of.

For he comes into vanity, and goes into darkness.
THat is, naked, destitute of all things and needy he came into the world, so
he lives, and so he dies: because he enjoys not his goods, but only is
troubled with care and desire of more. This is naught else, but to have nothing,
and to be bare and beggarly.

And his name shall be covered in darkness.
THat is, he does nothing worthy of name, or commendable in his house, but
only it is said of him, he was neither his own friend, nor other men's. Such
a miserable man, as no man would desire to follow.

Also he has not seen the Sun nor can be quiet in any place.
THis is an hebrewe phrase, What this phrase means to look on ye Sun.
to see the Sun, to enjoy and rejoice in things. For this corporal life
esteems yt (...) as a certain holy and sacred power, very necessary for man,
without the which all things appear and be sad and lumpish as Christ also
says: He that walks in the dark wotteth not whether he goes: But he that
walks in the day, stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world.
etc. It is a most joyful sight therefore to have the son to shine, but the
covetous man looks not on the son, considers not the son, that is, he
thinks not how good a thing the son is, nor any other creature to use and
enjoy it well. For with him all consideration of the benefits and creatures of
God is lost, by reason of ^^uetous desires, he never sees home goodly a gift
of god yt sun rising every day is. He myndeth nothing, he regards nothing, he
sigheth after nothing but money. So the ambitious man looks after nothing but
honors. The lover looks not upon his own wife, but always upon an other
man's. That is, they use not Gods present goods and creatures. Thus the ungodly
begin their hell in this life, wherein they are deprived of ye use of all the
creatures and gifts of god, so that they never see ye sun which yet we have
daily before our eyes. etc. that i^, they rejoice not in Gods gifts, but still
seek after their own desires.

Yea though he lived two thowsa^d years, yet has he no good life. Come not
all to one place.
The misery of a covetous man.
SEe how he amplifieth this misery of the covetous man: that is, he shall get
nothing, but the ^^nger he lives ye more his myseryes and comunities are
discreased. This is the life of man, more vanity and mysery, either such as
thou (...) be^^ thy self, or (...) others. For even the godly although they
live not after ye flesh, yet the flesh ^oubleth (...), and they are compelled
to feel the (...) of the flesh.

Do not all things go. etc.
HE repeateth that he said before in the first chapter, The son ryseth and
sets, and draws to his place where he rises. All things that have
beginning shall decay.
The Ryuers return to ye place from whence they flowed. One generation passes
away etc. All things return whence they came. At length all things perish.
Man's life, kingdoms, and whatsoever else belongs to man, returns from
whence it came, from ye earth to the earth, even as the wind blows to and
fro, and as the son returns to ye place where he arose. This therefore is
Salomons meaning, yt we must let go care and thought for things to come, and
enjoy the things present. Therefore he goes on.

All the labor a man takes is for him self, and yet his soul is never
satisfied acording to her desire
IN the Hebrew it is, all the labor of man is for his mouth, A mouth with the
Hebrews signifies a kind of measure.
by a a certain, phrase peculiar to yt people. So Moses, uses this word mouth,
for a quantity or measure. Genes. 47. speaking of Joseph. And he fed them,
and all his fathers house, giving the^ all meat, where in the hebrew it is: he
had a care for every mouth of them, that is, he provided all his fathers house
of meat, as it had been little children, which have their meat given them and
labor not. And in the 12. of Exodus You shall eat the Passover, according to
the mouth of every one, that is, according to the number of them that can eat
a Lamb. So speaks Solomon here. Every man's labor is according to his mouth,
that is according to the measure and task of him, yt is, every man has his
certain labor. God grants to every man his labor, according to his power,
and according to his vocation, which we express in the Dutch tou^g thus. Every
one has soch part as is appointed for him. God has measured to every man his
portion. A child must labor after one sort, a man after an other. A
magistrate in one kind, a pryuate man in another. He will have thee like an
infant, exercised in infants doings, and a Prince in high and weighty
affairs. Hereof comes this Proverb. Such person, such sloppe or breeche.

Every man must apply his vocation.
Thus he calls us from strange cares to our own vocation, not forbidding us
to labor, but declaring we must labor, willing us to go chearefully forward
with our business, according to our task, and leave other men's doings to
themselves. He will have us to take pleasure, but in God, that we run not at
riot with the ungodly, when we are in our pleasure, nor he grieved when pleasure
is wanting but to take all thing in good part. Rejoice (says he) in thy mind,
and take pain in body, so yet that you keep wtin thy compass, not like an
envious man, which seeks after ye which is other men's. The merchant prayseth
the Soldier, ye Soldier recounteth his infelicitie and prayseth the
merchant. Old men commend youth, we turn our eyes from ye pleasures we have
of our own, and with great misery, look on other men's. Be content with thine
own estate
No man can consider his own goods nor live content with his estate, for if
they could so do, they would not covet after other men's as they do. For if
old men considered the dangers that are in youth, they would not wish for
youth. Again, if young men saw the manifold incommodities of age, they
would bear their own inco^modities the more willingly, and would not envy old
me^ for their commodities. etc.

Who lyketh an others estate, hates his own.
But thus we can not do, but look always upon other men's commodities, and
despise our own. So the covetous rych man has an eye and desire to that he
has not, and that he has he neglects. For the soul is not filled, that is,
abides not within his compass. No man conte^teth him with his condition. A
beholder of an Interlude, thinks he could play better then those that play.
When I hear another preach I think I could far pass him. The servant
likewise thinks, if I were a king, I would govern all things prudentlie.
So that fellow that is in Terence says: I should have been made a king. And
yet if he had had a kingdom, none would have showed him self a more fool
then he. It is commonly said: a morraine to him that does better then he can.
But the mind forgets his own work and is most busy in another bodies, so
does he neither of both well. For he that looks not well to his own charge,
he will very ill look to another. God has given me occasion to be occupied
upon mine own, and in I leave mine own occupation, and busye my self with
other men's. This is truly ^ that he said before. The eye is not satisfied with
seeing. etc. Even so the soul or the heart, is not satisfied with coveting,
but is always inconstant and chaungeable.

For what has the wise man more then the fool, or what profyteth it the
poor, that he knows how to walk before the Living.
THat is, covetousness, Of what wise men and fools Salomo^ speaks.
to have more the^ is appointed us, troublesh as well the wise men, as the
fools, and wise men herein do nothing differ from fools. For both of them
covet to much, and both of them covet that that other men have. He
understands such men as be not wise in deed, but those that be wise after a
worldely sort. And by fools, he means wicked and ungodly men. The subtle
crafty and reachelesse people.

Both of them (says he) have their travel and labor appointed, beyond the
which they shall be able to do no good. The one will bring it as far as the
other. For one may think or say thus* if I were in office or authority, I
would do many things, but if he were in deed in office, he would do as
ly^le, as he y^ is in office already.

Or what profits it the poor?
HE understands by the living, those he spoke of before: not only those yt
have life, but those that enjoy the life: that is, those which live welthely
and well. He says therefore yt it is a folysh thing for private men, to
prescribe other how to order and govern all things, dreaming that they could
do all things better then other, where in deed there is nothing done, but
that that ought to be.

The sight of the eye is better then to walk after lusts. This is also a
vanity and vexation of Spirit.
A looking glass.
ALl this is an Hebraicall kind of speech to us utterly unknown. The Hebrew
word properly signifies a looking glass, yt is a thing coming toward our
eyes or sight. For thus we read in Exodus. 38. He made the Lauer of brass,
and the foot of it of brass, of the looking glasses of the women, that
watched at the door of the Tabernacle. This should thus be translated in the
hebrewe. He made a lauer etc. in the sight of those that watched before the
door of the Tabernacle of witness. For this people had certain women votaries,
which continued in prayers and supplication, watching and seruyng God day and
night, as we read in the first of kings, and second of Luke, that Anna
watched. Of this watching, Women watching in ye temple of the lord.
the women were called the host of the Lord, watching before the door of the
tabernacle of witness. Afterward in process of time, the religion decayed,
and as Judas says, was turned into wa^tonnes. So of Rachel ye wife of Jacob it
is said, she was comely to the glass, that is, to sight, or to look upon:
she was fair or pleasant in sight. The meaning therefore is: We must enjoy
things present, and not seek. after things away.
It is better to enjoy ye things in sight, and before our eyes, the^ to wa^der
after our lusts and desiers, that is, use the things thou have, and let not
thy wit wander about coveting of that, like Aesops dog, who catching at the
shadow, lost the meat in his mouth. That which God has set as it were before
thee, that use and be content, and follow not the desire of thine heart, which
can not be satisfied, as he said before. Understand therefore by the sight of
the eyes, not such as thine eyes make to thee, but such as is made to them of
other things, a passive sight: that is, use that that God for the time present
gives thee. Thus of God it is said in the first of Genesis God saw all that he
had made. etc. that is, he reioysed in his works, he stuck unto them, he saw
them, they pleased him, they were very good.

He reprehe^deth unstable minds, desirous of other men's welfare.
So he that is godly, cleaves to that is his own, and that that God has given
him for that time present lyketh and pleases him. The ungodly does not so, but
is vexed with all he sees, because he uses it not as a glass, but wandereth
still in his mind. Though he have money, he is not delighted therewith, he
enjoys it not, but always desires more. He has one wife, and desires
another: he has one kingdom, and is not content therewith. Alexander looks
and desires for another world. All things ought to be as a looking glass
unto us, to delight in them, to fix our eyes on them, to enjoy them and give
God thanks for them. Therefore he forbids us to let our soul wander about,
(as it is in the Hebrewe) that is to occupy our minds in the cogitations and
opinions of worldly things, so that ye conclusion of this whole place is: use
the things thou have, and wander not about in diverse cogitations. for this is
a vanity, namely to let thy mind wander and walk about.

What is that that has been? The name thereof is now named, and it is known
that it is man: and he cannot strive with him, that is stronger then he.
BY the things gone before, There shall be always unstable me^, covetous, and
desirous of other men's goods.
this is sufficiently understood, for we spoke of this phrase before: What is
that that is. etc. In all these words are Hebrewe phrases, which thing we thus
speak in the German tongue: As it has been, so is it now: and as it is now,
so will it be hereafter. That is, there shall be always most vain men,
desirers and wyshers for vanities, because they go beyond the word of God, and
their appointed state. For they harken not to ye counsels of God. God has made
a difference of men, and appointed to all men their bounds, when they shall be
borne, Every ma^s trade of life is appointed of God.
when they shall die, by what name they shall be called, and what office they
shall bear: and when they are borne, he offreth them things to use presently
and out of hand. But me^ being not contented with the ordinance and counsel
of God, choose them most times other ways, and covet other things but in
vain. For none but God alone brings that to pass, that he thinks or
deuyseth.

The meaning thereof is: What is that that is, etc. That is what is man now
living, or that shall be borne hereafter. Since that, that man is ordained to,
is all ready appointed, and what name he shall have. Understand here, that
name, that he has by his deeds, whereof he shall be called, as ye name of
Caesar is to be a Conqueror, the name of Catiline, a Murderer of his own
Countrymen etc. These names I say are so appointed, and so called with God
before we were borne. Even so it was appointed yt one should be a showmaker,
one a parish priest, another a preacher etc. If therefore these names and
offices were appointed and known before, why does man wander about in his own
opinions why takes he so many things in hand, and desires such excess? Why
meddleth he beyond his bounds and mark? For he does nothing but trouble him
self more and more.

For he can not strive with him that is stronger then he.
THat is with the thing that is above his reach. All things ordained and
appointed of God.
For all things have their foundation upon Gods law and ordinance. The very
heathens saw that thing were not governed by the counsel of the wise, but
attributed the doing to desteny, or to fortune, and not to God. So Solomon in
this place has an eye to the course of this world. As things do pass in the
world. There he sees, that me^ can not compass and bring to pass that they
desire and take in hand. The reason is, because the self same things withstand
them. They will not be in subjection nor be ruled by our counsels, As if one
would strive to have his own deuyse to go forward he preuayleth not, the
thing wythstandeth him, God stops him. In vain therefore we wince against
the prick, to as small purpose as if we would run through a wall with our
head. For that that is stronger then he, and above him withsta^deth his devise,
as Anthony would have brast through his enemies, when he came into Italy, and
made his two sons kings, one of the East, the other of the West, but he was
disapointed thereof. See how Caesar was put by his cogitations and devise.
Neither has the Popes enterprises succeeded: because their names were given
them before and appointed, they went beyond their bounds. So they straue
against a stronger then they, and so gat nothing thereby, but care, sorrow, and
calamity.

Be content with thine estate.
Because therefore thou see that all things are appointed by a law and
ordinance, both thy name and office, and yet not contented therewith, striuest
against it, thou rowest against ye stream, and shall not prevail, although
thou counfell and do many things never so wisely, but only multipliest
words: nothing more will come of it saving that it may he talked of. Thus Plato
wrott many things, so did Aristotle likewise touching the ordering and
governing of commonweals etc. but they are but mere words, and remain words
whereof nothing follows. Afterward when they saw they could not prevail,
they were desirous to help ye matter with other laws and devises, and said,
would to God we had taken this way first, being wise too late.

Therefore the stories as well of ye Gentiles as of the Jews teach us, that men
beyond their appointed stente and bounds can do nothing, The doctrine coming
by histories.
whether they be wise or foolish, but the stories of ye Jews were done in
the word of God, and teach us that all things are done by Gods ordinance,
and therefore it is good for us to stick to them. Otherwise the stories of the
Gentiles are as great and wonderful as they, but done beside ye word of God.

For who knows what is good for man living in the days of his vain life,
which is but a shadow? Or who will tell a man, what shall happen after him
under the Son?
THat is, no man knows what is good for him in this life. They know not how
to enjoy their goods, No man knows what is expedient for him in this life.
nor how to settle and quiet their mind. Men's devises are variable. One
seeks for rule, another for riches, and yet they know not, whether they shall
have. They enjoy neither the things they have, nor those they wish. Only
they desire that commodity and felicity, that they neither have nor see. This
is a general conclusion upon al men. None knows what is meet and convenient
for him. So Cicero and Demosthenes, when they had written much of a common
weal, and would have set ye same forward with their devises, they most
vnluckelie governed the same. The monks also and Papists would rule all the
world, and lo they seduce it, and drown it in grievous dangers and deep
darkness.

Or who shall tell a man what shall happen. etc.
The success of things is not in our power.
HE speaks not of that that shall happen after this life, but what is like
shortly after to follow the use of things present. There no man knows what
is to come, whether Antony shall live or not, whether Brutus and Callius shall
have the victory or not, when Julius came to be Emperor, he devised how to
establish and make sure the kingdom to him and his, but he perished in the
myddest of his cogitations, why then so trouble we our selves with such
thoughts, seeing things to come be at no time in our appointing and power? Let
us therefore be content with things present, and commit our selves to the
hands of God, who alone has known, and does know to rule and govern both
things passed, and things to come.

The Seventh Chapter.
A good name is more worth then a precious oyntement, and the day of death is
better then the day of birth.
THis place seems hard because of ye ignorance of the Hebrewe tongue,
Consolations and exhortations, entermedled in the account of vanities.
which has her figures that ca^ not be understood but after the use of the
tongue: and it seems no manner of way to agree with the things that are gonne
before. Me thinks that this is the sum and meaning of the place, that
Solomon will comfort men that are impatient in these vain devises, as hitherto
he has done after he has recited a sort of worldly vanities, to intermire
some consolation and exhortation to the fear of God, that our heart might rear
it self up unto God to harken to his word, and not to be to swift of our
tongue. etc. So here again he intermedleth a certain exhortation after his
rehearsed Roll, meaning afterward to return to his Roll again.

An exhortation to patience.
Let this place therefore serve for a place of exhortation or consolation for the
impatient man, inserted and set in the mydle of the rehersall of vain desires
and devises. For in this life the heart of man finds nothing but offenses, and
impatiencie specially those that are good men, because as he said before: He
that joins knoledge to him self, joins to labor. He that hears and
sees many things, has occasion to take much indignation, and sorrow, Because
he sees and finds that it vexes his heart. Look upon Timon who did
degenerate into a beast, and became a manhater, and enemy of mankind, after
he perceived he had nothing but envy and persecution, for the great benefits
he bestowed upon his country men. The like might happen again to an other,
seeing of all his labor and travel, he reapeth naught but unkindness. For his
heart may be so broken, that he he will leave of and travel no more.

These things Solomon speaks of good me^ which desire ye all things should
do well. Many wearyed with ye malice and ingratitude of men, leave their
vocation.
Such as are magistrates and governors over housholdes, not of fools which
regard not wisdom, nor care not how the world goes. For they that are
governors of the common weal and Rulers of families find great deceit and
falshode in men. This thing has frayed many men from intermedling with
publyke Offices, So that old man in Terence counted it an happy thing to be
without a wife. An other again said: I have married a wife, what misery have I
found therein, children come, cares increase. etc. Man's mind is offended with
all these things, unless it be armed aforehand with the word of God. Therefore
they that saw these things, said: He lives well that lives close and hid.
etc. But Christians must be exhorted to live in ye middle of these troubles, to
marry wives, to rule their family. etc. And if their purposes shall be
interrupted through the naughtines of man, to take it patiently, and not to
leave of a good work. Forsake not thy standing, but abide in it. Be not
discouraged with sorrow or impatience, nor ouercommed of anger. This is
therefore a joyful and very godly exhortation, but such as none geeueth ear
to, but only ye true Christians.

A good name is not gotten, but with great labor, and bearing of many troubles.
He begins this consolation with a proverb, saying: Better is a good name.
etc. after his accustomed manner: for Solomon is full of proverbs. This is it
he means: I have now rehearsed so many vanities in ma^s life, that a man
might despair and wish rather to die, the^ to see and suffer so many miseries
and calamities, or else to give over all pains taking, and to do nothing: but
not so, give not over, but hold on. Fare not as one that looks for no name
and fame: think that thou shall purchase thy self a name, if thou continue in
thy standing, whether thou be public or private person. Behold what a
sluggishe life they lead, which live for themselves alone. Therefore be not
ouercome^ of these adversities but stand against them. For it is better thou
prove a man of great name, an example to other, or commodity to thy self,
then to be an idle and singgishe drone, profitable to no body: for a good name
happens not to idle persons and sluggards, but to stout and courageous men:
Such as be courageous and wrestle, through. S. Hierom reprehe^ded.
etc. S. Hierome, because he would seem to fly the world and company of
people, fled from Rome and came to Bethlehem, because he would live here a
solitary man, and yet he was desirous of a name, but his heart was not firm and
strong enough. For he was very impatient, and had nothing less then a manly
courage. A good name compared to an odorifecous ointment.


He says therefore that a good name is better then a precious ointment. Name
in this place again signifies fame. And this proverb must be understood
after the use of things in Jury. In this kingdom only grows that precious
ointment called Balsamum, or balm. And oyntmentes among this people were
esteemed for the precioust things of the kingdom, as we may see in the books
of the kings. Wherefore this was a fit and apt proverb among the Jews, but
not among other nations, with whom perhaps precious stones are in more price.
This is therefore a metaphore. As a precious odor and smell delights ye nose,
so does a good name delight the spiritual smell and favor. This metaphore S.
Paul commends 2. Corinthians. 2. saying: We be the sweet savor of Christ etc.
For Paul was a good teacher, and sincere preacher, and in his conversation
faultles.

The meaning of this place.
The meaning therefore of this place is: Be not ouercommed of anger. As I have
taught thee to stand in fear before God, so I teach thee to continue in good
works before men. For what though some be offended and envy at thy labors?
continue thou still on, and the good savor and good name, thou shall get
thereby, shall allure thee more to apply and follow thy labor.

Better is the day of death, then the day of birth.
An exhortation to bear patiently the inco^modities of this life.
I Think this also is spoken prouerbially. It seems to taste of gentilitie,
and the flesh, to prefer death before life. But he speaks not simply of
life and death, but of such things as are to be done, and are done even of ye
wysest me^. Show me a man in office, or ruler of a house and family, and let
him say, if it were better to wish death, then to live in so many dangers and
toils? Salomo^ therefore compares this life to himself, and not to the life
to come, and says: If we shall consider the life of man, then it is true that
the day of death is better then the day of birth. For what greater evil can
happen to a man, then that those which are in office, and do all they can with
all their heart for the behoof of the common weal, and suffer whatsoever
things for the commonweals sake, yet at the length find nothing but all
kind of ingratefulnes, contempt, loss, banishment. etc.

Thus the text is not simply to be understood as it sou^deth, that he
speaks not of Gods works, nor of the life that is after this life, but of
worldly matters as we use and handle them, whereof we receive nothing but
occasions of anger and impatiencie. For the day of our birth brings us into
these miseries, and death delivers us from them. Man's birth is a good thing,
and a creature of God: neither does Solomon speak thereof, but of the use of
it. For as my nativity is the creature of God, and as I use it, they are
things different. We of our nativity have nothing but cares: not through our
natiuities default, but through our own, and by reason of the naughtines of the
world, which abuses the creatures of God. Even so our life, as it is the
creature of God, belongs not to this book. For of it to say, death were
better then it were a most impious thing, considering God has made us men, and
would have us to live. This therefore is but an exhortation, that we should
not despair: but be of good courage, to bear out these misfortunes, even as
he should say: Suffer, bear, yield not to these adversities, but rather
resist and withstand them.

It is better to go into a house of mourning, then into a house of feasting.
For there is the end of all men.
Sufferings are instructinges.
THis is spoken by way of a sentence. For of these two proverbs, he makes his
sentences and exhortations. A fool would affirm the contrary. Busye not thy
self with mourning, and meddle not with any heauynes of life (as Hierome
followed the single life for a pleasant thing) but Solomon says otherwise,
to bear the cross and to go into the mourning house is better. For in this
house we behold what the end is of all men, and of the world. All things are
full of grief and sorrow, as well in publycke government as private regiment,
but it is better to bear this cross, then to fly it. Trouble brings
understanding.
For he that is occupied in mourninge and mortification, acquainteth him self
to dye, he desires to live no longer, but dies with a good will. He that is
not acquainted herewith, but will always be at feasts, without the cross,
his mind is not enured, and he dies with great sorrow and stands in extreme
danger. But he that is occupied and enured and exercised herewith, he can well
away with it. Such a one will be a man.

He says therefore: Adversity must be suffered with good courage, and petition
and seeking of gods help.
although the fool does and desires the contrary hereof, yet leave not thou
of thy hold, content thy self although thou have more trouble then joy. It is
better to bear out misfortunes then to yield to them. For in that thou
suffrest the^, thou shall get ye a good name for it shall be said: this is a
stout and valiant man, he has stand fast in the middell of adversities. This
fellow is able to vanquish all the assaults of the world and the dyuell. For
in the mydle of these myschiefes, man learneth to contemn them as Ouyde says:
That that thou can not bear, if thou use thee to it, thou shall bear, and
away with it well enough. Even as the woman that drank poison dyed not of it,
because she used to drink it. And as the proverb says: known mischiefs are
best. We must not therefore so fly, and abhor adversities, considering we
know that the end of all me^ is to have envy, flaunder, myseryes and death.
Therefore if you wilt wade through them all, thou must learn these things by
continual use. Such griefs come upon fools unlooked for, but to the Godly by
reason of long use they seem light, as unto whom this world is counted but as
donge, and death seems pleasant. And in that they live, they live only for
gods sake, which will have them so to live.

And the living shall lay it to his heart
THe living is he that lives in wealth and pleasure. The natural life, What
this phrase, to live, means among yt Hebrwes
the Hebrews commonly call the soul, and ye usual and pleasant life, they
call to live. He truly expresses what the experience of adversity does,
namely that he that lives in pleasure, lays it to his heart, that is, yt he
is compelled in mind or heart, to learn by such adversities. And he that will
not suffer adversity learneth nothing, and so remains still a fool.

Anger is better then laughter, for by a sad look, the heart is made better.
THis is all one saying with that before. Why sadness is preferred before
laughter: for the mind of man ryoteth in prosperity.
But how agrees this with that he said before? We must not be angry, but
rejoice in all our labor. And here he says anger is better then laughter? I
answer. He speaks rather of sadness then anger, not that foolish sadness
which men counterfeit. But even as he speaks of the house of mourning, so he
speaks of anger, so that anger is a kind of sadness, or grief, yt causes a
kind of heauynes, as when it was told David that all the kings children were
slain, he fell sadd. There is the same word, that is in this place, which
surely can not there signify anger, but heauynes, so that it is all one with
that we say in the Dutch tongue. He was abashed and much troubled. Adversities
dusken the countenance, and make it heuye. So he that is in office public, or
pryuate, Such a one can leave his laughing, so that he be a good man and will
do his duetye truly, there shall he find such grief, that he shall be
compelled to say. The devil be a burrow master or governor, for there is
nothing but more sorrow and trouble in it.

Such sorrows cause sadness in the countenance of those men as wish all things
well, in so much that they thus reason and think: cease of, give over, thou
nothing preuailest, but gettest thy self grief and envy. Here Solomon
withstandeth these things, counsels, and warns thee, saying: yield not,
but go thorough with it. For it is better thou take indignation and be sad,
that thou must bite away the same laughing, that thou show heaviness in thy
countenance and behavior, and that thou be compelled to show it (namely by
reason of grief) then to laugh. The reason is:

Because thorough a sad countenance, the heart is made better.
THis may be understood two ways: first, through a sad countenance, With
gravity men are amended, with leuitie they are offended.
the heart, to say, of others is amended. So Paul in a Bishop requires
gravity in manners and conversation, that he offend not men by reason of
lightness. etc. So Solomon would have him that is in authority, to rejoice in
heart, but to show himself grave outwardly, that other might thereby be
amended. For if a man behave himself in such wise, yt his heart be meary, and
his countenance grave, so that he show no lightness in his apparel and
gesture, him will other fear and reverence, and his family will be of no
dissolute demeanor.

Secondly it may thus be expounded. A man may be meary at heart, and yet grave
in countenance.
In an heavy countenance the heart goes well, that is, there is no cause, but
ye heart may be meary, although the countenance outwardly be heavy, so that the
meaning may be thus: It is better to lead a grave and severe life, the^ a
light and dissolute. The Hebrews call laughing such a kind of life as our
Papists lead, which live most dissolutely, contemning and deriding all
things. And this meaning pleases me better, then that whereby it is thought
that the heart of a fool or godles body can be corrected by any ma^s sadness or
gravity. It may seem that a wicked body fears the gravity of an other, but
his heart is all one still.

A mean must be kept between mirth and sadness.
I take this saying therefore to be understood of thine own heart, that in the
middle of troubles it may be good. It is an Hebrew phrase, a good heart, for a
pleasant and meary heart. And Solomon speaks after this sort to dyrect his
hearer to the mark of his meaning, that is, to teach them to be meary,
howsoever ye world goes. But where before he said: It is good to rejoice. etc.
here he seems to affirm a contrary: Sadness is better then laughter. Surely
these two seem not to agree: but godly matters are always difficulte, they
are always wrested to a contrary sense. If we teach that nothing justifies
but only faith, then ye wicked neglecte all good works. Again: if we teach,
that faith must be declared by works, then they attribute justification to
works. A fool always swerueth too much on one side. So hard a thing it is to
keep the high way. So here Solomon requires neither sadness alone, nor mirth
alone, but will have a mean kept between them both. The mind must be meary,
at liberty settled, bearing it self even in worldly matters, betyde
whatsoever, adversity or prosperity.

In the sadness of the countenance. etc.
AS if he should say: I distinguishe between sadness of countenance, and
sadness of heart. I will have all me^ meary in heart inwardly: for it can not be,
but outwardly some sadness will happen. As the Apostle says 2. Cor. 6. As sad,
and always meary. etc. so that the one must be referred to the outward sadness,
the other to inward.

The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in
the house of mirth.
ALl these things seem contrary to that he has said before, except we make a
difference between these two, ye inward mirth and the outward, and inward
sadness and outward. He contynueth on in co^forting and exhorting, saying:
follow not those fools, which change their minds with every change of
things, and in heart cleave to them, they be meary in prosperity, but when
adversity comes, they mourn and are sad.

In the house of mourning.
Fools give themselves to mirth, but wise men study how to avoid adversity.
THe Hebrews call a house, not that building only which is made of timber and
stone, but what place so ever any thing is done in. So with their Grammaria^s,
every letter is a house of words that begins with the same letter. But why
is the heart of the wise in the house of mourning? Because wise men are not
ouercomed of adversity, neither change with every alteration. Fools follow
outward mirth, and fly aduersytie, a most troublesome kind of men, taking
many things in hand with great rashenes and feruencie, and when never so little
trouble appears, give over. Where things succeed with them, they go through
the stiche with it, where not, their heart is in their hose, and away they
run? Wherefore they are neither good to bear office public, nor yet to have
any private regiment, forasmuch as in no kind of life, men can live without
incommoditye and griefs. But the valyant mind and heart of the wise bears
out all bruntes, and passes through ye pikes of all adversity. It is to be
noted where he says: the heart of the wise, and the heart of the fool. For he
judges according to affections, and not the things their selves. The heart of
the fool looks always to mirth and pleasure, the heart of the wise to
aduersitye and myshap: notwithstanding the wise man many times has
prosperity, and the fool aduersitye. Therefore these are confirmations and
exhortations of good men.

It is better to hear the rebuke of wise men then the song of fools. For the
laughing of fools is like the cracking of thorns under a pot. This also is
vanitye.
HE calls the opinions of fools, The rebukes of ye wise must be patiently
borne.
a song, by a trim figure. Neither must it be transferred or understood of
Music, no more then that which goes before of outward banqueting, but of
the whole conversation of man's life, after the manner of the Hebrews, and
according to their figure. And rebukes are doctrines and exhortations towching
things to be done. This therefore he says* Although thou seem to prevail
nothing, yet must thou go forward with that thou have in hand, and not cease
from rebuking, although fools will give no ear: to the which thing Paul. 2.
Timoth. 4. thus uttered: Reprove, rebuke, be instant in season, and out of
season. I have taught and do teach that this world is vain, and that things
can not be ordered after our counsels and deuyse. etc. When a fool hears
these rebukes, he draws them an other way. Let us then do nothing says he.
But we must not cease for all this, neither from doing, nor from rebuking of
vanities, neither from teaching and preaching, howsoever we seem to be
contented, but must burst through all impedime^ts and rebuke the ungodly. If I
should have left of preaching of the word, because I see small fruit of the
word but among a very few, and great peruersenes and ingratitude of all the
world, I should long sythens have held my peace. But God does wisely which
lets us not see or perceive such things before we are in the middle of our
course, when we can not come back again. And much better it is to be enuyed
with these evils, then to leave of. Therefore it is more profitable to hear
the rebukes of the wise, which wish us well, then the singing of fools: that
is those things which the flesh hears willingly, and which are pleasant to
fools. For only they desire of us, to speak to them all things that may
please them. To be brief, Solomon treats with us to this end, that we
should not wax ere the slacker, or cease from doing, through occasion of this
foresaid doctrine.

For like as the cracking of thorns under a pot, so is the laughing of a fool.
LAughing signifies the whole life of a fool, wherein he delights, What
laughing means.
but it is but an outward visure of mirth, no true Joy of ye heart. But there
is a merueilous lykenes between the laughing of fools, and cracking of
thorns. The Jews abound in similitudes, which they take from things among
the^. For they were still occupied in baking and keeping of ^ier by reason of
their continual washinges and Sacrifices etc. For their priests were very
butchers and Cooks. Hereof sprang that proverb of the cracking of thorns in
the fire, both here and in the Psalms. This seems to us an hard thing,
because it agrees not with our usage, even as our proverbs seem hard to
them, as when we say. Copper money, copper soul mass, although it be in use
with us, and taken from our religion, yet would not they at all understand it.

Therefore all this place almost, is as a certain allegory taken from the fire
of thorns, which is a fire by and by, and full of crackling, but is soon done.
There is more flame and blase in it then fire. It threateneth a great fire, but
as soon as ye blase and sound is done, the fire is out. So in the Psalm:
They are extinct as the fire among the thorns. And Virgil in the third book
of his Georgikes: As sometime a great fire in the stubble without any force,
makes great ado. etc. Therefore the fire of briars or thorns, gives no heat,
it pearceth not, and yet it has a greater show then a fire of coals, which
has not much blase in it, but very great heat. So the mirth of fools has a
show as though it would endure continually, and to have as much force in it,
as it has flame: but there is nothing less, because they joy but for a
season: for when adversities come, they are dashed, and all things lie in
despair. Thus I think the sentence is clear, and very well agreeing with that
which goes before, and that which follows.

This also is a vanity.
BEcause after the end of mirth, grief and trouble remains in the mind.
After this sort is all carnal mirth, it ends in trouble, and leaves behind
it a king stinges.

For a sclaunderer troubles a wise man, and destroys a liberal or
bountiful heart.
THis also serves for a place of consolation. A comfort ye we ought not to be
wearied with the sclaunders and ungratefulness of men.
This is spoken by way of concession or grant: that is, it may come to pass
that a sclaunderer may trouble a wise man, and destroy the heart of ye gift
(for so it is in the Hebrew) that is, the bountiful and liberal heart. For
where a wise man goes about by his counsel to provide the best he can for the
world, and does all things very well: yet fools speak ye worste they ca^ of
him, and he has nothing but unkindness for his pains. The histories both of
the Gentiles and of the Jews declare the same, yea daily experience. Thus
Antiochus filthily put to death a man that had done very much for him, having
first slain his two children before his face. This verily was the reward that
he had for his good deserts. Justinian the Emperor most unjustly slew
Bellisarius a very good man and a wise. All writings are full of like
histories.

Wherefore he that will covet to bear rule either in the common weal, or in ye
house, must look to lose his benefit, as well as God that loses his benefit
of ye son, and all other his gifts upon unkind and wicked persons. Math. 5.
So sclaunder destroys a liberal heart, in so much that impatiencie causes
him to think to leave of his doing, and makes him through ingratitude to
become a fool, unless his heart be instructed in the word of God. Thus wise men
sometime do, as Hierome says: Patience oftentimes offended, rages. And man
ca^ do none other, but God can. God has given the son, kingdoms, and
principalities to wicked men. etc. What do they again? how requite they him?
They crucify his son. Here is the thanks he has. This can he suffer, but
me^ can not. For it happens to them as Solomon here says: Sclaunder
troubles the wise man, and destroys a liberal heart. But be not thou
ouerco^med of ill, but hold on: For:

The end of a matter is better then the beginning.
THat is, perseuerau^ce to the end gets the crown. We must continue to the
end, and bea^e out all adversity.
Wait for the end: and it consists not in the beginning but in continuance
to the very end. It is much better to attain to the end, then to give the
onset. For no man shall have praise before his last day. Not he that begins,
but he that holds on shall be safe. That I speak in matters of religion, the
same is to be said of all other things, according to that common saying: A
hott beginning, a warm middle, and a cold ending: So does it lie even among
the ashes. We Germans specially are reproved for this fault, because we are
desirous of new-fanglednes. We take many things in hand, we go forward, and
continue in none, and specially this falls out with us in doctrine, where
every day we embrace strange opinions. But this is the inconstancy of man's
heart. Therefore we must not think so much of ye beginning as of the end.
Wherefore see that thou hold on: thy wisdom shall be sclaundered, thou shall
find ingratitude, men shall forget thy benefits and good deserts, they shall
backbyte thy counsels and devises, and requite thee evil for good. Wherein, if
thou be a shrumpe and white lyuered, thou shall give over. But go thou on
courageously, hold out, for God at length shall geeue fruit and increase to
thy labor.

The Patient in spirit is better then the high minded.
HE continues still in his exhortation. In man's affayrs it is always required
to consider the end. Hastines must be avoided.
To this purpose the proud mind is not best, which by and by is changed and
will have all things done at once, and upon the head and spur, but the meek
sprited, which by patience and bearing can overcome all impedimentes, that lie
in his way, which thing we are taught by these sayings of ye wise. Make not to
much haste. Suffer and endure. etc.

Be not hastyly angry in thy mind, for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
THis is a copiousnes of Solomon exhorting us to hold one in ye we have
begone, Anger must be brydled.
howsoever our devises go not forward. He speaks of the anger of the mind
as before he spoke of outward anger. Be not carried away hedlong with anger,
although occasions of anger happen, Let fools be angrye Fools have anger both
in heart and outwardly. But keep thou thy mind meary, though outwardly thou
seem severe.

Anger rests in the bosom of fools.
THis is an hebrewe phrase, which we thus utter in Dutch: Anger is proper unto
fools, that is, they will easily or sone be angry.

Say not thou, why is it that the days of old time were better then these?
For thou do not inquire wisely of this thing.
The days are always (...), and ye world set on naughti^^^.
THis thing the heart of man goes about to search when it sees the unkindness
of the world, It is worse then ever it was before. Say not thou so, for this
is no wise question or demand. Thus use old men to say: When I was a boy,
all things were better then they be now, as says the Poet: A prayser of the
time passed. But Salomo^ says it is false. It went not well to work. For ye
reason why thou dyddest not see it, nor perceive it before now is, for that as
our years increase, so experience of things, and occasions of anger increase.
For a child cares not, nor is not enuyed, though one man deceive an other or
kill an other etc. but holds on his play, rides up and down, hunteth and
thinks it a great fault, for one to steal an others ball or bowl away, then
he is angrye. But when he comes to keep house, there he finds grief,
vntrustines of his servants, their if his horse break his leg, and his ox
be not well fatted, he is angry in deed.

Therefore ye world was always naught, but we were not always in ye world, nor
be not. When we were children, we felt no trouble, we were in a quieter kind
of life, but the world was always like it self. This in deed is true, that
naughtines bursteth out in one age more then an other, but this comme^th so to
pass, because there are many times greater occasions and chances thereof then
at other. But the naughtines of the world is always one. Julius Caesar, made
all the world to shake, because occasion and time served him, which occasion,
if Esau or Absolon had had, they would have done the like. Therefore the same
naughtines is always in the world. Wherefore see thou settle and quiet thy
mind that thou be not angry, when thou see these evils. It is not in thee to
alter the world, but take thou heed, that thou be not altered into an other
man.

Wisdom is good with an inheritance, and excellent to them that see the
son. For wisdom defends, and so does money. But wisdom is much better,
for it gives life to him that has it in possession
We must discharge the duties of our vocation, and commit the success unto God.
Solomon labors chiefly here, to improve that doltishnes that some allege
when they hear religion taught. If (say they) all our endeavor and studyes be
condemned, then let us do nothing, let us sit still like sluggardes. But
Solomon replyeth saying: I condemn not riches, neither allow I sluggishnes,
yea I allow both riches and wisdom, but I prefer wisdom before riches,
because she gives life unto man. Howbeit men's devises in compassing of riches
and other things I condemn. Neither be thou (say I) too busy, nor too idle,
neither be thou a fool, nor yet wise: Nether prevails, that is, bring not
thine own fetches and forecasts, nor follow them not in getting of riches, or
wisdom, but have a care to that, yt God would have cared for, and cast away
thine own devises which are naught but vanity. For the wisdom of God is not
set before thee to ye end thou should do after thine own wisdom, but
look up into heaven, that God may work these righteousnesses and wisdoms.
etc. Thus therefore he both condemns man's deuyses in compassing whatsoever
things: and yet, he exhorts them to be doing forthwyth in ruling and
governing of things, and to wait for Gods aid and helping hand, where they
perceive they succeed not etc. For if thou wylt follow and set forward thine
own devises, thou shall receive naught but vanity and trouble of mind. etc.

Wisdom with inheritance is better then they that see the Sun.
TO see the sun, Wisdom must be preferred before riches.
is to be meary and rejoice in this life, or to live pleasau^tly. This he
means: wisdom with inheritance passes all the pleasant life in the
world. And he makes a comparison: wisdom defends, and so does money, as
we say: Goods do encourage, that is, they that have riches, have trust, they
that have wisdom have trust (these be things granted) but yet make I a
difference between them. For herein wisedomo passes riches or money, that
wisdom brings life to the owner. This is not money able to do, it neither
keeps life, nor delivers from death. This he says, because he would not
seem utterly to condemn riches, but only the abuse of them. Then he
prefers wisdom, because it saves the owners life.

Behold the works of God. Who can make straight, that he has made crooked?
Men's affairs can not always be redressed by our deuyses.
HE concludes all this place, which he took in hand for the comfortyng of
impatient and angry me^, with a trim sentence. Why says he, art thou angry?
why art thou so impatient with ungrateful me^? Behold ye works of God, how
no man can make that straight, that he has made crooked, let this comfort
thee. For by this argument thou may know that God governs all things, and
that it is not required of thee yt all men should be good and kind, nor is not
in thy power to make them so. Therefore be content, and let it go as it
lists. It is not in my power to straighten things crooked. I benefit many,
and I receive reproach and unkindness for my labor. This is no marvel, nor
any news. For unless god give man an understanding and kind heart, thou shall
lose all thy good turns. Therefore this place has in it singular good
doctrine: that it is man's arbitreme^t to make the heart of man straight, or to
correct any kind of grief. Thou may in deed teach and admonish men. etc.
But none but god ca^ amend it. To know this is the only remedy against such
ingratitude and sclaunders. Wherefore, when thy rebuke and instruction helps
not, take Paul's rule: A man that is an heretic, after once or twice
admonishing avoid. When thou have done thy part, God will do his. For not to
leave of before you had corrected such things, were to place thy self in
Gods room, which were openly to be mad. Therefore:

Use well the time of prosperity, and remember the day of misfortune. For God
has made this as well as that, so that man can find nothing after him.
THis is the other part of his sentence. Thus shall thou do: It fares well
with no man always.
If you have wealth, be meary, and use it as thou have it: Lay thy cares aside
and thy devises, moderate thine affections. Let God be thy wisdom, commit
unto him both things past and things to come: And so rejoice presently, that
thou also remember adversity. That is, so frame thy self, yt thou may also
be sad. Enjoy the things present, but so as thou put not thy confidence in
them, that they shall always endure. Be not careless, always looking on
prosperity, but prepared also for adversity, bearing a steadfast mind and an
vpryght between both states. Thus he puts away the affection and affiaunce
of fools, which are drowned in joys present, as though they would always
continue. We must so joy, that we be not drowned therein, but keep a part of
our heart for God, wherewith we may also suffer adversity. So shall it come to
pass, that mischiefs forseene, shall less disquiet us.

For as God made this, so made he that also, after his manner and custom.
HE fetches all our cogitations to god, and pulls them from the things of
this world. We must take prosperity and adversity both in good worth
God (says he) made all these things, the good day as well as the badde: he
joins the good luck by the evil, and that after his usage and custom,
(where again there is an hebrew phrase in this word Dabar, as was before in
ye third chapter, and in the Psalm, according to the order of Melchisedech)
that is, as it is written and said of him, according to his manner, as he was
wont: this consider thou, then shall thou easily overcome all temptations. But
we are either drowned altogether in prosperity or adversity. But when the
godly see the intercourse of good and evil, they say, this is Gods order or
usage, and are ouercommed of neither.

That man can find nothing after him.
THat is, that he may be taught, All things are appointed of god.
that he can have no more prosperity then God will give him, although he seek
it. Man seeks further then God appoints, but he finds not. God has given
thee mirth, and thou seek more mirth, but thou shall not find it. For no
man is able to add any thing unto Gods works When our Lord has made an end,
then can thou add nothing to it. When the heart is meary, it can not be sorry,
and contrariwise. God so appoints all things, that thou may learn to be
content with that that he sends, and to use it so moderately that our joy may
be in the Lord.

I have seen all things in the days of uanitie, there is a just man that
perishes in his Justice and a wicked man that contynueth long in his
naughtines.
He returns to his roll of vanities.
NOw having ended his exhortatio^s and consolations, he returns to his Roll,
looking round about him. When I had vewed and considered (says he) all
things, among other vanities, came this also to be rehearsed.

There is a just man and he perishes.
We must not be too precise in executing justice.
HEre again we must so mark Solomon, yt we think him not to speak of Gods
justice, or of the justice of faith, but of civil justice, so that by a just
man, must be understood an exactor of justice, He that will make the people
honest. Such as is a man in office, or master of a family. I saw says he, a
just man that had notable laws and ordinances, which when he began to urge,
and to exact them all to the uttermost, he nothing prevailed, but all went
backwarde. Much like a rertaine fool which bowing and crooking him self
against the Sun, found fault that his shadow was crooked, and yet would
not lift up himself. Such be we like. We see a mote in our neighbors eye, but
the beam in our own eyes we consider not. To be short, Extreme law or
right, is extreme injury. He that will right all things perfectly either in
ciuell affairs or domestical, shall have much labor and littell profit. On
the contrary side, an other will do nothing, cares not for the executing of
justice, neither does any good. But a man must neither be wise, nor a fool,
neither just nor wicked. What the^ must me do? This shall be a mean.

Be not just overmuch, neither make thy self ouerwise, least thou perish. Be
not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish, least thou dye before thy time.
What it is to be too righteous.
THat is let go all extremity of right. Measure thy self by thine own foot
and singe Know thy felfe. Then shalt thou find in thine own bosom a long
roll of vices and shall say: Behold I my self am yet unjust, and yet suffered
of God and not driven out from among men. Why then am I so hasty, to exact of
other so rigorously that I my self perform not? This is to be too just. The
world will not away with this. Observe therefore the laws, teaching and
preaching, and give thanks to God, if at any time thy family, or hearers
confess thy laws to be right and holy, although they perform them not,
according to the prescript. So art thou in deed a just and a wise man. But
the^ art thou too wise and too just, when in authority, or in thine own
house, thou have good laws, and wilt have them so straightly urged and followed
that thou will not have one Jot of them broken. For this is Extreme right,
extreme rigor.

A wise Magistrate, and householder must make a difference between ye goodness
of laws, and the obedience of Subjects. We must use moderation in governance
rather the^^ rigor.
It is better we bear and suffer a little rebellion, then the whole common
weal should perish, as comes to pass where there are such severe Exactours
of laws. Therefore laws must be urged and set forward, as things will bear,
and not farther. Thus do Phisicians also, they judge not, nor heal not
dyseases, according to the prescript of their books only, but many times are
compelled to take an other way according to the quantity of the bodies they
have in cure. So men's minds are so diversely affectioned, that many times laws
must be moderated. To this purpose we have need of most wise men, whereof
there are but few in the world. Therefore we should choose all Magistrates
and howseholders like unto David, Abraham, Solomon, Joshua, and such like, if
they could be had, which could use laws aright. So expedient it were to have
the common weal well governed.

Be not thou too wicked. etc.
THis is the other part of the conclusion. See ye as thou art not too just, so
thou also be not to wicked, Some things must be winked at in governance, and
yet must not governance through negligence be corrupted.
that is that thou contemn and neglect not all government given thee in
charge, and that thou suffer not all things to run to hauock. It is good to
dissemble some things, but not to neglect all things. If thy wisdom
proceed not, thou must not therefore rage in Ire and desire of revenge.
Again, give not thy self to Idleness, as one that cares not which end go
forward. Do not like the wicked servant, that hid his tallent in the
ground, and would not put it to vsaunce. See thou be just, and other with
thee, set forward Godlynes, and continewe so doing, howsoever things fall out.
Why so? least thou perish, and dye not in thy time. For it is to be feared
least thy Lord come, and call thee to judgment, as he did the rich man's
soul, in a night when he least thought of it.

This life is full of sin and errors.
If this were an heavenly and Angelical life, nothing should be done unjustly
but this sinful nature can do naught else but sin, and play the fool. He that
knows not this, knows not the world as yet. We must imagine that we be
here as it were in a shipwreck, or in the middle of a great fire, where we
must labor to take some brandes away, seeing we can not st^nt, or put the fire
clean out.

Wherefore, if thou be an householder, As thou may, when thou can not as
thou would.
be content if thou can pull but one out of the common fire of naughty men:
If thou be a teacher of children, labor to teach and bring up well, though it
be but one. etc. If thou be a preacher of the Gospel, so preach, not as thou
would win all men unto Christ (for all will not obey the gospel) but if thou
can bring and convert but two or three souls, as it were smokye brands
ends unto Christ, give God thanks: for we must not therefore give over, because
so few amend through preaching of the Gospel. But as Christ did, so do
thou. He delivered his elect, the other he let alone. So did ye Apostles: thou
shall be able to do no better. Thou art a fool, if either thou presume to do
all thing, or contrariwyse, if thy doings succeed not, despayrest of all
thing.

It is good for thee to take hold of this, and not to let that go out of thy
hand: for he that fears God, shall come forth with them all.
He speaks of justice to bevsed in government.
A Like sentence uses Christ, Math 23. saying: These things it behooved you
had done, and not have omitted or left undone the other. So here also he
requires both justice, and not exact justice, so that thou should be
neither too remiss, nor too precise. Sometimes dissemble the laws and
equity, as though thou were wicked. Sometime again, lay hold on the law,
and show thy self just. But remember that Solomon speaks not here of such
justice as is required of every person, as was said before, but of civil and
politic justice, which is not before God, but in governing of others, and
before the world. For in personal and particular justice there ca^ not be too
much.

He that fears God shall come forth of them all.
A rule to be observed of governors of commonweals.
THat is, the fear of God shall judge what is best in both to do. If I fear
the Lord, my heart says: oftentimes I have lived thus, and as yet I live
filthely. Therefore I will use compassion toward those that offend. If I can
keep the^ under by moderate discipline I will, if not, I will let them go,
till they incur the danger of the sword. And if they escape all these, yet
shall they not escape the judgment of God. Thus he ye fears God walks
uprightly in these things, when he sees he ca^ not prevail, he calls upon
God. Wherefore do that is thy duty, admonish, exhort, cease not. He that
will not harken unto thee, shall fall into punishment, although thou punish him
not. There shall be one that will punish him. As it chanced of late to the
Bowers, The seditious bowers An. 1525.
who when they would not harke^ to our rebuking of them, were punished enough
by others. etc.

Wisdom shall comfort the wise man more then ten mighty men in the City.
THis is a commendation of the wisdom he spoke of before, Force without
counsel falls of his own sway.
that is to say, of justice and equity. Things are not preserved by force,
but all things are done and proceed through wisdom, in the kingdom, in
laws, in administrations, in occupations. So we are made men, to do all
things by reason, and to prevail more thereby then all beasts, by their
strength. Wisdom is the gouerner of commonweals, and not laws and power.
Therefore, though laws be never so well made, commonweals never so well
ordered and appointed, yet if wisdom lack, all things go backward. For when
a wise man makes laws, it is impossible that he ca^ foresee all cases and
circumstaunces. Wherefore many things are left to the order of those that
execute laws. So ye lawyers call ye Emperor a lively law, because he is set
in place to moderate laws, as he that sits at ye charrette to rule it, and
disposes all things according to place, time, and persons. etc. For a fool
does more hurt by his precisenes in seeing laws observed, then a wise man does
in dissembling some laws. All these things as yet are said by way of
exhortation: Be not angry (says he) though things succeed not according to
thy desire. Let it suffice thee to keep laws, so farforth as all things be
not trod under foot. For this is the greatest wisdom, not to know what law
and equity is, but to know that wisdom is not followed nor obeyed in this
world. This life will not abide to have all things done right. The sum
therefore of this place is, not to put any trust in our strength, but to rule
by wisdom, which oftentimes keeps all things upright in a kingdom, where
force and violence marreth all. Why so?

Because there is no man on the earth that does good and sins not.
Mark this always, The best gouerners are sometime deceaue^ and faultye.
ye Solomon speaks of things under the sun, and of such things as may be
done. Neither informs he here men's consciences chiefly, but teaches
quietness of mind in difficulte matters of this world. Therefore he adds
expressly (on the earth) understanding, worldly justice, and such offenses as
we make one against the other as if he should say: Why go you about to have
all things done straightly according to law? It shall never be, that all
things shall be aright. If thou will live in the common weal, thou must
wink at many things, thou must not know many things, to the end thou may
observe some justice.

Look upon thy self, and thou shall see how many times thy self do
unjustly, Against too severe exactours of justice.
and so not without a cause offendest many. Therefore seem not too just,
because thou sinnest and offendest in many ihinges. So Christ in the seventh of
Matthew says: Thou see a mote in thy neighbors eye, and considerest not the
beam in thine own, although there he speaks of heavenly justice. If we
would look on our selves at home, the^ surely we should find these defectes
that justly offend others. This thing surely ought to admonish us, not to be
so severe Judges toward others, nor to just exactours of others Justice. For
hereof it comes, that such rigorous exactours, are many times most vicious
men. They have no affection of mercy and compassion, they are grievous and
intolerable both toward them selves and others.

Gouerners must bear and wink at many things.
Solomon therefore means, that we should not be angry though we see things
done that offend us. For we our selves always do not that we ought. At many
things we must wink and bear with them. For as it is the property of the
righteousness of faith and spiritual Justice to bear with the weak, and
gently to enfourme them, so it belongs to civil justice (whereof he speaks
in this place) to bear with others defaultes, so that there ought to be a
mutual bearing and suffering one with an other. Cicero in his book of
friendship, will have nothing dissembled in frendeship. And Erasmus in his
Moria, will have all the faults of our friends corrected. There be also
speculations of most passionate men. Fools will govern the world with
books, not perceauing how no man is able to perform that is prescribed. So
ye Stoikes feigned most foolishly a wise man without sense, being themselves
grievous to all men. It remains therefore that we wink and bear one with an
other. For there is no man but offends, and does that, that greueth an other.

Take not heed unto every word that is spoken, least thou hear thy seuau^t
curse thee. For thine own heart knows, that thou thy self also have often
times spoken evil by other men.
EVen as I said to thee touching the experience of thine own sight: so say I
also touching the hearing of other men. In deed thy familye must be governed,
and the wicked must be punished. If thou can amend or redress no farther let
it alone. The wicked shall not go unpunished. For this is a true proverb or
saying: thou do not clearly run from the hangman, for God is the hangeman
him self.

Least thou perhaps here thy Servant curse thee.
We must not harken after every ma^s talk.
THere are some so curiouse in them selves, that they will hunte out all men's
sayings and signs in so much that they will harken at the windows, and peep
in at the creuesses of the walls to hear what every body speaks of them. To
whom it justly falls out, to hear that of their own familye that greeueth
them. Therefore if thou will give ear to every bodies taulke, look to hear
even thine own householde to speak evil of thee. Yea perhaps when thou
think not of it. For as thou shall try and prove many things: so shall
thou hear many things that thou would not, so that thou shall not need
curiously to harken what every body says. Neither be thou therefore by and by
angry, and take weapon in hand, but make light of them, cosidering that thy
self also have offended others in many things. If Jupiter should throw
forth his thunderboltes, as often as men deserve them, he would in short space
be left weapo^les, as Horace says.

Therefore these two things are necessary in the governance of the world, Two
things necessary in government.
The law maker, and the Qualifier of the law. The law maker to order and
govern the common weal by wholesome laws: The Qualifier of the law to apply
them rightly, and to use them prudently, according to time, place, and persons,
etc. And a Moderator of the law is more necessary in the common weal,
Moderation of laws necessary in all government.
then a law maker, as we may see by ye example of our own howses. A wise
householder appoints every servant his duty, his time, and place to do it
in, moreover he appoynteth meat, drink, and clothing, for men servant and
maid servants. But it chances that his servant falls sick, Here the
law must be broken, and time must be served. He will not require his task of
the sick body. He prepares for him better meat and drink, and more handsome
lodging, then for the rest. etc. And he is discharged of his task. For else his
master should be a foolyshe man, and an ungodly. So here the appointment of
the law is dashed, because the person is changed. Therefore if we many times
depare from the law, and offend in our sayings and doings, let us bear
with the same in others.

All these things have I proved by wisdom, for I thought I would be wise,
but it went the farther from me. It is far of. What may it be? And it is a
profounde deepenes, Who can find it?
He sets his own example before governors.
HE alleges his own experience declaring what heretofore has happened unto
him, while he went about to search these things. I instruct thee (says he)
by mine own example. I teach y^ to leave of this precise wisdom, and that
wisdom and a wise man be not all one. I was compelled to learn these things
by experience, when I would go about to be wise, and bring all the world to be
ruled by my straight laws. But nothing succeeded less. Therefore these two as
I said are necessary for the life of man, a lawemaker and a moderator of law,
this one as well as that other. Even as it is not enough for a wagener to have
good horses, and to know what way to go, unless he govern well his wagen
in the way as he goes. Therefore the law must have adjoined to it moderation,
which will say thus. Thou have done well to ordeine such and such laws, and
they must be observed, but things excepted, always to be excepted.

It is a profound deepenes. etc.
SO before he said. All things are hard. etc. They shall make and write
laws, they have an eye to general things as they must have. But they yt are
Magistrates must come down to particulars, and see whether it ought so to be.
There they shall find infinite cases and circumstances. And this is a
bottomless depth. The su^me therefore of the seventh chapter and this
exhortation is: Mainteyne the law, A sum of ye seventh Chapter.
as far as thou art able, and moderate ye law as much as you may, so yt
thou look not to have all things to precisely observed, neither be thou
discouraged with te^iousnes, but only fear and serve the Lord, and he shall
teach thee to do all things well. For they which are without this fear, are
either too just, or too impatient.

I applied my mind also unto knowledge, and to seek and search out science,
wisdom and understanding, to know the foolishnes of the ungodly, and the
errors of doting fools.
THis is an Addition to his foresaid exhortation and doctrine, as though he
should say: I have well marked what happens to such as will do, and have all
things done justly, and in exacting of justice, are too just, how things
succeade not with them, and how while they will be too wise, they become
fools. I have found, To play ye fool sometime, is an high point of wisdom.
that sometime it is the point of great wisdom to dote. Again I have
considered all kinds of life to know how the wicked went to work, and how
fools succeeded with their matters, whether were better to cast from me all care
(as fools use) or to be too just. For he speaks again of things done, or
to be done, by fools and ungodly, as he spoke before of things done
politikely by just men.

And I find the woman more bitter then death, whose heart is as nets and
snares, and her hands as bands. He that is good before God, shall be
delivered from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.
A Monge the affairs of fools I saw this also, that proceeds of women. An
other kind of vanity, the rule and governance of wives.
For since he wrote a Register of vanytie, this was not to be omytted, neither
it chances unto fools, that will not set their hands to work, but do
nothing, that they fall into the hands of women, and are compelled to do
service to them. He speaks of such a woman, which takes upon her to be wise,
and to bear rule above her husband not of ye anger of women, although this is
true, that a woman is more passionate then a man is.

Neither is womankynde here condemned, which is the creature of God. For the
kind must be separated from ye faults thereto belonging, as before he
separated the works of God from the devises of man. Man is the work of God,
but beside this work of God, he will follow his own devises, and will not be
ruled wholly by God, who only was his creator and maker. So must the kind be
severed from the faults thereto incident.

A wife ordained to obey, and not to have rule over her husband.
A woman as she is the creature of God, must reverently be considered. For she
is created to the end to be an help to her husband, to feed her children,
and to bring them up honestly and godly, to be in subjection to her husband.
And men are commanded to have the rule and government of their wives and
household. If now a woman leaves her duty, and challe^ge the maistry of her
husband, now she discharges not the work she was created for, but does
according to her own naughtines. For God created not this kind to bear rule
over the husband, but to be in subjection under him.

Amazones women bearyng rule.
Against these things might be objected the histories of the Amazones greatly
extolled of the greek writers, who are reported to have been great rulers and
warriors, but I think it but a ^^ble yt is told of them. And where the
Aethiopians those women to be kings and Princes: Candace.
(as we read of Candace Queen of Aethiopia in the Acts) they do it after
their peculyar manner. As many times foolish me^ are made princes and rulers:
It was never permitted by Gods ordinance, that the wife should govern. Thus
it may be, that a woman shall be appointed in steed of a king, but always
she ought to have a Senate or counsel of noble men, by whose devise all
things must be ordered. And although a woman yet be chosen on this wise to sit
in government, yet this confirms not the government of women over their
husbands: for the text is clear: Thou shall be under the obeysaunce of thy
husband, and he shall have the rule of thee. A woman is created to her use,
namely with wisdom and discretion to bring up her children. For every one in
the thing whereto they are ordained is best occupied. A woman shall do more in
the griping of her child with the least finger, then a man with both his
hands. Therefore let every one abide in that business and work, whereunto God
has called and ordained them.

The conclusion of this place therefore is, amongst the diverse impedimentes of
that rest and peace that a man ought to have in his heart, Crowing and imperious
dames, great impedimentes to their husbands.
is a woman, such as will not let her husband have the rule as he is appointed.
So Sampson a very noble man was seduced by Dalila, a vicious woman. For they
will not be contented with their distaffe and wool, but will prescribe and rule
their husbands in things pertaining to the common weal. Such women (says
Solomon) I greatly hate: For they are bitterer then death, in that they are
great causes of our vanity. For if the husbands begin once to yield unto
them, all things go to wrack, as it happened to Sampson, and as Solomon also
doted through his women. This therefore is that he says. Even as I have seen
them that are too just and too wicked: so have I seen women pearching over
their husbands, which is a great vanity, not because of the sex and kind,
but because of the grinnes and snares. Therefore wise men according to Gods
word, shall avoid the snares, but not the sex and kind.

Behold (says the Preacher) this have I found, seeking one by one to find
the count, and yet my soul seeks, but I find it not. I have found one man
among a thousand, but a woman have I not found among them all.
THat is, through mine experience and observation in things, Unhappy is the
wisdom that is not governed of God.
I have learned much, namely how all is vain, let other learn the same also.
For this is ye greatest wisdom that man can attain to, to know that no
wisdom can prevail or do farther then God gives leave, as Socrates said: I
know that I am ignorant, if he rightly understood the same. One by one, one
after another, that is, I have run through all devises: I find in them all,
that man cannot live well after his own ways. And my soul yet seeks, that
is to say, I see mine own vanity and others, and yet I cease not my folly,
nor can stay my self, but seek still for that I know I can not find. I have
found one man of a thousand, yt is, which sees how his own wisdom is of no
force, howsoever things fall out otherwise then they devised: so rare and
selde they are, that have attained to this denied wisdom. So Demosthenes after
he had uttered all his wisdom said, that wisdom profited not. Hereof the
Philosophers said, that all things came to pass by chance and fortune. For
they could not imagine that the wisdom of God was far greater and higher then
all men's ways and devises.

But a woman have I not found among them all.
IF men be not able to perform this thing, yea almost none, much less shall
women be able to do it. Again he speaks of womenkinde, as they be out of
grace, in nature, and under the sun. For nature prescribes not Gods works
and miracles. There may (says he) be found one among a thowsande which by
experience has attained to say: my counsels and devises can not succeed or
prevail, and so by this mean be made meet to govern. But not one woman has
atteined hereto, because of gods ordinance. Therefore in these cases they are
not to be harkened to.

Only lo, this have I found, that God has made man righteous, but they have
sought many Inventions
THe Schooleme^ heretofore have wrested this saying to the establishing of free
will, against grace, An error of the School doctors.
and against Salomons meaning, where as Solomon speaks of things under the
sun, and of things corporal in all his book. Neither enfourmeth he men's
consciences (as has been already declared) before God, saving that sometime he
makes mention of the fear of God, but he enfourmeth men in government, to
bridle and keep under their hearts.

This therefore is his saying: No man content with his present state.
God has ordained man to travel in ye world, he has appointed him certain
works, and labors. But man will not abide therein, but takes in hand such
things, as his desire leads him to. God made man righteous, straight for him
self, to see what was before him, that is to say his present state, that he
should content him self therewith. But not forsakinge this ordinance of God,
reasons and compasses matters to come. This is it therefore that Solomon
says: I have found this by my search, that no man lives contented with his
estate, that all men cast their eyes aside upon others estates, as Ouyde said.
The ranker Cropp is always seen,
upon my neighbors ground:
And greatest vdder in his Kydde,
is always to be found.


And again: The slothful Ox will saddle have,
And prauncing horse the plough does crave.


Such eyes had Peter, when he said: and what shall he here do? Therefore his
righteousness is in outward matters, that every man should have an eye to ye
that is right in doing, governing, and not look aside.

But they have sought many inventions.
THat is they are occupied in many ways, and diverse cogitations, how to
govern things herafter, leaving things present which god has set before them.
So the woman will entremeddle in her husbands chardge, and the man in ye wives
matters. Therefore this sentence is a concluosin of the vanity of man.

Who is wise, and who can declare these things?
THat is to say, all things are so difficulte, that they can not be uttered.
For we be so drowned in our own devises and counselles, that we understand not
how we be drowned in them, as though he should say, I will not speak of the
fact it self. For men understand not what right is, so far they are from
perfourming it. And this is a declaration how vain the heart of man is.

The wisdom of a man makes his face to shine, but unshamefastness puts it
out of favor.
I Judge these sayings to pertain to them that go before. An acclamation,
co^cluding with the commendation of wisdom.
This figure of speech, that Solomon uses here, is partlye known to us by
other places of Scripture, which have the like figure. In the seventh of the
Proverbs, it is said of an harlot meetyng with a young man: With a strong
countenance she flattred him: Again, there met him a woman strong in
countenance. (or whoorishe in behavior). So Daniell in the viij. chapter,
has a king fierce in countenance. This figure signifies impu^encye and
boldenes of countenance such as where no fear and reverence is, as we say in
our proverb of a foo^e, that he sets a good countenance on it, meaning
that he blusheth not, (...) is without fear and shame.

This place may be understood two ways, first actiuely, as wisdom makes
the face of the rightous to shine, that is, wisdom makes him cheareful in
look or countenance: Contrariwise foolish Hypocrites go sadly, as Christ
says of the Pharisees in the sixth of Matthew: They disfigure their faces,
they look sowerly. The wise man goes away with a clear countenance, because
he does that in him lies. The wicked always have an hateful and cloudy
clooke. It is therefore a kind of prouerbiall sentence, as if he should say. It
is to be seen by the eyes, where a meary heart is. The wicked always has his
forhed ryueled and wrinkled. For as their heart is, so is their face.
Secondaryly, it may be taken passiuely almost in the same sense, that is, one
that is of a meary countenance is chereful to other, and delights other, His
company is pleasant and delectable: And in this sense, it is a conclusion in
commendation of a wise man.

The viij. Chapter.
Keep the kings Commandment I warn thee, and the oath that thou have made
to God.
Solomon seems in this book to fray men from intermedling with worldly
affairs: Salomons counsel in this book.
wherewith he has as much need again to exhort them to be doing. As we while
we preach faith, do utterly dehort men from working, to set forth the true
Sabbath. Again, when faith is once pla^^ed, we must labor to show Christians
how busy they must be to do well to their neighbors, and how in this behalf
they must keep no Sabbath, but must be zealous in doing good works, seruent in
charity toward their neighbors, and keep the Sabbath only before God. So
Salomo^ teaches us in this place, to do nothing after our counselles and
devise, but all things according to the word of God. And thus he is occupied
as it were through half the chapter.

Obedience to the magistrate commanded.
Where therefore he says: I mark or take heed to the kings mouth or
commandment, he exhorts me^ to civil obedience. For this must be
understood of a politic king or kingdom, although it may also be
understood of God, but not of a subject. I (says he) would keep and
observe the kings commandment. I counsel you to be in subjection to the king,
and not to follow your own ways. You have enough to do in the common weal,
if you observe that the king commands, whom god has ordained for you to
hear. It is notably said of him ye kings mouth: because he will bind us to ye
obedience of his word. Whatsoever the magistrate commands standing with the
laws, that do thou (says he) and keep the oath of god. Understand such an
oath as thou swearest by to God, and not God unto thee. Obey (says he) the
magistrate, as thou have sworn unto God. For he that swears to the
magistrate, swears not to man, but unto God. Here may thou see obedience to
the magistrate trimly comprised in the obedience to God. Even as Paul will
have servants obey their masters, not as men, but as God.

Be not hasty to go out of his sight, nor stand not in an evil thing, for he
will do whatsoever pleases him. Where the word of the king is, there is
power. And who shall say unto him, what do thou?
TO go from the face, What it is to depart from the kings face.
is an Hebrewe phrase, much used in the Scriptures. In Jonas, in Job, and also
in Math. 18. chap. The servant went forth from his Masters face, and found
his fellow servant. etc. Now to go from ones face, is nothing else, but to
deny, forsake, or refuse ye obedience we owe to another.

Stand not in an evil matter.
COntinue not in disobedience, but abide in obedience, as if he should say:
Although the matter succeed not by and by as the king commands, although
the king fall or fail, yet hold thou on, and see that the kings
commandment remain in his majesty and force, and do not against it,
because thou shall not escape unpunished.

For he does what pleases him.
We must obey the magistrate.
THat is to say, in his Realm and kingdom: For he speaks of civil
government. He will defend justice: for he is ordained of God to this end:
therefore fo^^e him. It is even the same that Paul says to the Romans the
13. They that resist purchase to the^ selves damnation. Neither is it possible
that he shall escape judgment, that resists the magistrate. Therefore the
safest way is to obey the magistrate without any more ado. And he declares
the power of the king.

Whatsoever lyketh him, that will he do.
HE is ordained of God, therefore thou shall not prevail, nor be able to resist
him, though thou raise tumulte, or make any insurrectio^ against him. Therefore
either obey him to thy profit and commodity, or else fly from him to thy
loss and incommoditie.

For the kings word is mighty.
THe word or commandment of the king, is a very Solda^^^. It comes of this
word Salith, which signifies to bear rule. All this is said to the end to
exhort us to be obedient, and to abide in the things enjoined us of the king,
although matter fall not straight way as we wish.

He that keeps his commandment shall know none evil thing.
THis is a conclusion of the things gone before. They that obey, escape
punishment.
And it may be expounded two ways. First thus: He that keeps his
commandment will know none evil, that is, takes heed and is well ware, ye
he do none evil. Secondly: He that keeps his commandment, shall suffer
none evil. Both these senses are good, but I like the first better.

The heart of the wicked discerns time and judgment.
THis word Judgment when it stands alone, Judgment.
commonly signifies reuengement, punishments. So in the xiij to the Romans:
They procure their own da^natio^, (that is) they remain not unpunished. So is
it here taken. The wise man knows there is a time appointed of reuengement
against those ye are disobedient, and no man should be able to escape that
time. Therefore he stands in fear of God and works none evil.

For to every purpose there is a time and judgment: for great is the misery of
man upon him. For he knows not that which shall be, and Who can tell him when
it shall be?
He threateneth with punishment those that obey not ye magistrate.
THis is a commination and threatening of the disobedient with the punishments
that shall follow, as though he should say: I counsel you to be obedient and
in subjection to the Magistrates. And if any will not be obedient to them let
him go, but this vauntage he shall have thereby that he shall wrap himself in
many troubles, and incur many miseries and calamities, He shall every hour
stand in fear and never escape. Therefore the best for him is simply to
obey. For what shall it profit him to be disobedient, seeing he ca^ not escape
punishment, as it fell out with the country men and Bowers. Thus ought
preachers to exhort those that are seditious and rebellious. For God has
ordained and appointed a Judgment, God punishes them that obey not
magistrates.
and a revenge and punishment for all disobedient persons, which none shall
escape. And this is a singular comfort to all Magistrates, howsekepers and
schoolemasters, which having done that in them lies, and yet find those
under their tuition obstinat and incorrigible and escape from them, that they
take it in good part, knowing ye they shall not still escape unpunished.

For great is the misery of him (that obeys not the kings commandment) for
he knows not that which shall be.
BY a general sentence, he proves a special, as if he should say: The
disobedient turns his eyes aside and sees not the thing before his face. He
seeeth not what he does, nor how great an evil disobedience is. And he
knows not what is to come. etc. that is, ye disobedient foreseeth not what is
like to fall. His disobedyence causes him to desire many things, he hops to
attain to great matters, and is deceived. He promises him self all kind of
safetye, but when he thinks least thereon his judgment and hour is at hand,
and he perysheth in his disobedience. To be short. The wicked contenmeth
present obedience, and looks not on the punishment to come. But the wise man
does not so. For he knows what mischief follows the disobedient, and
therefore he obeys.

For man is not Lord over the Spirit, to retain the spirit, neither has he
power in the day of death, nor deliverance in the battle, neither shall
wickedness deliver the possessers thereof.
Kings have long hands.
Now he declares what he means by that he said before touching obedience to
the king. The kings word is of great power, For it is Gods ordinance, that
he shall not escape unpunished that despises to be obedient. Man is not of
such power ye he is able to withstand the king. Why therefore does he not obey
him? he ca^ not forbid the spirit, ye is life, or ye breath of life. He must
stand to it, he shall not escape: He has no power in the day of death, nor
shall not escape in the day of battle. To be brief, God has so many
judgments and so many ways to punish, that no man is able to escape his
hands. And although he escape all other things, yet he sets him out to the
battle, to perish there. He concludes therefore that:

Wickedness can not deliver the possessours thereof.
THat is, therefore be thou obedient, and do thy duty, for there is no way of
escape in being disobedient, least any man should think that I teach any
rebellion, or slacknes in doing our duetye.

All these things have I considered, and have given my mind unto every work
that is under the su^ne, and I saw how one man has lordshipp over an other to
his own harm.
NOw returns he to his Register, He returns to his roll of vanities.
repeating again the miseries of man's vanity. Among all these things that I
have rehearsed, I have seen this, ye man has power over man to his own hurt.
This is to be referred to ye person yt is subject, that is, it comes to pass
many times, that Tyrants bear the rule, and their rule tends to the
afflicting of the subjects. We must obey even naughty magistrates.
And yet notwithstanding, their commandment must be fulfilled, and no tumult
or business to be made, for although the Prince were a good man, yet has he no
thank, and not only he is not thanked, but men also become the worse, even
like as the commons in these days, being delivered from ye Bishop of Rome his
laws and bondage. All men desire to have tyranny taken away, but when they are
delivered, they can not abide in that state neither. He grants therefore
that magistrates are evil in punishing of subjects, but that they are
notwithstanding to be borne and suffered.

Likewise I saw the wicked buried, which walked in the holy place, and they
were forgotten, that they had so behaved themselves. This also was a vanity.
The unthankfulness of men when they have good princes to succeed evil.
THe like place is in Amos the 6. chap. Woe be to the rich in Sion, which
proudly enter into the house of Israel. To enter into the Church or house of
God, is an Hebrew phrase, signifiyng one that bears office or rule over the
people of God, as in the 22 of Deuteronomy, the Ammonites are forbidden to
enter into the house of God, that is, to bear any rule in ye common weal of
the Jews. For the Ammonites were suffered to be among the Jews, but not to
bear any office. So likewise in this place. They were in the holy place, that
is to say, they were rulers in the common weal. Therefore he says:

I saw the wicked buried.
THat is, how tyrauntes dyed, Frederike Duke of Saxony, a very good Prince.
and good Princes succeeded, as David did, after Saul was dead. But the wicked
once delivered from their tyranny, forget their delivery. Thus men acknowledge
not their benefits. So we by and by had forgotten our good Prince Frederike
the author of peace. No man remembers what benefits they got by him, and from
what mischiefs he delivered them. We always desire change, neglecting and
forgetting things present. All these things Solomon speaks to this end,
that we may learn to know this world, and wisely to use the foolishnes thereof.

This book would be redd of new chosen governors.
Therefore this book, new rulers ought chiefly to read on, who having their
heads troubled with diverse opinions, think to rule the world after their own
devises, and will exact the uttermost of all men. But these men ought first to
have learned to know the world, namely, how it is unjust, stubborn,
disobedyent, ungracious, and to conclude, unkind. Let them give God thanks,
if they can bring but the hundredth part, to the observing of their laws. So
our Sectaries are not content with the present goodness of God, with the
preaching of faith, and grace of the gospel, but will disturb all the world
with new and vain opinions. Therefore Salomons counsel is to teach us their
vanity, Salomons counsel.
and to withstand it as much as in us lies. Howbeit those whom we are not able
by our admonishmentes to convert unto the faith, and to keep in the same, we
must bid a dieu. For the evil are made even obstinate, and the worse with
continual punishment. Therefore he says:

Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedely, therefore the
heart of the children of me^ is fully set in them to do evil.
THis may be two ways expounded. Actiuely thus, that is: the wicked hold on
in doing evil, because their punishment is deferred. Because God takes not
vengeance by and by, as men do, therefore they wax the prouder. Passiuely
thus: we that see how such go unpunished, are filled with many evils, we take
indignation, we are overcome with tediousnes, and cease from doing well. For
both these things punishment put of, brings to pass. First it makes us
obstinate and the worse: next, it makes other also that see these things,
the slacker to do their duties. Both senses are good.

But though a sinner offend an hundredth times, and God prolong his days, yet I
know that it shall go well with them that fear the lord, and do reverence
before him. But it shall not be well to the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days: he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not God.
NOw he comfort not man, but the godly heart. For man can not abide this, nor
suffer such ingratitude. Neither could David bear with foolish Nabat, but
purposed to kill him in his cogitatio^, in the first of the kings the.25. He
says therefore, learn only to know ye world. Thou can not redress or
amend it, she will not yield to thee, thou must yield to her, that thou may
know it is ungrateful, and vnmyndefull of all pleasures and benefits: knowing
this, thou shall do well.

Punishment comes once, or at length.
This therefore is that he would say by these words: though a sinner offend an
hundredth times, that is, though his punishment be deferred, and his unjust
dealing not revenged, yet shall he be punished in time to come. It ca^ not be
chosen, but such ungrateful persons must be punished. Therefore be not thou so
hasty to iustifye and make good the world, or to be reuenenged of all men.
Hold thy self well apayde, if thou can convert but the thousandth part
thereof, and make it thankful. Let the world sin, and not thou. For it
shall not escape vengeance, no more then ye Jews, which murdered ye
Prophets and Christ, escaped the punishment of Vespasiane.

And his days shall not be prolonged.
IT seems the punishment of the wicked is long differred, specially to those
that are afflicted: but when the day and punishment of the wicked comes, it
seems the^ to us all to soon. As Job says: That the day of the wicked
comes suddenly. And in the 54. Psalm. Wicked men shall not live out half
their days: that is, where they always take enterprises in hand, and hope
after many things, they dye before they bring half their purposes to pass.

There is a vanity also which is done upon the Earth: that is, there be
righteous men to whom it happens as if they did the works of the wicked: and
there be also wicked to whom it comes as if they did the works of the just,
and I said: This also is a vanitye.
THese two things greatly offend the mind of man, that the punishment of the
unthankful is differred and ye good are entreated and dealte with all, A
consolation against the offense that ye godly take when the ungodly persecute
them.
as if they were wicked: good men hated and envied, and the wicked had in
estimation and reverenced. And yet daily so it comes to pass. Heretofore men
gave the wicked Priests all things, but now the Godly have scarce any living.
They that teach scholars are not maintained: those that travel most to set
the world at liberty, have no thank but are trode^ under foot. But they
that destroy and drown the world in naughtines want nothing. For now a days
Souldyers are more dearly waged then good teachers. These things for this
end are repeted so often to enfourme man's mind, and to enstruct ye good to
learn what ye world is: Namely a furious beast and an unkind, which waxes
fierce through benefits, exalting always the wicked, and oppressing the good.
And other thing then this, must we not look for.

Therefore I praised mirth and gladness because a man has no better thing under
the son, then to eat and drink, and to rejoice. For this is all he has of
his labor, all the days of his life, that God gives him under the Sun.
THis is a repetition but very necessary, because he had declared so many
sorrowful things, He concludes with his sentence so often repeated.
that he might seem to have forgotten his purpose. The world is unkind,
looking ever an other way. It lotheth things present, although they be good. It
suffers to toil and weary thy self, and despises and persecuteth thee.
Therefore mock thou the world as it mocketh thee. Do thine endeavor and
duty, and let go cares and sorrowfulnes. Be of good cheer and meary, knowing
that the world uses not to reward and consider the good.

And I applied my mind to know wisdom, and to behold the business that is
done on the earth, that neither day nor night the eyes of man take sleep.
THat is, while I was thus occupied, and vexed my mind, and devised how to
govern and order all things prudentlye upon earth, I gat nothing but sleaples
nights. And even so shall it happen unto thee, if thou will not be meary, but
weary thy self in thine own ways and devises, for herein thou do but as
that fool did, which would bear all the world on his shoulders, ye is, would
order and rule it, by his own industry and laws of his own apointing. Why
do thou not rather commit all matters to God, and cease thy curyositie in
other men's doings?

Then I considered all the works of God, how man can not find out the work
that is wrought under the Sun. But the more he labors to search it, the
less he finds, yea and although he think himself wise enough, yet he can
not find it.
THis is Salomons copiousnes. The sentence is like to that that went before:
Consider the works of God, how no man can make straight that he has
crookened. Even so here. Let no man take upon him to redress and amend all
things. For this is the only work of God, and not man's. And impossible it is
to bring man to do yt which God alone does. For man looks not on things
present, neither is satisfied with them, but looks only on things to come.
Man's heart is filled with diverse desires. But God has all things bounded and
appointed, things present, and things to come. Unhappy is the wisdom of
man not ruled by God.
But we are never quiet with things present, nor satisfied with things to
come, which is nothing else but to make things present, not present, and things
to come, not to come, This thing made the Poets to say, that all things were
ruled by destenye, and imagine ye the goddesses called Parcae brake of the
web of our life, even when we would faynest live. So Julius Caesar found
not, that is, accomplished not his deuyse, he was cut of from his purpose in ye
middle of his consultation. For as he devised to establish, or rather to
restore the Roman public weal he dyed, as he took the matter in hand.
Absolon castinge how to compass and get the kingdom, perished most miserably.

The nineth Chapter.
All these things I cast in mine heart to understand. There are righteous men
and wise, whose servant are in the hand of God, and yet no man knows the
love or the hatred of that that is before him.
How this saying, (man knows not whether he is worthy of love or hatred) is
corrupted.
HEre we must well remember the argument, that we geeue not ear to them which
draw this text to the worthynes of the hatred or love of God, and teach men
wickedly that no man can be certain of the favor of God. etc. Where Solomon
speaks only of things done under yt Sun, that is, among men, governance
of civil life. See (says he) what untowardness and crookednes is in this
world: where I find there are me^ that govern justly and wisely, whose
servants and subjects yet are in the hand of God, and are prospered and
defended, like Solomon and David.

And yet no man knows whether he is loved or hated.
An admonition yt we judge not of gods providence, according to prosperity or
adversity.
I Take both these words actiuely: that is to say, men are so untoward, that
they acknowledge not the just and wise men, whose servants they see God
prospers and governs, for their benefactours, or their love or hatred. They
forget nothing so soon as benefits. Salomo^ governed wisely, in peace, in
great plenty: As soon as he was dead, they complain how he yoked the^. There
they remembered none of his benefits.

What state or condition the world was ever in, it could not away with it. We
may see by Italy, which whether it be at peace or at war, it can away with
neither. In time of peace, they procure wars: in time of war, they would
feign have peace. So Germany is always newfa^gled. In ye beginning of ye
Gospel all men gredilye ran to hear it: when it had spread it self abroad,
every where they lothed it, forgetting the benefytes that ensue and follow it.
Now many men take part with the Sectaries: and when they shall have continued
their time they shall be disdained, and men will desire other things. To be
short, ye world ca^ not suffer neither good nor bad government: He whom the
Lord aydeth not in his government, can not live one day without danger.

Therefore he yt will serve this world either by wisdom, justice, or
whatsoever: other good qualities, must look for nothing but all manner of
extremity. Thus David, and Salomo^ very good kings, loved ye good and hated ye
bad, but ye people acknowledged not their love, forgetting all their benefits
and good turns. The world is given to naughtines.
Therefore S. John truly, wrote, that the world was given to naughtines,
because their is nothing but disquietnes and all kind of evil in it. Who
therefore can like this life, where men live in so great dangers and
unquietness all the days of their life.

They have both like success. For it happens to the righteous even as to the
wicked, to the good and clean as to the unclean, to him that offreth, as to
him that offreth not. As it happens to the virtuous, even so to the sinners:
to him that forsweareth, as to him that fears an oath. This is the woorste of
all things that are done under the Sun, that it happens to all men alyke.
Whereby the heart of man is filled with wickedness, and foolishnes remains in
their hearts, all the days of their life.
THis is again a copiousnes of Solomon, as though he should say: The unkind
world remembers no benefits.
The world is all together unquiet, and unkind, there is as small
remembrance of good men as of evil. This is to be understood on the worlds
behalf, not on Gods. The righteous men, that live are contained of the world,
and in the world: But with God they stand in good case as he said before, He
that fears the Lord it shall go well with him. The world rewards the good
and the bad alyke.

This is the woorst of all things that are done under the Sun.
THat is, man's heart is to weak to hear this peruersenes. They that have not
the fear of God, can not patie^tly suffer this ingratitude, and that there
should be no difference between good me^ and evil, but that it should happen
to both alyke.

This is the cause therefore that men's hearts are filled with wyckednes:
THat is to say, with indignation Intolerable sorrow. Because they have not
understanding, An admonition against the offense of unkindness.
nor can not frame them selves to do as God does, which sends rain to the
good and evil alyke. I suppose that the Philosophers, and Monks are here
quipped, which because they could not bear with these things forsook the
world. They would not serve in such an unkind world. But Solomon will have
us to be busyed in the world, and to know the world, and not to be feared
with the ingratitude thereof from doing, but to follow our heavenly father
which letteh his sun to arise upon the good and evil. Math. v.

And foolishnes remains in their hearts until they dye.
They that are offended with some men's unkindness will benefit no man.
THat is, they die without having done any work, even as though they had never
lived. They are like a shadow in this life, profitable to no body. None
enjoys any part of their service or goodness. And that they hope after, is
prevented by death. So their end is nothing but death: they leave no goodness
for posterity. But do thou so order thy life, that thou seek to be meary,
and to do good unto others.

For among all men living, hope is chosen, for a living dog is better then a
dead Lion.
BY this place Solomon prepares an exhortation for us to do good while we are
able, He exhorts us that we will not cease to do good, though men have used
us ingratefully.
that we be nothing moved with the ingratitude of the world, but that we
hold on in doing our duty, and have a good hope and trust. Because there is
hope in all men as long as they live, as if he should say: Do not so contemn
or despise this life, that thou either despair or forsake the felloship of
men, for hope or trust is the best thing yt is among men. For as long as men
are living, there is hope. Therefore we must do as much as we are able. For
because of the remnaunt, we must serve ye whole.

Thus a good minister of the word of God, for the good Citizens sake, We must
go through in our vocation, even for a fewes sake that be good.
preaches the word of God, although many blame the same. So if a good
schoolmaster have two good scholars, he must take pains for their sakes,
although he have twenty other naughty disposed and hopeloftes. Thus must each
magistrate also do, if he can not bring the whole City to do their duty, yet
he shall perhaps find some one or two whom he shall bring to good pass. etc.
This is it therefore that Solomon says: Let us not be discouraged through
despair, nor yet presume or take so much upon us. For we must not so despair
of the living as we do of ye dead, of whom, there is no hope. We must bear
with the importunities of men, and not despair of all men, although many be
wicked and ungracious.

For a living dog is better then a dead Lion.
If thou caust not be a lion be a whelp in thine office.
HE enter laceth a proverb, meaning thus: It suffiseth to correct and redress
something in the world, as a live dog, although he be a beast of no great
account; yet is he better then the great carcass of ye stro^gest Lion. This we
speake^ and utter in this wise. Better is a Sparrow sure in hand, then a Crane
in doubt. Again, in the Dutch tongue: The child must not be poured out with
the water that it has been bathed in.

For the living know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all,
neither have they any more a reward: for their remembrance is forgotten. Also
their love and their hatred and their envy is now perished, and they have no
more portion for ever in all that is done under the Sun.
THe living (says he) know they shall die, Be beneficial to other, because
thou know thou shall dye.
and therefore in their life they have this hope. Let them not therefore put of
from day to day to work and to do well, like fools and maycockes, which
always look on other men's examples, and will never give any onset by
themselves, before they see other begin to do well.

The dead know nothing at all, neither are they rewarded any more.
SAint Hierome wrested this place foolishly, A place to be noted against the
invocation of Saints daparted.
to the reward of the dead which were in purgatory. For Salomo^ seems to
think that the deap are without all manner of feeling. And I think there is
not a place in the scripture of more force for the dead that are fallen in
sleep, understanding naught of our state and condition, against the invocation
of Saints and fiction of Purgatory. It is an Hebrew phrase:

They have no more any reward.
WHich we thus express in ye Dutch speech: It is all in vain with the^ that
be dead, All they can do is of no avail, they now can do nothing that may
profit them, like as is said other where is: thy work shall be rewarded. And as
Paul says: your travel shall not be in vain.

Their love their hatred. etc.
Understand all these things actiuely as before, that is to say: the benefits
they did by loving, by obeying. etc. are forgotten: An error of Saint Hierome.
And where as Saint. Hierome caueleth, that although they know not what is
done in ye world, yet they know the things that are done in heaven, it is
an error, and a folly.

Moreover they have no part or portion in this word.
THat is, they have nothing to do with us. He describes the dead, as like to
sensles Carcasses. He will therefore have us use this life while we may, and to
labor all yt we are able. We are compelled to leave the greater part of the
world unto Satan, we can scarce bring ye thousandth part unto God. Therefore
if the Lion dye: kill not the Dog also.

Go therefore and eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
cherefull heart. For now thy works please God.
AS Solomon is wont after a rehearsal of vanity in this world to join
immediately some comfort and exhortation for us to be meary, and of good
cheer: Comfort often repeated.
eue^ so does he in this place, as though he should say: Seeing we are
constrained to live in this peruersitie it shall be best for us, to be meary,
and quiet. For we can not change these things, neither shall we any thing
prevail, though we take never so much care there about. He calls it thy
bread and thy wine, that thou have gotten through the blessing of God. So
Esaias. 4. We will eat our bread. And Paul to the Thessalonians: Let every one
eat his own bread.

For thy works please God.
The works of the godly please God, ergo man knows and ought to believe ye
God loves him.
THis exhortation belongs to ye Godly, that fear God, as if he should say.
Thou that art Godly, do that thou can, forasmuch as thou know, thy
works shall please God. And this is the greatest wisdom that can be, to
know that God will be merciful to us and that our works and labors please
him: as Paul says to the Romans the viij. The spirit bears witness to our
spirit, that we are the children of God. For onelesse our heart place and settle
it self in the good will and pleasure of God, it can never sweeten the
bitterness thereof. The heart remains ever bitter unless it be thus filled
always with the good will of God. This place ought to have been enough to have
confuted those, which of the words set before, but manyfestly translated: Man
knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred etc. would go about to make
men doubtful and uncertain, of Gods good will, and favor toward them.

At all times let thy garments be white, and let thine head be anointed with
oil.
Solomon speaks here according to the usage of that Country. The Romans and
Greeks commend purple and scarlet. But the Nations eastward and specially ye
Jews commend white apparel because they may be washed, and by reason of
cleanlynes and puritye which they earnestly professed eue^ as the Turk uses
lynnen garments, for the most gorgious. And we in the time of Popery at great
feasts used Albes. This is it he means. Be meary always and use such
rayme^t as thou art accustomed at feasts and banqueting.

And anoint thy head with oil.
THat is, Whom Solomon exhorts to be meary.
use also the oils which God has given thee. Again he speaks according to
the manner of the countreye, who set great price and delight in their
oyntmentes. This it is he says* Thou lyuest in the myddest of vanity: Enjoy
therefore thy life, and destroy not thy self with indignation, put away sorrow
out of thy mind. Thou can not better mock and ge^ke ye world, then to
laugh when it is angrye. Let this be sufficient to thee that God is merciful
to thee. For what is the malice of this world to be compared with the
pleasauntnes that is in God. Neither does he here persuade us to any voluptuous
life, or to such royetousnes, as they use which perceive not this vanity (for
that were to add oil unto fire) but speaks of the godly, which feel and
have experience of the vexations and greefes of this world. These men's hearts
goes he about to cheer and rear up. These men counsels he to be meary,
not ye froward and ungodly, which otherwise live in all manner of sensuality
and voluptuousnes. The same he means where he says:

Rejoice with the wife whom thou have loved all the days of the life of thy
vanity, which God has given thee under the Sun, all the days of thy
vanity. For this is thy portion in the life, and in thy travel wherein thou
labourest under the Sun.
AS though he should say: Thou shall carry no more with thee. So Paul in the
first to Tymothy the 6. Having food and raiment, let us therewyth be content.
For they that be not content herewith, but covet after other things, and
afflicte their selves with indignation and cares, add sorrow unto sorrow,
vanity unto vanity, and at once deprive themselves of all goodness.

All that thine hand shall find to do, do with all thy power: for there is
neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whether
thou go.
THis is the other part of his exhortation which he obiecteth to those idle
persons, Diligence and continuance in labor commanded.
who because they see the world unkind and grievous, cease of from labor, and
will do no more good. He commands us therefore to do both, namely to be
meary, and yet not so yt we loyter, but labor according as God has
commanded. Gen* 3. Let us take labor unto us, but put cares of mind from us,
and be content with the present estate: add a third thing, vex not thine
heart, because thou see the world is ungrateful. It is notable that he
says, shall find, that is, follow not thine own counsel, but do things as
they fall out, that which God commands, and offreth taking no care for ought
to come. Whereas he says, with all thy power, thereby he requires industry and
diligence.

For in the grave there is no work.
Against invocation of Saints.
AN other place, proving that the dead have no perseueraunce or feeling. There
is (says he) no devise, no science, no knowledge, no wisdom there. Solomon
judges that the dead are a sleep, and feel nothing at all. For the dead lie
there accompting neither days nor years, but when they are awaked, they shall
seem to have slept scarce one minute.

What this word infernus signifies.
Hell signifies a pit or grave, but properly (as I judge) that secret
withdrawing place, where the dead sleep out of this life, whence the soul
goes to her place (whatsoever it be, for corporal it is not) so that thou
may understand hell to be that place where the souls be kept, being a
certain grave (as it were) of ye soul, without this corporal world, as the
earth is the sepulcher of ye body. But what manner of place it is, we know not.
So in the 42. and 43. of Gen: I shall go down mourning into hell. Again: they
shall bring my white head with sorrow unto the grave. For they that truly are
holy, go not into hell to suffer any thing there. Where the saints that be
dead are.
The dead therefore are out of all place. For whatsoever is out of this life,
is out of place. Even as after the resurrection, we shall be clear from place
and time.

And I turned me unto other things done under the sun, and I saw that in
running, it helps not to be swifte, in battle not to be strong, to get
living, not to be careful, to get riches not to be wise, to be had in favor,
it helps not to be cunning, but that all lies in time and fortune.
THis is the sum and conclusion as it were of his discourse and roll of
vanities, as if he should say: Then be our enterprises happy, when God
prospers them and governs their success.
It makes no matter what a man can do. Therefore, follow not thine own ways
or devises, but that thine hand finds, that is, continue in a certain work
appointed and commanded by God, leaving the things which may hinder thee
therefro^, as Samuel said unto Saul: thou shall be changed into an other man,
and that thine hand finds, that do. etc. He prescribed him no rule or law,
but whatsoever thing fell, to take it in good part, and to labor therein.

We must go on with our vocation.
Thus does Solomon teach us in this place. Always go forward with that thou
have in hand, and belongs to thy vocation. Thou art a preacher, or minister
of the word of God, continue in reading the Scripture, and in teaching, be not
drawn to any other trade before the Lord draw thee. For whatsoever ye Lord
does not say or commau^de profits not, which thing he proves by his own
experience, saying: I saw the swifte prevailed not by running, and many strong
men, which yet lost the victory: I saw also many notable wise me^ have little
success, many diligent and good governors which little prevailed. It lies not
in the person how industrious or witty soever he be.

All success of matters is of God.
Many times the strong are ouerco^med in war of the weak, and many times
great hosts are slain by small number of men, because the matter consists
not in strength. So Troy was a most impregnable thing, wanting neither
strength nor power, and yet was it subdued and overthrown. For the time was
come that God had ordained it should so be. By the like reason, in the years
passed, the Emperor took and vanquished the king of France, Fraunces king of
France taken prisoner. 1525.
notwithstanding he far passed him in strength of me^. Where he says, that
running helps not the swifte, it is an Hebrew phrase, for with them to ru^ne,
is to bear office, as Paul to the Corinthians: So run I, not as at an
uncertain thing. Again: I have fynished my course.

To be had in favor it helps not to be cunning.
THat is, Many notable artificers contemned.
many are skillful in arts and good learning, and yet they are not regarded,
no man sees to them, or takes care for them. So with us the word is
plentiful, there are many good wits, and yet we can not bring all men to the
faith: and yet not withstanding we must not leave of from preaching the
Gospel. For God reigns even in weakness, he shall govern our doings and
bring them to pass. The Lord is able to kindle a great fire and flame, so we
will preserve sparcles. We are also meruelously troubled and vexed in our
minds about getting our living. One because he would be rich, becomes a
Printer, and lo he consumes that he has. It is not therefore sufficient to
be wise and industrious. For many singular wits, and excellent artificers,
are utterly despised. This is it he says:

The Success of all things depends on fortune.
We must travel, and leave all success unto God.
THat is, I ca^ not determine or apoint what success I shall have, when I have
done all I can. Do thou only yt is thy duetye. God shall find a time to use
thy labor. We ca^ not judge of these things, we must labor, but appointe no
end and effect of our woorking.

Man knows not his time, but as the fyshes which are taken with the angle,
and as birds that are catched with springesse, so are they snared in the
perelous time, when it comes svddenly upon them.
Understand, this time to be not only the very end of life, but every hour,
and occasion, as if he should say: Thou must labor, although thou know not
what will follow thereof. Therefore apply thy self to learning, and if God so
appoint, he will give thy study fruit and success. The like we must do in all
other trades and exercises of life laboring and commytting all success unto
God. For the time of success is not revealed to us.

And as fishes. etc.
With two feate similitudes, All adversities ca^ not be foreseen
he proves that most times matters fall out contrary to our devises and
weening: the fish is desirous of meat, and deuoureth the hook. The birds
likewise without all fear go on feeding, and think no thing of the grynne,
and suddenly they are caught: So we when we have chosen and hoped for that we
think good, are deceived. And when we think evil is toward, then goodness is
at hand, And we rushe in to those things, which afterward we can not get out
of, in such a wise, as we perceive not, how we be circumuented. And all this
comes to pass, because we know not the time and hour. So that experience
teaches us, how things are not ordered by our devises, but most times against
them. And hence proceeds ye saying of misfortunat folk: I thought not it
would have so fallen out.

This wisdom also have I seen vnvnder the Sun, and me thought it a great
thing. There was a little City, and a few men within it: So there came a
great king and beseeged it, and made great fortes against it: and in the City
there was found a pore man, but wise, which through his wisdo^e delivered the
City: Yet was there no body that had any respect unto such a simple man. Then
said I, wisdom is better then strength. Nevertheless a poor ma^s wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard.
Foolishnes and unkindness of the people reprehended.
I suppose yt this is set after his conclusion in stead of an example, whereby
he declares all that he has said before. It is a general example, the like
whereof is found in many histories. For thus in the ix. Chapter of the Judges,
a woman delivered the City saying Abimelech the king, with a piece of a
mylstone. He calls it great wisdom, because indeed that wisdom of
governance is very great that delyuereth a little City, of small force, from
valiant enemies. But to forget this wisdom, and so great benefits, as most
times it happens, is great unthankfulness. Themistocles.
Thus Themistocles employed many benefits upon his Country men but he found
great ingratitude for the same. Thus David benifited all Israel, so did
Solomon. But afterward forgetting so great benefits, ten of the Trybes
forsook the house of David, Wherefore to pleasure and benefit ye world, is
naught else, but to lose our benefits, and to cast gold into dirt and Pearls
before hogs. The best is therefore to be merry, and to labor for ye time
present, casting of all care of things to come. For it were better that my
benefits perished, then I to perish with my benefit also, as says Phaedria,
in the comedye entitled Eunuchus.

And no man remembered the man.
IN deed the wise man's words were heard, while he gave good counsel, but
that done, he was by and by forgotten.

The tenth Chapter.
The words of the wise are more heard in quietness, then the cry of him that
rules among fools.
Exhortations and reprehensions mixed together.
THe effect of this place is to comfort and exhort them which are troubled with
worldly affaiers, next to rebuke those which are a let and hindraunce, that
wise and godly men's counsels go not forward, as he began with the example of
a poor man, that wisely brought a great matter to pass, but as soon as ye
benefit was past, it was forgotten. For all present estate of men as was said
before, is despised. Therefore Salomo^ perceauing this matter, says: weary not
your selves, you ca^ bring the world to none other pass, nor yet the men
therein. If matters proceed according to your good devise, commytte them unto
God.

The words of the wise are heard in quietness. etc.
THe words of the wise are not regarded, Wise men's counselles despised.
therefore they are compelled to harken to the words of a foolish ruler. The
crying of a captain preuayleth among fools, and a foolish prince hears a
foolish Counselors words, because he speaks that which pleases him. This I
say, that thou must consider, as is said in the proverbs: The fool will not
hear, unless thou speak that he pha^sieth in his heart, because affections
rule all in the fools heart, therefore he regards not what thou say, unless
thou say that he desires. For they which thus are led with their own
affections and wisdom, will hear nothing else. Therefore thou shall not
prevail; thou shall not be heard: where minds are not quyeted, that is to
say, blinded with affections. So now a days, Counsel takes no place but in
minds wholsomly settled.
it is in vain to write against the Sectaries and heretics, for thou shall
do no good. Which thing Paul affirms also: A man that is an heretic, after
once or twice warnyng avoid. etc. And it falls not thus out in matters of
religion only, but also in civil affairs. Thus it fares in worldly
affairs: if thou give good counsel, thou shall not prevail, nor be heard,
but with Neutrals, whose minds are settled, and will take part with none. But
settled minds at quiet can truly judge that ye crying of a Captain is but
foolish. We must abide therefore till the affections be appeased, for then
shall he hear. Even as troubled-water is not clear, but if thou will see the
bottom, thou must tarry till the water be setteled: so all men that have
conceived any persuasion in their mind, will not be dissuaded again, unless
that conceit of theirs, wherewith they be as it were bewitched, be put away.
This Solomon in an other place expresses in this wise: It is better to meet a
Bear, or a Lion robbed of her whelps, then a man trusting in his own
foolyshenes.

Better is wisdom then weapons of war, but one sinner destroys much good.
Force without counsel can not stand.
THis sentence he has proved with the ensample gone before. And at this day all
that follow wars, prove the same, namely that warlyke engines are naught
worth without wisdom and counsel, and that wisdom is of more force and
avail in war, then is strength. For there are many sudden and diverse
chances and awaytes. etc. Thus ye Romans boast yt they overcame the world,
not by strength, but by wisdom. Wisdom therefore bears the stroke in this
world, but she is not heard or considered.

For one Sinner destroys much good.
FOr both in peace and war there are such unthrifts and naughty persons,
Peruerters of good counsel.
as disturb all things. There is a counselor stands up and speaks for
peace, straight way a thrasonicall mate and lubber dasheth all, whom thou shall
resist but in vain, because men are led with their own affections, and will
give no ear to such as give contrary advise, so that as Homere says, the
greater parts most time prevails against the better.

Dead flies cause the most precious ointment to stink.
THis is a prouerbiall sentence against fools, Evil cou^sellers reprehended.
howbeit Solomon has very hard translations. The translation would have been
more comely, if he had added, according to the proverb, It is as men say. The
proverb is taken from things in use among this people, which account and
esteem oyntmentes among their most precious things. It seems to us the
similitude is the more unpleasant and strange, because we have little use of
such things as that nation had. Like therefore as flies destroy a most precious
ointment, so some unthrift and naughtipacke destroys the best counsel in a
common weal, in the Parliament chamber, and in war. Therefore as we are
constrained to bear with such noisome flies, so are we compelled to bear with
such pestilent counselors.

Therefore a little folly sometime, is better then wisdom and glory.
To dote in some thing is held for high wisdom.
THis is a consolation against such chau^ses and naughtye Counselors, He
calls it little folly besause of the little time it endures as the Poets use
to say To seem foolish in place where, is holden for high wisdom. Therefore
when thou see a naughty man prevail in the Counsel, or in the Parliament
house etc. let thy counsel give place, and leave of thy wisdom, because thou
see it is not lyked and vex not thy self. It is better thou seem a fool
for a season: and let them go on in their foolishnes, because they will give no
ear to thee. For by force thou can not prevail. For a fool will be led by
no counsel, unless thou speak according to his mind. Therefore thou must
let them alone when thou have shewwed thy counsel, and done what thou can.
For if thou will go through with thy purpose, you shall wrath these waspes,
and meet with an angry Bear, and endau^ger thy self without necessity. These
counsels be very good for us, which dwell in this ungrateful world, which
harkeneth not to our good counsel, whatsoever we say or threaten-

Glory signifies not only fame, Glory.
but pomp, ornaments, and riches, which are cause of fame. So Math. 6. God so
clotheth the lylyes of the feelde, that Solomon in all his glory, that is to
say, in all his riches and pomp, was not so arrayed.

The heart of a wise man is as his right hand, but the heart of a fool is at
his left.
The difference between wise men and fools.
THis also is a kind of Proverb, that is, a wise man has his heart in his
own rule and power. If he perceaueth that they are foolish, and will give no
ear unto him, he can for a time hold his peace. He ca^ use his wisdom
according to the place and persons, and as he shall perceive his counsel is
like well or evil to succeed. But a fool is not master of his own heart, but
according to his affection, will run through with them. It is a great matter
to rule and moderate ye heart, which no man does or can do, but he that is well
acquainted with the world and has an eye to Gods judgments.

A fool walking in the way and being him self never so much a fool thinks
yet that all other are fools.
Many such glorious braggers in Princes Courts.
THat is, he is not content that himself prevails with his naughty counsel,
so that thou must yield to him, but also thou shall be compelled to bear with
him, in being glorified for his foolishnes, and naughty counsel, and in
shaming the wisdom of other men. For if thou give good counsel, he will
straight way be upon thy back, and reprove thy wise saying and counselling.
But answer thou thus: I have showed my counsel, I compel no man, but have
said that I think good. First therefore a fool will not hear thee: next he
will throng with his own imagination: and last of all, whatsoever thou say
to the contrary, (as thou art bound) but not to follow it, if thou think it
will not prevail, he will deride it, and reproach it as foolish and wicked.
This we see in our days and find true by our selves.

Therefore if the spirit of thy superior have his purpose against thy mind:
be not thou discontented, for to give place pacifieth great evil.
THis we thus express in our proverb: Fools must not be striue^ with, but
yielded to, for a time.
He that can have patience will be a wise man. He says therefore, if their
spirit prevail, that is to say, their force or counsel, be not impatient or
angry, leave not thy place, remain by thy self and continue. For if thou
resist, and wilt have thy counsel followed and allowed, thou shall but vex
the waspes only, and kick against the prick, for it is a great point of
wisdom, to dissemble and give place. For it allayeth many euels which by so
being quiet, that is by giving of place be caulmed, and at length of them
selves come to silence, which otherwise would stir up much trouble, if thou
would withstand them. Thus the Romans glory in their Fabius, which by
suffering and leisure overcame Hannibal. Thus our Frederick Duke of Saxonye, by
keeping silence and lying still, kept down the Erfordians, and was avenged of
them. Thus Virgill also says: All fortune must be ouerco^med by suffering.
For such sayings as these are taken out of the experience of this world.

There is a great evil that I have seen under the Sun, namely ignorance,
that is much seen among Princes. For some fool is aduau^ced to great honor,
and the rich sit in the dust. I have seen servants on horse back and some
Princes like servants go on foot.
IT is no meruell says he, All things replenished with folly.
if the violence or counsel of fools prevails against wise me^ and them
that give good counsel. For I see few princes but they are fools, and take no
wise way in governing their charges. Thus ye fool rules every where in the
Counsel chamber, in the Princes court. etc. The world is foolish and
governed with fools, and with foolish opinions: Wherefore if thou counsel
them otherwise, they will not hear thee. If thou hold on, the more is the
fool moved, and for hatred will do that shall turn his Country to great
hinderaunce. Whom he understands by rich men, and servants.
The rych that sytt in the dust, he understands to be such as ought to bear
rule, because they know well how to govern. He cauleth them Servants that
ought to be ruled, as though he should say: They which ought to be ruled,
them I see set alofte and in authority, being but slaves and fools, and wise
men want, and scarce have any living. Therefore when thou see such Centuaries
and Thrasones bear rule, which ought rather to do the service, meruell not at
it, remember this is the kingdom of the world.

He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and he that breaks a hedge, a
serpent shall sting him. He that remoueth stones shall hurt himself thereby,
and he that cleaves wood, shall be in danger thereby.
Gouerna^ce a perilous enterprise.
HEre Solomon cowcheth as it were a heap of proverbs together, all which he
applies to his purpose, saying as it were: it comes to pass in this world,
as these proverbs declare. Whatsoever thou do in this world, it comes to
pass, as says the proverb: He that diggeth a pit. etc. Men do not escape
from it without hurt. Likewise to rule men, is as to break up an hedge, where
many times, it chaunseth that a Snake stingeth him. Wherefore, if mishap betyde
thee, play the slackarde never the more, but remember that thus it goes in
this world. For to rule men is in Gods power only. Therefore, he that is
called to authority, must remember that he takes that in hand that ma^s wit
can not compass. For the hearts of men are not in our power. Only they which
have the fear of God in them are easily governed. This proverb is taken from
the^ that dig pits or graves, Gouerna^ce must not be cast of, for the perrils
therein.
whose chance it is many times unawares to fall into ye same. So to bear rule
in this world, is to dig a pit: there be thou fenced, and know thou art in
peril. Which except thou will do, thou shall fall into many sudde^ and
vnforeseene dangers. For dangers foreseen less hurt us. Thus did Demipho in
Terences Phormio well geeue warning of. Wherefore (says he) All me^ when they
are in most prosperity, most chiefly consider with themselves how to suffer
and bear adversity, dangers, losses, banishement. When he comes out of the
country, let him always think, my son may have committed some fault, my
wife may be dead, my daughter may be sick: these be common cases, and it may
be that they shall not be strange unto thee. Whatsoever falls out otherwise
the^ thou hopedst for, take for a^vau^tage. That if any thing so happen, thou
may say, thus I thought and looked for, and think no strange thing is
happened unto thee. And if any good hap or fortune betyde thee, take it for a
daily gain. Thou must not straight way leave of digging, though thou fall
unawares into the pit. The life of man is full of dangers: and as in breaking
down an hedge, it is to be feared least some Serpent lying hidden may sting
us: so in governing a common weal, we must beware we be not hurt. If thou hap
to be bitten or hurt, thou must bear it: for it is no news.

He that remooueth stones.
An other similitude.
HE that turns stones, some hurts his hand or feet. He understands such
huge stones, as can not be removed without some great hurt. So to have to do
in civil matters, is to turn such stones. Therefore when thou art hurt, say:
If I had not turned these stones, I had not been hurt, but because I move
and turn them, what marvel is it that I am hurt? If thou be an householder,
remember thou must turn this stone also. That that follows is like.

He that cleaves wood, shall be in danger thereof.
Danger joined with gouerna^ce.
THat is, things public ca^ not be weldded without hurt and danger. Best is
therefore to Bulwark and fence the mind, and to look for whatsoever falls
out, that if any thing chance well in ye common weal, we take it as a miracle.
Benefits, the more they happen beyond our expectation, the more they rejoice
us, even as mishaps the less hurt us, the more they are foreseen. Let us
therefore think we shall be always in hazard, and not still in good case.

If the iron be so blunt, that one can not sharpen it, he must then put to more
strength: but the excellency to direct a thing is wisdom.
Again he comfort them that are in office: An hard thing to govern a
corrupt common weal.
Even as an iron tool cankred with rust is hardly made clean and sharpened,
so is the world like a rustye iron, and hatchet full of gappes, loose in the
handle or helue, which no man can work well with. This is a very handsome
similitude. And as it is a very labourious thing, and troublesome to cut or
hew with such a rusty and hacled hatchet: so is it a woeful and miserable
state to be a gouerner in a realm or an house. For it is an unprofitable and
marred tool, and yet must we be doing, in, and about the same. So when men are
evil and full of naughty affections, there is need of great wisdom to rule
and moderate the^. Thus he says: If it be rustyed and blunt, then is there
need of a wise workma^, that is: It must be a cunning workma^ that can well
whet out an old rustye Axe. So it is needful he be a wise man that can
handsomely use such evil tools, that is the world, and such perverse and
untoward men. Men by nature are disspitefull. But God has authorized such men,
that at least they might therefore be obeyed. Great wisdom is needful, to
correct evil manners.
For he says: I will that thou be obedient unto this man, for if thou
disobeyest him, thou contemnest me. But yet they obey not by this neither.
Therefore publyke gouerna^ce or house keeping is but such a rustie tool as is
spoken of. Use therefore the same hatchet thou have, sins thou can handle none
other, as says the Proverb. He that has no lyme, must build his wall with
doonge or lome. If thou be an householder, or an officer, think thou have this
rusty iron, that is, such as thou can not rule, nor will be ruled, occupy it,
and cut with it as ye can that thou may at least keep some part and show
of a common weal. For men shall never be able to do so well in a common
weal, but much euel shall remain there still. Therefore he must be a good
woorkeman that can so sharpen an old rustye iron, that yet he can use it
handsomely. These are the things that must comfort us in such cases.

If the Serpent byte when he is not charmed, no better is a babbler and blab of
tongue:
THis perteyneth also to the common weal. As a serpent (says he) vncharmed, A
precept how to bear sclau^ders and back bytyng.
that is, unknown or unlooked for, (for a serpent yt is charmed byteth not,
because he obeys the charmers voice) even so byteth a blabbe of his tongue.
Neither is a blab of his tongue better then a biting Serpent, for he is not
master of his own tongue, he curses or speaks evil of his ruler and
governor. Even so it fares whether in public or private governance. If thou
be an housekeeper, thou shall do many things, that shall offend thy wife, and
family etc. Emongst whom thou shall find some that will deprave the well
doings, which the evil disposed will carry abroad to the Citizens and
neighbors and this also thou shalt be compelled to bear with. Thou shall to
thy power withstand it, but if thou be not able to let it, thou must suffer it.
It is in deed a tedious and grievous case to be thus dishonestly rayled at by
tounges of ill willers, and thou not wytting it, but what shall thou do? These
slanders and detractors thou can not stop. Only stop thine eyes and ears,
and do that thou art able. Even as we be compelled to bear with the words
and works of men that resist us. For the world will not cease to persecute
magistrates, and those that give them good counsel.

The words of a wise man's mouth have grace, but the lips of a fool deuoureth
him.
The devises of wise me^, hindered by ye sclaundering of fools.
THat is to say, a wise man orders his doings well, and with a kind of
grace, but because he is among evil tounges, he has little success. For the
detractor comes, and deuoureth and ouerwhelmeth ye good man with his words:
for so refer I this word him, to ye wise man and not to ye fool. For the
word of the wise that has in it such grace, is made in effectual through the
taulke of ye fool. If a good and wise man give good counsel, the slaunderer
and deprauer comes, and ouerturneth his counsel. So happened it to Paul in
ye Acts, when he was in shippwracke. Men and brethren (says he) you ought
to have obeyed me, and to have ryd it out in Creta. etc. To conclude, the fool
deuoureth ye wise, and the worse side still prevails

The beginning of his words is foolishnes, and the latter end of his taulke
is madness.
THat is to say, Fools devises preferred before wise men's.
thus it happens to fools, which will seem wise, and judge all other fools
in comparison of themselves: whether they begin, or make an end, yea all their
taulke is nothing but foolishnes. And ye more a fool goes about to seem
wise, the more he plaieth ye fool: and yet he prevails above the wise man
and deuoureth his good counsels. Even as the Pharisees prevailed against Christ
the best preacher, the Jews and false Apostles against the Apostles. The
Arrianes devoured the good teachers in their days. And we in these days
preach Christ, but the heretics persecute and devour us. But let us yet
look for greater matters, taking it for a vauntage in the mean season, that
yet we retain and keep some goodness, for that some hold fast the true
doctrine.

The fool multiplieth words.
Fools be full of words.
A Wise man dispatcheth briefly and in few words what he thinks, for truth
is content with plain and simple vtteraunce, but fools have abundance of
words, and can by no words be made hold their peace, but for one word will
give a thousand. Thus Christ used always in few words to answer the
lawyers and Pharisees when they slanderously said, his doctrine was of the
deuell, and not of God.

Man knows not what is before him, and who can tell him what shall be after
him?
THat is, man sees not things present, which are in his sight, he is never
contented with things present, his eye is still on other men, and on things to
come, leaving that God has given and appointed for him. Now is the Gospel
given us, but we give our selves to other things, but of this has enough
been said before.

The labor of the foolish does weary him, for he knows not how to get into
the City.
THat is, although fools multiplye words and prevail, The fool is vexed
with his labor, but ye wise man rejoices in his.
yet get they naught thereby but multiplication of toil and labor. They
scorn and cast day and night with themselves how to bring their matters to
pass, but this travel does nothing, but more and more disquyet them. And
these two contraries are to be well noted. The fool of his labor reapeth
misery, the wise man mirth. When the fool sees that his devise comes not to
pass, he is vexed and troubled in his mind: for he can not, nor knows not
how to commit the success unto God. But the wise man at all times is still of
one mind, because he knows that things be not ruled by ma^s counsels and
devises, but by the will and appointment of God. To him therefore he commits
all success and effect of his devises.

They know not how to go into the City.
Fools know not of what weight matters are, nor what is needful to be done.
THis is an Hebrew phrase, such as is to be seen in the Psalms: and the way of
the city they have not known, that is, they go up and down wa^dring, and
can not hit on the way how to come to rest: For all ways lead to some place
where men are dwelling, but they wander in all ways, they continue in none,
whereas wise men abide in the way, and keep their place, although diverse
dangers and impedimentes happen, because they foresaw this would come to
pass. Let every man therefore go about his business mearely. He shall
mearely so do, if he remember he is in the world, in the middle of dangers.
etc. Thus mishap is ouercomed, before it come.

Woe to thee o land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the
morning.
What a discommoditie a foolish prince is, and given to voluptuousnes.
Hitherto we have heard that ye world goes thus that fools chiefly prevail
and bear the swinge, although to their great loss, that when they have
oppressed the words of the wise, they pay for their foolishnes. Therefore,
where things thus go, it is very dangerous for ye king to be a child,
seeing among such abundance of fools, the king also is unwise. In this case
stand the kingdoms of Germany and Spain at this day, where ye Princes judged
of all other to be most wise, rule and do all for their own commodity and
avail. The residue can do nothing but ride on a great horse, keep harlots,
quaffe. etc. committing all matters to their Cou^sellers, which seek but their
own gain, nothing regarding the common weal. And thus all Germany lies
wast as it were, having in her no civility of manners, no care of well
bringing up their youth, the laws and all good discipline and arts being
decayed, and no consideration of Justice being had.

A good Prince is a great gift, A good Prince is a great gift of God.
which consideration and understands how to benefit his country, which
foreseeth what is fit for every man, that all things may be done and ordered
according to laws, that all men may have and enjoy their right. And yet all
things shall not succeed with this man, yea many things shall chance
contrary, but for all that, let him not cease from his purpose, but hold on to
do that he is able, according to the form aforesaid. For such a good and a
wise Prince or king was Salomo^: in so much that he wrote proverbs for the
instruction of youth, and yet had he but his labor for his travel. If then
matters succeed no better with the best Princes, what will they do where the
king is but a child, and does no exployte worthy for a Prince?

Whose princes eat in the morning.
THat is, which distribute not their doings into their times: which have no
care how the affayers of the common weal fare, so they may do well. Yea if
any man be desirous to give the Prince good counsel how to proceed, they will
seek to oppress him. In the morning, is as much, as first and foremost, before
all other things: for the morning is the first hour to labor and do any
thing in. These men eat in the morning, when they first of all make provision
for their own game and belly: and as for the affaiers of the kingdom, they
are put of till the evening, that is, they are handled last of all.

Blessed art thou o land, when thy king is the son of Nobles, and thy
Princes eat in time, for strength, and not for drunkenness.
THese be Hebrew phrases, the child of life, the child of death, the child
of the year: even so the child of Nobles, is he that has nobles of his
kynne. For the Hebrew word son, we commonly express by this word has, as
in Ezechiell, it is said of Pharao: I am the son of wise men, that is, I have
many wise men. The Hebrew word Horim signifies men in white. For it was the
manner of the people in the East, to wear white apparel, as the Romans used
purple and scarlet. Princes therefore are called white of the garment they
wear, even as some of the Romans were called Torquati of the bandrikes they
wear about their necks.

Whose Princes eat in their time.
THat is, Princes Courts.
which prefer not their own belly before the affairs and cares of the
kingdom, seeking for their own advantage. But where are they found? Such
covetousness reigns in the court, the nobles are covetousness her self. This
may you see in our Princes, where kingdoms are wasted and consumed, and great
men and nobles are enriched, By reason of these pestele^t Peers, we can not
bring to pass that poor people may be prourded for, that Schools may be set
up and maintained, that poor maidens may have competent Dowries appointed
the^, and such other works of Godliness may be accomplished: where they not
with standing can exhort and get of Princes every thing. Truly therefore is
ye land blessed, whose Peers eat in due time, and not for ryotousnes, that
is which are content so to use the Princes liberality, that they and their
family may have sufficient, and be maynteyned, and not seek to hand and
gather together infinite masses of treasure.

Through slouthfulnes the balkes of the house decay, and through Idle hands,
it rayneth into the house.
HE adds a prouerbiall sentence, Diligence commanded, whether in public or
private governance.
as if he should say. In such a kingdom where Princes and Peers seek their
own, and the king is a fool, it happens as to a negligent howseholder, who
where he might in time with one penny cost keep his rafters from rotting,
lets it run till the house be like to fall. Where therefore the householder
is not diligent, and every day repayring where decay is, here always one
damage and loss follows an other. But a diligent body straight way repayreth
a thing falllen in decay, and preserves not only that he has, but always
amendeth where he sees fault or breach, still making his house more and more
comelye. And that he says of the house, he will have understood of all
things belonging to house keeping. Even as the building being neglected
decays, so does the house keeping decay being neglected. A diligent
householder is always increasing somewhat: a slothful and negligent, always
loses somewhat. Thus many Byshoprickes and Dukedomes have decayed, because no
man has set his hand to the restoring of them. He that neglects that is
small by little and little loses all. An householder must be both a sparer and
liberal, and he must make much of small things, that when time serves he may
be liberal, For many small makes a great.

Frederike Duke of Saxony, a most laudable Prince.
Our Prince Frederick a most praise worthy householder so ordered his house
keeping, that he seemed a Niggard: for he paid all his servants, Cooks and
other their wages in their hand, but to those that came to his Court which were
to be rewarded, he was most bountiful, which he should not have been able to
do unless at other times he had spared it. And thus he brought to pass, that he
had a most well ordered house and family. So Princes when they neglect one or
two vserers, or other Malefactors, it comes to pass at length that they
punish none at all, and so the whole common weal falls. So ye Roman
Captains would have no enemy despised, were he of never so small force. To
conclude, where the king is a fool, there is a foolish government, and such
a kingdom as must needs fall. For so is it in a kingdom, as in house
keeping. And ye house to drop, is as much as to perish and decay.

With laughing they get their living, and wine makes them meary.
THat is, Princes Courts.
these pestilent Gluttons and Cormarantes, have no honest trade of life, but
get their wages and living only by toys and gaudes, by flattering and clawing
men by the back, by bolling and drinking, and thus they wax rich. Such are
for the most part in Princes Courts. Yea amongst four hundred, hers are
scarce four or five, which by honest mean and trade get their living, and
tender the common weal.

Wine makes them meary.
AS much as to say: they care for nothing but how they may live pleasauntly,
they do Princes no good, but spend their provision, and charge them with
needeles expenses.

But unto money all things are obedient.
WE in the Germane tongue, properlye express it thus: All things be done for
money. They look all together for money and gain, be it with or against ye
common weal.

The eleventh Chapter.
Curse not the king in thy thought, nor the rich in thy bed chamber. for the
souls of heaven shall carry thy voice, and they which have wings shall bewraye
it.
An exhortation to good works.
THe Chapter going before was a kind of inuectiue against fools, and a
description of the kingdom of this world, what a kind of thing it is, so
that whosoever bears office, may know he has a troublesome administration.
And to know that the kingdom of this world is so troublesome and
incorrigible, is the greatest wisdom that can be. Now this chapter exhorts
to good works: for when men are taught how unjust the kingdom of this world
is, then their hearts begin to wax weary, and they devise how to give up all
kind of administration, and to forsake the world, being ouercommed with the
malice of men, as was declared heretofore. But Solomon teaches, that the more
unhappy and ungracious the world is, the more we should travel and endeavor
to do some good.

And first he begins with honoring of the magistrate, A commandment to
honor the magistrate.
for the magistrate is an ordinance of God, and the better part of the world
under the Sun: and by this ordinance God does all things that are done under
the Sun. But the wicked begins with co^temning of the magistrates, because
they hear in the scripture that God reprehendeth them: but it is Gods office
to rebuke and reprove magistrates: and where thou hear God thus do, thou
must not follow him therein, for thou art not God, or any ordayner or restorer
of godly ordinance: but as God reprooueth the^, eue^ so reprooueth he thee
also in his scriptures, that thou also might do thy duty, but thou
forgetting the beam in thine own eye, begynnest to espy a moate in an other
man's eye, and reprehendest thy superiors, of whom thou oughtst rather to be
reprehe^ded. For if thou were in their office, thou would commit far more
faults then they, and would not perform so much as they do: let us
therefore hear how God rebukes the magistrate, but not follow him in so doing.

Even evil magistrates are to be honored.
This therefore is his meaning, I have said many things of of Princes how they
destroy ye world: but do not thou speak evil of the king within thy self, or
in thy heart, nor of ye rich man in thy secret chamber, yt is to say, men yt are
in authority, must be reverenced because it is no ma^s ordinance, but Gods.
For although Peter call the magistrate an ordinance of man, because they are
taken from among men, yet is their power of God. And although they be evil
men, yet are they to be honored because of Gods ordinance. Why therefore will thou speak evil of the^ which are troubled with so many cares and travails for
thy weal, if they be good men, and if they be evil men, their wickedness is,
and brings them evils enough. Bear with them therefore, but thus we do not,
yea the world does the contrary, it rendereth unkindness to the good, it
speaks evil of others, it commends fools, and makes good men out of the
way.

Men always impatient and discontent.
To conclude we can suffer neither our selves, ne yet others, neither
prosperity, no yet adversity. If God try us with a little affliction, with
sickness, or poverty, we become impatient and accuse God, if he give us over
to our own desiers, neither can we be so content. It is a great patience of
God that can bear with us in so great unthankfulness. Let us cease therefore to
speak evil of ye magistrates, but give them honor, whether they be good or
bad, give God thanks for them, if they be good: if they be evil, lament it and
bear with them. And let the preachers rebuke them, and not the commo^s.

For the fowls of heaven shall carry thy voice, and they which have wings
shall bewray it.
THe Hebrwes call a bird or foul, a man of wings or husband of feathers, or
one that has feathers. This he means, if thou speak evil of the king, it
shall not lie hidden but comes to light, and so thou shall be punished. For
the wrath of ye king is death, but his loving favor is as the evening dew.

Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall find it.
THis again is an Hebrew phrase, as Salomo^ abounds in such figures. A
commandment to be liberal.
This is it he would say: Be liberal to every man while thou may, use thy
riches every where, by pleasuring every man. And he joins a promise thereto:
For if thou live long, thou shall receive an hundred fold. So in his
proverbs: He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord. So Christ
also: Give and it shall be given unto you. And Paul: God loves a cheerful
geuer. He yt will be a beggar, let him give nothing to other men. He says
therefore, Cast thy bread, that is, distribute and deal of that living which
God has given thee: upon the waters, that is, give bou^tifully, and with a
single eye, although it seem to thee thine alms perish, and thy bread be
thrown in the water. For Solomon uses a metaphore, whereby he signifies that
thou being a man should feed and nourishe man.

For after many days thou shall find it.
THat is, if thou live long thou shall find that bread that thou did cast
into the water, as though he should say: it shall not be lost that thou geuest
to others, although it seem so, yea the Lord will give thee bread for a long
season. Psalm. 36. The righteous is ever merciful and lends. Again: In the
time of dearth they shall have plenty. For God will not suffer himself to be
ouercommed in liberality, but will far pass and surmount our bounty and
largess.

Give a portion to seven and also to eight, for thou know not what evil
shall be upon earth.
HEre again he exhorts, The commandment of liberality repeated again.
and joins a threatening to his exhortation. Deuyde says he thy bread among
seven or eight, that is give plentifully. For he that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparinglye, He that sows abundantly shall reap aboundantlye. As Paul
says: Think it not to much whatsoever thou geuest. And although y^ should
give all you have, yet should thou not want, so that thou have to give, and
gyuest of thine own, as Christ says in his gospel.

Because thou know me, what evil. etc.
THat is, it may come to pass, that to morrow thou shall dye and leave thy
goods to unworthy me^, or else some other calamity may suddeinly fall, and then
thou repent thee that thou did not give or bestow thy goods, and now being
willing art not able. Give therefore thy goods while thou haste them and art
able: thou know not what will afterward betide. For when Princes gather and
mass up infinite treasures, they do but minister occasion of wars, and rich
men doing ye like minister matter of law and contention.

If the Clouds be full, they will power fourth rain upon the earth.
THese be mere exhortatio^s and threats. If the clouds, that is the poor, be
full, they will send down rain into ye earth. This may be understood two
ways. First thus: Do as the clouds do, which when they are full, let ye
rain fall: even so do thou, pour out upon the poor. Secondly it may be a
promise, which I like better, after this sort. If thou have substance give it
to the^, which be like wandering clouds, and have nothing. Fill I say these
clouds, and thou shall see thy self also filled. The commination follows.

The tree whether it falls to the South, or to the North, in the place that
it falls there it shall be.
THat is, A commination against Niggards.
thou know not how long thou shall live, and possess thy goods. As a tree
when it is cut down, whether it fall to the South, or to the North, remains
there still: so howsoever death takes the, in whatsoever state or condition,
thou remaynest in the same. If the Lord find thee in the South, that is to
say fruitful, and rich in good works, it is happy for thee: If in the
North, that is to say, with no good works, woe to thee. Howsoever thou shall
be found, so thou shall be judged, so thou shall receive also.

He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the Clouds
shall not reap.
THis also apperteyneth to exhortation. We must give liberally.
We in the Dutche tongue express this sentence thus: He that is afraid of the
bushes, must never come into the woods or forest. It seems to him ye
gives, that he shall leave nothing at home, but lose all. And this is the
cause we geeue so unwillingly. Therefore (says he:) If thou will fear penurye
and ingratitude of men, thou shall never be beneficial. He that regards ye
substance he gives, more then the word of ye promiser, believes he shall not
be nourished in time to come nor have enough. Therefore look upon the word
and promises of God: Man lives not by bread only. If thou will believe this
word, he will bless the in thee feelde, at home. etc.

He shall never be liberal that is void of faith and fears poverty.
Therefore he sows not ye regards the winds, nor reapeth, that observes
the rain. For in the harvest rain is not good, but men look for fair
wether, and reap not till that be come. I would give gladly (say some) if I
knew I should not lack my self. Thou will give only yt whereof thou have no
need. But thou must know that the poor must eat with thee, so that thou
should rather somewhat defraude thy self, then he should lack. But he
that believes not the Lord will do no good. He that omitteth his word, will
omit his work also.

As thou know not which is the way of the Spirits, nor how the bones do
grow in the womb of her that is with Child: So thou know not the word of
God that works all.
Solomon uses this copiousnes of exhortation, Because our life is uncertain,
we must be liberal.
to awake and stir up our slouthfulnes: Even (says he) as thou know not
the way of the wind, and how the bones are joined together etc: even so thou
know not the work that God does every where or in all me^. Thou know not
what God will determine of thy self, or of any other, whether thou shall live
or dye to morrow, whether thou shall be sick, or have any other myshapp. If
God would have prolonged our life and our days, so that we might have known
how long, we would have been the woorst Creatures on the earth. But now know
we not whether we shall live one hour, and yet we will not cease our evil
doing. This similitude Christ uses in the third of Saint John: Thou hear
the blowing of the wind, and yet thou know not whence it comes, nor
whether it will, and no more know thou whether thou shalt go. As therefore
thou feel the wind present, so use thou thy present goods.

And how the bones be joined together.
The works of God be unknown to us.
LIkewise (says he) are beasts and men made in their mothers womb, thou
know not how. Psalm. 38. My bones are not bid from thee though (...) be made
secretly. and in all that Psalm of Domine probasti. etc. And though the womb
were opened, He that made thee, will feed thee.
yet could we not see how these things came to pass. For we all see that
trees do grow, and yet we see not how the bows, leaves and fruits of them
do grow, neither can we show any reason thereof. Even so other men see that
we grow. Seeing therefore we understand not things present and before our
eyes, how shall we understand things to come. To conclude, Gods works are to us
unknown, and so are those things that are to come.

In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest: For
thou know not whether shall prosper this or that, or whether both shall be
alyke good.
HE speaks not this of tyllage only, He repeateth his former exhortations
and comfortes.
but generally of all the works of man, and chiefly of doing good works as
Paul says: Let us do good while we have time. In the morning, that is,
betimes or always. The reason is, because you know not which will soonest
grow. Cast thou thy seed in ye ground, and do that thou ought, and then
commit all thy labor and success hereof to God. Do well unto all men, mark
not the winds, nor care not for that is to come. Thus must we do our good
works, and not look for our thanks here. If the world does give no thanks,
God thanketh, if both comes to pass so much is it the better. And if Dangers
ensue, receive them thankfully.

We see therefore in all this book that Solomon teaches us to use the things
present that God sends, and armeth us against dangers and calamities to
come, that when they light we take them not as strange. That that follows is
a kind of wish or prayer such as we use in our sermons and exhortations, in
Dutch on this wise: would to God it went so to work.

Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes, to see the Sun.
THis is an allegory, he means if were a pleasant thing, if a man would
express this doctrine in life: If the Princes and people would follow this
doctrine which I have taught and do teach in this book.

Though a man live many years, and in them all rejoice, yet he shall remember
the days of darkness, because they are many, all that comes is vanity.
A man shall scarce find one yt has lived mearyly all the days of his life.
THis is a very comprecation or prayer as I said, like as he should say: that
age would I feign see that had observed the contents of this book, the same
were an excellent man. Look how pleasant and joyful the Sun and light is, so
pleasant a thing it is to see a man many years inured with the experience of
these matters, and yet meary at his heart, and containing all worldy Dangers.
He should see in deed much darkness, yt is, myseries of this world. But this
should delight him, that he could set them lighter, as one knowing and
perceiving long before, that this were the state and trade of the world.

The xii. Chapter.
Be meary therefore O young man in thine youth, and let thine heart be glad in
thine young days.
AFter that he has described a rare kind of bird, He exhorts youth, to
enjoy their goods mearyly and in the fear of God.
namely such a man as has lived all his life with a meary heart, and has
laughed at the troubles and malice of the world, then he joins to a kind of
exhortation: Thou young man therefore (says he) that have little experience of
the world, if thou will live mearely, harken what I write for the, and teach
thee, that thou pass not thy bounds. Live so as thou may contemn ye world
and overcome the naughtines thereof. And here may thou see what Solomon
calls contempt of the world, not to forsake our selves, or other men, but to
be conuersaunt in the world, in the myddle of the broils thereof, but so as
we must keep, a quiet and peaceable heart in all manner of adversities. This it
is therefore that he says: If thou will attain to this gole or mark to have
a quiet heart, in the myddle of all troubles, enure thy self with troubles, and
that from thy childhode: For so shall thou safely stand al storms and
dangers.

Let thine heart be glad.
How youth should be brought up.
THat is, take prosperity mearyly when it comes, and be not ouercommed of
adversity, when God sends it. Thus should youth be brought up and
instructed. And unless youth follow such an admonisher, he shall never do like
a man. For youth is led altogether with affections, and is unskillful, which
unskillfulness is cause yt it ca^ not bear nor yield hereafter to the naughtines
and ingratefulnes of the world. Solomon therefore is an excellent instructor of
youth. He forbids not joys and pleasauntnes, as the foolish masters the
Monks have done. For this is nothing else but of young men to make blocks. And
as Anselme the veryest Monk of all other said: to set a great tree in a little
pot. Thus these Monks shut up their youth in a coupe, and forbid them the
sight and communication of men, because they should learn nor perceive
nothing, where as nothing is more dangerous for youth, then solytarines.

The mind must be well infourmed with good understanding and opinions, The
minds of youth must be well instructed.
that it be not corrupted with the company and familiarity of naughty men, but
the body must be conuersaunt in every thing. We must behold the world, and
hear it, only see that we have a good master and teacher. Therefore we must
beware that youth be not in sorrow and solitarines. For mirth is as necessary
for youth as meat and drink. For the body does battle through mirth of mind.
And we must not begin with the education of the body, but with the mind that
it be not corrupted. When the mind is well taught and enfourmed, there the
body is soon well governed. We must therefore bear with youth to be meary, and
to do all things with gladsomnes of heart: only we must take heed that they
be not corrupted with the pleasures of the flesh. For these quaffinges,
surfeiting, and amourousnes, are not the mirth of the mind that Solomon here
speaks of, but rather the sorrow of the same.

Walk in the ways of thine heart,
We must enjoy the goods that God gives us, with fear of ye Lord.
This place caused me to think that all this Chapter from the beginning was
but a kind of derision and scorn, because if a man walk after the ways of
his own heart, it is commonly taken in evil part. But we must stick to the
argument and consequence of the text. This it is then that he says: when thine
heart is well taught and enstructed, no joy or mirth shall be able to hurt it,
so that it be lawful joy, and no such naughty and woeful mirth, as I spoke of
before.

And walk in the sight of thine eyes
THat is to say, enjoy that, that comes to thy sight. Vex not thy self
about things to come, least thou do as the Monks do, of whom there were
some, namely, Syluanus the Monk, which taught men they should not look upon
the Sun. They would bereue youth of their sight, of hearing, of taulking, and
all their senses, and shut them up like Capons into a coupe, being in deed
ungodly, and ye true Misanthropi, that is, haters of men. Therefore if thou see
or hear any pleasant matter, enjoy it, so thou offend not against God.
Appoint or prescribe thy self no rules in this behalf, but enjoy every thing,
in the fear of God. See thou follow not the perverse pleasures of the world,
which will corrupt thy mind. Thus far, for one part.

Put away grief out of thine heart, and cause evil to depart from thy flesh:
for childehode and youth are vanity.
IT is as much as if he should say: Fret not against god, though adversity
fall, and be not ouerco^med with voluptuousnes.
even as I would have thee stayed by ye fear of God from following filthy and
noisome pleasures: so would I keep thee from being ouercommed with sorrows
and adversity. Put sorrow therefore out of thy mind, that is, use not to be
angry, nor to conceive indignation, when things go not as thou desire. If
any sad or sorrowful matter fall, know that it is the state of this world. Let
other envy, hate, and fret at it, but do not thou. For such doings mar the
pleasant life, according to the proverb: Envy is the rotting of the bones.
For envy is a fretting and a consuming sickness. Let thine heart always be one,
neither do thou corrupt it with overmuch worldly pleasures, ne yet with too
many worldly griefs. etc.

Put away evil from thy flesh.
Sorrow must be put away.
THat is, whatsoever may vex or trouble thee, put from thee, not that he
forbids man to chasten his flesh, but in vain (says he) do thou vex
thy self, while you let such things trouble thee. Frown not at these
matters therefore, but be of meary cheer: Only see yt thou fear God. For a
meary countenance declares a meary heart. And even as I will have thee to be
meary in mind, so will I thou be also cherefull of body.

For childehode and youth. etc.
Te^perance and modesty must be observed.
THat is, remember thou art young, and set all together in the way of vanity.
For youth of it self is a vain thing, and led with sundry and diverse
passions. Be thou wise therefore, and put not oil into the fire, as the
proverb says: Be thou neither in love, ne yet in sadness, be meary and enjoy
thy goods. And use thy self hereto in thy youth, that thou may know how to
do in thine age. For they that live quietly and pleasauntly in their youth,
shall come also unto a pleasant age.

Remember thy Creator now in thine youth, before the evil days come, and the
years approach: where in thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
ALl these things say I unto thee, He exhorts youth to fear God.
because I would have thee free from all youthly affections, that thou may
fear God, and use those things which he gives thee, Before the evil days
come, that is, before thou wax old. For age of it self is a sickness,
although it have none other disease beside. For old men lose the strength of
mind and body both. He describes age by many words and fygures, and how age
has nothing but evil days, and is unprofitable to be entangled with busynes.

Whiles the son is not dark, nor the light, nor the Moon, nor the Stars,
nor the Clouds, return after the rain.
A description of age.
Light signifies felicity, darkness, affliction, and miserye, as where it is
said, A light is risen up in darkness, to them that be true of heart. This he
means: Before the infelicitie and misfortune of age come, when neither the
sun shall be pleasant to thee, nor the light delights thee. There the
clouds return after the rain, that is to say there is a continual
intercourse of tribulation and sadness. In other ages, as in youth and myddle
age etc. there is a kind of enterchaungeable mirth, and after a tempest comes
clear weather, and after sadness mirth. But in old men, after clouds come
rain. One mischaunce upon another, one foul weather upon an other. And thus
the Poets called age, sad, or heavy.

When the Reapers of the house shall tremble.
THese are descriptions and very pictures of age. This he means. The hand^^
the guard of the body.
Acquaint thy self to bear adversity, live in the fear of God, before the
keepers of the house tremble or shake, that is, before thine hands tremble.
For the hands are the Protectours of the body, as Aristotle calls the hand
the instrument of instruments. Because it serves so many uses, namely, all the
members, wherein all other members have their distinct and several offices and
duetyes. For our body is like as it were an house, wherein a man may behold a
president both of public and private government, the king of which public
government is the head, and the hands are ye keepers, or guard. etc.

And the strong men shall bow them selves.
THat is, when the legs and knees shall wax faint, and yield. The legs.
For unto the bones and legs is attributed the strength of man, as in the
Psalm. The Lord has no pleasure in the strength of a man's legs.

When the Grinders shall cease, because they are few.
The teeth.
Old age is toothles. The teethe are the grinders of the meat, and the mouth
is as the Myll. There is evil grinding where the teeth be fallen out.

And they wax dark that look out at the wyndowes.
The eyes.
THat is, when ye eyes wax to be dim of sight. For age has no clear sight,
by reason that the strength of all senses in old men is diminished.

And the streat doors be shut without, and the base sound of the grinding wax
weak.
The mouth and lips.
THat is, when the mouth and chawes hang down, and are not fast. For the mouth
is the door of the heart. Math. 17. Out of the heart proceed. etc. The throat
shuts in the voice making it small. Thus the doors are shutt. For the two
lips are the doors or gate, out of the which our heart comes forth, even as
by a door into the streate. The voice.
This door in old men is shutt, because they can not singe, hallowe, and
speak out, yea they can scarce draw their breath.

When they shall rise at the peping of the bird, and all the daughters of
singing shall wax fainte.
THat is, Sleep.
they shall not only speak with much pain, but hardely catch any sleep. For
by reason of the dryness of humors in old men, ye root and cause of sleep
is taken away. For sleep has his feeding of the humors in man. Old men
therefore are awaked with every little chirping of a bird: where young men
sleep like hogs, and though the Cocks do crow, the Dogs do bark or it
thunder, they sleep still:

The daughters of singing.
ARe both the ears. The ears.
It is an hebrewe phrase, as the Son of help, of light of darkness, as has
been declared heretofore. So the ears are called, the daughters of singing,
that is, they that are busied in hearing of songs. These daughters of singing
wax fainte or weak: They become weak and feeble. etc. that is, Old men's
ears wax deaf, they delight not in music.

When the height shall be afraid, and fear in the way.
The head-shaking or trembling.
THat is, the old man shall go stowping with shoulders and head. For the head
and shoulders are the height of the body. This height fears, that it waxes
crooked. This he means, old men go fearfully in every place because they
go hanging down their head and shoulders, as they use that are afraid.

When the Almonde Tree shall flourish.
White head.
THat is, when the head waxes white. For the Almond tree of all others bears
whitest flowers. Of this flourishing Almond tree, he boroweth his metaphor of
hoary Age.

When the Grasshopper shall be a burden.
Leannesseand bones sticking out.
THat is, such an old man is like to a grasshopper. The whole body is nothing
but skin, and bone. For his bones stick out, and his body is worn away. And
so he is become a very Image and Counterfeit of death.

When pleasure and delight abateth
FOr thus had I lieffer to enterpretate the hebrewe word: Lothsomnes of meat
and drink.
for he understands not the venerous pleasure, which chiefly in old men is
ceased, but also all other kind of lawful and honest pleasure, as if he
should say: An old man takes delight in nothing, but is unfit to all such
purposes. There is no pleasant taulke or familiaritye with him, but he is even
a living corpse. Thou see therefore that he speaks here of decrepite Age,
good for nothing, not of such age as is able yet to be occupied in such
businesses.

For man shall go into the house of his age, and the mourners shall go about
in the streat.
HE entermedleth a place which enforces me to understand this chapter of age.
This he means: The buryall and grave.
It remains ye man must go to the house of his eternity, that is, to his
grave. For the grave is the house of his eternity or world, because he goes
thither and returns not again: yet we mourn and bewail him thus going to
his grave, With houling, and mourning is he brought to his grave. Serve God
therefore before thou wax old, for then there remains nothing, but that thou
must be carried to the grave.

Before the silver cord be taken away, and the golden Ewer broken.
Nutrime^t, or food.
THat is before thine eating and drinking slake, which is compared to a silver
cord, and to a rundlet of gold, or wheel, or ringe of gold. For as a wheel
or circle runs about and comes to his circle again: So meat and drink
always return, and are in deed like to a silver string, because our life
hangs, and depends on them.

Before the Pytcher be broken at the well, and the wheel at the Cesterne
Breath and life.
THat is before thy breath and life fail thee. Our body is like to a pitcher,
which has always need of reparation. The whele upon the cesterne, is the
stomach and other members, which give instrument to the body.

And the dust return to the earth, as it was in the beginning.
Solomon has a respect to the place of Genesis. 2. Chapter: as if he should
say, The body returns to dust.
After death dust returns to earth as it was before. We were all dust,
therefore when we dye, we return to dust, as we were before.

And the spirit return to God that gave it.
ANd here also he has respect to an other place of Gene. in the same chapter.
The spirit returns to God.
The Lord God breathed into the face of man, breath of life. He appoints not
whether the spirit goes, but says it returns to God from whence it came.
For as we know not whereof God made the spirit: even so we know not whether it
goes.

Vanity of vanities says the Preacher, and all is but vanity.
HE concludes his book with the same saying, A grievous compalynt of the
misery of man's life.
wherewith he begone it, and adds a commendation to his doctrine, and an
exhortation, that we should not be led about with strange and diverse
learninges, but abide in that, that has been taught us. For this is a great
misery that when God has set up his word and good teachers, by and by start
up heretics and wicked teachers, which through emulatio^ draw the people after
the^. Thus all the Apostles care was to keep us in wholesome doctrine. But this
peruersenes is the wholesome doctrine and word of God compelled to bear: when
God rayseth up his word, in come heretics, and Apes, that will counterfeit his
word. Moses appointed a service for god and certain Ceremonies, and forthwith
certain Apes erected Idols. Thus in all Arts and Sciences it comes to
pass: If there be a good Poet, he wants not his zoili: If there be a good
Artificer, there will be counterfets to follow him. Thus all Arts have their
imitators, that is, their destroyers. But this of all other is the worst, that
the multitude follows these fools, and prefer them before the true
Artificers, as Christ said of them: They shall deceive many. This is it that
Solomon in this place complains on.

This Preacher was not only wise, but also taught the people knowledge: he was
very diligent, sought forth and gathered together many Parables.
THat is, this preacher gave himself altogether to teach the people truly,
The duty of Preachers.
but it succeeded not, nor followed. He was a very diligent man, he sought how
to set all things in good order, he was diligent in teaching. He appointed and
ordered many things in excellent wise, but where are they that listen to him,
and receive his learning? There follows no more fruit but words. For either
he has no hearers, or else wicked teachers and peruerters succeed.

He sought to find out pleasant words, and uprightly to write the word of
truth.
THat is, he labored to profit me^ with wholesome and worthy words, or as
Paul speaks it, with words worthy of all acceptance, and he truly wrote
the words of truth. He did not wrappe or fold them up in darkness, as these
imitators do, who by reason they understood not things rightly, can not
teach rightly. For Aristotle says, it is a toke^ that a man has knowledge,
that can teach well. And Demosthenes being demanded how a man should teach
well, answered, if he spoke nothing, but that he knew and understood well.
For he that has good understanding, is able well to teach. And this is a
commendation of the author, as if he should say: he taught very well and
plainly, in so much that by his book, a man may understand, what to think,
what to take in hand, what to do, or to leave undone.

The words of the wise are like goades, and like nails fastened by the
masters of the Assemblies, and given by one Pastor.
He exhorts us to abide in the true and wholesome doctrine of the church.
HEre he exhorts us that we be not led about with diverse and strange
doctrines, as if he should say: you have a notable master and teacher, beware
therefore of new teachers. For the words of this master, are goades and nails,
that is, they are planted and set fast. They be fastened. Such are the words of
David and of the Prophets: The words of the inconstant wavering me^ be as
sku^me upon the water. And of this place I conjecture there were certain
books and histories, and to digeste them into certain annalles and Chronicles
of the Hebrews, and to compacte all other books in order, thereby to purchase
authority unto the books, and to ratify and allow those that were worthy to
be read. We must keep to the books received, and allowed by God.


So there are many authors that have written Bibles: But of them all those
only are received and allowed, which at this day we call ye Bible. This it is
therefore that he would say: Take heed my son, that thou stick fast to those
books that are received, as for other, set them at naught, because these wise
men have set them at naught. For it comes to pass, that when one good book
is set forth, ten other evil be set forth again, as may be seen in our days.
But ye words of ye wise are firm and true, which a man may take hold on. For
they are nails fastened, they have their authority of the men of the
congregation. Other books are not like them.

But are given by one Pastor.
THat is to say, one king being Pastor, The son of God the only shepeheard
of the Church.
has appointed wisemen to peruse and allow books. These men in this book
have acknowledged the holy ghost, and allowed it to be had of the people. Thus
were the Gospelles received and allowed of the Fathers, that is, the Fathers
acknowledged the holy Ghost to be in them. Now we must not hereof infer,
therefore the Church or Fathers are above the Gospelles: The church is the
pillar and witness of ye truth.
As it follows not, I know God to be the true and living God, and his word,
Ergo I am above God and his word. As he is not above the Prince that
acknowledges the Prince, nor above his father that acknowledges his father:
even so in this. These men teach not this Pastor, but receive of our Pastor.
So I make a difference among books, and say, this Epistle is Apostolic, and
this is not. Now, this is nothing else but to bear witness unto the truth. Now
follows the exhortation.

Of other books beside these my son take thou heed.
THat is, follow those books, which are allowed of them that have the holy
ghost, and have acknowledged them to be given, of one master and Pastor.

For there is none end in making of books.
HEre he touches the infelicitie of ma^s nature, The inconvenience of many
books writing.
seeming to imitate and follow these good men and writers, but full untowardly
and unhandsomely. This he means. Thou have to do in ye world where thou
shall happen on innumerable books, set out to edify the people, but abide
thou within a certain number of the^ prescribed: And hold thy self upon the
scripture.

Much study and reading, is a wearines of the flesh.
THis he says not of the wearynes of the person that writes but of his
disciples or hearers, as if he would say. These men with their many wrytinges
and books do nothing but cause men to weary themselves, who^ yet they would
seem to benefit, always learning, and never attayning unto the truth. This I
say is the fruit of these books* to trouble men's consciences, and to weary yt
people Therefore we must persist and abide in the opinion of one Teacher. One
master to be followed.
We must cleave either to one, or to a few which have the true form of
doctrine. Other we must beware of, which go about only to seem to bring some
new deuyse, and to seem better learned then others, as now many Sectaryes,
and their likes do. Well therefore does S. James say: Be ye not many masters.

Let us hear the end of all, fear God, and keep his commandments.
The su^me of the doctrine of this book, comprehending all worship and fear
of God, faith, and good works.
THat is, this is the su^me of all, fear God and worshipp him, and set him
always before thine eyes: and so shall thou perform all I have written in
this book. For unless a man fear God, he can accomplish none of these
things. He has set forth the examples of them which have lived wisely and
notablye without fear, who when adversity and distress comes, wax
insolent and trouble themselves. But they that fear the Lord can contemn and
set light all aduersityes and troubles, when they come, and give God thanks
when they come not.

For this is the duty of all men.
THat is, belongs to all men and is profitable for all me^. By other trades
and kinds of life, men seek for gain, by this for godliness. The same Paul
affirms in this wise: These things be proffitable for men. As for vain
talk avoid.

For God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secreat thing,
whether it be good or evil.
THat is, all things at length shall come unto judgment. Be they good, or be
they evil, vain talkers, backbiters, fools at length shall be confounded, and
their opinions shall no longer endure. Thus zoilus at length was thrown down
alive from ye topp of a mountain. But Homer abides the Prince of all Poets
still in despite of all the zoili, or of whosoever is more wicked then they.
Thus all other good authors, especially of the sacred Scriptures, by Gods power
and appointment, are likewise hitherto preserved.

With every secret thing.
THat is to say, hypocrisy. Because these Apes counterfeit a show of life and
good doctrine. So in the 25. Psalm also it is said. I will not keep company
with dissemblers, that is, such as Christ calls hipocrites. Paul says: They
have a show of Godliness. Therefore God shall Judge every work, that that may
remain and abide, that is perfect and sincere, all coulor and fainednes being
taken away wherewith they hid and cloked their works. He speaks not of the
latter judgment, but after the manner of ye Scripture in general of all
judgments, either such as heretics be judged and put to death by, or what so
ever sort of wicked persons. All these things have their judgment and time
appointed them of God which they must abide. Thus the Pope even at this day is
brought to judgment, and is almost condemned. Thus was Arius and diverse other
heretics, brought to this judgment, and the Lord reveled their shamefullnes
as Peter says: In the time of his visitation and inquiry.

FINIS.

